By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSNOV. 26, 2015
Matt Calvert scored the tiebreaking goal late in the second period, and Sergei Bobrovsky made 27 saves to help the Columbus Blue Jackets beat the Devils, 2-1, in Newark on Wednesday night.William Karlsson also scored for Columbus, and Bobrovsky extended his mastery over the Devils. He has won his last four starts against them.Adam Henrique scored for the Devils, who have lost three of four.The Blue Jackets took nine of the first 10 shots in the opening period, and the pressure paid off with Karlsson’s goal at 8 minutes 51 seconds.Schneider did his best to hold off the onslaught up to that point with spectacular stops on shots from Cam Atkinson and David Savard.AdvertisementColumbus broke through when Karlsson, shooting from a sharp angle, collected the rebound off his own shot and banked the puck off Schneider’s right pad.AdvertisementThe Blue Jackets skated off at the first intermission with the one-goal lead and a 14-4 shots advantage.The tide turned in the Devils’ favor in the second period as they started it with 3:12 of carry-over power-play time.The Devils did not score with that man advantage but, thanks to some slick passing, did finally beat Bobrovsky shortly thereafter.Henrique started and finished the play. He stripped the puck from Boone Jenner and fed it to Mike Cammalleri, who was motoring down the right wing. Cammalleri then delivered a perfect return pass to Henrique for a high wrister from the left dot past Bobrovsky.The Devils controlled the tempo for most of the period, denying the Blue Jackets a shot on goal for the first 16 minutes.But in the last four minutes, Columbus launched a big push that paid off with Calvert’s goal at 18:36.Atkinson unloaded a drive from the left point, and Schneider made a stick stop. Calvert was right there to steer in the rebound.AdvertisementHenrique seemingly tied the game eight minutes into the third period, but the goal was waved off when the officials ruled that Columbus, about to be assessed a delayed penalty, had gained control of the puck before Henrique put it in the net.Bobrovsky stopped everything else, making 10 saves in the third — including a goal-mouth bid by Andy Greene with a minute left.Both teams welcomed back significant players.Patrik Elias made his first appearance of the season for the Devils. The team’s career leader in goals and points, he had been sidelined since training camp with a right knee injury.The Blue Jackets regained two centers: Brandon Dubinsky (elbow) and Alexander Wennberg (foot), who had each missed six games.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.PENGUINS 4, BLUES 3  Evgeni Malkin scored 63 seconds into overtime, and Sidney Crosby broke out with two goals to lift Pittsburgh over visiting St. Louis.Malkin took a lead pass from Phil Kessel and beat goaltender Jake Allen on the backhand for his eighth goal of the season and fifth game-winner.Crosby scored his fourth and fifth of the season and now has a goal against every N.H.L. team — he had five assists in 10 career meetings against St. Louis. It was also the first time Crosby scored two regular-season goals since February, a span of 47 games.PREDATORS 3, SABRES 2 Mike Fisher ended Nashville’s franchise-record scoring drought in the first period and edged host Buffalo to end a three-game losing streak.Fisher ended the Predators’ goalless skid at 227:39, and Craig Smith and Cody Hodgson also scored. The Predators were outscored by 11-0 over the first three games of a five-game trip, which ends Friday in Philadelphia. They had not scored since the second period of a 3-2 win over the Anaheim Ducks on Nov. 17.AdvertisementEvander Kane and Jack Eichel scored for the Sabres.BRUINS 3, RED WINGS 2 Frank Vatrano scored his second goal of the game at 3:32 of overtime, giving Boston a victory at Detroit.Vatrano deflected Colin Miller’s shot past Petr Mrazek for his third N.H.L. goal. Miller scored the tying goal with 1:44 left in the third period, and Boston won its sixth straight game against the Red Wings.Detroit’s Pavel Datsyuk eluded Boston defenseman Torey Krug and shot the puck into the top left corner of the net for his 300th career goal.HURRICANES 4, OILERS 1 Elias Lindholm scored the go-ahead goal midway through the second period, Cam Ward made 30 saves, and Carolina cruised over visiting Edmonton.Edmonton forward Nail Yakupov, who got his 100th career point in the first period, left with an injury — apparently to his lower body — during the second and did not return.Benoit Pouliot scored for the Oilers, the 100th goal of his career.CAPITALS 5, JETS 3 Evgeny Kuznetsov had a goal and two assists, and Dmitry Orlov broke a tie late in the second period to lift host Washington over Winnipeg for its third straight win.Kuznetsov earned the lead assist on that play and added an insurance goal in the third.CANUCKS 3, WILD 2 Radim Vrbata scored twice and Jannik Hansen once, and visiting Vancouver held off Minnesota.Daniel Sedin had two assists, Ryan Miller stopped 30 shots, and Vancouver allowed fewer than three goals for the first time in 11 games.LIGHTNING 2, KINGS 1 Valtteri Filppula scored the winning goal in the third round of a shootout, and host Tampa Bay downed Los Angeles.AdvertisementTampa Bay got a goal from Tyler Johnson, and Ben Bishop made 38 saves through overtime.Milan Lucic scored for the Kings.A version of this article appears in print on November 26, 2015, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: Blue Jackets Goalie Stops Devils Again .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.