By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSNOV. 26, 2015
Kevin Durant scored 17 of his 30 points in the final 20 minutes, Russell Westbrook had 27 points, and the Oklahoma City Thunder beat the visiting Nets, 110-99, on Wednesday night.Dion Waiters had 16 points for the Thunder, who won their third straight game. Serge Ibaka contributed 12 points and 8 rebounds.Durant, in his second game back from a hamstring injury, played a game-high 37 minutes and added six rebounds, five assists and three blocks.The game was tied for the final time at 85-85 with 8 minutes 9 seconds remaining. Durant hit two 3-pointers and assisted on a third, by Dion Waiters, to give the Thunder a 9-point advantage. The Nets got no closer the rest of the game.Advertisement“We played with a sense of urgency,” Durant said. “They tied the game up, and we didn’t want it come down to the last minute. We did a good job of staying focused and staying with it. I just stayed patient with it, and I was able to knock some down.”AdvertisementWestbrook provided plenty of help with 13 assists, many of those on kick-outs to Durant after penetrating into the lane.“He makes it look easy,” Westbrook said. “Obviously he makes everything he does look easy, but he works hard, and he’s put himself in position to come back and show how good a player he is.”The surge by Durant left Nets Coach Lionel Hollins feeling helpless.“I mean, Durant walks up and shoots a 3, they get penetration and then throw it back out, and the guy in the corner hits a 3,” Hollins said. “They had two or three of those later on where they just ran pick-and-roll and Westbrook gets in the paint — you got to deal with him — and then he throws it out and they make a 3.”Durant said: “When you’ve got shooters all around the court and you’ve got good finishers, it makes it easier. When you’ve got a dynamic point guard that can get to the rim off pick-and-roll and make passes, it makes it easier for everybody.”Brook Lopez scored 26 points for the Nets, who had won their previous three games at Oklahoma City. San Antonio remains the only visiting team to win four straight there.RAPTORS 103, CAVALIERS 99 Kyle Lowry scored 27 points, lifting host Toronto past Cleveland for its third straight victory.LeBron James had 24 points, 8 assists and 6 rebounds for the Cavaliers, who lost their third straight road game. Kevin Love added 21 points and 13 rebounds.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.SPURS 88, MAVERICKS 83 Kawhi Leonard had 26 points, and San Antonio never trailed, holding on for a home victory over Dallas.AdvertisementLaMarcus Aldridge had 18 points and 7 rebounds for the Spurs in his return from a two-game absence with a mild left ankle sprain.PISTONS 104, HEAT 81 Andre Drummond had 18 points and 20 rebounds, lifting host Detroit to a rout of Miami.The Heat’s Dwyane Wade shot 1 of 9 from the field and had 2 points — the fewest he has scored in a game when playing at least 20 minutes.HORNETS 101, WIZARDS 87 Jeremy Lamb had 18 points and 7 rebounds, Nicolas Batum added 16 points and 11 assists, and Charlotte closed with a 25-2 run to beat visiting Washington.The Wizards led by 85-76 with less than nine minutes to play, but they were 0 for 17 from the field in their final 19 possessions.Before the game, the Hornets agreed in principle to a multiyear contract extension with Coach Steve Clifford, who is in his third season with the franchise. The team did not release financial terms.GRIZZLIES 102, ROCKETS 93 Jeff Green scored 20 points, and Courtney Lee had 10 of his 17 in the fourth quarter to help Memphis win at Houston.The Rockets lost their third straight game, dropping to 1-3 since Coach J. B. Bickerstaff replaced the fired Kevin McHale. James Harden led Houston with 40 points.TIMBERWOLVES 99, HAWKS 95 Zach LaVine had 18 points, 6 assists and 5 rebounds in place of the injured Ricky Rubio, leading host Minnesota past Atlanta.AdvertisementKINGS 129, BUCKS 118 Rudy Gay scored 36 points, helping Sacramento beat Milwaukee for its second road victory. Bucks Coach Jason Kidd was ejected late in the game after he slapped the ball out of a referee’s hand.A version of this article appears in print on November 26, 2015, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Thunder Win as Nets Sink at End of a Seesaw Game.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.