By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSNOV. 25, 2015
Seahawks running back Marshawn Lynch had surgery Wednesday to repair an injury related to a sports hernia and is expected to miss at least three weeks. The injury had bothered Lynch for weeks.Seattle will rely on Lynch’s backup, the rookie Thomas Rawls, as it battles for a playoff spot. Rawls rushed for 209 yards and a touchdown and added a scoring catch in a win over San Francisco on Sunday.REVIS MAY SIT AFTER CONCUSSION It appears more likely that Darrelle Revis’s concussion will prevent him from playing for the Jets on Sunday against Miami. Jets Coach Todd Bowles said that doctors had not yet cleared Revis to attend meetings and that he was sent home Wednesday because he was not feeling well.Revis, a cornerback, was hurt during the Jets’ 24-17 loss at Houston on Sunday. If he cannot play, Marcus Williams or Buster Skrine will start, Bowles said. BEN SHPIGELAdvertisementINJURED GIANTS RETURN Returning from their bye week, the Giants are generally healthier than they have been for several weeks. Cornerback Prince Amukamara said he was certain that he had recovered from a pectoral muscle strain that sidelined him for five games. Center Weston Richburg, who sustained a high ankle sprain in the Giants’ last game, resumed practicing, although he was somewhat limited. Linebacker J. T. Thomas (ankle) was back at practice.AdvertisementHowever, left guard Justin Pugh (concussion symptoms) and tight end Larry Donnell (neck) missed practice. BILL PENNINGTONRAMS’ KEENUM PRACTICES Rams quarterback Case Keenum returned to practice on a limited basis after missing one workout because of a concussion. (AP)Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.EX-COWBOY ARRESTED The former Cowboys running back Joseph Randle was arrested after an altercation at a Kansas casino. Randle was suspended for four games by the N.F.L. under the league’s personal-conduct policy this month, one week after he was released by Dallas. (AP)COACH SAYS MANZIEL BROKE PROMISE Browns Coach Mike Pettine explained his decision to bench quarterback Johnny Manziel, saying that Manziel had not kept a promise to stay out of the spotlight and behave during the team’s bye week.Manziel was demoted to the third string, behind Josh McCown and Austin Davis, after a video emerged of him partying last week in Texas while the Browns were off. Pettine said he had told Manziel that he needed to act in a responsible manner befitting a starting N.F.L. quarterback.  (AP)BENGALS HEADING TO LONDON The Bengals will host the Redskins at Wembley Stadium in 2016, the first time Cincinnati has been part of the N.F.L.’s annual international games.Twenty-one N.F.L. teams have played in London. In the other 2016 games, Jacksonville will host Indianapolis, and St. Louis will host a yet-to-be-determined N.F.C. team. (AP)A version of this article appears in print on November 26, 2015, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: Lynch Out After Surgery.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.