By PETER MAYNOV. 25, 2015
BOSTON —  He is the most visible manifestation of the latest, and to date, most futile version of “The Philadelphia Story.” Coach Brett Brown, by virtue of his job description, is the frontman for the continuing disaster that is the Philadelphia 76ers.His is a thankless task. But against all odds he remains upbeat despite 16 straight defeats to open the 2015-16 season, the latest being an 84-80 loss to the Celtics on Wednesday night at TD Garden. The defeat was the 26th straight for the Sixers, a skid that began with 10 consecutive losses to close the 2014-15 season.The 26 straight losses match the team’s — and the N.B.A.’s — worst losing streak; the 2013-14 Sixers also lost 26 straight, all in one season. The 2010-11 Cleveland Cavaliers lost 26 straight games in the franchise’s first season after the departure of LeBron James to Miami.Asked about the streak, Brown said: “I’m numb to it. I really am. It’s been a part of my world and our world for these last few years.”AdvertisementIn two-plus seasons with the Sixers, Brown, who comes from the San Antonio Spurs’ coaching tree, has won 37 games. He has lost 143. The losing, he said, has taken a predictable toll.Advertisement“If I don’t look at this thing from above, like I’m on a cloud, then I couldn’t sleep at night,” he said.He may have trouble sleeping after this one. The Sixers led by 11 early in the fourth quarter. They led by 5 with 2 minutes 51 seconds remaining. But the failure-to-close syndrome that has plagued this team — it blew late leads against Miami and Minnesota in its previous two games — once again surfaced.The Celtics closed with an 18-3 run as the 76ers’ only points came from a Jahlil Okafor 3-point play. The 76ers compounded their misfortune with seven fourth-quarter turnovers — four in the final six possessions — and Phil Pressey, who played for two years with Boston, missed what would have been a tying shot in the closing seconds.“There’s no excuse for that,” Pressey said, referring to the late turnovers. “This one hurts because we’re doing the same things over and over again.”Philadelphia will try to avoid setting an N.B.A. record for consecutive losses on Friday night at Houston. The team’s most realistic chance for a victory soon appears to be Tuesday in a home game against the almost-as-hapless Lakers.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Rockets, like the Celtics, have been struggling. But, Brown said, he cannot worry about other teams. “My fear compass, and how I judge being afraid nowadays, has changed,” he said.In addition to their last three losses, which have all been decided by 5 points or fewer, the 76ers had Dallas on the ropes at home before losing by 6. Brown said he felt the first victory was close at hand.Advertisement“They’re going to win games,” Celtics Coach Brad Stevens said. “They play extremely hard.”Brown has been given a roster that is, he said, “the youngest in the history of the sport.” It features five rookies and 13 players with no more than two years of experience. Only one player, Carl Landry, has more than three years of N.B.A. experience — and he has yet to play this season because of a wrist injury. He is also the only player on the roster born before 1990.This is the formula that Brown’s immediate boss, General Manager Sam Hinkie, thinks is the best way to build an eventual winner, despite all the evidence that young teams rarely succeed in the N.B.A.Brown said: “We talk all the time — how would you want people to judge you? What would you want them to say about you? What do you want the league to say?”He added: “Our report card doesn’t necessarily have to be our record. It can’t be, or we would feel like we’re failing, and we’re not. And I don’t want these young guys feeling like they are.”The 76ers and the Golden State Warriors are intriguing bookends to the standings. The Warriors, who relocated from Philadelphia after the 1961-62 season, are 16-0. The team currently in Philadelphia is 0-16.More than once, Brown used the phrase “marching orders” to describe his ordeal. That is a not-so-subtle reference to the unenviable task he has been given by Hinkie and the ownership. He has been ordered to get Nerlens Noel and Okafor, who are both 6 feet 11 inches, to play together and to play well. Brown described that as a “work in progress” and gave the experiment a grade of C.“I look forward to making it an A,” he said. “It’s probably the greatest challenge I have, getting those two to coexist.”Okafor had 19 points, 9 rebounds and 4 blocked shots while Noel had 3 points and was a minus-20 in his 34 minutes on the floor.Brown has also been ordered to try and compete in a league with an undrafted rookie point guard, T. J. McConnell.Advertisement“We’re taking some hits for that, but he is getting experience,” Brown said.McConnell had 6 points and 3 rebounds in 20-plus minutes.A version of this article appears in print on November 26, 2015, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: At 0-16, 76ers Continue Plunge to Dubious Mark.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.