AdvertisementSupported byCanadiens 5, Rangers 1By Allan KredaThe highly anticipated battle between the top two teams in the Eastern Conference proved to be no battle at all Wednesday night at Madison Square Garden.The Rangers were trying to win their 10th straight game at home — a feat they had not accomplished since the 1939-40 season — against their nemesis, the Montreal Canadiens.While each team featured All-Star goaltenders, neither netminder was around at the end of Montreal’s 5-1 drubbing.The crowd could only boo chants of “Go Habs go” from visiting fans as the minutes ticked away late in the third period.“It was everyone out of sync,” Rangers defenseman Dan Girardi said in an uncharacteristically quiet postgame locker room after the Rangers lost in regulation at home for only the second time this season. “It seems to be the same story against these guys. We make mistakes and they make us pay.”Carey Price — who returned last weekend, after spending three weeks on the injured list with a lower body injury, to beat the Islanders twice — was rolling along with 22 saves through two periods until he was replaced by Mike Condon to start the third.No worries for the Canadiens (17-4-2) who had beaten the Rangers (16-4-2) seven of the last nine times they had met. Montreal was paced by Devante Smith-Pelly, who scored two goals, and by Sven Andrighetto, Alex Galchenyuk and Max Pacioretty, who had one each. “I’m pretty happy to score twice, especially in this building, one of my favorites,” said Smith-Pelly, who joined the Canadiens late last season in a trade from Anaheim. “Obviously, we knew they were going to come out hard in the third. To get two quick goals was huge.”Montreal Coach Michel Therrien said Price had “the same injury” and would not play against the Devils on Friday. He did not elaborate about what was ailing his 28-year-old goaltender, who won the Vezina Trophy last season when he registered 44 wins.Henrik Lundqvist was pulled after Montreal’s fifth goal (by Pacioretty). It was a rough night in general for Lundqvist and his teammates.Rangers Coach Alain Vigneault expected a difficult encounter. After the morning skate, he said that “we got a lesson in hockey, that particular game,” referring to the Rangers’ 3-0 loss at Montreal on Oct. 15.Vigneault did not mince words after the loss.“We obviously didn’t answer the bell for the challenge we had tonight,” he said. “When you make the type of mistakes we made, they are going to make you pay and that’s what happened.”Andrighetto, a recent recall from St. John’s of the American Hockey League, scored his first goal of the season at 4 minutes 45 seconds of the first period on a setup by Lars Eller and P. K. Subban. Andrighetto, a 22-year-old Swiss forward, backhanded a rebound past Lundqvist.“I like fast hockey, it’s my game,” Andrighetto said after the morning skate. “I want to enjoy this,” he said, referring to his first appearance at the Garden.For the better part of the night, his teammates did exactly that. They played with relentless speed, passing the puck crisply and looking every bit the best team in the league.Smith-Pelly, elevated to the top unit in place of the injured Brendan Gallagher, banged home another rebound at 2:25 of the second as the Canadiens continued to have the better of play. Smith-Pelly’s goal came with assists from Pacioretty and Tomas Plekanec.Rick Nash shaved the deficit to 2-1 at 17:42 of the period when he deflected a Ryan McDonagh shot past Price on the power play. It was Nash’s seventh goal this season and his fifth in the last three games. It was also the lone bright spot for the Rangers during an exceptionally frustrating night.Any hopes that the Rangers would rally in the third were dashed when Smith-Pelly scored his second goal of the game just 17 seconds into the period. It was the first two-goal game for Smith-Pelly, a right wing who has 18 career goals.Galchenyuk made the score 4-1 at the 1:29 mark with his fourth goal before Pacioretty scored his 12th at 9:06 on the power play, and Lundqvist was replaced by Antti Raanta.Lundqvist accepted his role in the defeat, which dropped his record to 12-4-2 on the season.“I could feel that I lost my focus a little bit when they managed to score the third goal and then I gave up a really bad one on the fourth one,” Lundqvist said. “To beat a really good team, I think all of us have to play our best, starting with me, and I didn’t.”The Canadiens moved the puck with precision all night. Even though the Rangers had a 23-18 shots advantage after two periods, they were fortunate to head to the third down by just a goal.A comeback was not meant to be. “I think we should not overthink this one,” Lundqvist said.Advertisement