AdvertisementSupported byMagic 100, Knicks 91By Scott CacciolaORLANDO, Fla. — Scott Skiles, the Magic’s coach, sought to improve his team’s balance by shuffling his starting lineup for Wednesday’s game against the Knicks. With the Magic coming off two straight losses, Skiles moved Victor Oladipo to the bench and replaced him with Channing Frye. It was not an easy decision for Skiles.“I’d like to not change the lineup all the time,” Skiles said. “Typically, that’s what you’re doing as a bad team — you’re searching all the time. We don’t want to be that type of team.”By the end of the night, the Knicks were searching for pretty much everything — for scoring, for chemistry and for improved play from their own bench. The result was a 100-91 loss at Amway Center as the Knicks concluded a four-game trip with a whimper.“We couldn’t sustain any level of thrust or force or intensity throughout the game,” Coach Derek Fisher said.Carmelo Anthony scored a game-high 28 points and Jose Calderon added 23 for the Knicks (8-8), but their teammates combined to shoot 26.9 percent. More concerning was the performance of the bench — such a bright spot at the start of the season — which accounted for only 12 points.“I think it’s just a matter of guys being a little bit more confident when they get in the game,” Anthony said. “You don’t know who’s going to play on a nightly basis, so I think guys are thinking about that too much instead of focusing on, when they do get in the game, giving productive minutes.”Productive minutes were largely lacking from players like Langston Galloway, who missed all five of his shot attempts, and Jerian Grant, who was glued to the bench after committing two turnovers in the first half. Grant, a first-year guard, has not made a field goal in three games.“It’s my job to make sure that our bench guys, our younger guys — guys that are in their first year here — find ways to be successful,” Fisher said.Oladipo, unaffected by his new role as a reserve, and perhaps even buoyed by it, led the Magic (7-8) with 24 points.The Knicks found a fairly stout opposing front line awaiting them in Orlando. In particular, Kristaps Porzingis, the young star whose recent exploits have transfixed Knicks fans everywhere from Ridgewood to Riga, was opposed for long stretches by Frye, a 6-foot-11 forward who might as well have attached himself to the 7-3 Porzingis with masking tape.Porzingis finished with 10 points, 8 rebounds and 6 blocks while shooting 3 of 13. After the game, Fisher told the team to avoid getting too high or too low. The season is long.“We just got to learn from this and keep our heads up,” Porzingis said.The Magic were familiar with Porzingis, who worked out for the team ahead of June’s draft. The Magic owned the fifth pick. The Knicks wound up selecting Porzingis fourth.“It was clear that he had the type of personality where he wasn’t going to be afraid of the moment and that he was going to be ready,” Skiles said. “With all rookies, you’re not sure of the environment and how they’re going to react. But he’s reacted well.”After winning the first two games of the trip, the Knicks had hoped to rebound from Monday’s loss to the Miami Heat. But they sputtered, and the offense should have come with a parental warning. Consider that the Magic shot 24 percent in the first quarter — and still led by 20-17.The Magic feasted on the Knicks’ reserves at the start of the second quarter, running out to an 11-point lead. Anthony returned after early foul trouble and ignited the Knicks. For long stretches, he was the only player capable of making a shot. But the Knicks shot 29.3 percent in the first half and trailed, 46-35. Porzingis went scoreless in 16 minutes.The Knicks were much more fluid at the start of the third, and Porzingis worked to find a rhythm, sinking a pair of shots. Later, Porzingis passed out of a double team to Anthony for a 3-pointer that trimmed Orlando’s lead to three. But the Magic quickly mounted another run, and the Knicks fell behind by nine.The Knicks rallied again in the fourth when Porzingis blocked Oladipo, an athletic guard, at the rim. In transition, Calderon buried a 3-pointer to cut the lead to six. But they got no closer. Anthony said it was too grueling to play from behind the entire game.“So much energy you’ve got to waste,” Anthony said. “It’s exhausting.”Derrick Williams, whom Fisher leaned on earlier this season for his scoring punch off the bench, did not play. Williams seemed confounded that he had plummeted out of the rotation.“I can’t really control that,” Williams said. “That’s up to the coaching staff. But at the same time, it does get frustrating when I know I can help.”In the team’s season-opening win over the Milwaukee Bucks on Oct. 28, Williams scored 24 points. But his minutes have since evaporated.“It just wasn’t his opportunity tonight,” Fisher said.REBOUNDSDuring the four-game trip, Kristaps Porzingis averaged 15.3 points and 10.5 rebounds while shooting 41.7 percent from the field. ... The Knicks are home against the Heat on Friday night.Advertisement