
Sports Business By                     
 JOE NOCERA
 
NOV. 25, 2015
So this is how the N.C.A.A. saves face.Bill Self, the Kansas men’s basketball coach, had become increasingly outspoken about the N.C.A.A.’s unjust treatment of his prized recruit, Cheick Diallo. The university had publicly released a scathing letter it wrote on Nov. 10 to Oliver Luck, an N.C.A.A. executive vice president, outlining the “unfounded verbal statements” and the “inadequate professional standards” of the N.C.A.A.’s investigation into Diallo’s eligibility.Jay Bilas, an ESPN analyst, had uncorked a steady stream of tough-minded tweets about the Diallo case. And, frankly, The New York Times was looking into the N.C.A.A.’s behavior toward Diallo — as well as another player from Africa, Kassoum Yakwe of St. John’s, who was in the same situation.The N.C.A.A. needed a way out.On Wednesday afternoon, the Jayhawks and the N.C.A.A. issued a news release that essentially let the college sports overlords off the hook for the way they strung along Diallo and Kansas for months, humiliating the athlete and angering the university in one of the more shameful investigations in the N.C.A.A.’s long history of shameful investigations.The release said Kansas had provided the N.C.A.A. with “new information” about the classwork that Diallo, who immigrated from Mali four years ago, had done at Our Savior New American School, a Christian academy/basketball mill on Long Island that the N.C.A.A. had placed “under review.”AdvertisementThe notion of “new information” is, at best, a half-truth. The reason Kansas turned in new information at such a late date was that the N.C.A.A. refused for months to tell the university what its problems were with Diallo’s coursework — courses it had approved for other players in the past.AdvertisementIn the release, Luck was quoted as saying that the case included “a complex set of circumstances regarding amateurism.” This charge is classic N.C.A.A.: It believes that the man who brought Diallo to the United States, Tidiane Drame, a Mali native and basketball fanatic who now works for Ikea in California, is a wannabe agent, an allegation Drame vehemently denies. (Do I even need to mention that the N.C.A.A. never bothered to speak to Drame, even though he said he had asked to be interviewed?)In clearing Diallo, the N.C.A.A. also smeared him, implying he was in cahoots with a prospective agent. And this came from Luck, the former West Virginia athletic director who was hired as the association’s second-ranking official late last year, supposedly to be a new voice of reason and reform at an institution that badly needs both. How, I wonder, does the N.C.A.A. succeed in turning good people into heartless bureaucrats? And so quickly? Is its Javert-like culture that powerful?Oh, by the way, the N.C.A.A. on Wednesday also cleared Yakwe, the St. John’s forward, although it didn’t issue a release and declined my request for details of his exoneration, if you can call it that. Because Yakwe received much less publicity than the highly recruited Diallo, the N.C.A.A. seems to have thought it could skip over the St. John’s case. Sorry, it’s been noticed.Have I mentioned what was not in the Diallo news release? It said that Diallo “received a limited amount of extra benefits” and therefore would have to sit out one more game — in addition to the four he has already missed — as punishment. What was the extra benefit? We weren’t told. Was it related to the N.C.A.A.’s concerns over the academic rigor of Our Savior, or its concerns over Drame? What specific N.C.A.A. rule is Diallo alleged to have violated?Incredibly, the release also did not mention that Diallo had to pay $165 to the charity of his choice to repay the extra benefit. The Jayhawks do not appear to know what the extra benefit is because the N.C.A.A. has not said. To his great and everlasting credit, Self, during a conference call on Wednesday minutes after the announcement that Diallo had been cleared, bluntly took issue with the deal struck between Kansas and the N.C.A.A.“I am very happy he is eligible,” Self said. “But I do not agree with the content of the release.”Robert Orr, Yakwe’s lawyer, told me that his client had to pay $240 to repay his extra benefit. What extra benefit did he receive? Nobody at St. John’s has any idea what he supposedly did to violate the N.C.A.A.’s rules. A last little dollop of humiliation for two athletes who haven’t deserved the treatment they’ve received from the association.AdvertisementI spent much of this week looking into both Our Savior and Drame. Let me quickly tell you where I came out.It is certainly possible that Our Savior is substandard academically, although it is worth noting that it does not carry the characteristics of notorious basketball diploma mills. Not all students at the prekindergarten-through-12th-grade school are athletes, and it has a broader Christian mission. In any case, how would the N.C.A.A. know whether Our Savior was up to snuff? No one from the organization appears to have visited it or sat in on any classes.The N.C.A.A. appears to have put the school “under review” — whatever that means — without bothering to tell anyone at Our Savior. The N.C.A.A.’s eligibility standards drive high schools crazy all across the country, including prestigious prep schools like Deerfield in Massachusetts, where guidance counselors have been known to change the names of courses so bureaucrats at N.C.A.A. headquarters in Indianapolis will approve them.As Bilas has been pointing out on Twitter, why is the N.C.A.A. even in the business of approving high school courses? Isn’t it up to university admissions officers to decide who belongs in their university? The N.C.A.A. says that it has no responsibility for the quality of the courses that college athletes take. Yet it somehow reigns supreme over high school courses? It makes no sense.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.As for Drame, the evidence that he is a would-be agent is not strong, consisting mainly of some Facebook posts. The most “incriminating” of them, written to a basketball agent named William McCandless five years ago, read: “Pretty soon I will be big baller like you, we need to talk. I got 3 young basketball prospect in spanish system.”Everything else about him suggests that he is a pretty unlikely agent. Yes, he runs an Under Armour-sponsored basketball camp in Mali, but really, how many top prospects come out of Mali? He insists that he is trying to help athletes with potential as a way of helping people in his native West Africa. He also runs an after-school program and a foundation.Besides, as Orr said, even if Drame’s intentions are less than noble, there is nothing the N.C.A.A. can do to him. Nor can it punish Our Savior. “The only person who is victimized here is an 18-year-old kid from Africa,” he said, referring to Yakwe. “It is just fundamentally wrong.”Orr is proof of something else, something that Self confirmed this week: In today’s environment, with the N.C.A.A. under such a cloud, the way to fight it is to go public, not to cower and pray for mercy.AdvertisementThree years ago, Orr represented Shabazz Muhammad, who was unable to play early in his college basketball career at U.C.L.A. because the N.C.A.A. was suspicious of a relationship he had with a benefactor. After the boyfriend of the lead N.C.A.A. investigator, Abigail Grantstein, boasted during a flight that his girlfriend was going to “bring down” Muhammad — and said it months before the investigation was complete — Orr took the story to The Los Angeles Times. Muhammad’s eligibility was restored the next day.St. John’s kept Orr relatively muzzled during the Yakwe investigation, even though Joe Oliva, the athletic director, and Chris Mullin, the program’s famous new basketball coach, were fuming at the N.C.A.A.’s tactics. But Kansas made the decision to unleash Self.It infuriated Self that the N.C.A.A. had, as he put it to me this week, “no facts” yet refused to clear his player. The last straw came in the wake of that Nov. 10 letter to Luck, when it became clear that the N.C.A.A. was going to ignore Kansas’ long and detailed missive. Only on Monday, after the letter was released to the news media, did Luck call back the university.Last month, at the University of Missouri, a group of football players showed the power they had in speaking out publicly for something they believed in. There are many top-shelf coaches who have fumed silently as the N.C.A.A. has humiliated and unjustly punished their players. The N.C.A.A. needs to be held accountable, and its culture needs to change in deep and fundamental ways. Mark Emmert, the N.C.A.A.’s president, and Luck are clearly incapable of bringing about that change.Self has shown the way. It’s up to all the coaches now.Email: nocera@nytimes.comA version of this article appears in print on November 26, 2015, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: N.C.A.A. Clears Players, Then Absolves Itself.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »