AdvertisementSupported byBy David WaldsteinMasahiro Tanaka will have an opportunity to validate his credentials as the Yankees’ ace when he starts in the A.L. wild-card game against the Houston Astros on Tuesday.But although it will be Tanaka’s first appearance in Major League Baseball’s playoffs, it will not be his first foray into the postseason. In fact, perhaps no other major leaguer has Tanaka’s experience pitching in high-pressure games.Tanaka’s last postseason start came on Nov. 2, 2013, in Game 6 of the Japan Series. He threw 160 pitches, but even more surprising was that Tanaka took the loss as the Yomiuri Giants beat his Tohoku Rakuten Golden Eagles, 4-2. Tanaka gave up four runs and 12 hits, extremely high numbers for him that year.He had gone 24-0 in the regular season and won Game 2 of the Japan Series with a dominant performance. Still, despite the timing, his first loss of the year did not prove decisive.The next day, with the Golden Eagles ahead by 3-0 in Game 7, Tanaka asked to pitch the ninth inning, an honor sometimes afforded a team’s ace. So with 15 more pitches, Tanaka earned the save as Rakuten won its first championship.To many, it was a sign of Tanaka’s pride and competitive spirit. To the several major league teams that had been closely following his every move for years, it was seen as an irresponsible act by the Golden Eagles.Nevertheless, that winter, the Yankees agreed to spend $175 million (including a $20 million posting fee) to sign Tanaka. Now they want him to win a clincher — with far fewer pitches, though.“As far as the intensity of the game, I think it should be pretty much the same,” Tanaka said through an interpreter when asked on Monday about his previous playoff experience. “But obviously, M.L.B. is a little bigger than professional baseball in Japan. So maybe the lights might be a little more bright.”No one will ever know whether those two demanding outings on back-to-back days in 2013 led to a tear in Tanaka’s elbow ligament in 2014. Tanaka chose not to have surgery and went 12-7 with a 3.51 E.R.A. in 2015.There was persistent concern over his right elbow early in the season, particularly when he went on the disabled list with forearm soreness. But after he returned to the Yankees, he demonstrated his durability, and the concern dissipated. In his last four starts — including a clunker against the Boston Red Sox on Sept. 30 — Tanaka’s E.R.A. was 2.42.With C. C. Sabathia set to miss the postseason after admitting himself to an alcohol rehabilitation center, there is even more pressure on Tanaka to deliver as the ace.“He has a couple of swing-and-miss pitches, and he loves to compete as well,” Yankees Manager Joe Girardi said. “That makes me feel really good about him.”There have been some bumps, including Tanaka’s only start against the Astros this year, in Houston on June 27. In five innings, he gave up six runs and seven hits, including home runs by Chris Carter, Carlos Correa and Jose Altuve.Tanaka vowed that would not happen again.“Obviously, I do remember that not being a good outing,” he said. “But I do remember that I was not at my best during that particular time. So this time around, it’s going to be different.”Sometimes, when Tanaka is not effective, his split-fingered fastball refuses to dive, and teams like the Astros can be unforgiving when pitches stay up in the strike zone. In Tanaka’s last start, against the Red Sox, it was just such a splitter that Travis Shaw crushed for a three-run homer.That was an important game because the Yankees were looking to clinch a playoff spot. Now the Yankees hope that on Tuesday, when the extra-bright lights Tanaka mentioned are turned on, those pitches will zip and dart as they are supposed to do.“I expect good things out of Tanaka,” the Yankees’ Alex Rodriguez said. “The recipe doesn’t change. We need a well-pitched ballgame — hand the ball to our bullpen and score some runs.“We’ve done that 87 times,” he added, referring to the team’s win total. “We just need to do it one more time to advance.”Advertisement