AdvertisementSupported byBy Walt BogdanichIn court papers that Florida State University fought to keep confidential, the former director of the school’s Victim Advocate Office testified that in 2014, a total of 113 students reported being sexually battered, which is the same as rape in Florida. But the college reported only 14 cases to the federal government, records show.The former official, Melissa Ashton, who ran the advocate office in 2014, also testified that in the nine years she worked in that office, an estimated 40 football players had been accused of either sexual assault or “intimate partner” violence, and that to the best of her recollection, only one person had been found responsible. She said most of the women chose not to pursue the cases “based on fear.” No names were mentioned.Ms. Ashton said the number of sexual battery cases was so much higher than the total that university reported because most of the encounters occurred off campus, and the federal Clery Act, which requires colleges to report sexual misconduct cases as part of its overall crime statistics, did not require that those off-campus cases be included.“I think we could do a better job,” she said.In a statement, Florida State said, “We have no way to confirm or deny Ms. Ashton’s claims, given that her communications with such victims are confidential.”Ms. Ashton provided her testimony in connection with a federal lawsuit filed by a former student, Erica Kinsman, who alleges that the university failed in its duty under federal law to properly investigate her allegation that Jameis Winston, a Heisman Trophy-winning quarterback, raped her in late 2013.Mr. Winston, who now plays quarterback for the Tampa Bay Buccaneers, has denied the accusation. Late last year, a former Florida Supreme Court judge presided over a university code-of-conduct hearing and found Mr. Winston not responsible after concluding that neither side’s account was more credible than the other.The New York Times reported last year that the police had conducted virtually no investigation of the allegation, during which time important evidence disappeared. In December, the prosecutor, William N. Meggs, chose not to pursue criminal charges against Mr. Winston, saying that building a solid case would have been difficult in part because of the shortcomings of the police investigation.Florida State, which has publicly stated that it did not violate any federal law, sought a protective order to block an open records request by The Times, but late Wednesday afternoon released heavily redacted depositions from Ms. Ashton and the university’s football coach, Jimbo Fisher.Ms. Kinsman’s case was featured prominently in the documentary “The Hunting Ground,” which was shown on CNN on Sunday.Mr. Fisher said in his deposition that he had learned about the rape accusation against Mr. Winston soon after Ms. Kinsman reported it. Mr. Fisher testified that he subsequently passed on that information to Monk Bonasorte, an athletic department official whom he described as his superior. Mr. Bonasorte then spoke to a local lawyer, Timothy Jansen, who immediately began representing Mr. Winston.At Mr. Jansen’s instructions, Mr. Winston declined to speak to the police.Advertisement