By JOE DRAPENOV. 25, 2015
Lawyers from FanDuel and DraftKings appeared in New York State Supreme Court on Wednesday to fight efforts by the New York State attorney general, Eric T. Schneiderman, to bar state residents from playing daily fantasy sports contests on the companies’ websites.The attorney general has argued that the games are based on chance and not on skill, an important distinction. Fantasy sports companies contend that their games are not gambling because they involve more skill than luck and were legally sanctioned by a 2006 federal law that exempted fantasy sports from a prohibition against processing online financial wagering.On Wednesday, Judge Manuel Mendez said that he would make a ruling soon. Court observers took that to mean one or two weeks.
            In 2006, Congress tried to crack down on illegal online sports betting. Today, Internet wagering is thriving, and a new business that resembles gambling, fantasy sports, is winning millions of players and stoking controversy. The Times, with the PBS series “Frontline,” investigated illegal gambling in the Internet age.        Finding ‘Who’ and ‘Where’ Within the Cyber-Betting UniverseCash Drops and Keystrokes: The Dark Reality of Sports Betting and Daily Fantasy GamesThe Offshore Game of Online Sports BettingDraftKings Leaves Door Unlocked for Barred Fantasy Sports PlayersTo Those With Addiction, Daily Fantasy Sports Looks a Lot Like GamblingN.F.L. Data Deal: A Bet on Gambling?
Sign up to receive an email
			when we publish the next stories in this series.
		
Have a question or anonymous tip?

Terms and conditions
Something went wrong.

				Thank you for your submission.
			Mr. Schneiderman’s lawyers offered a range of arguments as to why the sites should be shut down in New York. A primary one, they said, was because winning the contests depends on a future event outside the players’ control.AdvertisementKathleen McGee, attorney for the state, argued that daily fantasy sports was clearly gambling because it depended on the outcome of events out of bettors’ control: a fumble, a batting slump, a dropped ball, injury and rain.“I place my bet, pick my team and watch television,” she said. “Chance pervades daily fantasy sports.”AdvertisementJohn Kiernan, representing FanDuel, argued that daily fantasy sports was not gambling at all.“What is skill?” he said. “It’s when through effort and aptitude you increase your probabilities of success.”A version of this article appears in print on November 26, 2015, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Sports Briefing | Fantasy Sports; Websites Get Their Day in Court.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »