By KEN BELSONNOV. 25, 2015
Frank Gifford, a Hall of Fame running back who was involved in one of the most brutal collisions in the N.F.L.’s history, was found to have had chronic traumatic encephalopathy, a degenerative brain disease.The finding, which can be confirmed only posthumously, was announced by Gifford’s family on Wednesday, more than three months after Gifford died. His family said it hoped that in publicizing the diagnosis, more attention would be paid to medical research linking football and traumatic brain injuries.“While Frank passed away from natural causes this past August at the age of 84, our suspicions that he was suffering from the debilitating effects of head trauma were confirmed” when the diagnosis of the disease, known commonly as C.T.E., was made, the Gifford family said in a statement. “During the last years of his life, Frank dedicated himself to understanding the recent revelations concerning the connection between repetitive head trauma and its associated cognitive and behavioral symptoms — which he experienced firsthand.”The family did not say who made the diagnosis or the severity of the disease, so it is difficult to determine what impact the finding will have on the emerging study of the disease. Doctors at Boston University have created a four-stage scale to delineate how advanced the disease was at the time of the patient’s death. Unlike former players like Junior Seau, who committed suicide at 43 and was later found to have had C.T.E., Gifford may have had symptoms that overlap with those found commonly in older people.Still, the addition of a star of his caliber to the growing list of players who had C.T.E. should help researchers and advocates who have called for more resources to be put into studying the disease.Advertisement“It’s incredibly important for awareness that the Gifford family had Frank’s brain studied and went public with the diagnosis,” said Chris Nowinski, a founder of the Concussion Legacy Foundation, which, through research and education, seeks to protect athletes from brain injury. “It’s the accumulation of cases and data over time that will teach us what we need to learn about C.T.E.”AdvertisementGifford’s family would not be eligible for a reward related to his C.T.E. under the terms of the settlement between the N.F.L. and retired players who had accused the league of hiding from them the dangers of repeated blows to the head. Only the families of players who were found to have had C.T.E. and who died before the settlement was approved in late April may receive up to $4 million. Gifford died in August.Gifford’s family could be eligible, though, if he had another qualifying condition, like dementia.Still, the settlement is under appeal and could be amended.One of the top football players of his era, starring for the Giants from 1952 to 1964, Gifford had a second career as a broadcaster that brought him another wave of celebrity.But his playing career was punctuated by a violent play on Nov. 20, 1960, when Gifford was the recipient of one of football’s most famous tackles. Playing against Philadelphia, he caught a pass over the middle and was running with the ball when he was flattened by Chuck Bednarik, an Eagles linebacker and a future Hall of Famer himself, who also died this year.Gifford dropped the ball and lay motionless as Bednarik waved his arms and shook his fists, an image that came to signify the rough-and-tumble N.F.L. of the time. Gifford was carted off the field with a concussion, ending his season. In February 1961, he announced his retirement.He returned, however, after missing only the 1961 season and in three subsequent years helped the Giants reach the N.F.L. championship game twice. He returned to the Pro Bowl in 1963.Coincidentally, the Gifford family’s statement was released a day after the N.F.L. held a conference call with the head athletic trainers of its 32 teams and the top medical directors at the league and the players’ union to discuss why St. Louis Rams quarterback Case Keenum was allowed to remain in a game on Sunday after receiving a hit to the head that resulted in a concussion.AdvertisementKeenum was not fully examined until after the game ended.In a statement, N.F.L. Commissioner Roger Goodell thanked Gifford’s family for helping “the medical community understand more about C.T.E.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.He also said, “We are grateful for their support of the league’s efforts to improve safety in our game.”Gifford’s family did not specify which “debilitating effects of head trauma” were present at the time of his death. Symptoms of C.T.E. can include aggression, depression, impulse problems and memory loss.While the study of C.T.E. is in its relative infancy, the discovery of the disease in former N.F.L. players has prompted tens of millions of dollars to be devoted to research. Even so, Geoffrey Manley, the chief of neurosurgery at San Francisco General Hospital, said researchers must find a consistent definition of the disease because the most common protein linked to C.T.E., called tau, is also found in other diseases like Alzheimer’s.Researchers must also determine why some people develop the disease and others do not and whether genetics or external factors like one’s lifestyle play a role. That requires long-term studies that track athletes, soldiers and other people prone to receiving head blows.“We didn’t learn about cancer overnight,” Manley said. “There’s no quick answer to this.”A version of this article appears in print on November 26, 2015, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: Gifford’s Family Reveals He Had Brain Disease.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.