AdvertisementSupported byBy Benjamin HoffmanEagles (4-6) at Lions (3-7) 12:30 p.m., Fox Line: Lions by 2 ½Supporters have called Detroit Coach Jim Caldwell stoic while his detractors have called him boring — or worse. But there is no denying that in the wake of consecutive victories, he delivered a quotation worthy of his more bombastic contemporaries.“Everybody thinks it’s magic,” Caldwell told reporters when asked about the turnaround. “I think you guys look at it as if there’s some huge thing that happened that all of a sudden catapulted this cataclysmic change, and the fact of the matter is, it isn’t. It’s just playing better football.”The Lions had started 1-7, but their holding the Oakland and Green Bay offenses to 16 points or fewer in consecutive weeks seems to indicate the defense, currently ranked 20th in the N.F.L. in yards allowed, has figured something out, even as the offense is still struggling to capitalize on the presence of Calvin Johnson and score.With Philadelphia having lost consecutive games, the momentum appears to be in Detroit’s favor. But the Eagles have the added motivation that a victory and a Giants loss will push them into first place in the N.F.C. East — and the fear that a loss will cost Coach Chip Kelly his job. Pick: LionsPanthers (10-0)at Cowboys (3-7) 4:30 p.m., CBS Line: Cowboys by 1 ½Tony Romo’s return helped end Dallas’s long losing streak. There were moments of beauty, like a gorgeous 31-yard touchdown pass to Terrance Williams in the first half, but there was also plenty of rust for Romo and the rest of the offense as they tried to recapture their form from Weeks 1 and 2.Romo and Dez Bryant connected for a touchdown for the 50th time, breaking the franchise record for touchdowns between a quarterback and a wide receiver, which they had shared with Troy Aikman and Michael Irvin. But Bryant, who had four catches for 45 yards, seemed to understand that there was work to be done.“Nobody is going to be jumping for joy around here,” Bryant told reporters this week.It will not get any easier against the Carolina defense. The Panthers are not as perfect as their record suggests, and their defense certainly seems weaker against the run than most realize. But the Panthers lead the N.F.L. with 15 interceptions and 10 fumble recoveries, giving them plenty of leeway to give up yards without incurring damage.Even if Romo were free of rust, this would be a difficult game for Dallas. After his showing over the weekend, there is little reason to believe that the Cowboys are ready for this matchup. Pick: PanthersBears (4-6) at Packers (7-3) 8:30 p.m., NBC Line: Packers by 8 ½Every week, it seems, the injury reports for Chicago and Green Bay include headline-worthy names. The Packers have played the entire season without Jordy Nelson and have also dealt with injuries to Eddie Lacy and Davante Adams. The Bears have played the last three games without Matt Forte, and Alshon Jeffery has managed to play in only five games.With a prime-time matchup on Thanksgiving, the teams appear as intact as they have all season. Lacy returned for the Packers on Sunday and looked like himself for the first time all season. Adams has been practicing on a limited basis but is expected to play. Forte has said he will be active for the Bears, and Jeffery is at least a possibility after not practicing at all last week.There is no getting around Jay Cutler’s record against the Packers, though. When he joined the Bears, the team had a 91-80-6 record against the Packers, a division rival. He has started 11 of their 14 regular-season meetings since, with a record of 1-10. With a Bears loss on Thursday, the series between the teams, which dates to 1921, will be tied.Cutler’s lone win in a head-to-head matchup with Packers quarterback Aaron Rodgers came in 2010, and with Rodgers healthy and seemingly having found his groove in Sunday’s victory over the Vikings, the streak of Bears losses should not end anytime soon. Pick: Packers  BENJAMIN HOFFMANAdvertisement