AdvertisementSupported byBy Tom PedullaThe Jets quickly established a winning formula through the opening quarter of the season: Chris Ivory’s punishing running style is complemented by Ryan Fitzpatrick’s efficient passing and an opportunistic, swarming defense that has already matched last year’s total with 13 takeaways.The elements combined for an auspicious 3-1 start that the team will take into an early bye week. But in the Jets’ lone defeat, a 24-17 loss to the Philadelphia Eagles at home, Ivory was unable to play because of a sore quadriceps. That game underscored the degree to which Ivory has emerged as the focal point of a surging team able to turn last year’s 4-12 record into a distant memory with the arrival of Coach Todd Bowles.Ivory returned to dismantle the Miami Dolphins almost single-handedly in a 27-14 victory on Sunday at Wembley Stadium in London. He carried 29 times for a career-high 166 yards in an overpowering performance that included 10 bursts of 9 or more yards. The Jets improved to 5-1 in games when he has run for at least 100 yards, another reminder of his immense value.“Chris is such a huge part of our offense,” quarterback Ryan Fitzpatrick said during a conference call with reporters Monday. “His style, his physical nature — he’s a great representation of what we are trying to be as Jets, a strong, physical guy who gives 100 percent effort on every play.”Ivory’s running style, the early timing of the bye and his history of injuries raise questions about how sustainable the Jets’ formula will be when they resume play against the Washington Redskins on Oct. 18 at MetLife Stadium. He has played a full schedule once in five previous seasons since he entered the N.F.L. by signing with the New Orleans Saints as an undrafted rookie in 2010.Injuries limited him to 12 games in his first season in New Orleans and kept him out of the postseason. After he underwent foot and sports hernia operations, he was limited to six games in each of the next two years with the Saints. They traded him to the Jets for a fourth-round draft choice.Ivory (6 feet, 222 pounds) carried 182 times for 833 yards in his first season with the Jets. He played all 16 games last year, when he set a career high with 198 rushing attempts. He finished with 821 yards and six touchdowns.Ivory already has 63 carries for 314 yards for an eye-opening 5-yard average and three touchdowns. His dominance against Miami helped the Jets maintain ball control for 37 minutes 23 seconds as part of a lopsided victory that prompted Stephen Ross, owner of the Dolphins, to fire Coach Joe Philbin four games into Philbin’s fourth season. Dan Campbell, the tight ends coach, was promoted in the interim.Bowles said the Jets were conscious of trying to ease Ivory’s workload. “We know he’s a bell cow, but we’ve still got two other guys who can run the ball,” Bowles said. “A 12-week season is a long season. We’ve got to make sure he stays healthy.”Bilal Powell and Zac Stacy provide depth at running back. Powell, though, sustained a groin injury Sunday and did not return. Safety Calvin Pryor (bruised knee), linebacker David Harris (quadriceps) and defensive end Leonard Williams (sprained ankle) were also hurt. Bowles said it was too soon to gauge their availability.Ivory’s health will be a constant concern because his violent running style often leads him to initiate contact with defenders rather than make moves in an effort to avoid heavy hits.“He’s a tough runner; that’s who he is,” Bowles said. “We’re not going to take that away. He takes care of his body. Hopefully, we can keep him healthy.”Fitzpatrick agreed that the Jets must be careful of how much they lean on Ivory. With Powell forced to the sideline, Fitzpatrick finished as the Jets’ second-leading rusher against the Dolphins with nine attempts for 34 yards.“It’s a long season,” Fitzpatrick said. “Those running backs in general, you’ve got to have a couple of good ones, because it’s tough to play 16 games.”Advertisement