AdvertisementSupported byGlobal SoccerBy Rob HughesLONDON — Sometimes, the definition of a true sportsman is someone one who can appreciate the thoroughness of the beating he has just received.Roma goalkeeper Wojciech Szczesny was that man on Tuesday. He made six saves, but also was beaten six times, and when a television camera was thrust into his face as he walked off the grass, he owned up, saying, “That was beautiful to watch because we played a team from another planet.” Then, pausing, he smiled and repeated himself. “I play for Roma, but it was beautiful to watch.”Roma lost, 6-1, at Barcelona, and its only goal was a meager consolation in the final seconds of the rout.Szczesny was sanguine about it because he had done all that he could against the best attack on earth. Lionel Messi, starting his first game since September, scored twice and played a part in others, as Roma was bamboozled.Luis Suárez also scored twice, the second with a sublime volley from 16 yards. Great golfers like Rory McIlroy and Jordan Spieth can swing a club in the most graceful way, and Suárez swung his right foot with the same beauty and timing.And what about Neymar, the third member of Barcelona’s remarkable front trio? For once, he didn’t score, but he was selfless with his trickery, movement and passing as he set up two goals. The joy of sharing was evident among Barcelona’s top three from the moment they emerged from the Camp Nou tunnel — three men sharing the pleasure of one another’s company like schoolboys in the playground.There were 27 goals spread around the eight Champions League games on Tuesday night, but not one of them was more artistic than the goal struck by Carles Aleñá in a UEFA Youth League match earlier in the day.Who might Carles Aleñá be?The world will know him soon enough. At 17, the young Spaniard is another kid they call the next Messi, and inevitably he is coming through the ranks of Barcelona’s academy, La Masia.Aleñá, with his mop of dark curls, actually resembles Diego Maradona more than he does Messi. But his goal for Barcelona’s youth team against their counterparts of Roma was reminiscent of both Argentine greats.Aleñá received the ball just over the halfway line and ran straight at the nearest opponent, who tried to grab his arm to stop him. The Roma player was left in Aleñá’s wake as he accelerated away. When the next opponent tried, and failed, to impede Aleñá, the Barcelona No.10 flicked the ball to the defender’s right, ran around him to the left and took back possession of the ball as he moved into the penalty area.As two more Roma youths advanced, Aleñá cut in from the right and curled a low shot beyond the goalkeeper’s reach near the far post.Carles Aleñá might not make it into the first team because there are no certainties in life. But the English clubs like Chelsea, Manchester City and Arsenal that have already tried to offer millions to lure him away appear to have wasted their time.Aleñá, whose parents are Catalan, has been part of the Barcelona academy since he was 8, and he signed a professional contract with the club on his 16th birthday. He is close to training with the likes of Messi, Neymar and Suárez. They are his example, the attacking trio of the team that won last season’s Champions League, and it is going to be difficult to dislodge this season, too.Who threatens Barcelona most in its title defense? Possibly Bayern Munich, which hammered in another four goals Tuesday, three of them in the opening 20 minutes against Olympiakos, as it won, 4-0. Chelsea, showing life after its dreadfully slow start to the season, also hit four against Maccabi Tel Aviv after the Israeli team was reduced to 10 men, following a red card before halftime. The Maccabi player who was ejected, the veteran Tal Ben Haim, has been around long enough to know that taking a swipe at Diego Costa, the master of provocations, often ends up in early dismissal.After that, it was only a matter of time before Chelsea overwhelmed Maccabi on the Israeli club’s lumpy turf.The field at Arsenal, however, is cut to pristine condition to bring out the best in the club’s two finest and most expensive imports, Mesut Ozil and Alexis Sánchez. Ozil’s sublime passes and Sánchez’s nonstop running are the keys to Arsenal’s better nights, and Arsenal needed one Tuesday as it tries to pull off a great escape in the Champions League. Arsenal handicapped itself when it lost its first two games in the tournament, against Dinamo Zagreb and Olympiakos. Arsenal retrieved some hope by beating Bayern Munich in London in its third game but then was destroyed in Munich.Almost out, but not quite, it needed to dismiss Zagreb on Tuesday — and did so through a rare headed goal from Ozil and two typically tenacious strikes by Sánchez.The 3-0 win for Arsenal guarantees nothing. It buys the chance to go to Piraeus, the port of Athens on Dec. 9 where, in as hostile an environment as there is in European soccer, Arsenal must beat Olympiakos by two goals to qualify for the next stage.“We’re going to play for our lives,” said Héctor Bellerin, Arsenal’s swift young fullback. Bellerin was once a La Masia prospect until Arsenal tempted him to London in the summer of 2011 when he was all of 16.Imagine what a team Barcelona would have if it could keep all its students.Advertisement