AdvertisementSupported byBy Dave CaldwellNeeding to win one of its last two regular-season games to become bowl eligible in Bob Diaco’s second season as head coach, Connecticut got the job done on the first weekend, stunning Houston, previously unbeaten and nationally ranked, on Saturday in East Hartford, Conn.“We felt good about the matchup,” Diaco said this week. “It wasn’t like there was euphoric shock after the game.”The Huskies (6-5) are among 71 Football Bowl Subdivision teams that have won at least six games, qualifying for a bowl.Just a year after going 2-10, Connecticut could improve its position in the bowl pecking order by winning its regular-season finale Saturday at Temple (9-2) — though no one brings that up.“We’re trying to keep it more nuts and bolts than looking at big-picture items,” Diaco said.At least Connecticut did not need to look at the big picture, the way 17 F.B.S. teams did after Thursday.Thirteen of those teams, most notably Virginia Tech, had five victories and one game remaining. South Alabama (5-5) has two games left. Another three teams had four victories and two games left.With 80 of 128 F.B.S. teams needed to fill a record 41 bowl games, there is a chance that not enough teams will qualify. If that happens, the N.C.A.A. will have to figure out which lucky 5-7 teams will get to extend their seasons.Big 12 Conference Commissioner Bob Bowlsby, who leads the N.C.A.A. oversight committee, told The Associated Press on Tuesday that he wanted to see the results from the weekend before making a plan.Several games between rivals will carry bowl ramifications. Among them are No. 20 Washington State (8-3) at Washington (5-6), and No. 3 Iowa (11-0) at Nebraska (5-6) on Friday. Significant Saturday games include: Louisville (6-5) at Kentucky (5-6), Indiana (5-6) at Purdue (2-9), Illinois (5-6) vs. No. 17 Northwestern (9-2) at Soldier Field in Chicago, and Wisconsin (8-3) at Minnesota (5-6).A little more rides on Saturday’s game between Virginia Tech (5-6) and Virginia (4-7) because it could be Frank Beamer’s final game in 29 years as the Hokies’ coach. Virginia Tech has beaten the Cavaliers 11 straight times and has been to a bowl 22 straight seasons.Connecticut last played in a bowl on Jan. 1, 2011. As the Big East’s representative in the Bowl Championship Series, Connecticut took on Oklahoma in the Fiesta Bowl and was taken apart, 48-20. Randy Edsall, then Connecticut’s head coach, took the job at Maryland two days later.Edsall’s successor, Paul Pasqualoni, lasted only two full seasons and part of a third before he was fired. Diaco, 42, a native of Cedar Grove, N.J., who played linebacker at Iowa, moved into the job from Notre Dame, where he had been the defensive coordinator.In his first head coaching job, Diaco put a greater emphasis on raising his players’ level of respect for the program than on installing systems. “It has been an incredible undertaking on everyone’s part, especially the players,” Diaco said. “It was good to see a result and a return on this investment.”The Huskies dropped three of their first five games this season, including a 9-6 loss to Missouri that included a last-minute interception on a fake field goal. But Connecticut has won three straight since a 37-13 loss to Cincinnati on Oct. 24.Diaco said that the Huskies were “bigger, faster and stronger than we’ve ever been” and that they were also relatively healthy because “they’re on top of their vitamins and minerals.” The team has also stayed out of trouble, with 31 players making the academic honor roll.“It’s a lifestyle,” Diaco said. “It’s not just coming here four hours a day.”Connecticut is thought of, first and foremost, as a basketball university. Diaco took the job five months before the men’s and women’s basketball teams won N.C.A.A. championships on consecutive days in April 2014.But Diaco said the university was excited about football again, adding, “School spirit is through the roof.”A year ago, Connecticut closed its regular season with a 27-20 home loss to Southern Methodist in the rain. S.M.U. had been 0-11. The Huskies had only one victory over an F.B.S. opponent.But now Diaco’s team is bowl bound, with a big game ahead against Temple. And Edsall is looking for a job.Diaco said of his seniors: “It’s an honor to coach them. They went through so much stuff.”Advertisement