AdvertisementSupported byLions 45, Eagles 14By The Associated PressDETROIT — Matthew Stafford and Calvin Johnson combined for one of the best games of their careers, helping the surging Detroit Lions keep the Philadelphia Eagles reeling.Stafford tied a career high with five touchdown passes. Three of them were to Johnson, who also tied a personal best, in a 45-14 rout of Philadelphia on Thursday.The Lions (4-7) have won three straight this season and three in a row in their annual Thanksgiving game.How can my team make the N.F.L. playoffs? It’s a simple question, but answering it can be devilishly complicated. This interactive simulator walks you through the scenarios.The Eagles (4-7) are on a three-game losing streak. They have allowed at least 45 points in two straight games in one season for the first time in team history, according to Stats.Stafford threw for more than 200 yards and three touchdowns without a turnover by halftime, helping the Lions lead, 24-7. He finished 27 of 38 for 337 yards and threw five touchdowns for the fourth time in his career. Johnson had eight catches for 93 yards and three touchdowns, matching his career high set in 2010.After not throwing to Johnson much early in the game, Stafford started connecting with him. The Eagles could not do much about it, especially when cornerback Nolan Carroll left the game with a broken right ankle and was replaced by the rookie Eric Rowe.Stafford threw a 25-yard pass high in the end zone, where only the 6-foot-5 Johnson could catch it, to put Detroit ahead, 24-7, with 12 seconds left in the first half. Stafford seems to be clicking with the plays called by the offensive coordinator Jim Bob Cooter, who replaced the fired Joe Lombardi a month ago.Taking advantage of Johnson in one-on-one coverage, Stafford threw 4- and 3-yard touchdown passes to him in the third quarter.Eagles quarterback Mark Sanchez started in place of Sam Bradford, who was inactive with a shoulder injury. Sanchez completed 19 of 27 passes for 199 yards and two touchdowns.Sanchez was able to connect with receivers when he had time, but that did not happen often.Detroit’s Ezekiel Ansah had a career-high four sacks, one of which forced a fumble by Sanchez. The Lions had six sacks as a team, equaling a season high.After the Lions punted on their first drive, they did whatever they wanted on offense from then on.Stafford started the scoring barrage with an 8-yard pass to Theo Riddick, who made a sharp move to the inside to get away from linebacker Mychal Kendricks late in the opening quarter.The Eagles tied the game on the ensuing possession, when Sanchez capped an 80-yard drive with a 2-yard pass to Brent Celek early in the second quarter.Stafford threw a go-ahead 2-yard touchdown pass midway through the second quarter to Golden Tate, who lined up as a fullback and went to the flat, where he caught the ball and stopped, letting safety Walter Thurmond run past him.Advertisement