AdvertisementSupported byKeeping ScoreBy Pat PickensYankees pitcher Lefty Gomez once said he would rather be lucky than good, but so far this season, the Rangers have been both.Through 22 games, the Rangers have lost only four times in regulation and are averaging three goals per game. Their 42 goals allowed are the fewest in the N.H.L., and they have sat atop the Metropolitan Division for much of the season.Entering Friday afternoon’s game at the Boston Bruins, the Rangers are only 2 points behind the Montreal Canadiens for the best record in the N.H.L., but advanced statistics suggest their 16-4-2 start is a mirage.The Rangers are generating the N.H.L.’s fifth-fewest shots per game (28.1), and they are tied for the fourth-most allowed per game (31.4).According to the analytics website War on Ice, the Rangers have the third-worst Corsi-for percentage (45.9), a measure of possession that tracks a team’s shot attempts created against those allowed. Corsi-for is considered a good indicator of a team’s chances to reach the playoffs.The Rangers have leaned heavily on their goaltending, but they do not feel compelled to apologize for their uneven hot start.“As long as you’re winning games, you don’t care how you do it,” goalie Henrik Lundqvist said. “If I have to work a lot, or not as much, it comes down to winning games, and I’m part of that group. Sometimes I have to do more; sometimes the team does more in front of me. You try to do it together.”Despite allowing five goals on 24 shots in Wednesday night’s loss to Montreal, Lundqvist has the N.H.L.’s best save percentage among starting goaltenders (.939); .930 is his career high for any single season.It is not just Lundqvist stealing games. The backup Antti Raanta (4-0) has faced nearly six fewer shots per game than Lundquist but has a .955 save percentage. The Rangers’ .942 team save percentage is the N.H.L.’s best. The Rangers are an eye-popping 10-2-1 this season when they are outshot in games.“Our best player is our goaltender, and obviously, we rely a lot on him,” Rangers Coach Alain Vigneault said. “We’re trying to improve other parts of our game. We’re going to get better; there is no doubt in my mind.”The offense has picked up the slack. According to War on Ice, the Rangers lead the N.H.L. in shooting percentage (10.6 percent) by nearly a percentage point; the median shooting percentage this season is 7.5 percent. Add that to their league-best save percentage, and they have a P.D.O. of 106.2 through 22 games.P.D.O. is calculated to determine a team’s luck. Only four teams since the 2005-6 season have finished with a P.D.O. greater than 103 over a full season, and the logic behind the statistic is that an average team’s P.D.O. will regress to about 100 over a full season.Such high shooting and save percentages are probably not sustainable over 82 games. But the Rangers led the N.H.L. in P.D.O. last season, too, and those who track advanced statistics believe it is no accident.“The Rangers are very likely one of maybe two or three teams in the league whose true P.D.O. isn’t 100,” said Travis Yost, who covers analytics for TSN in Canada. “That’s what happens when you have an all-world goaltender like Henrik Lundqvist, who consistently posts great-to-elite numbers every season.”Still, the Rangers’ play of late has set off red flags, particularly as their shooting percentage starts to dip. The Rangers have scored 10 goals on 105 shots in their past four games (9.5 percent), and they are 2-2 in that stretch.“Once the goals dry up, the possession numbers will become inflamed, and the team will become ultra-, ultra-reliant on Lundqvist to keep them afloat in the top half of the East,” Yost said.On Monday night against the Nashville Predators, the Rangers generated just seven shots through two periods, but Rick Nash scored on one of them. Lundqvist stopped all 31 shots he faced, many from high-pressure areas, as the team was outplayed but found a way to beat Nashville, 3-0.On Wednesday, the Rangers outshot the Canadiens, 34-25, but Lundqvist faltered, and so did the team, which suffered its worst loss of the season.No matter the results, the Rangers know their start has not been good enough, and it is up to them to turn it around.“We are very out of sync out there, and that is very unlike us,” Rangers defenseman Dan Girardi said Wednesday. “Even though over the last little bit, we haven’t been playing the best, but we’ve been getting the wins. We have to figure out how we can correct that, and we get right back at it. We have a lot of hockey coming up in the next week, and we have to get our ‘A’ game back here and get it going.”Advertisement