AdvertisementSupported byAnalysisBy Chase StuartOn paper, a matchup between a 10-0 team and a 3-7 team might seem like a good reason to spend more time with your family. Think again. The 10-0 Carolina Panthers travel to Dallas to take on a 3-7 Cowboys team that is anything but typical.For starters, the 3-7 Cowboys are actually favored by 1.5 points to beat the Panthers on Thanksgiving. This marks the first time since 1978 that a team with seven more wins than its opponent was an underdog, excluding end-of-season games where playoff bound teams have rested starters. The reason Dallas is favored is because Tony Romo is back. Romo led the N.F.L. in a variety of metrics last season, including completion percentage, touchdown rate and passer rating, but the star quarterback’s value has never been more clear than it has been over the last three months. The Cowboys went 0-7 with Romo injured and out of the lineup; meanwhile, Dallas has gone 7-0 in its last seven regular-season games started by Romo.Carolina is on an impressive streak of its own. The Panthers have won 14 consecutive regular-season games, with Cam Newton the starter in all but one of those contests. Incredibly, Newton and Romo have combined to win 20 straight regular-season contests: the last time either Newton or Romo lost a regular season game was in November 2014. Their combined consecutive wins will set a new record for starting quarterbacks in a Thanksgiving game.In 1962, Bart Starr was on an 11-game winning streak when the Packers traveled to Detroit to face Milt Plum — who was on a four-game winning streak — and the Lions. Seven years later, those numbers were matched when the Vikings played in Detroit. Then, Minnesota quarterback Joe Kapp had won 11 straight games, and Lions quarterback Greg Landry had won four. No game on Thanksgiving has featured two starting quarterbacks who each had at least five-game winning streaks, nor has there been a Thanksgiving game matching quarterbacks who had combined to win more than 15 straight games. That makes this game one of the more fascinating in Thanksgiving history.The game is big for both teams, but may be more important for Dallas. According to the New York Times’ Upshot Playoff Simulator, the Carolina Panthers have an 81 percent chance of getting the top seed in the N.F.C., which jumps to 89 percent with a win but stays at a healthy 73 percent with a loss. Meanwhile, the Cowboys have about a 4 percent chance of making the playoffs now, but that triples to 12 percent with a win on Thanksgiving. A Cowboys loss all but ends the team’s chances of making the playoffs.Advertisement