AdvertisementSupported byBy Simon CambersLONDON — In the 125-year history of the Davis Cup, the oldest and most prestigious team event in tennis, the closest a Canadian has come to getting his hands on the trophy was when the Montreal-born Greg Rusedski led Britain to junior Davis Cup glory as captain in 2011.In the senior event, two semifinals, in 1913 and 2013, remain Canada’s best efforts. But this weekend, if Britain defeats Belgium to win the Davis Cup for the first time since 1936, it may have an unassuming Canadian to thank.It is largely the performances of second-ranked Andy Murray that have taken Britain past the United States, France and Australia to the final. But the doubles could be pivotal, and that is where the Canadian coach Louis Cayer comes in.Since 2007, Cayer, 63, has been working at the Lawn Tennis Association in Britain, where he is the head of performance coaching, effectively teaching the country’s coaches, and he has revolutionized doubles in Britain. Having not had a man ranked in the top 100 in doubles since 2000, Britain had eight by 2012. Jonathan Marray was a Wimbledon doubles champion in 2012, and Jamie Murray, Andy’s older brother, finished this season ranked a career-high No. 7.The Murray brothers are expected to play doubles on Saturday in the third match of the final in Ghent, Belgium.Cayer’s credentials are impeccable. He was captain of Canada’s Davis Cup team from 1994 to 2000. He helped Daniel Nestor and Sébastien Lareau win a gold medal at the Sydney Olympics and was largely responsible for a generation of top Canadian doubles players, with Nestor, Lareau and Grant Connell ranked in the top five.Cayer moved to Britain to be with the woman who is now his wife, Stella, and had been living here for almost three years before anyone spotted him. It was Britain’s luck that Judy Murray, scouting players for her son Andy during the Monte Carlo Masters in 2006, saw Cayer working with the Israeli team of Jonathan Erlich and Andy Ram on a practice court.“I sat for two hours and was absolutely absorbed by what he was doing,” she said. “It was fascinating and it was very obvious he knew what he wanted. He was very thorough, very meticulous.”Murray convinced the tennis association to take Cayer on board, initially helping Jamie.“I’ve met a lot of coaches in my time, but he is without question the most dedicated, attention-to-detail coach that I’ve ever met,” said Jamie Murray, who even stood in as best man at Cayer’s wedding. “He’s more committed to his players and helping them, not just as tennis players but also as people, and he’s just got this incredible care for the whole package around the player. That’s a very, very rare thing to find that, so for that, he is to be absolutely treasured and appreciated.“But it’s not just as a coach. He’s also an exceptional coach educator, which is very different. He is a teacher. He’s got an absolute wealth of experience and anecdotes and teaching philosophies and he’s always looking to learn. He’s just an absolute sponge for education of others, and also of himself.”On the court, Cayer is enthusiastic and encouraging. Off it, he is diligent. Players he has worked with, including Andy Murray, speak of waking up to find an email containing video analysis of their last match. A confessed workaholic, Cayer keeps tabs on his players, wherever and whenever they may be in action.“Sometimes I wake up late at night, if they are playing somewhere with the time difference, and I look online at the score,” he said. “Sometimes I say, ‘Well done, good night.’ They look at the time, 2:30 a.m., whatever. I don’t do that all the time, but I do it sometimes and they know that I care.”Though he has also worked with many singles players, including the top-ranked British woman, Johanna Konta, Cayer has introduced science to the doubles court. Instead of the net player’s traditional sideways move to intercept, for example, Cayer, using ropes, shows his students that the most efficient method is to move diagonally forward to cut off the ball.“I have a way to teach that makes people improve faster,” he said. “I do things that people won’t even notice. Instead of saying, ‘I’m very proud of you, man,’ I say, ‘You can be very proud of yourself.’ I do a lot of empowering, and I’m quite good at that.”Cayer distinguishes between the “performer” (head, heart and legs) and the tennis player. He talks of “informing, forming and transforming,” and focuses on “beliefs, values, attitude and mental skills.” He trains each area of the game in every training session, rather than concentrating on one at the expense of another.Jamie Murray has no doubts about the Cayer effect.“To be honest, I owe my career to him,” Murray said. “A few years ago he had seven guys inside the top 60, which was amazing. That doesn’t get the credit that it deserves, which is a shame. We all know that he’s a great coach, the best we’ve got in the country, for sure. And, thankfully, he’s working with the doubles players. We’re the ones getting the benefit from him.”Cayer has worked with more than 30 top-100 players in singles and doubles. A fitting reward would be a first Davis Cup title in 79 years for Britain and a first, in a way, for Canada.“Some of my friends, including the Davis Cup captain who I coached for many years, are calling me lucky: ‘You’re going to be the first Canadian to win the Davis Cup,’ ” Cayer said. “But it’s exciting, and all my Canadian friends are really happy for me.”Advertisement