By RYAN GOLDBERGNOV. 26, 2015
Katsumi Yoshida needs few words to explain his approach to breeding racehorses: “I buy the best and I never sell.”Yoshida and his brothers, Teruya and Haruya, have put into practice in Japan the horse-racing adage to breed the best to the best. But it has not come cheap. In the last five years alone, the brothers have spent more than $100 million on broodmares from the United States and Europe to couple with their similarly cosmopolitan stallions.“The United States sells, Europe sells,” Yoshida said. “I only buy. I never sell, except some yearlings. I never sell a good mare.”The result of that strategy is racehorses prized and feared beyond Japan’s shores and a breeding and racing operation that not only has a veritable monopoly on those activities in Japan but is also envied worldwide.AdvertisementIt has also brought domination of the Japan Cup, which is running its 35th edition on Sunday at Tokyo Racecourse. Japanese horses have won the last nine editions, and Teruya or Katsumi bred or owned all but one. The last five winners were owned and bred by Katsumi. Last year, the Yoshida brothers had a hand on three-fifths of the Japanese entrants.AdvertisementEach of the brothers has a farm on the island of Hokkaido — Teruya, 68, has Shadai; Katsumi, 67, owns Northern; and Haruya, 64, has Oiwake — and they jointly own a fourth one, Shadai Corp., as well as Shadai Stallion Station, home to Japan’s top 10 stallions.Teruya and Katsumi own about 650 broodmares apiece, and Haruya has around 200. Together, the brothers breed a sixth of the 7,500 foals born in Japan. They keep the majority of those horses to race in their own names or for various syndicates they control.The foundation of the Yoshida empire was laid by their grandfather, Zensuke, who ran a horse in the first Japanese Derby, in 1932. His son, Zenya, added significantly to the legacy with his bargain-price purchase of the great American champion Sunday Silence in 1990. Zenya, who died in 1993, did not get to see Sunday Silence become the greatest stallion in Japanese history. His sons achieved that by embarking on a two-decade spending spree for the finest broodmares to breed to him and then to his sons.Despite the Japan Racing Association’s bonuses to attract foreign horses, there are few takers nowadays. Two from Germany and one each from France and England are entered in the 18-horse field on Sunday.The Japanese horse Lovely Day, a two-time Group 1 winner this year, is the favorite. Although the Yoshidas neither bred him nor own him, his sire, King Kamehameha, is one of their stallions. Katsumi Yoshida is sending out the Japanese Oaks winner, Mikki Queen, a talented 3-year-old filly who is trying to emulate Katsumi’s celebrated mare Gentildonna, who won the Japan Cup in 2012 at the same age.The Yoshida family’s buy-the-best philosophy seems logical, but it is not often put into practice by others. The brothers believe that the best progeny come from stallions and dams who were themselves outstanding racehorses. Racing fans everywhere know the Yoshida broodmares; they are classic winners in England, France, Germany, Ireland and Italy, American champions and Breeders’ Cup victors, stars from Australia and South America.At Shadai Farm, Teruya Yoshida’s finest broodmares occupy a barn known as Terry’s Jewel Box.“They’re buying global pedigrees and breeding them for two-turn classic distances,” said Craig Bernick, the head of Glen Hill Farm in Florida, “and we’re breeding for the 2-year-old market. When they run these international races, you can see the difference between their horses and ours. After 30 years of this, we’re paying the price. Japan knows what they’re doing.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Sunday Silence changed everything in Japan. Zenya Yoshida already had the leading stallion Northern Taste, a Canadian-bred horse he had purchased in the United States and campaigned in France, when he went looking for a successor.AdvertisementAmerican breeders were chilly toward Sunday Silence, a black colt with high hocks, knocking knees and a not very sexy pedigree. But what mattered to Yoshida was the horse’s track record: Sunday Silence had never finished worse than second in 14 starts. He had missed out on the 1989 Triple Crown, losing to Easy Goer in the Belmont Stakes, but then got revenge in the Breeders’ Cup Classic. Yoshida purchased a quarter of Sunday Silence for $2.5 million when he was a 4-year-old. He then bought the rest for $7.5 million after the horse retired in 1990.Sunday Silence became the leading stallion in Japan from 1995 through 2007, and he was so influential that he changed the phenotype of Japanese horses, said Harry Sweeney, an Irish breeder and owner based in Japan. He praised the foresight of Zenya Yoshida and his sons.“They backed their conviction,” Sweeney said. “They didn’t mind that Sunday Silence was the girl left standing in the dance hall.”The Japan Racing Association circuit offers the world’s highest purses, fueled by 20 percent of all bets on racing globally. The Yoshidas are thus able to at least recoup the millions they spend, either by selling yearlings or challenging for those purses. At the two-day select yearling auction in July, Teruya sold 94 yearlings and foals for nearly $27 million and Katsumi sold 165 horses for about $55 million, according to Britain’s Racing Post. Their sales alone top those of entire auctions in other countries.This money and scale give the Yoshidas great power. The select sale is held at Katsumi’s Northern Farm. They are able to secure the best trainers and the Japan Racing Association is known to bend to their will. But they have pushed to internationalize and promote Japanese racing, shrewdly embracing foreign bloodlines and racing their best horses overseas when they could more easily win at home.They also allow others to breed with their stallions rather than keeping them exclusively for their own mares. Some of the world’s biggest owner-breeders now buy Japanese yearlings.The most expensive colt ($2.05 million) and filly ($1.18 million) yearlings at the July sale were sired by Sunday Silence’s greatest son, the Yoshidas’ Deep Impact, and Katsumi Yoshida bred both.In 2003, though, he had sold Deep Impact as a yearling for about $600,000. It was an unusual mistake. Deep Impact would win the Japanese Triple Crown in 2005 and $12 million for his owner, Makoto Kaneko.“They did not moan their luck but fronted up and bought him back as a stallion for $51 million,” Sweeney said. “Can you deny them their success? They put their money on the line and they bought success. The ultimate thing for them was performance.”A version of this special report appears in print on November 27, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.