AdvertisementSupported bySpecial Report: Japan CupBy Ryan GoldbergAn estimated 100,000 people are expected to be on hand in the quiet Fuchu neighborhood of Tokyo on Sunday for the 35th running of the Japan Cup. But up in the owners’ boxes of the modern, six-story Tokyo Racecourse, Harry Sweeney will stand out.The reason is not only because the 54-year-old Irish veterinarian was the first non-Japanese breeder and owner permitted to enter the country’s once-closed racing society. And not only because he watched a horse he bred win the Japanese Derby on the same course. It’s also because he simply makes himself heard.Sweeney’s Japanese peers have never seen anyone like him. As his brother Finbarr, a farmer in the Sweeneys’ native County Louth, joked, “Harry says more than his prayers,” using an Irish expression to describe his garrulous and jocular older brother.“They know that I’m a straight-talker and if I don’t like something, I’ll say it,” Harry Sweeney said, referring to the Japanese. “They’re reasonably accepting of me … reasonably. I would say the respect I have for Japan is reciprocated towards me.”Sweeney is a trailblazer in the development of Japanese racing. And now in the last few years, some of the most deep-pocketed racing operations have begun venturing to Japan for its unique bloodlines and the world’s largest purses.In 1990, Sweeney and his new wife, Anne, landed in the northern island of Hokkaido and intended on staying one year. They never left. The question of leaving now sounds ridiculous, he said.“Why would you leave?” he said. “It’s not an absolute racing utopia, but it’s as close as you’re going to get anywhere.”For Sweeney, Japan is the only place where the racing economics are balanced. The Japan Racing Association’s average purse is $300,000 per race, which makes buying foals and yearlings a profitable enterprise, at least theoretically, unlike in most of Europe and the United States. The association also compensates owners if their horses suffer injuries on the racecourse or in training, and pays purse money to finishers through 10th place, in addition to an appearance fee of $4,000.Sweeney also said Japan has a passion for horse racing unmatched in other countries. Betting is a major part of that. Last year, nearly $30 billion was wagered on racing, or a fifth of the total bets worldwide.But there is more to Japan’s racing scene than gambling. The best horses and jockeys occupy celebrity status.At the Japan Cup, fans sport hats bearing the names of past horses and clamor for autographs from their favorite jockeys. On Sunday, the best horses, whether male or female, will be competing for the $5.2 million purse, including the 5-year-old horse Lovely Day and the 3-year-old filly Mikko Queen.“There’s no dodging here,” Sweeney said. “The purpose of the calendar is to establish the best horses. It’s true progeny testing.”He added that retiring the top 3-year-olds for immediate stallion careers — Golden Horn of England and the American Triple Crown winner American Pharoah are the latest examples — would be unacceptable in Japan. After Deep Impact, the 2005 Japanese Triple Crown winner, retired after his 4-year-old season, some still felt he should return for another year.Sweeney sometimes speaks to English-speaking audiences about the joys of Japanese racing and his path in it.His first move was to become the farm manager and veterinarian for Taiki Farm, in 1990. He was offered a salary six times larger than what he was making in Dublin, where the economy was in the dumps at the time. He and his wife expected it to be a short adventure.He was stationed in remote Tokachi on the island of Hokkaido. The closest English speaker was more than an hour’s drive away, so learning Japanese was his primary task. “I would wake up at 5 in the morning and study for an hour before work,” he said. “I did that for a number of years.”After five years, Sweeney had enough confidence to move to a larger stable. Before long, he decided to open his own farm, called Paca Paca, which is Japanese for clip clop.No foreigner had ever owned agricultural land before. Sweeney said he needed the “patience of 100 saints” to meet all the municipal government requirements. The same applied to obtaining a license from the Japanese Racing Association — no foreign owner had ever received one — and then joining the Hokkaido Breeders Association, where a friend tipped him off to a back-door route that sidestepped an informal “Japanese only” rule.Sweeney’s perseverance quickly paid off. He started with three broodmares and now has 20, from England, France, Ireland, Japan and the United States. He added to his original 100 acres with an additional 450 acres of undulating fields, which he said are not unlike County Louth farmland. His first Group 1 winner, Pink Cameo, was Paca Paca’s 36th foal.In 2012, the Paca Paca-bred Deep Brillante became Deep Impact’s first son to win the Japanese Derby. Katsumi Yoshida, Japan’s leading owner-breeder, had purchased Deep Brillante as a yearling for about $300,000. At the time of his victory, Sweeney had only bred 75 horses of racing age. Six weeks later, he had Deep Brillante’s sister up for sale as a foal. She sold for $1.79 million.Sweeney’s accomplishments stand out for a small breeder. He works with a small budget, canvassing American and European sales for broodmares who were successful on the track but at a cut below Grade or Group 1-winning status.It is no longer only in Japanese racing that Paca Paca is respected. At the two-day Japan Racing Association select sale in July, Sweeney sold two yearlings and eight foals for $2.09 million combined. WinStar Farm of Kentucky purchased a pair of Paca Paca foals, the first American stable to buy horses at the sale. Sweeney’s top lot, a Deep Impact foal out of the United States stakes winner Payton d’Oro, sold for $330,646, to the Irish bloodstock agent Mick Flanagan on behalf of a group of Americans.It was the most international auction Japan had ever seen, with buyers from Australia, England, France, Ireland, Qatar and the United States spending freely. Sweeney, for one, could take pride in that.Advertisement