AdvertisementSupported byGlobal SoccerBy Rob HughesLONDON — There has been a red devil on the crest of Manchester United since 1970, signifying that whatever else the team lacks, it will go forward, daring to score more than the opponents.Someone appears to have stolen that devil, at least in the Champions League. In this week’s games, there have been more than 50 goals scored, but none by a Manchester club.United tied a goalless and almost lifeless home game against P.S.V. Eindhoven on Wednesday, and Manchester City slipped to a 1-0 defeat at Juventus.City, at least, is safely into the next round, the knockout phase of the tournament. United is not there yet, and by no means is it assured of progressing, because its final group game is against Wolfsburg in Germany next month.How has it come to this? How to explain that United and City, two of the biggest-spending teams in the world, are struggling to join in the fun, in the flurry of goals? Wednesday’s big hitter was Paris St.-Germain, which hammered Malmo 5-0, in Sweden.Its biggest combined scores were Borussia Mönchengladbach against Sevilla, which ended 4-2, and an astonishing game in Ukraine, where Real Madrid led by four goals and relaxed, almost catastrophically, as it allowed Shakhtar Donetsk to come back in a game that ended 4-3. Goals, goals, goals — except for the Manchesters.City’s excuses? Injuries. Sergio Agüero was able to start Wednesday, but Wilfried Bony, the other main striker, is still out. City is also missing the creativity of David Silva and the solid defending of its captain, Vincent Kompany.Even so, City had its chances in Juventus’s stadium. Fernandinho squandered one in the first half, while Raheem Sterling shot wide from only a few yards out in the second. And in between, Mario Mandzukic volleyed the one goal of the evening, giving Juventus a 1-0 victory that ensures its place among the last 16.United, though, seems almost afraid to score or concede. This is against the club’s nature, because daring to attack, and to risk the opponent’s scoring, has been its credo since 1945. United played 1,141 games under the great Scottish manager Matt Busby, and very few were goalless. In 1968, Busby’s team, which incorporated the talents of George Best and Denis Law and the imperious Bobby Charlton, won the old European Cup. United later was coached by another great Scot, Alex Ferguson, for 1,500 games between 1986 and 2013, and under him the club was always stocked with exciting forwards who almost always played with devilment. The manager’s instructions came down to a simple phrase: “Go for their throats.”Fergie’s teams won the Champions League twice, in 1999 and 2008.There is a new man at the helm now, the Dutchman Louis van Gaal, and a new philosophy. It starts, and all too often of late ends, with ensuring the soundness of the defense, and so deeply is this drilled into the team that games often end up in stalemates, as did Wednesday’s home match against P.S.V.Far from there, a former Manchester United star, Cristiano Ronaldo, scored twice and created two other goals in Real Madrid’s extravaganza in Ukraine.Madrid, remember, went there after it was chastened at home last Saturday by Barcelona, and it was up four goals against a gifted but easily demoralized Donetsk team that still has to play its home games in Lviv, hundreds of miles from its home, because of the conflict in eastern Ukraine. Ronaldo’s goals and his two assists were not spectacular. But they had the trademarks of the man who has scored 84 goals in 120 Champions League games, which keeps him first in the record books over No.2 Lionel Messi (79 goals in 101 games).“We scored four goals against a very strong team away from home, so my team deserves praise,” Real Coach Rafa Benitez told reporters after the game. And then? Benitez admits there might have been a lapse in concentration, with his team so far ahead and so far from home.Once, twice and three times, the Brazilians in Donetsk’s lineup stepped forward to show a little devilment and some pride. Three goals in 11 minutes cut the deficit to 4-3 and had Madrid hanging on for the final whistle. “Both teams are famous for their attacking play,” Benitez said, “so it’s not surprising that so many goals were scored.”It was surprising, and he knows it, because a team with ambitions to win the Champions League should not so carelessly allow a beaten foe to come back. Madrid’s attack is still potent, but the defense has now leaked seven goals in two matches.Bayern Munich and Barcelona would shred that defense, should they meet in a later round in the tournament. And so might P.S.G., given the form of Zlatan Ibrahimovic and Ángel Di María (the latter a former Real Madrid winger).Di Maria is the link in this story because he was discarded by Madrid after Real won the Champions League title two years ago. He was sold to Manchester United but could not adapt to van Gaal’s regimented demands.So now he is a Paris player on fire, with two of the five goals in Malmo.But Wednesday was always going to be Ibrahimovic’s night, as he returned after 14 years to play against his original club.“Go easy on Malmo, Dad,” his 9-year-old son, Maximilian, had pleaded with him.Maybe Zlatan Ibrahimovic forgot. Maybe he just couldn’t help himself. He scored the third of the five goals, then was taken off before the end so that the crowd could give a standing ovation to their greatest ever player.“I lived a dream coming back, tonight,” Ibrahimovic said, “and on top of that I scored one. I got goosebumps. It felt like I was home again.”Advertisement