AdvertisementSupported byCricketBy Huw RichardsFor 138 years, test cricket has been played with a red ball in daylight. On Friday, that will change when Australia hosts New Zealand in the first day/night test, which will use a pink — yes, pink — ball.Supporters of the experiment hope it can revive interest in cricket’s longest and most prestigious format, which is declining in popularity outside England.“We know and understand we need to shift entertainment into periods of the day that are more appealing,” James Sutherland, chief executive of Cricket Australia and a longtime supporter of day/night tests, said earlier this week. “I love all cricket, but my preferred format of the game is test cricket. And I honestly believe that if we do nothing, we are at risk of loving test cricket to death.”Five-day tests are traditionally played from 11 a.m. to 6 p.m., but on Friday the test will be played from 2 p.m. to 9 p.m., with lights going on when needed. While day/night one-day internationals have used white balls since the 1970s — the red ball is hard to see at night — the test will use a pink ball to preserve another cherished test cricket tradition: players’ wearing white uniforms.Fans have responded to the innovation. Tickets for the first two days have sold out at the Adelaide Oval, which can seat 50,000.The experiment will be watched with curiosity across the cricket world. Zakir Khan, an official with the Pakistan Cricket Board, will be among the spectators at Adelaide, since Pakistan has been asked to play a day/night match in Australia next year.The idea has already been endorsed by one of Pakistan’s greatest batsmen, Zaheer Abbas.“Skeptics and critics might call it a leap in the dark, but I prefer to see it is highly enlightened, a common sense decision,” said Zaheer, president of the International Cricket Council, the game’s governing body. “Ultimately it is all about maintaining the relevance of test cricket.”Indian support is crucial to any innovation, so the approval of India’s captain, Virat Kohli, bodes well for the experiment.“It is a big step towards changing something in test cricket,” he told journalists in Nagpur, India, before the start of India’s current test against South Africa. “As cricketers we should be willing and accepting of the fact that we need to step forward and contribute to the game, however possible.”Players will also have to make adjustments to the way the new hours and ball change the game.“My overriding memory is of the hour or so as the sun was setting. It became very difficult. The main problem was in the field, where it felt as though depth perceptions were changed,” said Mark Wallace, who played for Glamorgan against Kent in the only pink ball day/night match ever played in England’s County Championship, in 2011.“Players can get a little set in their ways and wary of change. You wonder how it will affect your game,” said Wallace, a veteran wicketkeeper who is chairman of the English players’ union, the Professional Cricketers Association. “But when they look back in the future, they’ll be glad to have played in the first night/day test. I think it is a good idea, and it could be a great success.”There have been pink-ball matches over the past three seasons in Australia’s major league, the Sheffield Shield, though some still think the ball behaves differently, even though the only difference is its color.Ed Cowan, an opening batsman who formerly played for Australia, has argued that it “behaves abnormally throughout the whole innings.” Wallace said that the ball in his match “did become discolored quite quickly and went soft,” a statement seconded by Adam Voges, who will be playing for Australia Friday.But what upsets some may benefit others. “It’s perfect. Batters can’t see the seam,” Nathan Lyon, Australia’s main spin bowler, said this week.Australia called up Steve O’Keefe, a spin bowler who calls himself a “pink ball specialist” after his success in day/night Sheffield Shield matches.Australia leads the three-match test series, 1-0.New Zealand’s players’ union expressed some concern about playing conditions when the match was announced earlier this year, but its team has been buoyed by its performance in the second test, a high-scoring draw in which Kane Williamson, its star batsman, and Ross Taylor posted huge numbers.As Tony Irish, head of the Federation of International Cricketers Associations, has pointed out, Friday is still only an experiment. With no other day/night tests scheduled for now, the test might end up only a footnote in the game’s history, but there will be plenty who hope it instead will be the start of a whole new chapter.Advertisement