
Sports of The Times By                     
 WILLIAM C. RHODEN
 
NOV. 25, 2015
Jonathan Stewart is not a fan of your fantasy football team.“It’s not a fantasy, it’s real life,” Stewart, a Carolina Panthers running back, said in a telephone interview this week. “These are guys who have actual families. This is a job. It’s not fantasy.”The regulation posse is taking a hard look at the two leading daily fantasy sports companies, FanDuel and DraftKings, over the central question of whether they offer games of skill or a way to circumvent laws against online gambling. We can debate the merits of their arguments endlessly, and on Wednesday that fight moved to a New York courtroom.The more troubling issue about fantasy football to me, though, is that its increasing popularity is masking something darker: the desensitizing effect it is having on fans, numbing them to the pain and injuries that are the stock in trade of a violent game.I’ve seen it time and again: An injury to a player evokes moans and sometimes profanity in the moment. But it is not out of concern for the athlete on the field. It is because the player — often a quarterback, a running back or a receiver — is central to someone’s fantasy team.AdvertisementThe players see it, too.“I see them bashing people’s names, cursing them out on social media,” Stewart said. “Bashing guys for not performing because they didn’t win $10 in their fantasy football league. You want to respect your fans, but you want the fans to respect the game.”AdvertisementThe problem is that fantasy, by its very definition, is disengaged from reality. It has created a class of fans who view the N.F.L. every weekend only through the distorted prism of their own made-up rosters.In one game alone on Sunday, Ravens running back Justin Forsett broke his arm, quarterback Joe Flacco tore up his knee and Rams quarterback Case Keenum sustained a head injury so serious that it left him struggling to stand. Yet thousands of fantasy moguls with these players on their rosters surely bemoaned not their fate but their unavailability for statistical purposes.“I’ve certainly been guilty of saying, ‘I hope this guy gets hurt today,’ and then following it up when I look at my wife and say, ‘I don’t really mean that,’ ” said Seth Young, an executive of Flower City Gaming, which operates Star Fantasy Leagues. “When you’re competing and you’ve got your own fantasy team on the line, you care about you. You don’t care about the players. But at the end of the day, we’re all still human beings.”I have heard the argument that the greatest value of fantasy football is that it engages casual fans, pulling in individuals who otherwise had no interest in football. That has clearly been a boon to the league, with the increased engagement showing up in page views and television ratings. But what is really driving that interest?“What are you engaged for?” Stewart said. “Are you engaged because you love the game and respect the players? Or are you trying to make easy money?”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Stewart has reason to be soured on fantasy: He has been on the receiving end of harsh social media criticism for years. A durable and productive player for his first four seasons, he played only nine games in 2012 because of injuries. A year later, he appeared in only six, running for only 180 yards and scoring no touchdowns. In this season’s first 10 games, he had two 100-yard games but six in which he failed to score a touchdown.”You see somebody when you go out and they say, ‘Hey, man, I need you for my fantasy team,’ ” Stewart said. “I’m like: ‘Wait, I need this for my job. Forget your fantasy.’ What’s important here? You making a couple dollars in an easy format or me providing because this is my job?”AdvertisementDespite Carolina’s overwhelming victory on Thursday and Stewart’s solid performance, his fantasy owners were disappointed because he did not score and rushed for fewer than 70 yards.This much is true: In the past 20 years, fantasy football has changed how we watch the N.F.L. and how we look at athletes. Instead of players to admire and cheer, they have become cogs in a machine, chess pieces to move around a virtual board.Shawn E. Klein, a philosopher who teaches at Arizona State University and has a blog called The Sports Ethicist, argues that this is a function of fans’ not knowing athletes.Dr. Klein sees a lack of sensitivity “as part of the spectator experience to see the players more as objects or as figures in the entertainment space, to see them almost as imaginary, to not see them as human beings with jobs and family.”We see the same phenomenon, to an extent, in entertainment and politics. The difference in the N.F.L. is that there is weekly carnage, and fantasy allows team owners to anesthetize their sensibilities and indulge an intriguing double agency.On Sunday, Stewart carried the ball 21 times for 102 yards in Carolina’s 44-16 victory over visiting Washington. Carolina improved to 10-0 with the victory.After the game, Stewart said, he was congratulated by a fan thrilled because he was on the man’s fantasy team. Except, Stewart said, the man was a Washington fan.“Where’s the loyalty there?” Stewart said two days later, still dinged and bruised from the effort. “It just feels weird.”He added: “I think they don’t look at us as human anymore. I think they look at us as an opportunity.”AdvertisementIt’s a chilling evolution in which compassion feels like the real fantasy.Email: wcr@nytimes.com A version of this article appears in print on November 27, 2015, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: Memo to Fans of Fantasy Sports: Injuries Affect Players’ Lives.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »