AdvertisementSupported byCanadiens 3, Devils 2 | ShootoutBy The Associated PressNEWARK — There are a few reasons the Montreal Canadiens have the N.H.L.’s best record.The rookie goaltender Mike Condon’s play in place of the injured Carey Price, who won the Vezina Trophy and was named the league’s most valuable player last season, has been a big one.On Friday night against the Devils, Condon made 25 saves, Alex Galchenyuk and Sven Andrighetto scored in regulation and again in a shootout, and the Canadiens rallied from a two-goal deficit to win, 3-2, for their fourth straight victory.“We never give up,” said Andrighetto, who has two goals in three games since being recalled from the American Hockey League. “It shows we kept pushing, and we all believed. We all pulled in the same direction with the bad start we had.”Andrighetto scored the game-winning goal with a snap shot off the post that beat Cory Schneider.Condon preserved the win by stopping Patrik Elias with his pad on the Devils’ fifth attempt in the shootout.“This is huge,” said Condon, whose record is now 8-2-2. “Any time you get a win, it’s huge. It’s not about one guy. We got contributions in the shootout, and we stuck with it even when we were down 2-0. That’s a key part of our game.”Condon thought he had lost the game for a split second. With the shootout tied at 1-1, Lee Stempniak had a chance to win the game on the Devils’ third attempt. His backhander hit the post, but Condon briefly left the crease thinking it was in and the game was over.It was not, and Montreal improved to 18-4-2.Adam Henrique and Stempniak scored for the Devils in regulation, and Jacob Josefson had their only goal in the shootout. The Devils have lost four of five games.“I think if you really look at the game, Schneider made some unbelievable saves, and we could have been down,” Devils Coach John Hynes said. “That’s a high-end offensive team. It’s a very good team with good goaltending. We stuck with it and competed hard. We found a way to get a point. We would have liked to have had two.”Schneider had two outstanding stops in overtime, including a point-blank save on Max Pacioretty on a power play in the waning seconds and a short-handed stop on a breakaway by Tomas Plekanec.Andrighetto pulled Montreal to 2-1 behind with 4 minutes 43 seconds left in the second period, and then Galchenyuk tied it with 8:46 left in the third.Price is sidelined again with a lower-body injury. He had just recently returned after missing eight games with the same injury.This was the opener of a home-and-home series. The teams are scheduled to play Saturday night in Montreal.After a scoreless first period, the Devils jumped ahead by 2-0 in the opening 9:06 of the second period, only to see the Canadiens rally to tie it.Galchenyuk scored by using his speed on a breakaway. Pacioretty set the goal up with a pass that allowed Galchenyuk to split the defensemen Andy Greene and Adam Larsson and beat Schneider with a backhander. It was his third goal in three games.“I’m relaxed, having fun and just trying to go out there and made plays,” said Galchenyuk, who was switched to a line with Plekanec and Pacioretty in the second period. “It definitely paid off for me.”Montreal got back in the game late in the second period. Lars Eller kept a clearing pass by Devils defenseman Jon Merrill in the attacking zone, and Andrighetto beat Schneider with a shot that handcuffed him.Schneider robbed Plekanec with a diving glove save with 3:32 left in the first period and stopped David Desharnais in close on a rebound a minute later. He also stopped Desharnais on a 2-on-1 break in the second period.SLAP SHOTSAfter signing a one-year contract earlier in the day, Devils forward Tyler Kennedy was in the lineup. ... Devils defenseman David Schlemko missed his third straight game with a lower-body injury. ... With Carey Price out, goaltender Dustin Tokarski was recalled from St. John’s in the American Hockey League to back up Mike Condon. ... defenseman Greg Pateryn was back in the Canadiens’ lineup after being a healthy scratch against the Rangers, replacing Alexei Emelin. ... Defenseman Andrei Markov picked up his 400th assist with the Canadiens on Alex Galchenyuk’s goal.Advertisement