AdvertisementSupported byHeat 97, Knicks 78By Andrew KehThe Knicks won 17 games last season, so the mere fact that they are no longer an unmitigated laughingstock has engendered an understandable measure of satisfaction among the team and its fans.But as Coach Derek Fisher made clear on Friday, the Knicks have not been content to be seen as a pleasant surprise this season. They hope to be a strong team, and that will take some more work.“We’ve had a little bit of success, and sometimes that leads you to believe you have it all figured out,” Fisher said just before the Knicks withered against the Miami Heat, 97-78, at Madison Square Garden. “And the reality is that we’re still developing and learning and becoming the best of who we can be.”That much was clear as the Knicks (8-9) fell to their third consecutive defeat. When the Heat pushed the lead to 20 in the fourth quarter and the arena was as quiet as a temple, the Knicks’ postures, facial expressions and intramural chirping betrayed a growing frustration.“To drop three after we’ve been playing so well, we got a reality check, and we’ve got to figure it out on our own,” Carmelo Anthony said. “Nobody’s going to help us figure it out.”On Friday, Fisher bemoaned what he had identified as a lack of tactical discipline among his players. Asked what that meant, Fisher clarified his criticism: “In the game, when you’re stressed, when you haven’t made a few shots, get back to just running your offense and keeping it simple as opposed trying to do more individually.”Fisher said the issue was more noticeable among his bench players — if only because reserves, in comparison to star playmakers in a starting lineup, tend to be less effective when freestyling and producing points outside the principles of a coach’s offensive system.The sluggishness of the second unit has been glaring. The bench was averaging 39.3 points through the first 14 games. But in two losses earlier this week, the reserves scored a combined 22 points, shooting 7 for 47 and missing all 16 of their 3-point attempts. They scored 46 points on Friday, but they shot just 18 for 43 from the field.No one has been able to find a groove — neither the players nor Fisher in deploying them.Derrick Williams signed a two-year, $10 million contract over the summer, and he made a statement in the opening game of the season, scoring 24 points. But he played only four minutes on Monday and never made it into the game on Wednesday. He scored 9 points and had a few bright moments on Friday, but they materialized when the game was already slipping out of reach.Langston Galloway, one of the main scorers in the second unit, had shot 5 for 23 — including 2 for 11 from 3-point range — in his last three games before Friday night. He had a forgettable night, too, finishing with 8 points on 3-of-9 shooting.The Heat led the Knicks at halftime, 50-49, and then stretched their lead to 11 points after the third. Luol Deng and Amar’e Stoudemire were unavailable for Miami, but the team managed fine without them. Gerald Green scored a game-high 25 points, Chris Bosh chipped in 20, and Wade added 17.The Knicks could have used a bench revival. Kristaps Porzingis picked up his fourth foul early in the second half and spent key moments of the game watching from the sideline. He received a loud ovation every time he checked into the game, but he could muster only 11 points and 8 rebounds.“We’ve just got to go back to the basics,” said Porzingis, who guessed that teams that had the opportunity to scout the Knicks in the early games were making good adjustments now to stop them.At the same time, Anthony went cold after a strong, 11-point first quarter. He made four of his first five shots but missed his final eight. He did not take a shot in the final quarter and finished with 11 points, 3 rebounds and 1 assist.The sluggishness forced Fisher to use 12 players — something he has not been afraid to do all season while experimenting. The ugly loss ensured that the searching and tinkering would need to continue.“It’s my job to continue to figure out and search for how to substitute guys, how to get our rotations in a way where we can sustain that and not have the drop-offs in the second and fourth quarter,” Fisher said.Fisher said it would be a continuing challenge for him to find the right combinations on the court, to mix and match from a group that includes several capable professionals — a luxury, he implied, he did not quite have last season.Fisher made sure that his challenge was not characterized as a burden.“It’s different than a year ago,” Fisher said with a wry smile, “so I like feeling this way more than the way I felt last year.”Advertisement