AdvertisementSupported byBy Joe LemireAs a rookie linebacker and long snapper with the Dallas Cowboys in 1984, Steve DeOssie assumed a mentality of being “crazy all the time.” A second-year teammate, however, made an important impression. Defensive end Jim Jeffcoat showed DeOssie that it was possible to assume a separate mentality off the field. “I saw a different side of professional football in a guy like Jim,” DeOssie recently recalled, “a guy who could be tough and aggressive and play good defense and still be a good, solid not-crazy family guy.”Earlier that year, DeOssie and his wife at the time, Dianna, welcomed boy and girl twins, Zak and Christina.In 1986, Jeffcoat married his wife, Tammy, and four years later, they welcomed boy and girl twins, Jackson and Jacqueline.After the Giants and the Redskins met at MetLife Stadium on Sept. 24 — their rematch is Sunday in Washington — the Giants’ long snapper, Zak DeOssie, paused for a photo at midfield with a Redskins outside linebacker named Jackson Jeffcoat.Two time zones away in Denver, a pair of friendly co-workers at the financial firm NorthStar Securities went to watch that game at Tavern Uptown, which caters to local New York and Washington fans. One, Christina DeOssie, wore blue and red with a Giants scarf; the other, Jacqueline Jeffcoat, donned a Redskins T-shirt. Each cheered her twin brother’s team three decades after their fathers were teammates.“Thousands of miles away now, it’s amazing the intertwining of lives over a course of, what, 30 years now,” said Steve DeOssie, who is an analyst for the New England Patriots.“I thought it was pretty cool,” said Jim Jeffcoat, who is the defensive line coach at the University of Colorado. “That’s very rare that you see fathers play together and then their sons play against each other. The DeOssies were always good people that I’m glad I had the opportunity to meet, and I’m glad our kids have had the opportunity to further our relationship.”The Giants won that game 32-21, driving Jacqueline from the bar early because “I was so irritated with that game. I want to leave before I get emotional.” Her companion was a bit less invested in the game.“Christina is so funny — I’m like, ‘There’s Zak’ and she’s like, ‘Where? Where?’ ” Jacqueline said. “She’s not even paying attention. She’s not a sports person. She’s incredible at what she does at her job. She’s just not into sports.”Jackson won’t be able to help get revenge on Sunday, either, as he was placed on injured reserve two weeks ago.The DeOssie twins are six and a half years older than the Jeffcoat twins, and Zak’s reaction to competing against Jackson made him feel old, “but it brought up some old memories. And just the coincidence of it is remarkable. Here we are, families growing up in the circumstance we did.”Zak calls Christina his “best friend from day one” even when they were competitive, trying to get their test up a little higher on the refrigerator. They also have a sister Nichole, who is a year and a day older than they are. “Without Dianna being strong, tough and a thoroughly dedicated mother, it would have been impossible,” Steve said, before adding, “I knew instinctively that the calm household I came home to after work was not what was happening during the day.”Neither Steve nor Dianna had family nearby, which made the presence of family friends like the Jeffcoats so much more important. A particular attraction for the little ones was the Jeffcoats’ backyard swimming pool. Tammy remembers Zak as nothing but “big eyes.” Jim remembers that Zak and Christina were “fun to be around and full of energy,” and that Zak braved the diving board when he was only 4 or 5. Zak was around that age before his father was traded to the Giants, so he only vaguely remembers the Jeffcoats’ house, pool and dog.The memory of that dog, a Rottweiler named Brutus, is etched in their minds. Nichole had taken her floaties off to go inside the house for a minute. She came back outside and jumped back into the pool without putting her floaties back on. Tammy and Dianna had been chatting with their backs to the pool, Tammy said, and had not realized Nichole was back in the water.All of a sudden, Brutus started barking and raced to jump in the pool after Nichole.“That alerted Dianna, and Dianna dove in to get Nichole,” Tammy said.Because of that “Lassie situation,” as Zak named it, when the DeOssies got a Yorkshire terrier, they named him Brutus Jr. Their succeeding dog also received the name Brutus.Soon thereafter, the Jeffcoats had their own twins, which prompted Tammy to call Dianna and ask, “Give me some knowledge: What do I do with these two babies?”The families would keep in touch from afar, with annual Christmas cards and occasional visits. After starring at Plano West High in Texas, Jacqueline later earned a Division I scholarship to play women’s basketball at Oklahoma; she later transferred to Texas State, where she started and eventually graduated. Jackson signed to play football at the University of Texas, where as a senior he led the team with 86 tackles and 13 sacks to earn all-American honors. Steve DeOssie began tracking the career of his teammate’s son from afar, tuning in on Saturdays to watch the Longhorns.“I’d watch him sometimes do some of the things that I saw Jim do,” Steve said, recognizing “the same toughness and same football acumen.”Any time Jackson sees old footage of his father, it seems Jim Jeffcoat makes a big play. At the end of a recent workout, Jackson looked up at the TV and saw an old Cowboys game from 1993.“Lo and behold, two plays later, he makes a sack,” Jackson said. Jackson signed with Washington as an undrafted free agent. Jacqueline graduated with a degree in communication studies but reconsidered an earlier ambition to enter broadcasting. She moved to be near her parents in Colorado while looking for a job. By that time, Christina had moved to Denver to work at NorthStar Securities. When Dianna came to visit, she caught up with Tammy over lunch and Dianna encouraged Tammy to have Jacqueline reach out to Christina, whose office had an opening. Jacqueline applied and was hired as a national sales assistant.The DeOssies are the only father-son duo in N.F.L. history to have won Super Bowl rings with the same franchise; Zak even has two with the Giants to his father’s one, a fact regularly discussed by the son. Jim Jeffcoat earned two rings with the Cowboys. Jackson is in only his second season.Steve DeOssie said that playing in the N.F.L. had been great but that watching his children do anything — his daughters running cross-country or performing in theater groups, or his son playing college and professional football — exceeded his own accomplishments. He has not spoken to Jim this season but bets he will say the same.“I’ve made a point that I’m going to call Jim after” the season is over “and just share the feeling,” Steve DeOssie said, before adding, “This is a direct link and something very cool that few fathers get to share.”Advertisement