AdvertisementSupported byN.F.L. RoundupBy The Associated PressJets cornerback Darrelle Revis will not play against the Miami Dolphins on Sunday because he is still dealing with a concussion.Revis was injured in the Jets’ 24-17 loss at Houston last Sunday and has not practiced since. Coach Todd Bowles said Friday that Marcus Williams would start in Revis’s place opposite Antonio Cromartie in the secondary.Revis remains under the N.F.L.’s protocol for concussions and must be cleared by doctors before he can return to practice. Also for the Jets, center Nick Mangold was a full participant for the second straight day of practice and will play Sunday after sustaining a deep cut to his right hand against the Texans. The cut required several stitches. ROMO OUT FOR SEASON Dallas Cowboys quarterback Tony Romo will miss the rest of the season with a small fracture in the same collarbone that previously sidelined him for seven games this season. The Cowboys’ owner and general manager, Jerry Jones, said on his radio show Friday that Romo’s left collarbone would not require surgery.Romo was injured in the third quarter of Thursday’s 33-14 loss to the Carolina Panthers. REDSKINS’ CULLIVER INJURED Washington’s starting cornerback Chris Culliver is heading to injured reserve after he tore ligaments in his right knee.Coach Jay Gruden said Friday that Culliver tore his anterior cruciate ligament and medial collateral ligament in practice Thursday.Gruden said the injury was “just a fluke deal,” adding that Culliver went up for a ball, landed on the knee “and it tore.”LUCK WON’T START Indianapolis Colts Coach Chuck Pagano made it official: Andrew Luck and left tackle Anthony Castonzo will miss Sunday’s game.Luck will miss his second straight game with a lacerated kidney and partly torn abdominal muscle. Castonzo will miss his first game since 2011 with a sprained right medial collateral ligament.FALCONS’ FREEMAN TO SIT OUT Running back Devonta Freeman, recovering from a concussion, will not play Sunday in Atlanta’s game against the Minnesota Vikings. He missed practice all week. The rookie Tevin Coleman is expected to start at running back.Coach Dan Quinn said Freeman had not completed the N.F.L. concussion protocol and added that the player was “doing really well.” BILLS TACKLE SET FOR SURGERY Buffalo defensive tackle Kyle Williams will have surgery on his left knee and miss the rest of the season.Williams, a 10-year veteran who has been out since sustaining the injury against the Cincinnati Bengals in Week 6, said he would need surgery for a meniscus injury.Advertisement