AdvertisementSupported byBruins 4, Rangers 3By The Associated PressBOSTON — With less than four minutes left and their modest winning streak in jeopardy, the Boston Bruins pulled off a comeback that would have seemed improbable a few weeks ago.Ryan Spooner and David Krejci scored 2 minutes 3 seconds apart late in the third period, and the Bruins rallied to beat the Rangers, 4-3, on Friday.“We didn’t stop playing,” Krejci said. “We kept pushing.”After limping through an inconsistent start to the season, the Bruins extended their winning streak to five games by beating the Rangers, one of the top teams in the East.The Rangers incurred a costly penalty in the second period when Dylan McIlrath was called for instigating a fight with Matt Beleskey after Beleskey had leveled Derek Stepan with a hit deep in the Rangers’ zone.Rangers Coach Alain Vigneault said the hit came well after Stepan had passed off the puck. It also broke a few ribs, leaving the Rangers without Stepan indefinitely, Vigneault said.Stepan was slow to get up after the hit by Beleskey. He played another shift in the second period but did not return for the third.“In our opinion, it was a late hit,” Vigneault said. “More than a second, and he was a couple of feet away from the boards. So we’ll have to wait and see.”McIlrath shook off his gloves while heading for Beleskey and landed a few shots, but Brett Connolly capitalized on the resulting penalty for the Bruins at 9:34 in the second.In the third period, Spooner scored a power-play goal with 3:46 left to tie the score at 3-3, and Krejci then struck on a deflected slap shot that beat Henrik Lundqvist with 1:43 remaining.“We showed a lot of character tonight,” Boston forward Brad Marchand said. “I think we have to be really happy about it. It shows that we’re learning and we’re coming together.”Tuukka Rask had 24 saves for the Bruins, and Connolly and Patrice Bergeron also scored.Oscar Lindberg, Rick Nash and J. T. Miller scored for the Rangers, and Lundqvist finished with 30 saves.The Rangers lost back-to-back games in regulation for the second time this season. They held leads of 2-1 and 3-2 but could not finish off the Bruins.Advertisement