AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressGHENT, Belgium — Andy Murray kept Britain in contention in the Davis Cup finals on Friday when he beat Belgium’s Ruben Bemelmans in straight sets, leaving the teams level at 1-1 after the opening singles.Murray, ranked No. 2 in the world, made a smooth transition to clay and won, 6-3, 6-2, 7-5, against his left-handed opponent, who is ranked No. 108.Earlier, David Goffin rallied to beat Kyle Edmund, 3-6, 1-6, 6-2, 6-1, 6-0, overcoming a two-set deficit for the first time in his career to put Belgium ahead.Belgium is seeking its first Davis Cup title, while Britain has not won the team competition in 79 years.Murray was briefly in trouble in the third set, but he broke back with a passing return. He also had to save a set point after double-faulting in the 10th game. He won the match with a service winner that Bemelmans returned long.Bemelmans played some delicate drop shots and other winners, but his 33 unforced errors, more than twice the number Murray had, made the difference.Edmund came close to making his Davis Cup debut a memorable one after rolling through the first two sets against the higher-ranked Goffin.But Goffin stepped up his game as Edmund started making mistakes.Goffin is No. 16 in the world and had not lost a set in four previous Davis Cup matches this year in leading Belgium to the finals. Edmund is ranked No. 100 and had not played in the competition until Friday.“I was just trying to focus on trying to block out the atmosphere, the occasion, and just play tennis, which is something I do every day,” Edmund, 20, said. “I hit thousands and thousands of balls. It couldn’t have gone any better. The third set, he started to get on top of me. Then things started to fall away. In the fourth set, I was struggling physically, and in the fifth set. It was just disappointing that my body couldn’t hold up the way I would have liked it to.”The first game went to six deuces, and Edmund saved two break points to win it in 12 minutes. After that, he raced through the first two sets. Edmund finished the first with an ace and broke Goffin’s serve three times to win the second in 27 minutes as Goffin double-faulted on set point after doing the same at the end of fifth game.Goffin, 24, began his comeback with a break of serve in the third game of the third set and broke again for a 4-1 lead.“I was a little bit worried, because Kyle was playing unbelievable,” Goffin said. “He just had nothing to lose. He played a wonderful match. But I knew I had a chance.”After the Paris terrorist attacks, and with Belgium on a heightened terrorist alert, security was tightened at the event. Fans went through body searches and were not allowed to take bags into the Flanders Expo.Advertisement