AdvertisementSupported byBy Jason Sablich and Justin SablichFantasy football analysis for N.F.L. Week 12 games and Monday’s matchup between the Baltimore Ravens and the Cleveland Browns. You can also follow the Sablich brothers on Twitter at @5thDownFantasy and see their complete Week 12 player rankings.1 p.m. Line: Bengals by 10Quarterback Andy Dalton (CIN) — He bounced back with 315 yards and two touchdowns against a formidable Cardinals defense, so he is capable of overcoming this tough matchup (second worst, 14 F.P.P.G.). Running Back Todd Gurley (STL) — The Bengals have allowed just two rushing touchdowns this season and are yielding 17.2 F.P.P.G., but Gurley has at least 12 fantasy points in each game he has started, so he remains an elite RB play.Jeremy Hill/Giovani Bernard (CIN) — Do not be fooled by Hill’s two-touchdown performance in Week 11. He saw fewer snaps than Bernard, and averaged 3.5 Y.P.C.Wide Receiver/Tight End A.J. Green (CIN) — He has just one game of over 10 fantasy points in his last seven, so he is far from reliable at this point. But he is still a low-end WR1 given his targets. The Rams are the third worst matchup for receivers (14.6).Tyler Eifert (CIN) — He added two touchdowns last week to his position-leading total of 11. He is clearly Dalton’s favorite red zone target at this point, to the detriment of Green’s fantasy value, and is our third ranked tight end this week.These player rankings from the Sablich brothers are for standard and PPR scoring formats and will be updated throughout the season.1 p.m. Eastern time; Line: Even Quarterback Matt Ryan (ATL) — The Vikings have kept opposing receivers in check all season, not allowing any of them to top 20 fantasy points at an average of 15.3 F.P.P.G. (seventh fewest). Ryan is a QB2 against this stout pass defense.Teddy Bridgewater (MIN) — Atlanta has allowed the fourth fewest F.P.P.G. to quarterbacks, but that number may be deceiving. Only three of the quarterbacks the Falcons have played are currently in the top 15 among fantasy quarterbacks. No matter. Bridgewater is not high-caliber competition, either, and is barely a QB2 this week.Running Back Devonta Freeman/Tevin Coleman (ATL) — It is looking less likely that Freeman will play (concussion), putting Coleman in the RB2 conversation against the N.F.L.’s 17th ranked run defense.Adrian Peterson (MIN) — The Falcons are allowing 22.1 F.P.P.G. to backs (sixth most), but have not allowed a 100-yard rusher, either. Our money is on that changing in Week 12. Peterson is the consensus top running back play this week. Wide Receiver/Tight End Julio Jones (ATL) — Jones has failed to top 13 standard fantasy points in only three games.Stefon Diggs (MIN) — He is averaging 5.5 F.P.P.G. in his last three games after averaging 15.4 in the three games before that. The Falcons are fantasy’s second toughest matchup for receivers, so we are not expecting an improvement this week. Kyle Rudolph (MIN) — He is coming off his best performance of the season, with six receptions for 106 yards and a touchdown. He is still a touchdown-dependent option on the low end of the TE2 spectrum.1 p.m. Line: EvenQuarterback Derek Carr (OAK) — The bust of Week 11 (7.6 points vs. DET) will try to bounce back against the Titans’ third ranked pass defense (214.2 Y.P.G.). He showed remarkable consistency before last week, and we like him as a solid QB2 play this week.Running Back Latavius Murray (OAK) — The Titans have allowed the fourth fewest F.P.P.G. (14.3), and Murray is averaging 3.0 Y.P.C. over the last two games. Fantasy’s 10th best back over all is a low-end RB2 in this tough matchup.Wide Receiver Kendall Wright (TEN) — He is expected to return after missing the last three games and can be considered as a flex option against the Raiders’ 30th ranked pass defense.Amari Cooper/Michael Crabtree (OAK) — Crabtree managed five receptions for 60 yards on 11 targets despite Carr’s horrific performance. Cooper was not as fortunate, with just one catch for 4 yards. Both can be started as WR2s in what should be a bounce-back performance from Carr.Delanie Walker (TEN) — He may lose a few targets with Wright back in the fold, but he has been one of the more reliable tight end options at 8.9 F.P.P.G. and has a good matchup for the position, with the Raiders allowing the fourth most F.P.P.G. (11.3).1 p.m. Line: Colts by 2.5Quarterback Jameis Winston (TB) — He is now the 11th ranked fantasy quarterback after his five-touchdown performance against the Eagles. The Colts have allowed seven touchdowns over the past three games, so consider Winston a solid QB2 with QB1 upside.Running Back Frank Gore (IND) — The banged-up Gore has averaged only 2.9 Y.P.C. over his last three games. He is on track to play after being listed as questionable earlier in the week, but he is a low-end RB2 against a run defense that has not allowed a back to reach the end zone since Week 3.Doug Martin (TB) — Welcome back to fantasy royalty, Mr. Martin. His 235 rushing yards against the Eagles last week gave him 941 on the season (second in the N.F.L.), and he is fantasy’s third best back at 136.9 total fantasy points. He is an elite RB play against a beatable Colts run defense (20.8 F.P.P.G.).Wide Receiver T.Y. Hilton/Donte Moncrief (IND) — Without Luck behind center, Hilton saw only four targets (2/21/0), while Moncrief had five receptions for 41 yards on eight targets. Both of their ceilings are limited with Matt Hasselbeck at quarterback, but Hilton can still be deployed as an WR2 in this matchup. Mike Evans/Vincent Jackson (TB) — The Colts are allowing the seventh most points to the position at 25.9 F.P.P.G. Evans, who has either at least 125 yards or a touchdown in his last three games, is an obvious WR1 while Jackson is a solid WR3.1 p.m. Line: Chiefs by 7Quarterback Alex Smith (KC) — The Bills have kept opposing quarterbacks under 15 fantasy points in each of the last four games. Smith, who has one touchdown pass in his last two games, is not worth a start in any format this week.Running Back  Charcandrick West/Spencer Ware (KC) — The Bills have allowed a back to top 13 fantasy points in each of the last five games. West is unlikely to play after missing practice most of the week (hamstring), which means Ware, who had two touchdowns against the Chargers last week, is a solid RB2 with RB1 upside this week.LeSean McCoy (BUF) — The Chiefs are fantasy’s third toughest matchup for backs (14.2), but McCoy, who has at least 15 fantasy points in each of his last three games, is still a low-end RB1.Wide Receiver/Tight End  Jeremy Maclin (KC) — He has not topped 10 fantasy points since Week 4, but he is still worth considering as an WR3 in this matchup (24.7 F.P.P.G.).Sammy Watkins (BUF) — The Chiefs are tied with the Eagles as fantasy’s best matchup for receivers (28.7 F.P.P.G.), though they have kept all opposing receivers under 10 points in the last three games. Watkins has just 53 yards on six receptions in his last two games combined, but the matchup keeps him in the WR2 conversation for one more week. Travis Kelce (KC) — The Bills are one of the tougher teams for opposing tight ends to play (5.8 F.P.P.G.), and Kelce has just one touchdown in his last eight games.1 p.m. Line: Jets by 3Quarterback  Ryan Tannehill (MIA) — The Jets are no longer a matchup to fear for quarterbacks, as they have handed over 21 F.P.P.G. over their last five games. Cornerback Darrelle Revis, who was not playing well to begin with, left Sunday’s game with a concussion and may not play this weekend. The underachieving Tannehill remains a QB2 play regardless.Ryan Fitzpatrick (NYJ) — Fitzpatrick has been terrible over his last two games, completing just 46 percent of his attempts to go along with an average of 206 passing yards and four total interceptions. He managed just 218 yards and 1 TD/1 INT against the Dolphins in Week 4, which makes him a shaky QB2 option despite the favorable matchup.Running Back  Lamar Miller (MIA) — This is not the same defense that held Miller to 26 yards on seven carries in Week 4. The Jets’ ground defense has caved to the likes of Alfred Blue (15 points), LeSean McCoy (15 points) and T.J. Yeldon (10 points) over the last three games. Most of that damage was done in the passing game, which is something Miller excels in. He remains high-end RB2 material.Chris Ivory (NYJ) — The Dolphins are fantasy’s third best matchup for running backs, and have permitted three 100-yard rushers over their last three contests. It will be impossible to keep Ivory out of your lineup despite his recent struggles, considering he rushed for a career-high 166 yards against the Dolphins earlier this season. Wide Receiver Brandon Marshall/Eric Decker (NYJ) — The Dolphins allowed both Terrance Williams and Dez Bryant to reach double digits in fantasy points last week, which is exactly what Marshall and Decker achieved in Week 4. Both are must-start options this weekend. Jarvis Landry/Rishard Matthews (MIA) — Landry remains a low-end WR2 option against a struggling Jets secondary that could be missing Revis. Matthews is coming off his worst game of the season and is a weaker WR3 play considering his lack of volume in recent weeks.1 p.m. Line: Giants by 2.5 Quarterback Eli Manning (NYG) — Manning has had his way with the Redskins of late, averaging 279 passing yards and a 9-to-1 TD-to-INT ratio over his last three games against them. Washington just served up five touchdowns to Cam Newton and has surrendered the eighth most fantasy points to the position this year. All signs point to quality QB1 production from the younger and still active Manning brother this Sunday.Kirk Cousins (WAS) — A home game against the league’s worst pass defense (309.9 Y.P.G.) makes Cousins an elite QB1 streamer in Week 12. He has produced high-end QB1 numbers in his last two home games against poor defenses (TB: 317 yards, 3 TDs; NO: 324 yards, 4 TDs).Running Back Rashad Jennings/Shane Vereen (NYG) — Jennings is a low-end RB3 gamble from this messy, four-way backfield committee despite the fact that Washington is considered the league’s third worst run defense. Vereen failed to convert any of his three targets in the Week 3 game against Washington.Alfred Morris/Matt Jones/Chris Thompson (WAS) — Speaking of frustrating backfields, the Redskins rank right up there with the Giants. Morris should be able to suit up and can loosely be considered the safer RB3 dart throw with Jones’s fumbling issues of late. The Giants struggled to contain Thompson in the passing game in Week 3 (8/57/1), which puts him on the flex play map in P.P.R. settings.Wide Receiver/Tight End Odell Beckham Jr. /Rueben Randle (NYG) — Beckham is a top-three option against a Redskins secondary giving out the sixth most points to the position. Randle is always boom or bust, but was more boom in his last outing against Washington (7/116/1), which gives him WR3 appeal in Week 12.DeSean Jackson (WAS) — Jackson hauled in five of eight targets for 87 yards and a touchdown last week against the Panthers, who are much better at stopping the pass than the Giants. He appears to be back to full strength and can safely be used again as an WR2.Jordan Reed (WAS) — Reed has fallen off the fantasy radar since Jackson returned, and he is dealing with a minor M.C.L. strain. But he will remain a top end option against a Giants defense that has allowed the second most points to the position.1 p.m. Line: Jaguars by 4Quarterback Philip Rivers (SD) — Rivers has not been the same since Keenan Allen went down, but he will still be hard to sit against a Jaguars unit that has allowed at least 18 standard league points to the position in five straight weeks. Over all, Jacksonville is allowing the fourth most fantasy points to the position. Blake Bortles (JAC) — Like Rivers, Bortles has not been playing good football of late. He remains a fringe QB1 play at home against a sinking San Diego defense that has permitted at least 19 points to opposing quarterbacks in four of their last five games played.Running Back Melvin Gordon/Danny Woodhead (SD) — Gordon is averaging just 2.8 yards per carry over his last three contests and has yet to score a touchdown. Woodhead remains the preferred, low-end RB2 play against a tough Jacksonville run defense that ranks ninth best in the league.T.J. Yeldon (JAC) — Yeldon wins the most favorable running back matchup sweepstakes this week. The Chargers just served up consecutive 20-point fantasy performances to backup running backs Jeremy Langford and the Chiefs’ Ware, and have held opposing backs out of the end zone in just two games this season. Yeldon will not find a better opportunity to turn in RB1 value than this weekend. Wide Receiver Stevie Johnson (SD) — Johnson has not reached the end zone since Week 2, but his steady stream of targets in Allen’s absence has made him a nice asset in P.P.R. formats. He is a reasonable bet for standard WR3 success against a beatable Jacksonville secondary. Allen Robinson/Allen Hurns (JAC) — The Chargers have yielded an average of 10.8 fantasy points to opposing WR1s over the last five weeks. Robinson is cemented as an WR1 and Hurns is likely to draw the tougher corner in Brandon Flowers, but his nose for the end zone will keep him in the WR2 tier.Antonio Gates (SD) — The Jaguars have permitted consecutive 10-point days to the position over the last two weeks and are allowing an average of 9 F.P.P.G. on the year.1 p.m. Line: Texans by 3Quarterback Brian Hoyer (HOU) — Hoyer returns in Week 12 and gets a crack at fantasy’s most favorable matchup for the position. The Saints have allowed at least four passing touchdowns in three straight games, and an average of 30 fantasy points in five straight. Hoyer can be streamed where needed.Drew Brees (NO) — The Texans have played well against the pass of late, limiting their last three passing opponents to a 12-point fantasy average. Brees is always in the QB1 conversation, but a road game with an improving Texans defense may lower the ceiling.Running Back Alfred Blue (HOU) — The Saints have surrendered double-digit fantasy days to fellow plodders Alfred Morris and Antonio Andrews over the last two weeks, and are on the hook for allowing the second most fantasy points to the position. Mark Ingram (NO) — The Texans’ 22nd ranked run defense has held opposing running backs to just 3.5 yards a carry and 0 TDs over the last three weeks. Ingram has cleared 80 yards in four straight weeks, and should still be able to turn in a respectable performance.Wide Receiver/Tight EndDeAndre Hopkins (HOU) — The Saints’ 31st ranked pass defense has served up an average of 33 fantasy points to opposing receivers over the last five weeks, including monster games from T.Y. Hilton (27 points) and Beckham (31 points). Hopkins is a top three receiver play this weekend.Willie Snead/Brandin Cooks (NO) — The Saints duo will face the N.F.L.’s fifth best pass defense, which has held top receivers Green (5/67/0) and Marshall (4/47/1) in check in its last two contests.4:05 p.m. Line: Cardinals by 11.5Quarterback Carson Palmer (ARI) — Palmer was 20 of 32 for 311 passing yards and two touchdowns in his earlier meeting with the 49ers, who represent fantasy’s 10th best matchup for the position. He is averaging 25 fantasy points in his last three games despite some stiff competition in Seattle and Cincinnati, and is an elite option at the position in Week 12.Running Back Shaun Draughn (SF) — The matchup leaves a lot to be desired, as the Cardinals have the league’s sixth ranked run defense, but Draughn has dominated this backfield in touches since Carlos Hyde went down, and that kind of workload typically offers a reasonable RB2 floor regardless of the opponent.Chris Johnson (ARI) — Johnson torched San Francisco’s 26th ranked run defense for 150 total yards and two scores in Week 3. Speaking of being torched, the Seattle backup Thomas Rawls burned this unit for 259 total yards last Sunday, making him the third back to produce at least 18 fantasy points against them in three consecutive weeks. Wide Receiver Larry Fitzgerald/Michael Floyd/John Brown (ARI) — The 49ers are allowing the fifth most fantasy points to receivers. Fitzgerald had one of his best games of the season against this secondary in Week 3 (9/134/2) and is the premier play. Floyd (hamstring) will also be a must-start if he can give it a full go. Brown is losing targets to J.J. Green, but has found the end zone in two of his last three and will be a decent WR3 option if Floyd sits.Anquan Boldin (SF) — The Cardinals’ seventh ranked pass defense held Boldin to two receptions for 16 yards the last time they faced off. He is coming off one of his better games of the season with Blaine Gabbert behind center (5/97 vs. SEA), and will be in play as a decent WR3 in P.P.R. formats, health permitting (hamstring).4:25 p.m. Line: Seahawks by 3.5 Quarterback  Russell Wilson (SEA) — The Steelers come out of their bye with the N.F.L.’s 28th ranked pass defense, allowing 278.4 passing yards per game. The matchup is primed for Wilson to put up another quality QB1 outing together. Ben Roethlisberger (PIT) — Seattle ranks second against the pass and is fantasy’s eighth worst quarterback matchup. On the plus side, all QB1-caliber quarterbacks who have faced this unit have managed at least 19 fantasy points.Running Back DeAngelo Williams (PIT) — Seattle is fantasy’s worst matchup for the position, and Williams is coming off a downer against a soft Browns defense, so expectations need to be well in check.Thomas Rawls (SEA) — The matchup is an ugly one, as the Steelers are the second toughest matchup for opposing running backs and have allowed just three double-digit games all year, but Rawls will see enough opportunities to warrant RB2 consideration in an offense that is as run-heavy as Seattle’s.Wide Receiver/Tight End Antonio Brown/Martavis Bryant (PIT) — One of these guys will have to take the brunt of dealing with Richard Sherman, and on paper that arrow points mainly to Bryant. Seattle is the fourth worst matchup a receiver can have, and has allowed just two double-digit fantasy performances to the position. Brown can never sit, but we will not fault you for exercising caution with Bryant this week.Jimmy Graham (SEA) — The Steelers are giving up 11 F.P.P.G. to tight ends, which is the fifth most in fantasy. Graham frustratingly remains a TE1 play based solely on the matchup.8:30 p.m. Line: Patriots by 2.5Quarterback Tom Brady (NE) — Brady is likely to be in for another long night on the road against the league’s best pass defense. Denver represents the worst matchup a quarterback can have, and has allowed just one game of 18 or more fantasy points this season. He is a low-end QB1 play at best.Running Back Ronnie Hillman/C.J. Anderson (DEN) — The Patriots rank third against the run and have allowed just two backs to top 10 fantasy points in a game over the last eight weeks. Either back will be hard to trust as anything more than a low-end flex play.LeGarrette Blount/James White (NE) — White’s emergence last week complicates this backfield situation for fantasy purposes, but we will assume Blount will again see the majority of carries against Denver’s eighth ranked run defense. Wide Receiver/Tight End  Demaryius Thomas/Emmanuel Sanders (DEN) — The Patriots rank 21st against the pass and have permitted the ninth most fantasy points to the position. Deploy your Broncos receivers where needed.Brandon LaFell/Danny Amendola (NE) — Amendola (knee) has not been formally ruled out yet, but it would be wise to assume he will not be active on Sunday. All New England receivers are unappealing starts this weekend against the worst matchup for the position.Rob Gronkowski (NE) — Only Gary Barnidge has managed to top 10 fantasy points against the Broncos this year, but Gronkowski has proved matchup proof and may see even more targets given Brady’s lack of options at receiver.8:30 p.m. Monday. Line: Ravens by 3.Quarterback Josh McCown (CLE) — Baltimore has been a doormat for the position all season (second best QB matchup), and McCown himself shredded this hapless secondary for 457 yards and two scores back in Week 5. There’s elite QB1 upside here, with a high-end QB2 floor.Running Back Javorius Allen (BAL) — One of the better waiver wire adds this week comes out of the gate with a tempting matchup, as the Browns rank dead last against the run and have surrendered the fifth most fantasy points to the running opposition this year.Wide Receiver/Tight End Travis Benjamin (CLE) — He is locked in as a WR2 play this week against fantasy’s third best receiver matchup. He managed 83 yards on six receptions the last time he faced the Ravens seven weeks ago.Kamar Aiken (BAL) — The forecast has more clouds than sun with Matt Schaub now behind center, but the matchup is good enough (fourth best), and the floor has been steady enough to keep rolling him out as a WR3.Gary Barnidge (CLE) — He dropped an 8/139/1 statistical line on the Ravens in Week 5.Crockett Gillmore (BAL) — Has now been TE1 worthy in three consecutive weeks, and the Browns (12th best TE matchup) have allowed an average of 13 points to the position over the last three weeks. Start him where needed.Advertisement