By VICTOR MATHERNOV. 27, 2015
The Warriors have become the first N.B.A. team to start a season 16-0. On Tuesday, the 76ers could become the first to start 0-19. In each case, the opponent for the record-breaking game is the Lakers.Los Angeles fans had better enjoy this proximity to history; the team is unlikely to be involved in much more. Its 111-77 loss to the Warriors on Tuesday was the ugliest so far in an ugly 2-12 season.After making the playoffs in 16 of the first 17 years of the Kobe Bryant era, including seven finals appearances and five titles, the Lakers plunged to 27 wins in 2013-14 and 21 last season. The sharp decline coincided with injury problems for Bryant, who played only six and 35 games in those seasons.Bryant is back this season, but it is not entirely clear that is a good thing for the Lakers.Though his skills have declined, Bryant remains the focal point of the team’s offense. His usage rate, which measures how often the offense is run through him, is 29.5 percent, leading the team and not far below his career average of 31.8.AdvertisementIt is fair to say that Bryant has become the worst shooter in the league. Last season, he shot .373, the worst figure ever for a regular player with a usage rate over 30, according to Basketball-Reference. This year, he is worse, at .311. That’s the lowest figure in the league by a player with at least 150 attempts. Bryant is 15 for 77 from 3-point territory, at .195 the worst percentage of any player with 60 attempts.The bricklaying was capped by a 1-for-14 performance in the Warriors game, tied for his worst shooting effort ever in a game in which he took at least five shots. Many of his misses on the night were not even close.“He’s struggling right now to make a shot; I think he’ll be the first to tell you that,” Coach Byron Scott told reporters after the game. But Scott has also said that Bryant’s minutes will not be reduced.Other aspects of Bryant’s game have also declined. His assist average is down to 3.5, a drop from his usual five or six. His steal rate is his lowest in 18 years.The Los Angeles Times suggested Friday that it might be time for Bryant to retire, quoting Charles Barkley: “Somebody asked me how I knew it was time to retire. I said because I was pump-faking. So now I see Kobe and he’s pump-faking because he’s scared they are going to block his shot. That’s what the pump-faking is. People are knocking your shot into the stands.”AdvertisementThough many expect this to be Bryant’s farewell tour, he has said he will not decide his future until the season is over. He is making $25 million in the last year of his contract.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.He is getting little help from his teammates. In the 30-team N.B.A., the Lakers rank last in shooting at .411, helped by Lou Williams, who is coming off the bench to shoot .348 and .236 from 3. The team is 28th in assists and steals. In points per 100 possessions, it ranks 29th offensively and 28th defensively.The No. 2 overall draft pick, D’Angelo Russell, is starting at point guard but ranks just fourth in assists per game among rookies, and just 14th in player efficiency ratio, behind, among others, T.J. McConnell, an undrafted point guard playing for Philadelphia.At 2-12, the Lakers look down only on the hapless Sixers. For fans of a more cynical bent, this could actually be good news. The Lakers must send their first-round pick next year to the 76ers, unless they land in the top 3. The more they lose, the more ping-pong balls they get and the better their chances to get a potential star.Russell is just 19 and figures to improve. Add, say, Ben Simmons of Louisiana State, and the Lakers could be back on the long road to glory.More than just a record could be on the line in that game at Philadelphia on Tuesday.A version of this article appears in print on November 28, 2015, on Page D3 of the New York edition with the headline: As Bryant Declines, Lakers Fall From the N.B.A.’s Elite.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.