By BRAD SPURGEONNOV. 27, 2015
On a man-made island in Abu Dhabi, the Yas Marina Circuit was inaugurated in 2009 with great fanfare. It was considered the world’s most original and advanced circuit layout, with unique features like a tunnel leading out of the pit lane and portions of the track run-off area set under the grandstand and a hotel.It was also the first dusk-to-night-time Formula One race. With these ingredients, the series had high hopes for the race. Unfortunately, however, the track layout had some flaws, and it failed to deliver on the hopes for spectacular racing.The next year, however, the second Abu Dhabi Grand Prix was the scene of one of the most unexpected Formula One drivers’ title showdowns in history, for reasons that had nothing to do with the track design or location.That 2010 race would also inaugurate a new era in the series, with results that would create long-lasting career consequences for some drivers, including Fernando Alonso at Ferrari, Mark Webber at Red Bull, and, to a lesser extent, Lewis Hamilton at McLaren Mercedes. It would also be the beginning of a four-year domination by Sebastian Vettel and his Red Bull team.AdvertisementThose four drivers each had a chance to win the driver’s title in the Abu Dhabi Grand Prix, which was the last of the season’s 19 races. It was the first time in Formula One history that four drivers had a shot at the title in a final showdown. Alonso led the series with 246 points; Webber was second with 238, followed by Vettel with 231 and Hamilton with 222.AdvertisementIn the end, it was Vettel who would take the race victory as well as the world title. Like Kimi Raikkonen in 2007 and Giuseppe Farina in 1950, he had moved up from third in the series to winning the crown.Vettel also became the series’ youngest world champion, at 23 years old and 134 days, 166 days younger than Hamilton was when he became the youngest champion in 2008. He was also the first champion since James Hunt in 1976 to lead the series only once in the season, after the final race.Vettel, with winning the race the only way he could win the title, scored the pole position in Abu Dhabi and led from start to finish. Behind him, the two other main contenders, Alonso and Webber — Hamilton was a distant outside contender — had just about everything go wrong that could go wrong.Alonso, in his first season at Ferrari, needed only to finish in fourth position or better to become champion. Considering that he had qualified third, it looked as if he would have an easy coast to that goal.But Ferrari made a serious error in judgment, basing Alonso’s race on Webber’s position and ignoring Vettel. The mistake was a sign that the team that had dominated the series for much of the 2000s had lost its edge, a trend that would continue in the coming years.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Webber made a pit stop on Lap 12, having had problems with his tires and a brush with the barriers. Ferrari thus decided to make Alonso’s pit stop just after Webber’s, and, as planned, the Spaniard returned to the race ahead of Webber. But with the stop he had dropped down to 12th position, while Vettel continued to lead.Hamilton drove a solid race and would finish second, with his teammate, Jenson Button, finishing third. But Alonso only managed to finish seventh, and Webber was eighth. This meant that Vettel won the championship with 256 points, finishing with 4 more points than Alonso, who ended up second in the series.Vettel said later that he hadn’t known he had a chance to win until after he had crossed the finish line, when his engineer told him. But the result was so close that it was only once the other cars had crossed the finish line that the title was truly his.Advertisement“I didn’t know anything until I crossed the checkered flag,” said Vettel. “The last 10 laps I was wondering, as my race engineer every lap was trying to give some advice and trying to help me carry the car home.“Then he came on the radio and screams at me that we have won the world championship.” »After the race, putting a good face on the matter, Alonso tried to defend the team’s blunder.“After the race it is always very easy to see the best strategy,” said Alonso, a double world champion. “You need to cover someone, and if we didn’t stop I think Webber probably would have overtaken us.”But the Spaniard would never win the title at Ferrari, finishing second again in 2012 and 2013. He then left the team, convinced that Ferrari would continue to miss out on the title even if finishing close, as it has again this year, with Vettel ending up third in the series, behind the two Mercedes drivers.After that first title in 2010, Vettel went on to win the championship the next three years. Webber, his teammate, seemed never to have recovered entirely from that turning point in which he saw the title slip away in favor of his much younger teammate.And Abu Dhabi has never again put on such an exciting show, despite the title having been decided there last year, in a gruelling finale between Hamilton, who would win his second championship, and his Mercedes teammate, Nico Rosberg.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »