AdvertisementSupported bySpecial Report: Abu Dhabi Grand PrixBy Brad SpurgeonLewis Hamilton may this year have won his second straight drivers’ title and the third of his career, he may have dominated the season until that title was in hand last month, but this weekend the focus is on Nico Rosberg, his teammate at Mercedes, who for the second year in a row has finished behind Hamilton. The 30-year-old German has intrigued fans and insiders alike with his late-season return to strength and even domination of Hamilton, a Briton who is also 30. In fact, this year Rosberg has taken a remarkably different turn than he did a year ago, when he arrived at the final race of the season in Abu Dhabi with a chance to win the title. Then, after losing the title to Hamilton, his longtime rival and teammate, Rosberg looked like a driver who had had the wind knocked out of him, his confidence drained. Last season he scored more pole positions than Hamilton, but this year Hamilton scored 11 pole positions to only one for Rosberg. In the first 12 races of the 2015 season, the Briton had seven victories to three for the German, who seemed to have lost his edge. But over the last five races, suddenly Rosberg has scored every pole position. He was heading to a victory at the United States Grand Prix in Texas last month when, with just 10 laps left, he made an error, went off the track and handed both the victory and the world title to Hamilton. He has taken pole position and victory in the two races since then, appearing to be as liberated by the easing of the pressure as he had seemed crimped by his failure last season. But Rosberg denied that.“It doesn’t change,” he said. “With the way it was in the championship in the end, the pressure was on Lewis, because I was hunting.” In the Brazil Grand Prix on Nov. 15, Rosberg’s victory ensured that he will finish the season in second place, ahead of Sebastian Vettel at Ferrari. So the question before the final race of the season on Sunday is whether Rosberg, whom Niki Lauda, one of the Mercedes team directors, calls the best driver of the moment, will continue this run. “I can’t really tell you what it is, the driving or psychologically,” said Toto Wolff, the Mercedes team director, of Rosberg’s turnaround. “Or whether Lewis has won the championship and that is locked in, and Nico had to secure second. It’s just that his driving is exceptional.”Rosberg says he doesn’t know, either. “Unfortunately, I don’t have an explanation for it,” he said in Brazil. “What I do know is that I have been working at it, and so if I am now faster, especially in qualifying, then great. It seems that my work is starting to pay off. Because qualifying was one of the big weaknesses and definitely one of the reasons Lewis won the championship this year, because it helped him a lot starting first all the time.”Rosberg’s career in Formula One has not only been overshadowed by that of his teammate on the track, but also in terms of media image. He is a perfect contrast to Hamilton, who was born to a black father and a white mother and raised modestly in an English village. Hamilton managed to rise to the top and make a successful career by what seemed to be his own force of will and talent, although he was helped by financial assistance from the McLaren team throughout his teenage years. Every step of Hamilton’s climb was accomplished under the media microscope. While he managed to deliver early, winning his first title in 2008 at the age of 23 in his second year in the series, he still had some growing up to do. He eventually had to split with his father, Anthony, who had been his manager.Rosberg, by contrast, was perceived as a solid driver from the start, the son of a former world champion, Keke Rosberg of Finland, who won the title driving for Williams in 1982. But both Keke and Nico have always kept their father-son relationship out of the media spotlight. Keke had managed his compatriot Mika Hakkinen, who won the drivers’ titles in 1998 and 1999 at McLaren, and he had the necessary contacts to help his son’s career. The young Rosberg, who grew up privileged in Monaco, joined his father’s previous team, Williams, in 2006. He spent four years learning his craft there until he joined Mercedes, along with the seven-time world champion Michael Schumacher, in 2010. It was only then that Rosberg began to prove himself. Schumacher may have returned from retirement at the relatively advanced age (for a driver) of 41, but as the most successful driver in the series’ history and still physically fit, he was a yardstick by which to judge Rosberg.In the three seasons that the two drove together, Rosberg scored five podiums and a pole position, to just one podium finish and no pole positions for Schumacher. He also finished higher than Schumacher in the standings each year. In the first year of the Hamilton-Rosberg combination at Mercedes, the British driver scored five pole positions to three for the German. But last season it was Rosberg who scored 11 pole positions to just seven for Hamilton. This season the statistics reversed again: Hamilton has scored 11 pole positions to Rosberg’s six. The two drivers seem fairly equal, therefore, in all but the victory statistics. In 2013, Rosberg won two races and Hamilton won only one. Things changed last season, as Hamilton had 11 victories to five for Rosberg; this year, Hamilton has won 10 races, while Rosberg has five. But just as when they were youthful go-karting teammates, it has always been Hamilton who has won the titles.There has been public scrutiny of Hamilton’s demons and growth, but little attention is paid to the potentially inevitable difficulty for Rosberg of trying to live up to his father’s achievements. He has better statistics in victories and poles than Keke. But taking the ultimate prize, as his father did in 1982 with just a single victory that season, must have its psychological hurdles. Rosberg played down that aspect, though. “The head is always there,” he said. “Half of me is a Finn, you know. So there is the Finnish ‘sisu,’ fighting spirit.”Advertisement