AdvertisementSupported bySpecial Report: Abu Dhabi Grand PrixBy Brad SpurgeonAs Formula One prepares for the final race of the season this weekend in Abu Dhabi, some fans have complained that yet another season has been dominated by the same team and driver: Mercedes and Lewis Hamilton. As it did last year, Mercedes has won all but three of the races so far in 2015. The three exceptions were victories by Ferrari’s Sebastian Vettel. In 2014, Daniel Ricciardo of the Red Bull team triumphed three times instead of a Mercedes driver. This situation has brought a collective sigh of disenchantment with the series, which many observers believe is moving in the wrong direction with its technical and financial rules. But the truth is that in Formula One, as in many other sports, domination is not just the name of the game, it is also the status quo.From 1979 to 2004, Ferrari, McLaren and Williams won all but one of the annual constructors’ titles — the exception was Benetton in 1995 — in mostly alternating periods of domination. Ferrari even won the titles five years running, from 1999 to 2004, with Michael Schumacher driving and winning the drivers’ titles from 2000 to 2004. Going back to 1974, Lotus was the only other team to win the title.“I am very surprised sometimes to see people wondering why there is domination,” said Jean Todt, the team director during Ferrari’s domination last decade and now president of the International Automobile Federation, or F.I.A., the sports’s governing body. “There has always been domination. For the 50 years or more that I have been following motor racing, you have domination. You have domination in each category of motor sport. You have domination in any kind of sport, not only in motor racing. And that is the challenge: to break the domination and to do a better job.”Endurance racing, the second-highest form of racing, embodied by the 24 Hours of Le Mans in France, has been dominated by Audi for most of the 21st century. And even before Todt’s half-century, Grand Prix racing went through periods of different team and driver domination. The Argentine driver Juan Manuel Fangio was the champion in half of the Formula One seasons in the 1950s. The Mercedes Silver Arrow cars dominated the second half of the 1930s; Bugattis were dominant in the late 1920s. There are similar reigns in other sports — exceptional teams like the New York Yankees in baseball, the Los Angeles Lakers in basketball, Barcelona and Real Madrid in soccer. In ice hockey, the Montreal Canadiens have been the most victorious team in National Hockey League history, winning the Stanley Cup 24 times — including every year from 1956 to 1960 — and playing in the finals an additional 10 times. The same phenomenon is seen in nonteam sports like golf, tennis, or track and field, where certain athletes frequently dominate for years.The champion hurdler Edwin Moses, 60, who compiled a nine-year, nine-month and nine-day winning streak in 122 races from September 1977 to June 1987 and set four world records in the 400-meter hurdles, noted that unlike in most sports, dominance in auto racing can be made or broken by regulations.“It’s all technical,” said Moses, who follows Formula One closely through his role leading the Laureus sports awards. “It’s not like me boring over 10 hurdles and wearing everybody down time after time again, where everything is basically the same except for your conditioning and the time of the season and things like that.”“It’s different in auto racing,” he said. “It’s a kind of artificial dominance that can be created by rules changes.”The dominance from 2010 to 2013 by the Red Bull team, with Sebastian Vettel driving, resulted from specifications that made aerodynamic intricacy the crucial factor in a car’s success. Red Bull reigned because it had the best aerodynamics designer and team of engineers. The current dominance by Mercedes is the result of a radical change in the regulations last season that reduced the importance of aerodynamics and made the engine the most important factor. And Mercedes has built the best engine. As a cost-saving measure, and to balance the financial playing field, engine manufacturers today are not allowed to continue developing their engines once the Formula One season has begun. The fear is that the richer teams would have an advantage because they could finance costly engine development that would be beyond the means of the smaller teams. But the teams and the governing body have now agreed to allow more engine upgrading next year. Monisha Kaltenborn, a part owner and the director of the Sauber team, said that dominance was never a problem in the past and should not be a problem now. For her, the problem now is how the rules are made.“For me, that’s never been any negative point in our series because we have always had that situation dominance,” Kaltenborn said. “If you go back to the years of Michael Schumacher — how many years did the team dominate? And look at all the things that were attached to it: Tires were being developed for one team, for one driver basically, and you never had these kinds of discussions.”The problem today, she continued, is when teams use their dominant position to influence the regulations in their favor and thus make it difficult for smaller teams like hers to survive. She cited various financial and technical proposals that are being blocked by dominant teams like Ferrari or Mercedes.“What is important is that you don’t misuse that dominance to carve or put the sport in a direction which is maybe not really good for the entire sport,” she said. “You have to respect all teams, be they No.1, No.2 or No.10, because everybody has their part to play.”For the drivers, the question of dominance is inherent to the career ladder: They start at small teams and work their way up, hoping to arrive at a big, dominant team or to help build one.“This is Formula One,” said Valtteri Bottas, a Williams team driver. “Most of the time you are not in a team that can win a title. But one day it can be that the team that you are in becomes it, or you are in another team that wins the title.”“As a driver, all you can do is try to prove yourself and make your way up,” he added, “either together with the team or with a winning team.” Beyond the singular issue of supremacy gained through technical regulations, Formula One and other sports share some common ground in what it takes to achieve excellence. Moses said that staying on top in any sport requires making more assiduous, intelligent and effective work plans and sacrifices than your competitors.When his rivals grumbled, Moses said he had a simple response: “My answer to that was that you have to get up early and stay up late if you want to beat me. If you’re willing to have a really good technical training program and execute it all the time and pay the physical price that it takes to train two or three times a day to make it work, then that’s O.K.”“I never took anything for granted, even that I was going to be able to run as fast as I did the year before,” he added. “Every year it was like a fresh, new start, and you never knew where things were going. And I made sure that my training was on target.”In Formula One, though, it is fair to wonder what satisfaction there can be for a dominant team, racing in a car that no other driver — except possibly his teammate — can beat. “The pleasure is there,” said Hamilton, who has won the last two drivers’ titles for Mercedes. “What is the pleasure in being with the same woman for a long period of time? You still find it. You experiment, you make it fun. And every time I get in the car, you are still putting the car to the limit.”Whether fans like it or not, Moses said, depends on their perspective. “They used to tune in to see me win again,” he said of some fans. “I have so many people, I see them today and they say, ‘When I was a teenager, or when I was in grade school, my mom or dad used to sit us down and make us watch you and talk about winning and consistency and use you as an example.”’“So no, the fans didn’t get tired of it,” Moses added, “although I’m sure there were some fans of some other athletes that didn’t want me to win all of the time. But that’s the way it always is.” Advertisement