By BENJAMIN HOFFMANSEPT. 30, 2015
8:25 p.m., CBS, NFL NetworkLine: Ravens by 3Antonio Brown is saying all the right things, but Brown, who is second in the N.F.L. in receiving yards, cannot be happy about spending a few weeks with Michael Vick as the Steelers’ starting quarterback while Ben Roethlisberger recovers from a strained medial collateral ligament. It could put an end to Brown’s record streak of productivity.“He’s a leader, and he’s been doing it for a long time,” Brown said this week when asked about Vick. “It’s not only about him. We’ve got to be able to help him, catching passes, got to be able to run the ball, protect the ball and help him out.”It is an understatement that Brown and his teammates will have to help. They have grown accustomed to catching passes from Roethlisberger, who has completed 68.1 percent of his throws over the last two seasons. Vick’s career completion rate is 56.1 percent, and he has topped 60 percent in only one season. His teams have gone 6-13 in his starts since the start of the 2012 season.The change could come at great cost to Brown, who has an incredible productivity streak on the line. He has had at least five receptions and 50 yards in 35 consecutive regular-season games, an N.F.L. record by a wide margin. The second-longest streak was 19 by Laveranues Coles. Even Jerry Rice never had a streak longer than 10 games. But Brown’s chances of extending the streak with Vick playing seem iffy at best.The good news is that Le’Veon Bell hit the ground running last weekend after returning from his two-game suspension, and a combination of Bell, a few Vick runs, and a blown coverage or two on Brown should be enough for Pittsburgh to beat Baltimore, its struggling division rival. Pick: SteelersBENJAMIN HOFFMANAn earlier version of this article misstated the number of consecutive regular-season games in which Jerry Rice had at least five receptions and 50 yards. It was 10 games, not 17.A version of this article appears in print on October 1, 2015, on Page B19 of the New York edition with the headline: Thursday’s Matchup: Ravens (0-3) at Steelers (2-1).  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.