AdvertisementSupported byAnalysisBy Chase StuartIn 2014, the Houston Texans rushed on 52 percent of all plays, the most run-heavy ratio in the N.F.L. Last season, Coach Bill O’Brien’s first, the Texans rushed a league-high 551 times, establishing themselves as a power-running team. They went 9-7, missing the playoffs.In the off-season, the Texans traded quarterback Ryan Fitzpatrick to the Jets and released wide receiver Andre Johnson, which perhaps signaled an even larger commitment to the running game in 2015.Instead, the Texans — through four games — have become one of the most pass-happy teams in N.F.L. history. Including sacks, Houston had 52 pass attempts against the Kansas City Chiefs in Week 1, 59 against the Carolina Panthers in Week 2 and 58 Sunday against the Atlanta Falcons. In the process, the 2015 Texans became the first N.F.L. team with more than 50 pass attempts (including sacks) in three of its first four games. The Texans have recorded 209 pass attempts (including sacks) through four games, also the most in league history.But the quantity is hardly a reflection of quality, which is why the team has a 1-3 record. The Texans have split the quarterback repetitions between Brian Hoyer and Ryan Mallett this year, with neither inspiring much optimism. Houston quarterbacks have completed just 52.7 percent of all passes, the lowest rate in the N.F.L. As a result, the Texans have thrown a remarkable 95 incomplete passes; no other team has even 75. Houston is averaging 5.9 yards per pass attempt this year; every other team is averaging at least 6.3.The Texans were featured on the HBO series “Hard Knocks” over the summer, and the team’s quarterback battle between Hoyer and Mallett was a prominent feature. O’Brien settled on Hoyer but then benched him in the fourth quarter of the first game. After Mallett struggled, O’Brien reversed course, benching Mallett for Hoyer in the third quarter on Sunday after the Texans trailed the Falcons, 42-0.Houston has played much of the 2015 season from behind, which has been all the incentive the team has needed to rely on the passing game. But the Texans have one of the worst quarterback situations in the N.F.L. and have little in the way of skill-position targets other than the star wide receiver DeAndre Hopkins.The injury to running back Arian Foster led the team away from the ground game in the first three weeks, and Foster was ineffective Sunday in his first game back. But the Texans have done a remarkable 180-degree turn, going from the league’s most run-heavy team to one of history’s most pass-happy. Given the team’s personnel, that change of course is hardly advisable.Advertisement