AdvertisementSupported byN.H.L. RoundupBy The Associated PressDefenseman John Moore scored in overtime, and the Devils rallied for a 3-2 victory over the N.H.L.-leading Canadiens on Saturday night in Montreal.Patrik Elias and Kyle Palmieri scored in regulation for the Devils (12-9-2). In his first career game at Montreal’s Bell Centre, Corey Schneider stopped 29 shots.Alex Galchenyuk scored twice for Montreal (18-4-3). Mike Condon made 28 saves while subbing for the injured starter Carey Price.The Devils bounced back nicely from Friday’s 3-2 loss to Montreal, when the Canadiens rallied from two goals down to beat the Devils in a shootout in the first game of their home-and-home series. Condon and Schneider started both games.After Palmieri tied it with 22 seconds remaining in the third period Saturday, Moore beat Condon on a breakaway at 2 minutes 29 seconds of overtime.CAPITALS 4, MAPLE LEAFS 2  Jason Chimera had a goal and an assist, and visiting Washington beat Toronto for the Capitals’ fifth straight victory.Tom Wilson, Marcus Johansson and Justin Williams also scored, Braden Holtby made 32 saves and the Capitals improved to 7-2-0 on the road and 17-5-1 over all.It was the third straight loss for last-place Toronto.OILERS 3, PENGUINS 2  Matt Hendricks and Jordan Eberle scored in a shootout and Edmonton beat host Pittsburgh.Hendricks deked around Penguins goaltender Jeff Zatkoff to start the shootout, and then Eberle put a quick shot between Zatkoff’s legs. Oilers goaltender Anders Nilsson stopped David Perron and Sidney Crosby.BLUES 3, BLUE JACKETS 1  Scottie Upshall scored in the third period to lead host St. Louis over Columbus.Vladimir Tarasenko scored his 14th goal for the Blues (15-6-3). Alexander Steen added an empty-netter, and Jake Allen made 23 saves.Ryan Johansen scored and Sergei Bobrovsky made 29 saves for the Blue Jackets (10-15-0), who had won three of four and six of their last eight.SABRES 4, PREDATORS 1  Sam Reinhart scored twice to send visiting Buffalo to a win over Nashville.Jamie McGinn and Ryan O’Reilly also scored for the Sabres. Chad Johnson made 28 saves.Mike Fisher had Nashville’s only goal.Nashville goaltender Juuse Saros made 20 saves in his N.H.L. debut.STARS 4, WILD 3 Tyler Seguin scored at 3:57 of overtime, and Dallas came back from a three-goal deficit to beat host Minnesota.Alex Goligoski, Jamie Benn and John Klingberg scored for Dallas in the third period. Seguin, Benn and Klingberg each had one assist, and Cody Eakin had two assists.Antti Niemi made 23 saves as the Stars won for the fifth time in six games.Minnesota lost for the fifth time in six games.Darcy Kuemper made 40 saves for Minnesota.Advertisement