By DAVE CALDWELLNOV. 28, 2015
Just seconds after he had flattened Philadelphia defenseman Nick Schultz with a ruthless check, Rangers defenseman Dylan McIlrath found himself face-to-face on Saturday with the snarling Flyers defenseman Luke Schenn, who had taken exception to the hit and flung down his gloves.For the second straight afternoon, McIlrath got into a fight that he won decisively, knocking off Schenn’s helmet and pounding him with uppercuts. The fight stirred the Madison Square Garden crowd and might have launched the Rangers to a victory. But they suddenly have other problems.After the fight, which unfolded 11 minutes into the game, the Rangers were outshot, 31-21, and the Flyers, who remain the league’s lowest-scoring team, rolled to a 3-0 victory. The Rangers (16-6-2) have lost three games in a row in regulation for the first time this season.“At the end of the day, right now, we all need to man up here,” Rangers Coach Alain Vigneault said. “I need to get this group to play better, and I’m very confident this group knows the right way to play.”AdvertisementThe Rangers were knocked around plenty over 27 hours. Center Derek Stepan was out Saturday because Boston forward Matt Beleskey broke his ribs Friday with a check that the Rangers said should have drawn a penalty. McIlrath immediately pummeled Beleskey.AdvertisementAfter Saturday’s game, in which goaltender Henrik Lundqvist did not play, he answered several questions about Boston Coach Claude Julien’s remark that Lundqvist had embellished a collision with Bruins forward Brad Marchand.“I know he does some acting on the side,” Julien said in a postgame news conference Friday, “but it doesn’t need to be on the ice.”Lundqvist called Julien’s remarks “disrespectful,” adding that his head and neck were still sore from the collision. “Diving has never been an option for me,” Lundqvist said.With Stepan out indefinitely, Vigneault recast his forward-line combinations Saturday, with the rookie Oscar Lindberg centering J. T. Miller and Jesper Fast, and Kevin Hayes centering Emerson Etem and Chris Kreider, who has one goal in his last 10 games.After a dreadful second period in which the Rangers were outshot, 18-7, Vigneault put Miller on Derick Brassard’s line and moved Rick Nash to Hayes’s line, with no immediate results. The Rangers were booed off the ice after their second shutout loss of the season.“It seemed like we got outworked during the game at certain points — and certain points that mattered a lot,” said Nash, who squeezed off only three shots on goal Saturday after scoring six goals in his previous four games.Nash said three straight losses were not acceptable for a “team of our caliber.”Vigneault said the Rangers did not have to dwell very long on the loss to Philadelphia (9-10-5), since they are set to play four games next week before a three-game Western trip.AdvertisementAntti Raanta was in goal for the Rangers because Lundqvist played Friday, but Raanta was hardly to blame for the loss. Wayne Simmonds scored Philadelphia’s first goal at 12 minutes 24 seconds of the second on a Rangers breakdown and semibreakaway, and Sean Couturier stuffed in a rebound off a shot by Simmonds at 3:06 of the third.Raanta gave up only those two goals on 33 shots before Vigneault pulled him for an extra attacker with nearly four minutes to play. Simmonds rifled a shot into an empty net with 50 seconds left, emptying the stands except for those who lingered to boo.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Defenseman Ryan McDonagh, the Rangers’ captain, said the team needed “a lot more communication and a lot more fire in our game.”Vigneault had detected inconsistency in the Rangers’ game even before the three-game losing streak. Once again, he made a point of crediting Lundqvist, saying, “We’ve probably gotten some of those wins because of extraordinary goaltending.”Raanta, who entered Saturday with a 4-0-0 record, a .955 save percentage and a 17-0-3 career record at home, was also extraordinary, Vigneault added. The Flyers probably could have scored a couple of more goals, especially during the second period.And the Rangers killed two Philadelphia power plays, including a 63-second two-man advantage in the third period, with McIlrath and Jarret Stoll in the penalty box.“We talk about protecting all the time, and we’re usually very good at it,” Rangers defenseman Marc Staal said.Rangers defenseman Dan Girardi sat in the dressing room after the game and said, “We’ve got to be mad at ourselves.”Vigneault labeled the loss as a lesson. The Rangers have Sunday off, then play lowly Carolina on Monday at the Garden. But that begins a stretch of three games in four days, including the first Rangers-Islanders matchup in Brooklyn.Advertisement“You can’t just assume and go out and think it’s going to happen easily for you,” McDonagh said. “You got to work hard, and work smart, and play together as a team, and realize we need everybody to be up to their game here for us to be successful.”A version of this article appears in print on November 29, 2015, on Page SP11 of the New York edition with the headline: Another Loss Leaves Rangers to Face Their Flaws.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.