AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressGHENT, Belgium — Britain is a point from capturing the Davis Cup title for the first time in 79 years, having won in doubles against Belgium on Saturday.The brothers Andy and Jamie Murray beat David Goffin and Steve Darcis, 6-4, 4-6, 6-3, 6-2, to give Britain a 2-1 lead in the final going into the reverse singles on Sunday.Andy Murray could seal Britain’s victory in Sunday’s first match against Goffin.However, Murray sounded a note of caution, saying, “It’s far from over.” Goffin has not won a set in two previous meetings with Murray, losing, 6-1, 6-0, against him at the Paris Masters last month. But the two have never met on clay.“On a clay court, I have some weapons to play a good match,” said Goffin, who has played nine sets in two days.He added: “It’s not a problem if I have to play five sets tomorrow. I will be ready.”Murray is No. 2 in the world while Goffin is ranked No. 16.“It was good to get that one done in four sets,” said Murray, who has played two sets fewer than Goffin has.The Murray brothers fought off seven break points in the pivotal fourth game of the fourth set and cruised from that point as the Belgians’ spirits sagged. The British pair broke serve one more time, and Andy Murray fired a service winner on their second match point to put it away.The teams split the opening singles on Friday.Goffin and Darcis had never played together in a tie; the Murray brothers improved to 4-0 for their career in the competition.Belgium’s captain, Johan van Herck, said that the “little difference today” was the “experience of playing doubles together, the experience of playing doubles the whole year round.” He added: “We had our chances to do more in the first three sets. It’s a difficult day tomorrow. But as a team we have to believe; we have to stand up; we have to fight. There’s a huge task ahead of us.”Belgium is seeking its first Davis Cup title. Britain is seeking its 10th, although it has not won the competition since 1936.Murray showed just how fired up he was after winning the first set. He jumped around wildly, clenching his fist and pointing it at British supporters.“To play in a Davis Cup final with your brother, and to win a point for your country, is obviously great,” he said. “We may never get the chance to do that again.”A double fault by Jamie Murray gave the Belgians their third break point, and they took advantage when Goffin fired a winner for a 2-1 lead in the second set. Goffin also clinched the set, hitting an off-balance volley while bending down. The unorthodox shot was a winner, and Belgium was back in the match.With sloppy play on both sides, the third set had five breaks of serve before Andy Murray closed it out with a service winner.Advertisement