AdvertisementSupported byOhio State 42, Michigan 13By Tim RohanANN ARBOR, Mich. — Jim Harbaugh stood near the line of scrimmage, bent over, his hands on his knees, watching intently as Ohio State lined up needing a yard to convert a fourth down. Ohio State had knifed through Harbaugh’s defense all day. He looked as if he wanted to run onto the field and tackle Ezekiel Elliott, the Buckeyes’ running back, himself.But Elliott barreled for 4 yards and, after the next play, Harbaugh shouted something at his assistant and watched, his hands on his hips, as Ohio State celebrated in the end zone. This was Harbaugh’s first game coaching Michigan against Ohio State, in what was supposed to be the game that reignited the rivalry between these longtime Big Ten powers. Instead, the No. 8 Buckeyes took this opportunity to remind No. 12 Michigan of how lopsided the series has been recently. Ohio State thumped Michigan, 42-13, behind Elliott’s 214 rushing yards and two touchdowns for the Buckeyes’ 11th win against Michigan in 12 years.“Crazy, huh,” said J. T. Barrett, the Ohio State quarterback.The Buckeyes’ performance was especially impressive considering the way they played the week before. Elliott had recorded his fewest touches (12) and fewest yards (33) of the season, the offense struggled to gain any momentum, and Ohio State lost to Michigan State on a last-second field goal, spoiling its best chance of making the College Football Playoff.In the college football playoff rankings, many analysts focus on the teams. That’s the wrong way to think about the playoff picture.After that game, Elliott spoke out honestly and emotionally — a rarity for a college athlete — blaming his coaches for abandoning the running game before it got going. He also announced that he would be leaving college after this season for the N.F.L.Urban Meyer, the Buckeyes’ coach, spent this week mending that relationship. He decided to move the offensive coordinator Ed Warinner to the press box so Ohio State could call plays at a faster tempo. Meyer also invited Elliott over for Thanksgiving for the third consecutive year. “Whatever was said last week, I think he apologized 37 or 38 times,” Meyer said. “I told him he didn’t need to apologize.”The first play against Michigan went to Elliott. In this game, the Buckeyes kept running him. On his fifth touch, Elliott took a handoff, waited for a hole to open, and then sprinted for 66 yards — in that one play Elliott racked up twice as many yards as he gained against the Spartans. Soon after, Barrett faked a handoff to Elliott and then ran for a 7-yard touchdown.A look at the top players in contention for college football’s highest honor.Ohio State scored touchdowns on five of its next six possessions, either relying on Elliott or using him as a decoy. Barrett kept the ball, with Elliott as the option on the play, for runs of 25 yards and 16 yards, setting up the Buckeyes’ second touchdown. Elliott and Barrett kept running, taking their turns wearing down the Michigan defense, which looked gassed.“This isn’t a rivalry,” Maurice Clarett, the former Ohio State running back, wrote on Twitter. “We prefer Michigan State now.”But Harbaugh’s presence at Michigan had revived the rivalry to some degree. He posed a threat for Ohio State in national recruiting. He coached Michigan into the top 10 — at least according to the playoff rankings, where the Wolverines are No. 10 — entering this game. His bravado permeated the program: As a quarterback, Harbaugh had guaranteed victory over Ohio State in 1986, and backed it up. On Tuesday night, Harbaugh joined a horde of Michigan fans taking a tour through Forest Hill Cemetery, stopping by the grave sites of Michigan football legends. Harbaugh gave an impromptu speech at the grave site of Bo Schembechler, the longtime Michigan coach for whom he played, and even smashed a buckeye with a maize-painted hammer.Ohio State players could tell that, despite their recent dominance, Meyer had a different look in his eye before this game. “He’s a fiery, passionate guy, you guys know that,” said Buckeyes linebacker Joshua Perry. “But the fire was just burning a little bit hotter today.”Michigan stood no chance. Jake Rudock, the Wolverines’ quarterback, threw for 263 yards and a touchdown, and had the Wolverines trailing by 4 points at halftime. But a vicious sack by Ohio State’s Joey Bosa forced Rudock from the game early in the fourth quarter, and Harbaugh’s trademark smash-mouth rushing game gained only 57 yards on 25 carries.“They played very well,” Harbaugh said. “They deserve credit.” The Buckeyes controlled possession for about two-thirds of the third quarter, and they scored twice more. Barrett ran for 139 yards and three touchdowns as Elliott’s sidekick. As the final seconds ticked off, Ohio State fans led a coordinated “O-H-I-O” chant throughout Michigan Stadium. Afterward, Meyer danced with his players in the locker room.At one point, Harbaugh found Elliott and personally congratulated him. “That’s something we should do every week, honestly,” Elliott said of the rushing game. “The way our offensive line plays, and when we go up-tempo and teams only play their base against us, we wear them down and they get tired. As the game goes on, we only get stronger.”Elliott started his news conference by emotionally apologizing — again — for his comments last week. A large Ohio State logo was tattooed prominently on his left shoulder. With this performance, Elliott passed Eddie George to become Ohio State’s second-leading career rusher.“Who’s that?” Meyer joked, referring to George.This win seemed to solve all the Buckeyes’ issues. Unprompted, Meyer campaigned for Elliott to be invited to New York as a Heisman Trophy finalist. He also joked that he hoped to have Elliott over for Thanksgiving next year. “But that’s not looking good,” Meyer said.Advertisement