AdvertisementSupported byBy Billy Witz and David WaldsteinC. C. Sabathia, a commanding presence and a key leader for the Yankees, if no longer a franchise star, left the team and said Monday that he was entering an alcohol treatment program.Although Sabathia was not expected to pitch Tuesday night in the A.L. wild-card game against the Houston Astros — the Yankees’ first playoff game since 2012 — the announcement left the Yankees stunned. Many members of the team threw their support behind Sabathia.“All that matters now is what’s happening now, which is obviously he’s going to get the help necessary in a structured environment,” General Manager Brian Cashman said in a news conference at Yankee Stadium, just before the team worked out. “He’s going to get professional help. That’s the most important thing right now.”Cashman said that Sabathia had reached out to him, Manager Joe Girardi and other team officials on Sunday and told them he needed help.That conversation, which took place shortly after noon — hours before the Yankees concluded the regular season in Baltimore — set the wheels in motion.Sabathia’s wife, Amber, was involved in the discussions, and Cashman, Girardi and others encouraged Sabathia to seek treatment for alcohol abuse even if it meant he would not pitch for the remainder of the season.“I love baseball,” Sabathia said in a statement released by the Yankees, “and I love my teammates like brothers, and I am also fully aware that I am leaving at a time when we should all be coming together for one last push toward the World Series. It hurts me deeply to do this now, but I owe it to myself and to my family to get myself right. I want to take control of my disease, and I want to be a better man, father and player.”Cashman, asked several times if he or the Yankees were aware of any personal problems Sabathia had encountered or of any incidents involving alcohol abuse, said he saw no warning signs.“Clearly there has been a number of occurrences that led him to come to this type of decision that’s necessary, but those incidents are personal to him,” Cashman said. “I was not expecting that situation to come my way yesterday, but it did.”It has been a turbulent year for Sabathia, who endured the worst full season of his career in his return from knee surgery, going 6-10 with a 4.73 E.R.A. Sabathia, a left-hander, needed several injections to ease the pain in his degenerative right knee, but the pain became so great that he left a game on Aug. 23 and went on the disabled list.Over the last few weeks of the regular season, he wore a bulkier knee brace, which allowed him to be effective. But Sabathia also had a number of outbursts in the last year — on and off the field.He had a dispute with airline employees at Newark Liberty International Airport in December when he was late for a flight, and he was involved in a confrontation outside a nightclub in Toronto in August.Sabathia, who is listed as 6 feet 7 inches and 285 pounds, is imposing atop the pitcher’s mound but is generally one of the most easygoing Yankees, both gregarious and accountable. While he has always been a fierce competitor on the field, he has found himself in disputes with opponents and umpires more frequently this season.In June, he was ejected from a game for the first time since 2006 for arguing with an umpire as he walked back to the dugout between innings, despite being in the midst of a rare strong performance. Although he has denied it, he appears to have a continuing feud with Boston outfielder Jackie Bradley Jr., whom he has hit with a pitch and taunted. Sabathia also yelled at Seattle’s Kyle Seager for bunting against him.In late July, Sabathia was hospitalized overnight with what the team called dehydration after pitching in near-100-degree heat in Arlington, Tex.As to whether any of those incidents might be related to Sabathia’s apparent alcoholism, Cashman said: “I didn’t drill down into how did this happen, when did it start, how long has it been going on, what have you been experiencing. I haven’t gone through any of that stuff. It was just, Hey, we’re here to support you in any way, shape or form.”Sabathia, 35, is under contract for two more years. He is owed $25 million next year, with another $25 million due in 2017 as long as he does not sustain a debilitating shoulder injury.Sabathia, who left during Sunday’s game to return to his home in the New York area, spoke with several teammates before he left, including Dellin Betances. Betances said that Sabathia, whose locker is adjacent to his, was like a big brother. But he and many other teammates said they saw “no sign” of any drinking problem.Sabathia has a deep reservoir of respect, having helped carry the pitching staff to a World Series title in 2009, the season immediately after he signed a seven-year, $160 million contract.A number of Yankees said they would try to win Tuesday — and beyond — for Sabathia.“We play for C. C. now,” Alex Rodriguez said. “C. C.’s gone to the mat for us many, many times. I know me, personally, and many people in here, we wouldn’t have a ring if it weren’t for C. C., so now we go to the mat for him.”Outfielder Slade Heathcott, who participated in a substance abuse program shortly after he was drafted by the Yankees in 2009, said he admired Sabathia for acknowledging he had a problem.“We all have battles; we all have things that we deal with in life,” Heathcott said. “Anyone in the world can relate. It showed a lot of courage on his part.”Sabathia drank Champagne along with his teammates on Thursday night, clutching a big bottle in the clubhouse after helping pitch the Yankees to their playoff-clinching victory over the Red Sox.As he savored his return to a big stage, Sabathia expressed his gratitude to Girardi and described how they had developed a close bond through their wives and children over the years. On Saturday, he elaborated on their relationship.“He knows how hard it is,” Sabathia said. “I think he knows how hard it is to have families and different things going on in your life that maybe you can’t make it on time for stretch every day.”Asked Monday if the nature of their relationship allowed him to look back and see warning signs, Girardi said: “You know, I don’t know. Obviously when things happen, you try to evaluate exactly what’s going on with players, but I’m not with him 24 hours a day.”Advertisement