AdvertisementSupported byBy Ben ShpigelFLORHAM PARK, N.J. — The good news about the Jets is how well they tend to play after halftime. Only three teams — New England, Arizona and Houston — have outscored opponents by more points in the second half than the Jets have (49).The bad news about the Jets is that before they make it to the second half, they still have to play the first. Those opening 30 minutes doomed the Jets over the last five weeks as four losses sent them plummeting from a contender at 4-1 to a bastion of mediocrity (or worse) at 5-5.Their problems are most pronounced on offense, where a cavalcade of errors — sacks and penalties, poor execution and third-down inefficiency — and a departure from the team’s core principles have created a unit that has looked discombobulated at best and hapless at worst.In the Jets’ last four losses, they have managed only one touchdown in the first half, and that came in the defeat that began this skid, on Oct. 25 at New England. During the four losses, they were outscored by 56-22 before halftime. They called fewer and fewer running plays in the first halves and averaged progressively fewer yards per carry, from 2.9 against the Patriots to 2.0 against the Texans.“We probably started trying to go into trigonometry when we should have stayed with algebra,” Coach Todd Bowles said. He added: “The more you win, the more creative you try to be on both sides of the ball. At some point, it gets to a point where it’s too creative, and then you have to back down and go back to basics.”By algebra, Bowles meant redoubling the Jets’ devotion to the running game and the play-action opportunities that can materialize afterward. He, and others, emphasized a return to the Jets’ base package of plays, the plays they have practiced since training camp, the plays they supposedly know best.How can my team make the N.F.L. playoffs? It’s a simple question, but answering it can be devilishly complicated. This interactive simulator walks you through the scenarios.“If you can get back to the things that you know a little bit better,” the offensive coordinator Chan Gailey said, “I think that’s going to help us be more consistent.”When asked last week about the Jets’ slow starts, Brandon Marshall and Eric Decker mentioned that gaining chunks of yardage on first down — thus minimizing the potential for unfavorable down-and-distance situations — would help reverse their fortunes.But the Jets actually thrived on first-down plays in the first halves of their last two games, averaging 7.3 yards against Buffalo and 6.3 in Houston. In theory, that early success should have positioned them well. It did not.Against the Bills, the Jets ran eight plays on second down and lost 3 yards, and that did not include a 5-yard false-start penalty on Breno Giacomini that put the Jets at second-and-15. On the next play, quarterback Ryan Fitzpatrick was sacked. On the play after that, on third-and-18, he threw an interception that gave Buffalo the ball at the Jets’ 34-yard line and led to a field goal.The Jets’ failures on second down meant that they needed an average of 10.1 yards on third down in the first half. They converted two of eight chances. They fared even worse against Houston, when, having to gain an average of 6.8 yards on third down, they went 0 for 5.“Anywhere from third-and-5 or below is manageable,” Decker said. “Because once you get third-and-6 or higher, the game plan shrinks. The threat of pass or run isn’t there.”The defense, anticipating a pass in those situations, deploys its coverage accordingly, often double-teaming Marshall. Not surprisingly, Marshall has caught only two of the eight passes thrown to him in the first half the last two games, for 16 yards.“He’s the guy that I want to throw to him on every play, and sometimes you can’t because of the coverage,” said Fitzpatrick, who is 11 for 28 with an interception in the first half the last two games. “That’s something I have to fight all the time and just kind of weigh those decisions.”The fewer yards needed for a first down, the more options the Jets have. They seemed in an optimal position, then, in the second quarter last week after a 9-yard run by Bilal Powell gave the Jets a second-and-1 at the Texans’ 22.With two chances to gain that lone yard, the Jets first threw downfield, but Fitzpatrick’s pass to Decker was broken up. On third down, Chris Ivory was stuffed for no gain, and a promising drive ended with a field goal.The Jets are not explosive enough to regularly overcome these missed opportunities, or to generate bushels of points without the short field gained after forcing a turnover. In their last four losses, the Jets have one first-half takeaway, against Houston, and it was the only one they had in those games.The chasm between the Jets and the league’s elite can be quantified in several ways, including the quality of their quarterbacks and their defenses, but first-half performance is just as strong an indicator of prosperity.Among the 17 teams at .500 or better, four have a negative point differential at halftime, and only one — Minnesota, which is minus-1 — has a winning record, according to Pro-Football-Reference.com. It is no coincidence, either, that the N.F.L.’s two unbeaten teams, New England and Carolina, rank second and third in first-half scoring, trailing only Arizona, which is 8-2. The teams that rank fourth and fifth, the Giants and Kansas City, currently hold playoff spots.An outlier is Denver, which did not score a first-quarter touchdown until its seventh game. But the Broncos won that night, against Green Bay, as well as their previous six games, in part because of a defense that had yet to allow any points — let alone a touchdown — in the first quarter.Still, as the Jets try to reclaim an offensive identity, their opponent Sunday, in what amounts to an elimination game, could present an antidote: Only two teams have allowed more first-half points than Miami (148). If the Jets’ struggles persist, how they play after halftime may not even matter. Advertisement