AdvertisementSupported byBy Brian SciarettaThere was never any doubt that Darlington Nagbe had talent. Talent is what made him the national player of the year in college, and it is what earned him goal of the year honors in his rookie season in Major League Soccer. It is also what drew the attention of United States Coach Jurgen Klinsmann, who eagerly threw Nagbe into two games this month almost as soon as the ink on his new citizenship papers was dry.No, Nagbe’s talent has long been clear. The only question — the eternal question about Nagbe — has been where he should play.“Darlington has been an enigma, even for me, to find the right position, and I’ve known him nearly 10 years,” said Portland Timbers Coach Caleb Porter, who also coached Nagbe at the University of Akron. “It’s just that he doesn’t fit a position. For really special players, unfortunately, there are formations. If you adopt really rigid formations, then the player doesn’t fit.”Early in his career, Porter had used Nagbe either out wide or in an advanced attacking position. But after the Timbers missed the playoffs in 2014, and with the team struggling again early this season, Porter made a change: Nagbe, he decided, would be deployed in a withdrawn, box-to-box role that would allow him to be more involved and get more touches with the ball.The switch changed the course of Portland’s season. Now, with Nagbe, 25, emerging as a reliable two-way cog in Portland’s midfield, the Timbers are hitting their stride: Portland is 7-1-1 in its past nine games, outscoring opponents, 19-8. After a 3-1 win over top-seeded F.C. Dallas in the first leg of the Western Conference final last weekend, the Timbers enter Sunday’s return leg in Frisco, Tex., on the verge of their first M.L.S. championship game appearance.“It’s amazing when you watch him — the tight spaces he is in and his completion rate on passes and just dribbling by guys,” Timbers midfielder Jack Jewsbury said. “Players respect his game. Even if he doesn’t come with the stats, they can really tell how much he’s controlling matches even without putting up a ton of goals and assists. But that will come over time. He’s shaping games all the time, and he’s been a game changer the past few months.”Portland is not the only team benefiting from Nagbe’s rise. Two months after his citizenship came through, Nagbe made his debut for the United States national team in two World Cup qualifiers: on Nov. 13 as a substitute in a 6-1 win over St. Vincent and the Grenadines, and again four days later in a scoreless tie at Trinidad and Tobago.Klinsmann, who has drawn the ire of American fans for his penchant for sometimes using players out of position, seemed to acknowledge last week that Nagbe might have finally found his in Portland.“We found a player that is really good handling the ball in both directions,” Klinsmann said of Nagbe in an interview with USSoccer.com. “He is responsible defensively, to always go behind the ball and to defend, and help out. When we go forward, he knows when to pass, when to dribble, when to keep things racing forward, and also when to take some risks in a certain moment.”Nagbe, he added, “had to wait a long time, and we’ve been waiting for him as well, but it’s a great fit and we are glad to have him on board.”The pathway to American citizenship was not easy for Nagbe. Born in Liberia during its long civil war, he stayed behind with his mother while his father, Joe, a mainstay with Liberia’s national team alongside the former world player of the year George Weah, played professionally in Europe.“It was a really difficult time, especially for my mom,” Nagbe said. “I hear a lot of stories about the time my dad left to go to France to play. My mom hadn’t followed him yet, and then the war broke out. At nights, she was hearing gunshots, and there was no electricity. My older brother was 3, and she was pregnant with me. She had to find someone to deliver me and was getting help from rebels. They managed a way to stay together, stay alive, and flee the country.”Once they left Liberia, the Nagbes bounced around from France to Greece to Switzerland to — in the one move not involving Joe’s playing career — Cleveland. Early in his Akron coaching tenure, Porter got a phone call from the former United States national team player George Nanchoff, Nagbe’s youth coach at the time, imploring Porter to scout Nagbe. When he did, Porter recalled, he described Nagbe’s performance as “jaw-dropping.”“He is world class technically, and I mean that,” Porter said. “When you compare him to some of the best players in this country — national team guys — he has composure on the ball that they don’t have. Now, he is missing some other things, but I think those things will come with a new challenge and a new environment. For me, those other things are a little bit of edge, aggressiveness, responsibility of taking a game over and taking a little bit more of that pressure on your shoulders.”The biggest pressure, though, may already be off. The acquisition of his long-awaited American citizenship — rather than Klinsmann’s recognition of his on-field prowess — may be why, as Nagbe ran onto the field in St. Louis for his national team debut, he smiled ear to ear.“Moving here when I was 10, I really didn’t know too much,” Nagbe said. “All I knew is that my mom moved here for me to get an education and live our lives here. The closer I got to citizenship and I got older, I realized why it was important for my mother. “I have a little girl now, and I want her dreams to come true, too. I was put into a situation for our dreams to come true, and I am lucky to have it.”Advertisement