AdvertisementSupported byKeeping ScoreBy Benjamin HoffmanIn a flawless start to the season, it is tempting to try to find fault amid the perfection. With the Golden State Warriors displaying no obvious issues on the court, close watchers of the team have set their sights on a rule that prevents Luke Walton, the interim coach, from getting credit for any of the victories.The only problem is that there is no rule, or at least not one written into the N.B.A.’s rule book, that gives Golden State’s victories to Steve Kerr while he recovers from off-season back surgery. Instead, the practice of awarding wins and losses to a head coach in absentia, regardless of the circumstances, is the product of a longstanding policy that was never formalized.Until now, the policy has mostly resulted in a difference of just a few wins and losses for the fill-in coaches, but for Walton, it means he is not credited with, among other things, the longest winning streak to start an N.B.A. coaching career and the longest winning streak for a team to start a season. With November about to end — and the Warriors 14-0 for the month and 17-0 for the season heading into their game Saturday night — the policy would also cost him a chance at coach of the month honors. A person confirmed Friday that the N.B.A. was considering a change in policy, with a decision expected in advance of the voting for coach of the month, which at the very least should clear up the confusion of whether the award could go to Walton or whether Kerr, having not appeared on the sideline, would technically be the team’s candidate for the honor.Amid the hoopla, Walton and Kerr have taken turns praising each other and insisting the other deserves the credit for the team’s historic start, but Kerr recently took a harsher tone when discussing the situation with ESPN. “I’m sitting in the locker room and watching the games on TV, and I’m not even traveling to most of the road games,” Kerr said in advance of the team’s 16th win, which came on Nov. 24. “Luke’s doing all the work with the rest of the staff. Luke is 15-0 right now. I’m not. So it’s the dumbest thing I’ve ever heard, to be honest with you.”In truth, the two coaches have worked together. The team’s rotation, put in place last season by Kerr, has remained steady, and the Warriors continue to run Kerr’s offense, with him participating behind the scenes even if he is not on the sideline. Walton, however, has had to make all of the in-game decisions, and while he has occasionally been hounded for letting teams back into games, he has seemingly had a knack for knowing when to deploy the team’s devastating small-ball lineup of Draymond Green, Harrison Barnes, Andre Iguodala, Klay Thompson and Stephen Curry. The Finals Five, or Death Ball lineup, as some have called it, has been used sparingly — the players had been on the court together for 64 minutes through Friday, making them the team’s third-most-used lineup — but that is likely just an attempt to avoid the wear and tear that would result if Green and Barnes were asked to guard bigger players for extended stretches.Given the success of Walton’s in-game decisions, the popular sentiment is that a rule should be formalized and that Walton should receive credit for the wins. But the debate has more nuance. In the case of the Minnesota Timberwolves, the death of Flip Saunders took away the issue, but had he not died, there would very likely have been some pushing for him to be credited with the team’s eight wins rather than Sam Mitchell. An extreme argument against the change could concern a team like the Philadelphia 76ers. Had Brett Brown been unable to start the season, there would probably not have been much clamoring to saddle an interim coach with the team’s 0-17 record.If a rule is created to credit interim coaches with wins, it is unlikely that the N.B.A. would go back historically and change old coaching records. That is a key distinction because Don Nelson is currently the career leader in coaching victories with 1,335, but at least 10 of them came when Avery Johnson filled in for him in the 2004-5 season as he worked through some health issues. It is possible that a close examination of Nelson’s career, and the career of Lenny Wilkens, who is credited with 1,332 wins, could result in a change at the top.However the decision regarding the credit for Golden State’s wins plays out, the team’s tremendous start has probably put Walton’s name at the top of the list for any franchise looking to make a coaching change. And with Kerr, who was a rookie coach last season, not expected back any time soon — reports suggest that he will not be back until at least the All-Star break in February — there is a chance that Walton will have racked up more than half of the N.B.A. head coaching experience that Kerr has before handing the team back. Should Walton end up with the credit for the wins, he would surpass Lawrence Frank as the coach with the longest winning streak to start a career. Frank went 13-0 for the Nets when he replaced Byron Scott in the second half of the 2003-4 season. While Walton’s squad is certainly more talented than Frank’s, it is worth remembering that the Nets’ success did not last. The team was 22-20 under Scott, and after the long winning streak, it closed out the season 12-15 before being knocked out of the playoffs in the second round on the heels of consecutive N.B.A. finals appearances under Scott.For now, Walton will continue to be a caretaker for a franchise with dynastic aspirations. And once the issue of who is credited with the wins is settled, everyone can set about trying to find other aspects to nitpick for a team that does nothing but win.Advertisement