AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressSTANFORD, Calif. — Alanna Smith had left for her flight from Australia to join Stanford’s basketball team, so she never saw her mother’s tears.“It was the hardest for my mom to let me go,” Smith recalled of their emotional goodbye almost three months ago. “But it’s been a goal of mine for quite a while now. My uncle went to college in California, and it’s been stuck in my head that I wanted to go to college here.”Smith unintentionally made history the moment she stepped on campus. She is the first international recruit for the Cardinal women’s program, which has had talented squads in recent decades under the guidance of the Hall of Fame coach Tara VanDerveer.Smith has so much to learn that it has been daunting at times. She is adjusting to a new level, new rules and even the vernacular. “Tailgating” tripped her up not long ago.And there is “bearhugging” while playing post defense, “which we call half-fronting,” Smith said.But she has made it through her first quarter of college and will not have any final exams next month, just two final papers.“It is hard to believe Alanna is our first international player,” VanDerveer said. “She is a gem.”Smith said: “It seems crazy to me as well. I’m surprised there haven’t been any international recruits here, but it is getting a lot bigger. This year, so many Australians have gone to college that I know.”She visited Wake Forest and Texas before settling on Stanford — not a difficult call given the coach, the academic reputation and the great weather and culture in Northern California.Smith, a 6-foot-3 forward, had a good feeling about her choice from the start.“The team is so welcoming,” she said. “They’re my family now. It’s been a lot of fun getting to know them. It’s been really cool just being here and experiencing it all.”Now she just hopes to get to a Golden State Warriors game soon to watch her countryman Andrew Bogut, an N.B.A. champion.Smith’s parents know she is in good hands.In an email, her father, Darren, wrote: “Both Stanford and Tara have unrivaled reputations in Australia, so when Alanna was finally accepted we were ecstatic. And to be the first international student athlete for the women’s basketball program is a significant achievement for Alanna and really shows the next round of kids here in Australia that the pinnacle can be reached, even from halfway across the world.”He will attend some of her games in December while coaching an Australian junior team on tour in the area.Coming off a surprising loss to Santa Clara, Smith and the 13th-ranked Cardinal (4-1) defeated Missouri State, 82-65, on Friday at the Gulf Coast Showcase in Estero, Fla.Smith averages about 12 minutes per game, scoring 5.8 points and grabbing 2.4 rebounds. She is shooting 2 of 9 from 3-point range.“The American 3-point line is actually closer than where our 3-point line is in Australia, so that makes it a little bit easier for me, shooting a step in,” she said. “Now I just have to work on consistency.”VanDerveer nearly had her first international recruit last season. Penina Davidson, a 6-3 forward from New Zealand, had attended Stanford camp and planned to attend the university. But Davidson wound up in Berkeley for the rival California women’s team after she did not gain admittance to Stanford. VanDerveer encouraged Golden Bears Coach Lindsay Gottlieb to take her aboard.So Smith is the one making her mark on the program’s history, although her family did not know it ahead of time. VanDerveer often checks in to let her know the coach’s door is always open if anything comes up — like a cold that slowed Smith down.“There’s great talent places other than the U.S.,” the junior guard Lili Thompson said, “and for our coaching staff to be able to tap into that is pretty cool. We’re super lucky to have Alanna. She fits into the team great.”After playing in Russia during the summer for the under-19 Australian team, Smith arrived at Stanford in September, a year after her official visit.The versatile Smith can play the wing and create mismatches with her height or go down low to the post.“She has a great feel for the game,” VanDerveer said. “It is a huge adjustment for her and it has been tough. She has a great international game — runs well, puts it on the floor and loves to score. We have some work to do on defense and rebounding.”Smith is eager to accept coaching along the way as she makes the transition.“I feel so blessed to be able to have the opportunity to come internationally,” Smith said. “I’m just really happy to be here.”Advertisement