AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressFAYETTEVILLE, Ark. — Jimmy Woods has been a youth sports official for nearly 30 years, and he has lost count of the number of football games he has refereed and how many times he has been yelled at, threatened or insulted.He remembers the details. Woods has been surrounded by angry parents after games, told he has “no integrity” by coaches and cursed at as recently as this season by players and fans at a private high school in Little Rock.“People don’t respect the emblem anymore,” said Woods, 50, a firefighter. “They think you’re out to get them or cheat them.”Violence against referees is as old as sports itself, and most are familiar with awful stories from lower-division soccer matches in Europe or South America. But the headlines have appeared uncomfortably closer to home for Woods and his fellow officials lately.In a two-year span, referees in Utah and Michigan died after they were punched by angry players during games. In September, two San Antonio high school football players blindsided a referee on purpose, an incident that drew widespread condemnation.By all accounts from those involved, finding and retaining referees is becoming more and more difficult. In fact, recognizing the potential shortage, many state high school associations have taken lead roles in recruiting new talent to an aging work force facing startlingly hostile conditions.One of those states is Kansas, where the number of registered officials has dropped since the 2012-13 school year. The state had 2,027 basketball officials that year, compared with 1,887 this year, and the number of football referees has shrunk to 1,309 from 1,372 over the same span. The average age of the state’s softball umpires by one measurement was found to be over 60.The effects of a referee shortage are many. Games are delayed or moved or canceled, and referee crews in sports like soccer and basketball are trimmed to two from three, said Gary Musselman, executive director of the Kansas State High School Activities Association, whose group, like many others, is in the midst of football playoffs.“I don’t want to sound disparaging of younger generations,” Musselman said, “but I think sometimes younger people aren’t as inclined to be as fixed in as some older people. Maybe they are more established and aren’t as caught up in ‘does everybody like me?’ Because officials are going to do things that people aren’t going to like, and not everybody can handle that negative feedback.”Two years ago, the association started making training opportunities more accessible for potential referees and offering a $1,000 grant, the first of which was awarded to the Greater Wichita Officials Association to help create a library of video clips for training. Coaches were asked to identify possible future referees among their players. The efforts resulted in the registering of 22 recent high school graduates as officials.The Wisconsin Interscholastic Athletic Association offers to waive its first- or second-year registration fees for current and former members of the military.In 1980, Barry Mano founded the National Association of Sports Officials in Racine, Wis., and spent 23 years as a college basketball referee. The group does not keep national data to track the decline, but its 2002 survey found that 90 percent of high school officials believed they had a referee shortage. Mano said he doubted those concerns had gone away in the face of growing animosity and poor behavior among fans and coaches.“Unsporting behavior continues to be the main reason that people get out of officiating,” said Mano, who added that pay for his members ranged from $50 to $60 per game at the high school level to $2,500 to $3,000 for major college football games. “They worry about their safety. They worry about putting up with all that guff for $50 a game. Are you kidding me? That’s why there are shortages of men and women who want to go out and officiate in a lot of parts of this country.”A call to the officials’ association leads to a menu of choices. The third option is the association’s assault protection program for its 22,000-plus members.“It is kind of a sad commentary,” said Mano, whose organization backed legislation in more than 20 states to increase punishment for people who attack referees. The association also provides insurance that can help officials who are victims of an assault by a spectator or an athlete, as well as money for legal fees.Don Boss, 64, has officiated a variety of sports in 47 years, and he has overseen high school and adult soccer leagues in Arkansas for more than 20 years. He assigns officials in the central part of the state and tries to weed out officials who might not be able to walk away from a heated situation.“The problem isn’t finding refs,” Boss said. “The problem is finding good refs.”Like many of his colleagues, Woods started as a football referee, in Texas in 1987, to remain connected to the game he had once played. It offered a little money and a chance to be active.“It’s a great service to the kids,” Woods said. “Without these guys working at all levels of football, from peewee to junior high to high school to college to different pro and semipro events, these kids wouldn’t be able to play.”Advertisement