By ANDREW KEHNOV. 29, 2015
Seconds into the overtime period, Dwight Howard of the Houston Rockets jumped up to catch a lob pass that was drifting several feet away from the hoop and was still able to hammer the ball through the rim with both hands. Kristaps Porzingis, the popular Knicks rookie, could only flail his arms below.The dunk elicited a cry from the sellout crowd Sunday night at Madison Square Garden. Howard sauntered away from the basket, staring into the near distance as he shouted profanities. When the instant replay was shown on the video screens, the Knicks’ fans grunted again, as if they had been sucker-punched.That feeling was representative of the night as a whole, as the Knicks were blindsided by a late Rockets comeback. Playing without Carmelo Anthony, the Knicks squandered a 15-point lead — they were ahead by as many as 14 in the final quarter — before losing, 116-111, in overtime.Howard praised Porzingis’s physical gifts and advanced skills.“After the game, he said, ‘That was a nasty dunk,’ ” Howard said. “I saw Porzingis jump, and the rest is history.”AdvertisementWithin the final 43 seconds, Langston Galloway and Jose Calderon attempted a total of three potential tying 3-pointers, but each one clanged off the rim, ensuring that the Knicks would lose their fourth game in a row.Before the evening’s ugly conclusion, it had an inauspicious beginning. At 7:04 p.m., about a half-hour before the game, the Knicks announced that Anthony was ill and would be unavailable. After three consecutive losses, it seemed as if the scaffolding of their promising start to the season had begun to rattle. Their offense was already stalling, and now they would be without Anthony, who was averaging a team-high 22.1 points per game.Earlier in the night, Coach Derek Fisher kept invoking concepts like faith, belief and trust as he cataloged the things the Knicks needed to do to get better. His primary gripe was that the players, when under duress, did not carry out the offensive plan. When the shot clock wound down, Fisher said, the players failed to execute the coaching staff’s schemes.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“It takes time and belief in something that you can’t see at the time, and that’s not an easy thing to do,” Fisher said.The effects of Anthony’s absence trickled around the court Sunday. But against the odds, the Knicks built a comfortable lead.AdvertisementPorzingis had the minor honor of being the last Knicks player announced before the game, soaking up the cheers normally reserved for Anthony. Porzingis scored 20 points and grabbed 13 rebounds — his eighth double-double of the season.Cleanthony Early, who had not played since Nov. 10, was activated Sunday, played six minutes and missed his only shot. Arron Afflalo, given more latitude in Anthony’s absence, took 19 shots and scored 31 points. Kevin Seraphin added 14.Lance Thomas, who had not started this year, took Anthony’s place in the lineup and had a strong game. His luck symbolized the Knicks’ early success: With about three minutes to go in the first half, an outlet pass bounced off his body because he did not have his head up. But the loose ball skipped around a Houston player, and Thomas recovered it for a rousing breakaway dunk. Thomas missed a 23-foot jumper with about 19 seconds left in regulation that would have put the Knicks ahead.“There are no moral victories in this game,” Thomas said.The Knicks had a 13-point lead at halftime. It was 8 points after the third quarter, in which the Rockets kept hinting that they might seize the momentum, but they kept failing to do so.The Knicks fell apart in the fourth, though, unable to take care of the ball. They shot 57.7 percent in the game, but they committed 23 turnovers.James Harden led the Rockets with 26 points despite shooting 10 for 28 from the field and missing all seven of his 3-point attempts.With 1 minute 27 seconds left in regulation, Afflalo drained an 18-foot jump shot from the baseline to give the Knicks a 3-point lead. About 26 seconds later, Marcus Thornton missed a 3-point attempt for the Rockets, but Calderon lost control of his dribble out of bounds on the ensuing possession to return the ball to Houston. With about 32 seconds remaining, Thornton capped a frenetic Houston possession with a 3-pointer near the left sideline, tying the game.That knocked the wind out of the arena, before Howard and the Rockets delivered the finishing blow in overtime.A version of this article appears in print on November 30, 2015, on Page D6 of the New York edition with the headline: Knicks’ Big Lead Collapses With a Thump .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.