By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSNOV. 29, 2015
Tom Brady lost yet another one of his trusted targets, and this time he also lost a game.C. J. Anderson scored on a 48-yard run with 12 minutes 32 seconds left in overtime, powering the host Denver Broncos past the New England Patriots, 30-24, on a snowy Sunday night.Watching from the cozy indoors at field level was Peyton Manning as Brock Osweiler and the Broncos (9-2) overcame an early 14-0 deficit and handed the Patriots (10-1) their first loss since 2014.Now the Carolina Panthers (11-0) are the N.F.L.’s only unbeaten team.Osweiler threw a 3-yard touchdown pass to Bubba Caldwell with 1:09 left in regulation to put the Broncos up, 24-21. But Brady, playing without the injured star tight end Rob Gronkowski, needed just five plays to drive the Patriots 51 yards and into range for Stephen Gostowski’s 47-yard field goal that tied it at the end of regulation.New England won the coin toss and elected to receive, but thanks to a sack by Von Miller, Denver forced a three-and-out and, on third-and-1 from the New England 48, Anderson raced around the left sideline and into the north end zone.AdvertisementSEAHAWKS 39, STEELERS 30 Russell Wilson threw for 345 yards and a career-high five touchdown passes, two to Doug Baldwin in the game’s final 8:12, and Seattle held on for a wild home win on over Ben Roethlisberger and the Pittsburgh.AdvertisementPittsburgh trimmed Seattle’s lead to 32-30 late in the fourth quarter, but Baldwin secured the victory with his final touchdown, his third of the game, on an 80-yard catch-and-run with 2:01 left.Baldwin, running a crossing route on a third-and-10 at the 20, broke two tackles on the way to that score. His scoring catch midway through the fourth quarter, a 30-yarder, had put Seattle back in front after Pittsburgh had taken a 27-26 lead.Wilson’s two other touchdown passes went to Jermaine Kearse as Seattle, trying to get back to the postseason, picked up a huge win.Markus Wheaton had nine catches for 201 yards for the Steelers, and Roethlisberger threw for 456 yards — the highest total ever against Seattle. But he was also intercepted twice, and he was pulled with two minutes left and taken to the locker room as part of the N.F.L.’s concussion protocol. Coach Mike Tomlin had no update on Roethlisberger after the game.Landry Jones replaced Roethlisberger and tried to lead a rally, but he threw an interception to Kam Chancellor at the Seattle 6 with 1:37 left. It was Jones’s second interception of the day, after a fake field-goal attempt in the first half went wrong.VIKINGS 20, FALCONS 10 Minnesota bounced back from a tough loss to Green Bay by winning at Atlanta, with Adrian Peterson running for 158 yards and two scores against the N.F.L.’s top-ranked run defense.The Vikings jumped ahead on a 1-yard run by Peterson in the opening quarter and clinched the win when he got loose on a 35-yard scamper down the sideline with 4:15 remaining. Peterson moved to 18th on the career rushing list with 11,354 yards, passing O. J. Simpson, Corey Dillon and John Riggins.The Falcons’ Matt Ryan threw two interceptions, giving him five in two games. After one in the end zone, he heard perhaps the loudest boos of his career at home.AdvertisementCARDINALS 19, 49ERS 13 Arizona topped host San Francisco in an ugly game with the help of Carson Palmer, who ran for a go-ahead 8-yard touchdown with 2:28 left but tumbled after spiking the ball in a telling story of his day.Moments earlier, Palmer had fallen backward as he released the ball on a 34-yard completion to J. J. Nelson that put the Cardinals on the 1. After Palmer’s score, Chandler Catanzaro missed the extra-point attempt, giving quarterback Blaine Gabbert and the 49ers one more chance with 2:21 left. But Anquan Boldin gained only 18 yards on a catch on a fourth-and-20.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.BENGALS 31, RAMS 7 Andy Dalton threw three touchdown passes, two of them to A. J. Green, and host Cincinnati emerged from a two-game skid with an effort reminiscent of its perfect first half of the season.With St. Louis’s Case Keenum limited in practice because of a head injury he sustained last week, Nick Foles, who started the first nine games, returned as the Rams’ first-string quarterback. But he threw three interceptions, one of which Leon Hall returned 19 yards for a touchdown.TEXANS 24, SAINTS 6 Houston cruised to its fourth straight victory as visiting New Orleans finished a game without a touchdown for the first time since Dec. 24, 2005, ending a streak of 155 games. Drew Brees’s streak of games with a touchdown pass, dating to 2012, ended at 45, and the Saints lost their third straight.The Texans’ J. J. Watt had seven quarterback hits and two sacks to push his N.F.L. lead to 13 ½. He would have had another in the second quarter, but Brees threw the ball into the turf as Watt wrapped him up, resulting in a penalty for intentional grounding.COLTS 25, BUCCANEERS 12 Adam Vinatieri made four field goals for host Indianapolis, which won its third straight and remained tied with Houston atop the A.F.C. South.In the first matchup between the oldest and youngest starting quarterbacks in the N.F.L. since 2010, according to Stats L.L.C., Matt Hasselbeck, 40, easily outplayed Tampa Bay’s Jameis Winston, 21.AdvertisementThe Buccaneers drew a critical leaping penalty and a Vinatieri field goal became a clinching 3-yard touchdown pass with 5:53 left.CHARGERS 31, JAGUARS 25 For the second time in five years, San Diego ended a six-game losing streak with a victory at Jacksonville.Philip Rivers threw four touchdown passes for the Chargers, passing Joe Montana (273) and tying Vinny Testaverde (275) for 11th on the N.F.L.’s career list. Rivers, with 300 yards, also became the 17th player in N.F.L. history to throw for 40,000 yards.Two Jaguars drives ended with field goals because Blake Bortles, scrambling on third downs inside the 10, threw the ball after crossing the line of scrimmage, resulting in penalties.RAIDERS 24, TITANS 21 Given another chance because of a disputed call, Derek Carr threw a 12-yard scoring pass to Seth Roberts with 1:21 left, and Oakland stopped a three-game skid by winning at Tennessee on a wet, sloppy day.The Titans, who had rallied to take a 21-17 lead, lost for the ninth time in 10 games. They thought they had a game-saving play when safety Michael Griffin broke up a pass in the end zone on a fourth down. But officials flagged B. W. Webb for holding on the other side of the field.Nate Allen ended the Titans’ last chance by intercepting a Marcus Mariota pass with 43 seconds left.CHIEFS 30, BILLS 22 Jeremy Maclin had nine catches for 160 yards and a score, and host Kansas City won its fifth straight to move to 6-5, solidifying its spot in the playoff chase. The Chiefs also took the head-to-head tiebreaker against Buffalo (5-6), another wild-card contender.The Bills had a chance to tie the score. But after quickly getting a first down, Tyrod Taylor was knocked out of bounds short of the marker on a fourth down.A version of this article appears in print on November 30, 2015, on Page D4 of the New York edition with the headline: Broncos Knock Patriots From Ranks of the Unbeaten.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.