By JONAH BROMWICHNOV. 29, 2015
Every week, The New York Times will choose one essential game to watch, highlighting hot teams, winning and losing streaks and statistical intrigue in the N.B.A.San Antonio at Chicago, Monday, 8 p.m. Eastern, NBATVStephen Curry has made a career out of doing the unexpected. So it was not altogether surprising that, when asked if the Golden State Warriors were concerned with breaking the record for best start to the season, he dispensed with the platitudes that often greet such questions.“I think I’ve probably talked about it more than anybody else on the team, just because I know about the history and just really how hard it is,” he said before Tuesday’s game against the Los Angeles Lakers.Curry and his Warriors went on to beat the Lakers for their 16th win, breaking the record. They are now 18-0, and their every game is a must-watch event while they remain unbeaten. But they are not on national television this week, leaving room for some less thrilling N.B.A. acts to take center stage.AdvertisementThat includes the Spurs and their coach, Gregg Popovich. It is difficult to imagine Popovich as a locker room chatterbox when it comes to any sort of regular-season record. Popovich is an instrumentalist: For him, it seems, the regular season is a means to the playoffs and nothing more.AdvertisementThe Spurs are meeting their coach’s expectations. They have glided into second place in the Western Conference, right behind Golden State, having won 11 of their last 12 games. A win against the Chicago Bulls in the Windy City on Monday night (8 p.m. Eastern, NBATV) would give them six in a row.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Coming into the season, excitement about San Antonio was mostly focused on the addition of LaMarcus Aldridge. But novel talent carries less weight in San Antonio than old reliables, and it is the Spurs’ regulars who have led the team to its hot start. Kawhi Leonard is having a career year: He averaged 24 points in his last three games and added 7 rebounds, 6 assists, 5 blocks and 4 steals in Denver on Friday, when his teammates Tim Duncan and Manu Ginobili were resting.Partly because players like Leonard can carry the Spurs to a win against certain opponents, neither Duncan nor Ginobili is seeing the kind of decline normally associated with veteran players. At 38, Ginobili is the second most efficient of the Spurs’ major contributors after Leonard, averaging 11.5 points a game on 46 percent shooting in limited minutes off the bench. Duncan, 39, has seen a more significant decline in his overall output, but he, too, is playing extremely efficient basketball.Aldridge, still struggling with his shot, has also been granted a reprieve by the Spurs’ easy schedule. Their opponents so far are the weakest that any Western Conference team other than the Mavericks has faced. The Bulls, with their 9-5 record, represent more of a challenge.Chicago is running in the middle of a much-improved Eastern Conference pack. The team has beaten some of its toughest opponents — the Cleveland Cavaliers, the Indiana Pacers and the Oklahoma City Thunder — and generally plays up to the caliber of its opponents.The Bulls’ new coach, Fred Hoiberg, was expected to rejuvenate the Chicago offense, which has not seen much innovation since Phil Jackson instituted the triangle. Hoiberg has sped up the Bulls’ attack, the same philosophy he instituted successfully at Iowa State. But the team’s offensive efficiency has taken a hit. The only teams with a worse offensive efficiency rating entering Sunday were the winless 76ers, the Lakers (2-12) and the Nets (3-13).Another notable change in Hoiberg’s inaugural season has been the amount of time he keeps his best players on the bench. The Bulls’ last coach, Tom Thibodeau, was known for running his starters into the ground. Jimmy Butler played 38.7 minutes a game last season, while Pau Gasol played 34.4. Hoiberg has scaled Butler back to 36.8 minutes a game. Gasol is playing 29.1.Resting players during the regular season risks a few losses in order to keep the stars fresh for when they are really needed. The Golden State Warriors’ enthusiasm for their record-breaking season is fun to buy into as a fan. But as commentators start to mention the 1995-96 Chicago Bulls, who went 72-10, the best record ever, they should keep in mind that coaches like Popovich have changed the N.B.A. There is a reason that most superstars no longer average more than 35 minutes a game. If the Warriors or any other contenders run low on fuel chasing regular-season records, then you can count on Popovich’s Spurs to be there in the postseason, waiting until the right time to put out the fire for good.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.