AdvertisementSupported byRoundupBy Filip BondyHARRISON, N.J. — Yet another promising season ended badly Sunday for the Red Bulls, on a night when they awakened too late and when a ball bounced the wrong way off the post in the waning seconds.The Red Bulls were eliminated by Columbus in the Eastern Conference finals despite a 1-0 victory, dropping the home-and-home series, 2-1, on aggregate score. Having posted the best regular-season record for the second time in three seasons — a feat that would trump all others in most professional leagues abroad — the Red Bulls failed to recover from a disastrous start last week at Columbus in this very American playoff system.Their Pyrrhic victory led to very different interpretations inside the locker room. Jesse Marsch, the Red Bulls’ coach, called the effort admirable and the season “an overwhelming success.” The captain, Dax McCarty, felt differently.“I apologize to our fans,” McCarty said. “They deserve more. For the most part, we didn’t play well. I thought we were outplayed, outworked and outcoached. We had no ideas in the final third of the field.”The Red Bulls dominated possession and field position during the second leg, yet rarely penetrated the Crew’s stubborn, compact defense. By the time a header from the substitute Anatole Abang beat Steve Clark in the third minute of added time, many fans inside the sold-out arena were heading for the PATH train. One more header by Bradley Wright-Phillips, moments before the final whistle, teased the remaining crowd by bouncing low off the right post.“For a second, it looked like it was going in,” Wright-Phillips said wistfully.Columbus Coach Gregg Berhalter kept eight men behind the ball and in the box on most occasions, while the Crew’s counters often proved far more dangerous than the Red Bulls’ fruitless passing game. The Red Bulls could not muster a shot on goal until the final seconds of the first half, while their own goalkeeper, Luis Robles, made three acrobatic saves during that span. “As soon as they turned the ball over, you saw their midfielders drop back,” Robles said. “They did their best to have a block of eight on defense.”The Red Bulls pressed more effectively in the second half, and Sacha Kljestan’s shot forced a diving save by Steve Clark in the 73rd minute. The final moments were chaotic, finally exciting. But as it turned out, the goal Justin Meram scored nine seconds into the first leg at Columbus set the tone for the entire series. The 180 minutes that followed did little to change the landscape. Now the low-payroll Red Bulls go back to the draft board and the free-agent market, while the league stages an unglamorous, small-market matchup of Portland at Columbus next Sunday in the M.L.S. Cup.“The off-seasons are never easy,” Marsch said. “This team will never be together as it exists now, and it’s hard to know that. I love this team. Now it’s important for each guy to think about their own personal situations. There’s a lot of delicate situations with different players. We have to figure out how to keep the nucleus. It’s a very daunting task.”The Red Bulls’ fate was a familiar finish. An original M.L.S. franchise, it has yet to capture the Cup after 20 seasons of trying. Although the current general manager, Ali Curtis, says he has never heard of such a thing, fans are well-versed in the Curse of Nicola Caricola — the Italian import who scored an own goal to doom the MetroStars in their Giants Stadium opener in 1996.Marsch insisted the team had proved quite a bit this year, and that the Red Bulls might have pulled this one out with tighter refereeing or a little bit of luck.“This has been a magical season,” Marsch said.Referring to Wright-Phillips’s header, he added: “It was an inch, two inches, you tell me how much. One of Columbus’s tactics was, any time we were getting out on a break, they’d foul us. I thought the referee let too many physical challenges from Columbus get away.”The Red Bulls, facing a two-goal deficit on aggregate score going into the home match, were forced into a delicate balancing act. They needed to attack aggressively, yet protect against a disastrous counter by Columbus. Crew defenders marked strikers Wright-Phillips and Mike Grella particularly tight. The return of Gaston Sauro, the Crew’s central defender who was coming off a one-game suspension, rendered matters even more difficult.The game, played in temperatures in the 30s, turned ugly, briefly, midway through the first half. Felipe Martins was shown a yellow card after a nasty tackle on Federico Higuain. Players pushed and shoved one another, igniting the crowd.The Red Bulls failed to convert any of their set pieces, their best hope. Eventually, the clock ran out on their season.“We know how long the game is,” McCarty said. “It’s not going to change just for us.”PORTLAND ADVANCES TO FINAL The Portland Timbers advanced to the M.L.S. Cup final for the first time, tying F.C. Dallas, 2-2, in the second leg of the Western Conference finals in Frisco, Tex.Portland won the first leg at home, 3-1, on its way to a 5-3 victory in the series.  (AP) Advertisement