By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSNOV. 29, 2015
Mikaela Shiffrin won a second consecutive World Cup slalom race Sunday in Aspen, Colo., overcoming an early mistake in her final run and still winning by a remarkably large margin.Shiffrin, a 20-year-old American, finished in 1 minute 40.18 seconds, beating Frida Hansdotter of Sweden by 2.65 seconds. Sarka Strachova of the Czech Republic was third, 2.90 seconds back. Those were the only two competitors within three seconds of Shiffrin, the reigning Olympic and world slalom champion.“It’s just really difficult to catch her,” Strachova said. “She’s in another class.”A SWEEP FOR SVINDAL Aksel Lund Svindal of Norway won the super-G to sweep the two opening World Cup races in Lake Louise, Alberta. Svindal, 32, finished in 1:29.30 a day after winning the downhill. He missed most of last season because of a torn Achilles’ tendon.Matthias Mayer of Austria was second in 1:29.65.ITALIAN WINS LUGE OPENER The Italian luger Dominik Fischnaller won the season-opening World Cup race in Igls, Austria, after the first-run leader, Felix Loch, was disqualified for an equipment irregularity, while Germany dominated the team relay.AdvertisementFischnaller finished in a two-run combined time of 1:40.687 to edge Armin Frauscher of Austria by 0.006 of a second.AdvertisementThe German team of Dajana Eitberger, Andi Langenhan, Toni Eggert and Sascha Benecken comfortably won the concluding team relay in an aggregate time of 2:9.035, defeating Latvia by 0.393 of a second.GERMANS SWEEP BOBSLED Francesco Friedrich led a German sweep of the podium in the opening four-man bobsled World Cup of the season in Altenberg, Germany.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Friedrich, the two-man world champion, posted runs of 55.81 and 55.98 seconds for a combined time of 1:51.79 to edge Nico Walther’s team by 0.09 of a second.NORWEGIANS DOMINATE The Norwegian duo of Martin Johnsrud Sundby and Therese Johaug defended their leads to win pursuit races in Kuusamo, Finland, to wrap up a three-day mini-tour that opened the cross-country skiing World Cup.Johnsrud Sundby won the men’s 15-kilometer classic race in 37:10.0 to lead a Norwegian sweep, as Petter Northug finished 44.7 seconds behind the winner, with Finn Hagen Krogh 46.5 back.Johaug was also in a class of her own, winning the women’s 10-kilometer race in 27:22.3.BIATHLON RELAY MAKES DEBUT Norway won both races in Ostersund, Sweden, as the biathlon World Cup season started with two mixed relays.Kaia Woien Nicolaisen and Lars Helge Birkeland combined to win a 2x6-kilometer single mixed relay, a new format that features just two skiers on each team. The duo finished in 36:27.3 to beat Canada by 11.9 seconds and Germany by 13.2.In a regular mixed relay, with two men and two women on each team, Tarjei Bo skied the anchor leg to lead Norway to a big win ahead of Germany and the Czech Republic.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.