AdvertisementSupported byJets 38, Dolphins 20By Ben ShpigelEAST RUTHERFORD, N.J. — The Jets had played some horrendous football the previous two games. The kind of football that produced embarrassed locker rooms, provoked a postgame tirade from their coach and prompted their hirsute quarterback to trim a beard more prolific than their offense.But however much the Jets had seemed to fade from the playoff chase, one fact was obscured. Measured against their peers, the Jets, for all their flaws, resided in the middle of the league standings.Many teams are better, but many are worse, and one of them happened to visit MetLife Stadium on Sunday. True to its record, that team, the Miami Dolphins, performed as if it flew all the way up here just to boost the Jets’ confidence.Which it did. The Jets’ 38-20 victory, which completed their first season sweep of the Dolphins in eight years, doubled as their daily affirmation: They are good enough, aren’t they? They could make the postseason, couldn’t they?The answers to both those questions will be resolved during the next month or so — starting with the meeting against the Giants next Sunday for MetLife supremacy — unless the Jets can successfully petition the N.F.L. to schedule Miami for the remainder of the season. The Dolphins would most likely object to that proposal (O.K., definitely object) on grounds of cruel and unusual punishment. The first time the Jets beat Miami, on Oct. 4 in London, the Dolphins reacted by firing their coach. If possible, Miami played worse — and the Jets better — on Sunday.“It was more than just how we won,” defensive lineman Sheldon Richardson said. “We won how we were supposed to win. We went out there and imposed our will.”It started on defense, by allowing 12 rushing yards (on nine carries), the fewest in franchise history, and continued by stifling quarterback Ryan Tannehill, who guided the Dolphins to seven punts and an interception on their first eight possessions. His stat line — 351 yards, on 33 of 58 passing, with three touchdowns and an interception — was more deceptive than a house of mirrors. It took until about the four-minute mark of the third quarter, with the Dolphins trailing, 21-0, for them to convert their first third down against the Jets this season.Yes, this season. Miami had failed on its previous 20.“We’re a tough-minded team,” Jets Coach Todd Bowles said. “We’re going to show up and fight.” Once again, Brandon Marshall shredded Brent Grimes, who proved he could not cover Marshall on this side of the Atlantic Ocean, either. Grimes allowed both of Marshall’s touchdown catches and the bulk of his season-high 131 receiving yards (his previous best, 128, came in the teams’ last meeting), though Marshall afterward called him the first cornerback — in the non-Darrelle Revis division — he would try to acquire if he were a general manager.But ...“It was tough for anybody who was going to be out there,” Marshall said. That is because Ryan Fitzpatrick, with his tidy facial hair, tossed four touchdowns without an interception against a defense so wary of the run that it became susceptible to the pass. During the game, Marshall was told that the last time Fitzpatrick pruned his beard to a respectable length before a start — for Houston, last November — he threw six touchdown passes. “Maybe it’s a weekly trip,” said Eric Decker, who caught a third-quarter touchdown, of Fitzpatrick. “We’ll pitch in.”By midway through the fourth quarter, most of the fans had vacated the premises, content with a display of dominance that resuscitated the Jets’ playoff hopes. The Jets (6-5) overtook Pittsburgh, which lost at Seattle, and kept pace with the A.F.C. South-leading Colts, the Chiefs and the Texans by soaring at the end of a turbulent week. They currently sit in seventh place, behind Kansas City and Houston but ahead of Pittsburgh. The eight-day stretch began with a scolding in Houston from an incensed Bowles, who made Fitzpatrick wait a day before announcing who would start Sunday at quarterback. A former first-round pick, Quinton Coples, was released on Monday, and the Jets returned to work on Wednesday to a simplified game plan — on defense, too — and a shorn Fitzpatrick. The Jets’ ineffectiveness against Houston and Buffalo prompted some rigorous self-scouting. Aside from some atrocious execution, the source of their struggles, coaches determined, was an ill-timed dose of creativity. Countering opponents’ adjustments, the Jets abandoned the run in favor of more of a spread offense that, Fitzpatrick said last week, complicated things too much.In response, the Jets did not hand off the ball over and over to Chris Ivory. They allowed Miami’s defensive tendencies to dictate their approach. When the Dolphins flooded the box, Fitzpatrick exploited favorable matchups — Grimes on Marshall, for one — to complete 22 of 37 passes for 277 yards.Even with three false starts and a holding penalty, and even with a certain touchdown erased by a Decker drop, and even with Ivory rushing for a pittance, the Jets still managed 234 yards in the first half. Of that total, 17 came on a beautiful touch throw from Fitzpatrick to Marshall, who scored the Jets’ first touchdown before halftime in three weeks. Another 16 went on one play to the rookie Devin Smith, who jumped to grab a slick pass in the middle of the end zone — and held onto the ball as Jamar Taylor tried to knock it out — for his first N.F.L. touchdown. Marshall, and others, spoke about sensing a positive vibe at practice last week. That feeling extended into warm-ups Sunday, when Antonio Cromartie spotted teammates dancing, and then again on the Dolphins’ first possession, when Calvin Pryor leveled receiver Rishard Matthews on an incomplete pass, knocking him out of the game. Calling it a clean hit, Tannehill said Pryor was classless for celebrating. Pryor said he was just trying to bring energy. His teammates noticed, during the game and afterward. Walking through the locker room, Marshall glanced at Pryor and said: “He’s the tone setter. That’s the tone setter right there.” Maybe it was, and maybe it was not. There are five games left. The Jets will know soon enough. EXTRA POINTSMiddle linebacker Erin Henderson received extended playing time in place of Demario Davis. Said Todd Bowles, “You earn your playing time around here.” ... Cornerback Marcus Williams (sprained knee), who recorded his team-leading fifth interception, and linebacker Calvin Pace (abdominal strain) are day to day, Bowles said.Advertisement