AdvertisementSupported byBy Marc TracyRutgers announced Sunday that it had fired its football coach, Kyle Flood, and athletic director, Julie Hermann, and had hired her replacement, Patrick Hobbs — three moves amid a flurry of personnel changes in major college football programs.The Rutgers firings were widely anticipated. Flood, who went 27-24 in four seasons as head coach, was suspended three games this season for violating university policy in contacting an athlete’s teacher regarding a grade. Six players were dismissed from the team this season after arrests, and the university said it was possible there were N.C.A.A. violations. Since Rutgers moved into the Big Ten before the 2014 season, the Scarlet Knights have gone 12-13 over all, and 4-12 against conference opponents.“Our continued struggles on the field combined with several off-the-field issues have convinced me that we need new leadership of our football program,” Rutgers’s president, Robert L. Barchi, said in a statement.In a teleconference with reporters Sunday afternoon, he said: “Wins and losses are really important. How you’re getting there is just as important.”While the assistant head coach Norries Wilson will serve as interim head coach for off-season activities, a search for a permanent head coach will begin immediately. Barchi hired Hobbs after a “strong referral,” Barchi said in the statement. From 2009 to 2011, Hobbs was interim athletic director at Seton Hall, which is in the Big East and does not field a varsity football team. “This is a tremendous opportunity,” Hobbs said during the teleconference. “I feel incredibly honored even to be asked.”Hermann became the university’s athletic director in the spring of 2013 and was embattled from the start, with allegations emerging that she had been verbally abusive toward players while serving as Tennessee’s volleyball coach in the 1990s.Barchi said that he decided to terminate Flood and Hermann at the same time because of a “confluence” of factors, and noted that on Saturday the Rutgers women’s soccer team upset Virginia to advance to the national semifinals.A look at the top players in contention for college football’s highest honor.The day after football’s regular season ends is traditionally known as Black Sunday, because many struggling coaches lose their jobs. This season, an unusually high number of them were terminated, announced their resignations or quit while the season was still going on.Most notably on Sunday, Georgia parted ways with Mark Richt, who went 145-51 with two Southeastern Conference championships and just one losing season in 15 years as head coach, and Virginia Tech announced that Justin Fuente, just off a run as Memphis’s head coach, would replace the retiring Frank Beamer, the Hokies’ coach for the last 29 seasons.Also, Virginia announced the resignation of Mike London, and Syracuse announced last week that Scott Shafer would coach his last game on Saturday. Iowa State announced Sunday that it had hired the former Toledo coach Matt Campbell less than a week after it said that Saturday’s game would be Paul Rhoads’s final one as coach.Even as Illinois and Minnesota recently signed their interim head coaches to short-term contracts, more than a dozen openings remained among the Football Bowl Subdivision’s 128 programs, including at Southern California, Missouri, Miami, Maryland and South Carolina, where Steve Spurrier resigned in the middle of the season.With Fuente and Campbell off the board, the most sought-after head coaches include Houston’s Tom Herman and Bowling Green’s Dino Babers. Oregon’s offensive coordinator, Scott Frost, and Alabama’s defensive coordinator, Kirby Smart, are also expected to be in high demand.Black Sunday’s perceived winners included Iowa State, which has had one winning season in the last 10, and Virginia Tech, which in addition to nabbing Fuente, persuaded its longtime defensive coordinator, Bud Foster, to stay on.To some, Louisiana State may have made the day’s biggest move by doing nothing at all. Late Saturday, Athletic Director Joe Alleva confirmed that, despite widespread reports to the contrary, Les Miles would remain the Tigers’ coach.Hobbs, Rutgers’s new athletic director, most recently served as New Jersey’s first ombudsman for the governor’s office, a position created by Gov. Chris Christie last year to replace an office that an internal investigation found had punished and rewarded various mayors based on their support for Christie’s re-election.Flood’s buyout has been reported at $1.4 million. Rutgers’s athletic department currently runs at operating deficits in the tens of millions of dollars, though it has said it hopes to be in the black near the beginning of next decade as it begins to receive full payouts from the Big Ten.“I am looking at this transition in our athletics department as a major step in being competitive with and in the Big Ten,” Barchi said. “We look at this on a five-year basis, and as an investment in our future.”At $1.25 million, Flood’s salary was among the lowest in the Big 5 conferences. It is likely that the next coach could command higher compensation.“You know better than I what the average salaries are in this business,” Barchi said. “We will be looking for a competitive coach who can make the changes we need to make here.”Advertisement