

 Marc Tracy
 

ON COLLEGE FOOTBALL
NOV. 29, 2015
After Louisiana State’s 19-7 victory against Texas A&M on Saturday, players hoisted Tigers Coach Les Miles onto their shoulders. He interrupted an on-field interview to sing along to the university’s alma mater — “And may thy spirit live in us, forever L-S-U” — before he was asked about the crowd chanting his name, in recognition of widely circulated reports that Miles was about to be fired.“I have always loved this place,” Miles told reporters. “It’s nice to be” — he paused — “reviewed.”The theater metaphor was quintessential Miles. All of college football’s a stage, and all its coaches and players merely, well, players. They have their exits and their entrances.But Miles, a popular coach throughout the sport who in his previous 10 seasons at L.S.U. averaged more than 10 victories and won a national title, was apparently not ready to leave.AdvertisementShortly after the game, Athletic Director Joe Alleva assured everyone that neither was L.S.U. ready for Miles to go.Advertisement“I want to make it very clear and positive that Les Miles is our football coach and he will continue to be our football coach,” Alleva told reporters, seeming to acknowledge that this fact had been anything but clear and positive.Meanwhile — and with no disrespect to the Tigers, who would be 9-3 but for the weather-related cancellation of a September game against an inferior opponent — the post-Thanksgiving weekend had new acts and closing curtains more consequential as far as the postseason was concerned.Most notably, Oklahoma — No. 3 in last week’s College Football Playoff rankings, used throughout this column — virtually assured itself of a berth with a 58-23 beat-down of No. 11 Oklahoma State (10-2, 7-2 Big 12). Sooners quarterback Baker Mayfield had barely a speaking role — 180 passing yards, two touchdowns and no interceptions, with another 77 yards and a touchdown on the ground — but only because running backs Joe Mixon and Samaje Perine each rushed for more than 130 yards and cornerback Jordan Thomas made two interceptions, one for a touchdown.“Hopefully, we were already in a positive position, in the top three,” Sooners Coach Bob Stoops said. “We can only move up, I’d guess.”Maybe. Recall that in last season’s penultimate rankings, Texas Christian — which, like this year’s Sooners, finished the regular season 11-1 over all and 8-1 in the Big 12, with each team’s sole loss coming in early October — was in position for the Playoff’s third seed. By the time the dust settled, the Horned Frogs were sixth in the rankings and headed to the Peach Bowl.There are important differences, though. One is that Oklahoma, which earned a strong out-of-conference victory at Tennessee, finished its season with three victories in difficult games — two of them on the road — and looks to be the team getting better each week. (Last year, that designation fell to Ohio State, the eventual champion.)More important, last season featured four undefeated or one-loss champions from the major conferences that hold championship games, locking out the Big 12. This season, only three of those conferences are in position to have such a champion: the Atlantic Coast Conference, with No. 1 Clemson and No. 14 North Carolina; the Southeastern Conference, with No. 2 Alabama; and the Big Ten, with No. 4 Iowa (12-0, 8-0) and No. 5 Michigan State (11-1, 7-1). The absence of the Pacific-12 Conference, whose champion will be Stanford (10-2, 8-1) or Southern California (8-4, 6-3), provides a logical spot for a Big 12 team.AdvertisementIn a similar sort of calculus, Oklahoma won Saturday not only in Stillwater, Okla., but in Palo Alto, Calif., where No. 9 Stanford beat Notre Dame on a last-second field goal, 30 seconds after Fighting Irish quarterback DeShone Kizer had scored a go-ahead touchdown.With a win at Stanford, No. 6 Notre Dame could have moved into the top four of the Playoff rankings at 11-1, with its only loss to Clemson. Instead, the loss dropped the Irish to 10-2 and, effectively, out of contention.As for Stanford, it has at times looked like the best team in football, with a strong defense, an experienced quarterback in Kevin Hogan and a star in running back Christian McCaffrey, whose 3,035 all-purpose yards have him near the N.C.A.A. single-season record of 3,250, set by Barry Sanders — the father of McCaffrey’s teammate Barry J. Sanders.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Cardinal’s only losses came in Week 1 against Northwestern, now No. 16 in the Playoff rankings, and by 2 points against Oregon, which has risen to 17th with a late-season resurgence.But those two losses could prove one too many. The existence of two contenders in the Big Ten, who will effectively play for a Playoff berth Saturday in Indianapolis, means that Stanford must hope not only for kind consideration from the Playoff selection committee — and, of course, a victory over better-than-its-record U.S.C. in its own conference championship game — but also for upsets in two other title games.As to the first: good luck. In Atlanta on Saturday, Alabama (11-1, 7-1), having just steamrollered Auburn, will face No. 12 Florida (10-2, 7-1), which lost to No. 13 Florida State by 27-2 on Saturday.More promising for the Cardinal is the A.C.C. championship game, between Clemson and North Carolina in Charlotte, N.C. Clemson (12-0, 8-0) held off South Carolina, 37-32, on Saturday, one week after the Gamecocks lost to a Football Championship Subdivision team. And the Tar Heels have not lost since Week 1 (against South Carolina) and continued to look impressive on Saturday, beating North Carolina State, 45-34, on the road.“We’ve done everything we can to this point, and now we’ve got to play the No. 1 team in the country,” North Carolina Coach Larry Fedora told reporters. If his team wins that game, he added, “I think we’d be very deserving to be in the playoffs.”AdvertisementBut in the minds of the 12 selection committee members, North Carolina has perpetually lagged behind its Associated Press ranking — last week, it was No. 14 in the Playoff rankings and No. 11 in the A.P. poll, a relatively narrow gap for the team this season — so a Tar Heels upset would just as likely benefit Stanford.Or Ohio State, the on-paper best team in the country, which was ranked No. 8 and finished the regular season 11-1 by winning at No. 10 Michigan by a punishing 42-13. Chaos, particularly on the order of losses by both Clemson and Stanford, could allow the Big Ten to become the first conference of the new four-team Playoff era to have two members get in.Yet even if the curtain is drawn on the Buckeyes’ season — not including a non-Playoff bowl game, potentially the Rose Bowl — they have the nation’s top freshman recruiting class to look forward to next fall.Second on that recruiting list, incidentally, is L.S.U., which will also have the star running back Leonard Fournette back. The stage is set for Miles, the Tigers’ coach, to become more than a critical darling.A version of this article appears in print on November 30, 2015, on Page D8 of the New York edition with the headline: L.S.U.’s Coach Gets Another Chance. Some Teams Will Not Be So Lucky.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »