AdvertisementSupported byMotorsportsBy Brad SpurgeonABU DHABI, United Arab Emirates — There may be 20 cars in a Formula One race, but for a driver, since so much of his relative strength depends on the quality of his team’s car, the main competitor is always his own teammate.In a season so dominated by one team, few races of the 2015 season were more about the battles of the teammates than the Abu Dhabi Grand Prix on Sunday, the last of the season’s 19 races, as all of the drivers wanted to make a final, parting impression of superiority.And nowhere was the battle more significant than at that dominating team, as the Mercedes drivers, Nico Rosberg and Lewis Hamilton, again fought each other for the victory. And for a record 12th time this year, the two came in first and second, respectively.But although Hamilton had already won the year’s drivers’ title at the United States Grand Prix in Austin, Tex., last month, the Abu Dhabi race was another in the trend of the final three races in which Rosberg drove better, took the victory, and also scored pole position, for sixth race in a row.“Delicious, the best ever,” Rosberg said. “It’s always tough to race Lewis. He’s doing an awesome job, and he’s one of the best out there, so an even better feeling to win, definitely against such opposition. It’s a great battle internally all the time. That’s what I race for, such battles, and I look forward to more next year.”It was Rosberg’s sixth victory of the year, compared to 10 for Hamilton. While the German may have failed to win the title for the second year running, in winning this race, he did a little better than last year, when he scored five victories to Hamilton’s 11.Still, Hamilton came out looking fairly relaxed. “I think being world champion sounds a lot better than winning the race,” the British driver said when asked who was most likely feeling better as the series heads into its winter break.Hamilton started the race much slower than Rosberg, but after 20 laps he began setting fastest lap after fastest lap. By Lap 27, he had reduced a gap of nearly 7 seconds to Rosberg to 1.7 seconds. But he was unable to pass the German either on the track or in the pit stops, and despite a late-race charge that made up several seconds, he finished 8.2 seconds behind Rosberg.Hamilton had asked to stay out for the final laps of the race, making one fewer pit stop than Rosberg and gambling to win. But his engineer told him that the gamble was too big and that the tires would be unlikely to last.“I think in hindsight once Nico pitted I would probably have backed off a little bit and I would have made those tires go a lot longer,” he said. “The tires were still fine at the end, so I honestly felt that I could potentially have taken them to the end.”Elsewhere in the battles of the teammates, Kimi Raikkonen, of Ferrari, ended his season with a rare better performance than his teammate, Sebastian Vettel. The Finnish driver finished the race in third position, for his third podium of the season, while Vettel, who started in 15th position after a problem in qualifying on Saturday, managed to finish fourth.Vettel has scored 13 podium finishes this season, including winning the only three races not won by Mercedes drivers. Raikkonen also passed over Valtteri Bottas of the Williams team in the standings, to finish fourth in the series.Vettel drove a terrific race, and there were several tense moments between the teammates as the German had caught up to, and passed, Raikkonen after the latter’s pit stop on Lap 32. Then, on Lap 36, his engineer told Vettel to let Raikkonen pass him.“It hasn’t been ideal,” Raikkonen said of his season. “But that’s how it goes sometimes. The speed has been there, but mistakes and problems mean the end results haven’t been there at times.”The battle between the two youngest teammates, Max Verstappen, 18, and Carlos Sainz Jr., 21, at the Toro Rosso team was one of the most closely fought. Sainz, who has scored fewer points this year than Verstappen, managed to qualify higher than Verstappen in 10 races, including in Abu Dhabi.After a tight battle between the two, who qualified 10th and 11th, Verstappen managed to pass Sainz on Lap 17, only to make a mistake braking a couple of laps later, and put a flat spot on his tire, forcing a pit stop on Lap 20, that allowed Sainz to pass him again.Verstappen then drove a fairly wild race to catch up, passing cars but also receiving penalties, one for going off the track while passing the McLaren Honda of Jenson Button, and the other for ignoring the blue flags telling him to stop blocking another car.Sainz looked ready to finish in the points for the final race of the season, and not Verstappen. But in the final laps, Romain Grosjean of the Lotus team passed him for 10th and the final point. Grosjean then passed Daniil Kvyat in a Red Bull for ninth position, in his last race at Lotus, before he moves to the new Haas team next year.Daniel Ricciardo, in the other Red Bull, finished sixth — to Kvyat’s 10th — and moving to within three points of the Russian in the standings.At McLaren Honda, a team that has had problems with its engine throughout the season, the battle of the teammates was compromised during the first lap of the race when Fernando Alonso ran into Pastor Maldonado, Grosjean’s teammate, and knocked him out of the race. Alonso had to make a pit stop to replace the damage, and he was also given a penalty for causing the accident — which he later denied doing.That left Jenson Button to finish 14th, to 15th for Alonso. Button scored 16 points this year, compared to 11 for Alonso.“It has been a very tough season, very poor,” said Alonso. “We have been unlucky too.”At the Force India team, Sergio Pérez qualified in fourth position compared to seventh for his teammate, Nico Hulkenberg; Pérez finished fifth in the race, while Hulkenberg finished seventh.At the back of the pack, the drivers for the Manor team, Will Stevens and Roberto Merhi, may have had the slowest car, but the two fought hard for the last place as usual. Stevens, who lies behind Merhi in the standings, and in last position of the drivers’ series, managed to finish one spot ahead of his teammate.“I’ve been feeling really comfortable in the car all weekend, and thankfully I was able to carry that confidence through to the race today,” Stevens said. “On the whole, I’m pretty satisfied with how things have gone for me in my debut season.”Advertisement