AdvertisementSupported byBy Sam BordenGHENT, Belgium — Giant foam fingers. A remarkable variety of percussion instruments. Vuvuzelas. Disturbingly oversize photos of the home players on wooden sticks. Copious face paint. And at least one trombone.There were many elements that differed from the typical tennis match here on Sunday at the Flanders Expo exhibition hall — a venue whose sporting history includes a semiregular regional dog show — but amid the unusual cacophony of noise and spectacle, there was, also, a singular familiarity: Andy Murray played. Andy Murray won.It was, in many ways, that simple at this Davis Cup final, where Murray’s third victory in three days helped Britain win the most prestigious team competition in tennis for the first time in 79 years, beating Belgium, 3-1. On Friday, Murray beat Ruben Bemelmans in straight sets to even this best-of-five team match. On Saturday, he partnered with his brother, Jamie, to win in four sets. In the finale, he sealed the result by beating a game but overmatched David Goffin, 6-3, 7-5, 6-3.Murray, the No. 2 player in the world, already held a special place in British tennis history for his victory at Wimbledon in 2013, the first British man to win the tournament since Fred Perry in 1936. Now, after helping end another drought that began that same year, he is at the center of his sport once again.“It’s incredible that we managed to win this competition,” Murray said. “I didn’t know that would ever be possible.”Murray, from Dunblane, Scotland, seemed to revel in the team nature of this competition, playing with a frothy emotion against Goffin and constantly shouting and pointing at his teammates, who were sitting just off the side of the court. At one point in the second set, he gestured demonstrably at his brother — who had slipped away from the bench for a moment — to get back to his seat. When Goffin broke Murray’s serve early in the third set, Murray stamped his feet and screamed, drawing a warning from the chair umpire for (quite loudly) using foul language.All the feeling worked for Murray, though, as he seemed to feed off the noise and energy from the crowd of about 13,000, even if most of the fans were rooting against him. The match at times felt like one long plea from Pascal Maria, the chair umpire, for the fans to quiet down, but the hooting and whistling and blowing of horns — even when they inevitably came just before Murray’s serve — did little to slow Murray.“That’s what happens when you get your country involved,” Murray said. “People just become more passionate.”While Murray has received plenty of acclaim for his contributions to Britain’s accomplishment, the team’s revival began when Leon Smith took over as captain in 2010, inheriting a program that was on the brink of being dropped to the Davis Cup’s lowest level of competition.Smith’s first competition in charge was against Turkey, and if Britain had lost it would have been relegated to Group 3 in the Davis Cup’s zonal setup — a depressing possibility for a country that hosts a Grand Slam tournament.But Britain won — with Jamie Baker, who had a career-high ranking on the professional tour of 186 and is no longer active, playing the opening singles — and began a remarkable five-year climb to the top of international team tennis.Over the last few years, as Smith has become entrenched in his role with the Davis Cup team, the Murrays have figured prominently. With his victory on Sunday, Andy Murray joined John McEnroe and Mats Wilander as the only men to ever go 8-0 in singles in a Davis Cup year, and he is a remarkable 23-1 in the competition since Smith became captain.“Obviously when we started to move toward World Group territory, it’s important to have the highest quality,” Smith said. “Andy, when he comes into that, brings us that quality that suddenly became a reality.”Belgium’s run to the final was a less dramatic rise as the team was regularly part of the top-tier group in Davis Cup over the last five years but had not put together any sort of sustained success until this year. After winning a playoff with Ukraine last September, Belgium played, and won, three straight at home to reach its first final since 1904.The Belgians certainly had a good bit of fortune along the way — they played Switzerland without Roger Federer and Stan Wawrinka, for example, and beat Canada without facing its top two players — but there was no denying the passion their players felt for the task.Goffin, a rising star on the ATP Tour who is currently ranked 16th, was at the heart of the Belgian surge. He won the decisive fifth match in the first round against Switzerland despite recovering from a back injury, won two more matches in the Belgians’ 5-0 sweep of Canada and rallied from two sets down here on Friday to avoid a disastrous loss to Kyle Edmund in the opening singles.Goffin and Steve Darcis were not able to overcome the Murray brothers on Saturday, however, and on Sunday Goffin seemed simply outgunned. Despite playing on clay — a surface that favored the Belgians — Goffin could not find the holes in Murray’s game.“I have no regrets — I think we lost to a better team,” Belgium’s captain, Johan van Herck, said. “If you saw Andy today, there was nothing more for us to do. He was great in the big points.”In the final set, Goffin managed to crack Murray in the second game but could not hold the lead as Murray, who finished with 12 aces, came right back before breaking at love again and accelerating toward the finish. On the final point, Goffin had Murray on the run and seemed like he might push off the inevitable only to see Murray, on a dead run, loft a glorious backhand lob up and over him.The ball landed just inside one baseline. At the other, Murray fell on his back as his teammates rushed out to pile on top of him.“It’s obviously an amazing feeling,” Murray said. “I mean, I probably haven’t been as emotional as that after a match that I’ve won. I’ve been pretty upset having lost matches before. But I’d say that’s probably the most emotional I’ve been after a win.”Advertisement