By ROB HUGHESNOV. 29, 2015
LONDON — When Leicester City’s Jamie Vardy broke the record by scoring in his 11th straight Premier League game, the feat brought thousands of social media posts before the final whistle sounded in a 1-1 tie with Manchester United.Foremost among the messages Saturday was the tweet from Ruud van Nistelrooy, the previous record holder. “Well done vardy 7! You’re number one now, and you deserved it.”Simple and direct, just like Vardy’s dash for the goal.Van Nistelrooy scored in 10 straight league matches across two seasons in 2003 for Manchester United, the club that Vardy scored his goal against on Saturday.When van Nistelrooy, a Dutchman, was at Manchester, he was one of the world’s most coveted and highest-paid strikers. Vardy, on the other hand, has come from nowhere — or rather, from the depths of nonleague soccer in England five years ago to the heights of a club that suddenly has risen among the top three in the Premier League.AdvertisementVardy’s story is one of exceptional perseverance, since he was rejected by the club Sheffield Wednesday as being too small at age 16. He then worked his way up through the reserve team of Stocksbridge Park Steels, a club in the eighth level of English soccer. He took on extra shifts in a factory to make ends meet, as he played for the equivalent of about $45 a week.AdvertisementHis goals might well prompt a bid during the January transfer window or next summer that could net Leicester $45 million or more — 30 times the 1 million pounds the club paid for Vardy in 2012, which was a record for a nonleague player — and propel Vardy into the stratosphere of £100,000-plus weekly salaries in Britain, or about $8 million or more a year.Who might pay such sums? Manchester United, Arsenal and Chelsea all need a potent and surefire goal-scorer.Let’s consider the strike that Vardy hit against United on Saturday, which used almost everything the 28-year-old has in his armory.Leicester goalkeeper Kasper Schmeichel began a counterattack that started like a coiled spring. Schmeichel caught the ball from a United corner kick and quickly released it to his fullback, Christian Fuchs, in front of the right side of Leicester’s penalty area.Vardy started sprinting the moment he looked across from the left and saw Fuchs advancing with the ball. Speed is Vardy’s greatest weapon, and United’s Ashley Young tried twice to stymie Vardy by tugging at his shirt as he ran past the halfway line.Leicester is known as the Foxes, and it was Vardy who picked up the scent of a goal-scoring opportunity. As he neared the Manchester penalty area, he was approached by a second defender, Matteo Darmian.Darmian is quick, but Vardy had the advantage of knowing where he was running. He pointed to the green grass space behind Darmian, and when Fuchs responded by passing the ball there, Vardy seemed to go up a gear as he raced past the defender. He bore down on goalkeeper David de Gea and slipped the ball around him, low and precise, inside the far post.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.It takes longer to describe the play than it took Schmeichel, Fuchs and Vardy to achieve it. Leicester took the lead with the goal, but it conceded the equalizer on a header by Bastian Schweinsteiger right before halftime.AdvertisementThe result left both teams just below Manchester City on top of the Premier League after City beat Southampton, 3-1. For Leicester, a club of comparatively modest means and one that almost annually struggles in the lower reaches of the Premiership, these are heady days.For Vardy, these are times he hoped for but never dared expect. For the handful of scouts and coaches who saw the raw material in him, it is vindication. And for those at Sheffield who cast him aside at 16, when he was still growing into his 5-foot-10 frame, now is the time to be very quiet.Vardy plans to start his own academy to identify and help players in the lowest tiers to understand what it takes to be professional. He believes in unfulfilled talents, because he did not think he was that exceptional, except for his desire and willingness to work and luck in having scouts and coaches who saw something in him.During the past week, as the publicity built up around his record-setting score, he found himself being followed from his home to his car to his place of work, Leicester’s King Power Stadium.“I kept telling myself not to let it get into my head,” he said Saturday.Leicester City Manager Claudio Ranieri, who took over at the start of this season, told the team before the match that it had two priorities — number one, try to win the game, and number two, to see if they could help Vardy get the record.One task fulfilled, the other not quite so.But to be the equal of the two Manchesters has its virtue. United Manager Louis van Gaal said last week that it is hard to win in England because every club shares in the immense television revenue, so they all can sign good players.True, but the Manchester United team cost about $870 million in transfer fees to assemble, compared to the $117 million it cost Leicester for its squad.The difference is made up through the energy that Leicester shows on the field — as personified by Vardy.But his work is not yet done. The record he set is for the Premier League, which started in 1992. Long before that, Stan Mortensen scored in 15 straight games in the top tier for Blackpool in 1950-51, although the sequence was broken by games he missed because of injury.AdvertisementFurther back, Jimmy Dunne netted 18 goals for Sheffield United in 12 successive games in 1931-32.Vardy has unfinished business, and his response is no different from any week. “We have training on Monday,” he said. “That’s what we have to concentrate on.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.