By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSDEC. 1, 2015
Will Hill returned a blocked field-goal attempt 64 yards for a touchdown as time expired, giving the Baltimore Ravens a 33-27 road win Monday night over the luckless Cleveland Browns, who lost their sixth straight game, along with the starting quarterback Josh McCown.Cleveland’s Travis Coons lined up to kick a potential game-winning 51-yard field goal with three seconds to go, but it was deflected by defensive end Brent Urban, who was playing his first N.F.L. game for the injury-riddled Ravens (4-7). Hill scooped it up and rumbled down the left sideline for an improbable win, stunning a Cleveland crowd that moments earlier had been ready to celebrate.Ravens quarterback Matt Schaub, making his first start since 2013, threw two touchdown passes.McCown injured his right shoulder in the fourth quarter and was replaced by Austin Davis, whose 42-yard touchdown pass to Travis Benjamin tied the score at 27-27 with 1 minute 47 seconds remaining.The Ravens won their second straight.Cleveland (2-9) had beaten Baltimore, 33-30, in overtime on Oct. 11.AdvertisementDOLPHINS FIRE COORDINATOR The Miami Dolphins’ interim coach, Dan Campbell, is running out of time to make a good impression, so he is going with a new play caller to try to breathe life into his feeble offense.AdvertisementCampbell fired the offensive coordinator Bill Lazor and gave Zac Taylor primary responsibility for calling plays. Taylor will remain the quarterbacks coach.The moves came after the Dolphins lost, 38-20, to the Jets on Sunday. The Dolphins (4-7) were shut out in the first half and have not scored more than 20 points since Oct. 25.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Offensively, we’ve been anemic for five weeks now,” said Campbell, who wants to run the ball more. “We have to find a way to become more of a physical offense.”Campbell hopes to return as coach next season, but the Dolphins are only 3-4 since he replaced Joe Philbin, who was fired Oct. 5. Miami also changed defensive coordinators in October.Lazor was in his second season with the Dolphins, while Taylor is in his fourth.KELLY DENIES U.S.C. CONTACT Philadelphia Coach Chip Kelly denied reports that Southern California had met with him to discuss its coaching vacancy before the university gave the job to the interim coach Clay Helton.Kelly, in his third year with the Eagles after a successful run in the Pacific-12 with Oregon, addressed the issue at his regularly scheduled news conference.“I have never spoken to anybody from U.S.C.,” Kelly said “I have never emailed anybody from U.S.C. I never had a phone call with anybody from U.S.C.”AdvertisementTITANS COACH CRITICIZES CALL The Titans’ interim coach, Mike Mularkey, said the N.F.L. had called a late fourth down in Tennessee’s 24-21 loss to Oakland on Sunday a “poorly officiated play.”Mularkey said officials had missed both a false start by Raiders receiver Michael Crabtree and offensive pass interference in the end zone by Oakland receiver Andre Holmes on the two Titans defenders breaking up the pass. Instead, Titans cornerback B. W. Webb was flagged for holding on the other side of the field, and Oakland scored the winning touchdown two plays later.“I vented my frustration about that, and they said if you guys have any questions on that, call them, because they said it was a poorly officiated play,” Mularkey said. “It should never have even started. The play never should have started.”A version of this article appears in print on December 1, 2015, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: Ravens Score on Blocked Kick to Top Browns .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.