By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSNOV. 30, 2015
Southern California hired Clay Helton as its permanent coach on Monday, removing the interim tag in light of his guiding the team to a division title after taking over for Steve Sarkisian.Helton, 43, signed a five-year deal. He has been an assistant with U.S.C. since 2010, working under Lane Kiffin and Sarkisian.He was offensive coordinator when Sarkisian was fired on Oct. 12. The Trojans have gone 5-2 since Helton took over, and they beat U.C.L.A. on Saturday to clinch the Pacific-12 South and a spot in the conference championship game. The Trojans (8-4, 5-3) will face Stanford (10-2, 8-1) on Saturday.Philadelphia Eagles Coach Chip Kelly denied reports that U.S.C. had met with him to discuss the coaching vacancy.Advertisement■ The N.C.A.A. Division I council approved a recommendation made by the football oversight committee that would fill the record 40 bowl games this season with five-win teams because not enough teams would meet the standard bowl-eligibility requirements.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Teams with 5-7 records will become eligible for at least two bowl bids, and as many as five, based on their academic progress rates.AdvertisementThere are 75 teams with at least six victories and .500 records going into the final weekend of the regular season. Only three more can get to six wins.Based on 2013-14, Nebraska has the best A.P.R. among 5-7 teams, at 985. Missouri is next, with 976, but moments after the N.C.A.A. announced that the Tigers would have a chance to play in the postseason, Athletic Director Mack Rhoades released a statement saying the team would not participate.Missouri is trying to find a replacement for the retiring coach Gary Pinkel.■ Mark Richt remains interested in another coaching job and said he would listen “to anybody who has interest in me” as he prepared for his final game as Georgia’s coach. Georgia announced Sunday that Richt would not return as coach in 2016.A version of this brief appears in print on December 1, 2015, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: U.S.C. Coach Will Stay On.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.