By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSNOV. 30, 2015
Isaiah Briscoe scored 18 points, Jamal Murray added 16, and No. 1 Kentucky overcame a sluggish first half to defeat visiting Illinois State, 75-63.Out-hustled on both ends by the athletic Redbirds through 20 minutes while adjusting to playing without the injured starting point guard Tyler Ulis, the Wildcats (7-0) emerged from halftime more physical and used that energy to gain some breathing room.Outrebounded by 20-12 in the first half, Kentucky beat Illinois State, 27-17, on the boards and held the Redbirds (3-5) to 29 percent shooting in the second half.Marcus Lee added 13 points and 12 rebounds for his second double-double in five games, and Alex Poythress had 11 points for Kentucky.AdvertisementDeVaughn Akoon-Purcell scored 22 points for the Redbirds.■ Cornelius Hudson scored on a baseline drive with 18 seconds remaining to help visiting Wake Forest beat Rutgers, 69-68, in the Big Ten-Atlantic Coast Conference Challenge.AdvertisementAs Wake Forest trailed by 68-67 with 28.1 seconds left, Hudson took a pass in the left corner, pump-faked and drove the baseline for a go-ahead basket.Devin Thomas had 23 points and 17 rebounds for Wake Forest (5-2), while Mitchell Wilbekin had 12 points and John Collins added 11.Rutgers (3-4) lost its third straight.■ Even though the N.C.A.A. cleared the five-star prospect Cheick Diallo to begin playing for No. 4 Kansas this week, it has not stopped Jayhawks Coach Bill Self from criticizing the investigation.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.During a news conference, Self called the monthslong investigation an exercise in frustration and added, “I don’t think anything done by the N.C.A.A. was done in the kid’s best interest at all.”The N.C.A.A. forced Diallo to miss the first four games this season while examining coursework from a New York prep school. Ultimately, it ruled that Diallo had accepted a limited amount of improper benefits and docked Diallo, a 6-foot-9 forward from Mali, a fifth game.Diallo is set to take the floor Tuesday night when the Jayhawks (4-1) play Loyola at Allen Fieldhouse.■ In a women’s game, Moriah Jefferson scored 15 points and did not miss a shot as No. 1 Connecticut breezed past Chattanooga, 79-31, for its 41st consecutive victory.The Huskies’ winning streak is the fourth longest in program history. The Huskies, the three-time defending national champions, have beaten each of their first four opponents by at least 40 points and have not lost since falling, 88-86, at Stanford on Nov. 17, 2014.Jefferson made all five of her shots and four free throws. Breanna Stewart and Gabby Williams each added 14 points for the Huskies (4-0).AdvertisementChattanooga (5-3) ended a 17-game home winning streak.A version of this brief appears in print on December 1, 2015, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: Kentucky Defeats Illinois State.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.