AdvertisementSupported byOn BaseballBy Tyler KepnerThe Opryland Resort & Convention Center in Nashville is a sprawling wonderland with rivers, waterfalls, plant life and glass ceilings that make you feel like a cast member in “The Truman Show,” a reality series that is actually just make-believe. Next week, the subject is baseball, back for an encore presentation.The winter meetings have been held many times at Opryland, including 1998, when the Los Angeles Dodgers signed Kevin Brown to baseball’s first $100 million contract. That deal made clear that owners had untold resources to lavish on players and was a sure sign that baseball economics could never be measured against any other kind.Nine-figure contracts are relatively common now. There have been almost 60, the latest going to Jordan Zimmermann, who left the Washington Nationals for the Detroit Tigers on Monday. The sides reached a five-year, $110 million agreement over the weekend, making Zimmermann the first ace-level starter to go off the market.Last winter, Zimmermann turned down a five-year, $105 million offer from the Nationals that would have begun after the 2015 season, when he earned $16.5 million. His earned run average rose by a full run, to 3.66, but the decision still paid off. Zimmermann guaranteed himself an extra $5 million by waiting.Yet a common response to his deal, around baseball, was whether Zimmermann could have gotten even more. In real terms, the only question would be how many generations of Zimmermanns stand to benefit from $110 million. But, again, these are baseball terms, so the issue makes sense through that lens.Zimmermann, a two-time All-Star, will be only 34 at the end of the contract. Brown, incredibly, was already 34 by the time he had pitched the first game of his groundbreaking deal, which ran for seven years. With money flowing so freely these days, Zimmermann conceivably could have pushed for six or seven years, possibly from a team that loses out on the biggest names in the pitching market, Zack Greinke and David Price.Both could command $30 million per year. Greinke, 32, and Price, 30, are former Cy Young Award winners who finished as runners-up last season, Greinke in the National League for the Los Angeles Dodgers, Price in the American League for the Toronto Blue Jays, who acquired him in a trade with Detroit last July.The Tigers and their 86-year-old owner, Mike Ilitch, are often involved when the subject is highly-paid starters. Last winter, they lost Max Scherzer to the Nationals and Washington’s own aggressive owner, Ted Lerner, who is 90. It was another case of a pitcher betting on himself and winning. Scherzer turned down $144 million from Detroit before the 2014 season, made $15.525 million as he waited for free agency, and then scored a seven-year, $210 million deal with Washington. Much of the money is deferred, but the deal was the richest ever signed by a free-agent pitcher.Scherzer responded with two no-hitters and the best E.R.A. (2.79) of his career. He also had 276 strikeouts, second in the majors to the Dodgers’ Clayton Kershaw, who is the highest-paid pitcher. Kershaw signed a seven-year, $215 million deal before the 2014 season, when he won his third Cy Young and first Most Valuable Player Award.The Kershaw model, of course, is the way to do it: develop your own pitchers, enjoy their prime years — which increasingly seem to start almost immediately, as the Mets’ rotation has shown — and then sign them to contract extensions before free agency. If you can get them at a bargain rate, like the San Francisco Giants with Madison Bumgarner, all the better.Bumgarner had pitched only one full season in the majors when he signed a five-year, $35 million deal through 2017, with club options for 2018 and 2019. Again, in the real world, it is an extraordinary contract. In baseball, it may be the most team-friendly deal for any pitcher. The savings helped the Giants bid aggressively for Jon Lester last winter — before Lester went to the Chicago Cubs — and make them a realistic threat to sign another ace now.Bumgarner was part of a rotation that thwarted the Tigers in the 2012 World Series, when Detroit had Justin Verlander, Scherzer, Anibal Sanchez and Doug Fister in its rotation. Before the next season, the Tigers spent $260 million on contract extensions for Verlander ($180 million, seven years) and Sanchez ($80 million, five years). But they have not returned to the World Series, and neither pitcher has met expectations the past two seasons.There are troubling signs with Zimmermann, who used his fastball less last season, will face deeper lineups in the A.L. and had Tommy John surgery in 2009. His toughness is widely admired, and scouts still consider his stuff to be well above average. But even as a relative bargain, $110 million is a gamble.The Yankees, usually reliable spenders, do not seem interested in this market. They have not won a playoff game since the 2012 division series, even after splurging for Masahiro Tanaka, Jacoby Ellsbury, Brian McCann and Carlos Beltran before the 2014 season. They are eager for long-ago deals to expire and prospects to contribute.C. C. Sabathia starred for the first four years of the seven-year, $161 million contract he signed in December 2008. But the leverage of Sabathia’s opt-out clause (after 2012) led to a regrettable extension that will pay him $25 million in 2016 and another $25 million in 2017, as long as his shoulder stays healthy.Sabathia’s performance has not been worth such a salary for years — yet, remarkably, he led the Yankees in innings last season, with 1671/3. That fact underscores the precarious nature of pitching: it is such a risky investment, but the hope of sturdy, dependable arms is so hard for teams to resist. Greinke, Price, Johnny Cueto and others will continue to prove that, perhaps under the glass domes in Nashville next week. Advertisement