By BILLY WITZNOV. 30, 2015
When Yankees General Manager Brian Cashman was discussing Chris Young, his only free agent of any real consequence, at the general managers’ meetings last month, he could not have been more complimentary.He effusively praised Young’s production as well as his clubhouse presence.“And he looks like Denzel Washington,” Cashman said. “I can’t throw enough bouquets his way. He was a special guy and we’d like to have him back, but I have no idea.”Actually, Cashman did.The next day, the Yankees traded for Aaron Hicks, giving them a crowded outfield — unless they are able to trade Brett Gardner for more starting pitching. Once the Yankees acquired Hicks, it became clear that as long as they had four outfielders, Young was headed elsewhere, no matter how many petals were laid at his feet.On Monday, Young headed to Boston, which has agreed in principle to a multiyear deal, according to multiple reports. Fox Sports was among the first to report the agreement.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Young, 32, may provide the Red Sox with a reliable presence behind the promising young outfield of Mookie Betts, Jackie Bradley Jr. and Rusney Castillo — and the utility man Brock Holt. The Red Sox appear so deep in outfielders that the signing of Young may also signal the willingness of Dave Dombrowski, their new chief baseball executive, to trade one of them for sorely needed pitching.AdvertisementAgainst left-handed pitchers last season, Young batted .327 with a .927 on-base plus slugging percentage. He was so effective that Yankees Manager Joe Girardi benched Jacoby Ellsbury for the wild-card playoff game against the Houston left-hander and Cy Young Award winner Dallas Keuchel.AdvertisementYoung has also been particularly comfortable at Fenway Park, hitting .344 with a 1.054 O.P.S. in 21 career games there.In the last decade or so, a number of Red Sox players have become Yankees, from pitchers Alan Embree and Mike Myers to outfielders Johnny Damon and Ellsbury and infielder Stephen Drew.It is rare for players to go the other way.With baseball’s winter meetings next week, the shape of the teams’ rosters could soon shift drastically, but at the moment, it could be a slightly discomfiting sight for the Yankees — a team with few potent hitters against left-handers — watching one of their best head to Boston.A version of this article appears in print on December 1, 2015, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: Yankees’ Young Is Reportedly Joining Red Sox .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.