AdvertisementSupported byBy Ben ShpigelJets quarterback Ryan Fitzpatrick asked center Nick Mangold a crucial question on Monday. He wanted to know what a regular-season game against the Giants was like — if it felt different. So Mangold told him.“It’s an away game for us, even though it’s at our own stadium,” Mangold said. “The tickets are like every other away team. They’re usually in the upper deck, and we park in the different parking lot.”No mention of actual football or rivalry between the Jets and Giants. The teams play each other every four years, and no matter how many players shuffle in and out, they tend to view the game the same way. It is critical not because of any heightened intensity or deep, longstanding enmity but because it counts, unlike the annual preseason matchup.They share a stadium and a city, but not a division or a conference. They are vying for playoff berths, but not with each other. Even when Rex Ryan was at his most mischievous, proclaiming before the Jets’ 29-14 loss four years ago how they would become the best team in the city and then the best in the league, his players did not voice the same sentiment. And under Coach Todd Bowles, they still don’t. “The more games we win,” Fitzpatrick said in a teleconference Monday, “the more important the next one becomes.” This next one is important to both teams, who reside on the periphery of the postseason race — the division race, in the Giants’ case — and run the risk of fading into extinction with a loss. As the Giants stumbled at Washington to drop to 5-6 and fall out of first place in the N.F.C. East, the Jets thrashed Miami to improve to 6-5 and set up a meaningful slate of December games.The Jets pummeled the Dolphins so thoroughly, by 38-20 after leading by four touchdowns in the fourth quarter, that for the second time in eight weeks, Miami responded to a loss against the Jets by firing a coach. Instead of the head coach’s losing his job, as Joe Philbin did in October, it was the offensive coordinator, Bill Lazor, whose unit’s ineptitude prompted the interim coach, Dan Campbell, to use words afterward like “fragile” and “anemic.”All week, Bowles promised a return to basics, but that applied on defense as much as offense. The Jets streamlined their game plan, deployed extra defensive backs to counter the pass and compensated for a decrease in blitzing by awarding more playing time to the edge rushers Mike Catapano and Lorenzo Mauldin, who each played more than half the defensive snaps.Mauldin sacked Ryan Tannehill and recovered a fumble, while Catapano had a quarterback hit. In stifling the Dolphins for the first three quarters, the Jets did not miss Darrelle Revis so much as wish he were healthy and available. He remained in the league’s concussion protocol eight days after absorbing a hit to the head in the loss in Houston, jeopardizing his availability for a potential date with the star receiver Odell Beckham Jr. Bowles was uncertain whether Revis had begun physical activity.“He’s making slight progress, but we’ll see how much progress he makes toward the end of the week,” Bowles said.The Jets can hope with Revis, and they will. Much as they can hope that Fitzpatrick can replicate his performance against Miami the next five games — and, perhaps, beyond. Fitzpatrick played his best game since the last time he trimmed his beard, a six-touchdown masterpiece for the Texans last November.He approached the Miami game with more patience, he said, and made throws that he was comfortable with. Four of those throws produced touchdowns, and none resulted in an interception.It was Fitzpatrick’s 100th career start, his father reminded him in a text message Sunday morning, and he savored the significance of the achievement: seventh-round draft pick, barely recruited to play in college, who has endured six teams and 11 seasons. After all that, he has his best chance yet to appear in the playoffs. “We know we’re still in it,” Fitzpatrick said. “We also know that there’s not a lot of room for error.”EXTRA POINTSTodd Bowles said cornerback Marcus Williams, who started for Darrelle Revis but left Sunday’s game with a knee injury, had sprained a medial collateral ligament but could still play against the Giants.Advertisement