AdvertisementSupported byKeeping ScoreBy Benjamin HoffmanKobe Bryant can most easily be described by one word: volume.Calling someone a volume shooter carries negative connotations, but for Bryant, who announced Sunday that this would be his final season, his ability to simply do more — of everything — than anyone around him has defined him in a way that his awards and titles have failed to.Playing his entire career for the storied Los Angeles Lakers, Bryant has essentially rewritten the team’s record book. He has not surpassed George Mikan in championships, or won as many Most Valuable Player Awards as Magic Johnson. But Bryant has played in more games for the Lakers than Kareem Abdul-Jabbar. He has more win shares than Jerry West. He has played more minutes than Elgin Baylor. He has taken more shots than James Worthy and Shaquille O’Neal — combined. He is in the team’s top five in career rebounds, assists, steals, blocks, free throws, 3-pointers, fouls and turnovers.In a league that has rapidly become obsessed with efficiency, Bryant has never been scared of being inefficient, provided his team comes out with a win. And his accolades have added up in the same way his statistics have. He has made 17 All-Star teams and has been named all-N.B.A. first team 11 times and first-team all-defense nine times. And most important to him, he has won five championships and has been named finals M.V.P. twice.Bryant once distilled his strategy in a way that made many cringe, but it also helped explain his greatest successes and worst failures. It was in a Sports Illustrated article about a Bryant documentary, and the director, Gotham Chopra, recalled telling Bryant that Deron Williams of the Nets had shot 0 for 9 from the field in a game.“I would go 0 for 30 before I would go 0 for 9; 0 for 9 means you beat yourself, you psyched yourself out of the game,” Chopra recalled Bryant saying.A man of his word, Bryant has missed more shots than any player in league history. His 13,919 missed field-goal attempts through Sunday have surpassed John Havlicek’s record of 13,417. As long as he stays healthy, Bryant will surely miss his 14,000th shot soon. (Bryant ranks third, behind Abdul-Jabbar and Karl Malone, in shots taken.)But to Bryant, the five championships his teams won justified every one of those misses, and his confidence in his own ability led to what could be considered the greatest individual performance in basketball history. Wilt Chamberlain may have scored 100 points while being fed the ball inside repeatedly in a blowout win, but Bryant, playing from the outside, scored 81 points while shooting 28 for 46 in a game against the Toronto Raptors that was close until the fourth quarter. It was the second-most points scored in an N.B.A. game, and given the context of the game, the pace of the era, and the position Bryant played, it would be easy to argue that it was as impressive as Chamberlain’s historic night, if not more impressive.Bryant has often seemed obsessed with Michael Jordan, and while he has fallen just short of his hero in most regards, the numbers are skewed by Bryant’s slow start and pronounced decline, mostly because of injuries. In his prime, each player was the best scorer in the league and in the argument for best wing defender. Each could rebound, block shots and pass better than anyone was willing to admit. Most career evaluation tools favor big men over guards, but Bryant’s legacy appears secure as that of the game’s second-greatest shooting guard and one of the 20 or so most accomplished players over all.For the ultracompetitive Bryant, being second best would most likely qualify as failure. That mind-set could explain why he has played the last three seasons despite injuries and ineffectiveness, taking away nearly all of his greatness. Just as he would rather go 0 for 30 than 0 for 9, he has been willing to trade some points off his career field-goal percentage and endure some abuse about tarnishing his legacy rather than admit that he has never matched Jordan.Explaining his career to future generations might be tricky, but one thing will always be clear: There was a lot to Bryant, both on and off the court. And when he is done with the N.B.A., the volume will be turned down in more ways than one.Advertisement