By VICTOR MATHERNOV. 30, 2015
One of the oldest traditions in organized sport appears right at the top of cricket’s rule book from 1744: “The pitching the first wicket is to be determined by the toss of a piece of money.”So was born the pregame coin toss.But time moves on — though, in cricket, often slowly. After 272 years, English county cricket will do away with the coin toss in many games starting next season.Coins are tossed in lots of sports, though the result is not usually crucial. In football, for example, the advantage of winning the pregame toss and receiving the ball first is mostly negated by the other team’s receiving the ball to start the second half. Still, a surprising amount of coin toss lore has built up over the years.On Thanksgiving 1998, a Steelers-Lions game went to overtime, and the Pittsburgh captain, Jerome Bettis, seemed to call tails. But the referee, Phil Luckett, said the call was heads and awarded Detroit the ball. Three minutes later, the Lions kicked the winning field goal.The blunder led to a change in procedure: Players began calling heads or tails before the coin was in the air. And the feeling that the result of the overtime toss was too important led to a new rule in 2010 that a field goal on the first overtime drive would not immediately end the game.AdvertisementOn a snowy day in Philadelphia in 2013, the coin actually landed on an angle and had to be retossed.Predraft coin tosses have changed the course of sports history. The Portland Trail Blazers’ call of tails in 1984 gave the first pick of the draft, Hakeem Olajuwon (then known as Akeem), to the Rockets.AdvertisementA coin toss is also the tiebreaker of last resort in many competitions. At the 2000 women’s Gold Cup soccer tournament, the United States and Brazil wound up dead even, with each having two wins, one draw, 19 goals for and none against. The United States won the toss and was awarded first place in its group. In the men’s edition the same year, Canada needed a coin toss to qualify for the quarterfinals and then went on to win.In cricket, more than most sports, the toss can be vital. The pitch, the grassy area where the ball is bowled, can change as the game goes along. And because the team batting second may not get its chance for a day or more, it can face drastically different conditions.Even when a team wins the toss, the wrong decision by the captain can doom it almost before a ball is bowled. In the 2002 Ashes in Brisbane, Australia, the England captain, Nasser Hussain, won the toss but decided to bowl. Australia happily batted, scored 492 runs and won the match by 384.The home team’s groundskeeper can also have a great effect on the pitch, preparing it to best suit his team’s bowlers. Cricket officials in England are concerned that home teams have fallen into the habit of setting up their pitches to favor certain bowlers, perhaps by making the grass damp.In particular, counties seem to be setting up their pitches to favor garden-variety bowlers who bowl fast, but not too fast. These bowlers are known as medium pacers, or derisively as dibbly-dobbly bowlers.“The pitches are a real problem,” Andy Flower, a former England cricket coach, told CricInfo. “Spin bowlers don’t develop because the medium pacers bowl their overs and batsmen are not exposed to quality spin.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“But when you get to international cricket, the pitches are completely different, and the qualities that proved successful in county cricket will be of little use. Dibbly-dobbly bowlers are not going to win you test matches.”AdvertisementUnder the new rules, the visiting team will always have the option to bowl first. Should it decline, there would still be a coin toss. Officials hope that will encourage home teams, knowing that the visitors can always choose to bowl first, to set up higher-quality pitches that favor batsmen more. They also think the change will help develop spin bowlers, who are crucial to the success of the England team in spin-friendly countries like India.Another benefit will be giving a small edge to the visiting team that would reduce the fairly large home-field advantage in cricket.Cricket traditionalists, who tend to be far more traditional than most, are upset. “Please don’t scrap the coin toss from cricket,” The Telegraph plaintively, and politely, urged before the decision was final.Andrew Gale, the captain of Yorkshire, also disapproved. “So no coin toss next year if away team doesn’t want it?!” he posted on Twitter last week, adding that the change was “absolute madness.”But the march of progress never stops. Perhaps cricket will soon be ready for another seismic change. Expect one by around 2288.A version of this article appears in print on December 1, 2015, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: Coin Toss Retains Its Place in History, if Not in Cricket.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.