By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSDEC. 1, 2015
Matt Duchene scored again, Reto Berra made 27 saves, and the Colorado Avalanche beat the Devils, 2-1, on Tuesday night in Newark.Duchene had a franchise-record 11 goals in November, and he picked up right where he left off on the first day of December. He opened the scoring at 2 minutes 10 seconds of the second period with a shot from the right circle that hit Devils goalie Cory Schneider in the left arm and trickled into the net.Tyson Barrie also scored for Colorado, which won for the third time in its last eight games. The Avalanche improved to 8-0-1 in their last nine games against the Devils.Kyle Palmieri scored for the Devils, and Schneider made 23 stops.Barrie powered Colorado to a 2-0 lead with a rising wrist shot from the right circle at 6:15 of the second.AdvertisementThe Devils broke through 2:09 into the third period, scoring off a face-off. Travis Zajac drew the puck back to Palmieri, who fired a shot that glanced off defenseman Nate Guenin.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.FLYERS 4, SENATORS 2  Sean Couturier had an empty-net goal and two assists, leading Philadelphia to victory over host Ottawa.AdvertisementWayne Simmonds, Shayne Gostisbehere and Evgeny Medvedev also scored for the Flyers in their third straight win.CANADIENS 2, BLUE JACKETS 1 Max Pacioretty scored on a power play late in the third period to give host Montreal a win over Columbus.Mike Condon got the start in place of the injured Carey Price, who is expected to miss at least six weeks with a lower-body injury. Condon stopped 22 shots.PANTHERS 3, BLUES 1 Derek MacKenzie scored twice, and visiting Florida beat St. Louis.Brandon Pirri also scored for Florida, which has won three in a row.WILD 2, BLACKHAWKS 1 Defenseman Ryan Suter drove to the net and poked in a rebound with 7:56 left in the third period, lifting Minnesota over host Chicago.RED WINGS 5, SABRES 4  Brad Richards scored on Detroit’s third attempt in a shootout and Jack Eichel missed the net on the ensuing chance, allowing the Red Wings to beat visiting Buffalo.PREDATORS 5, COYOTES 2  Filip Forsberg scored twice and added an assist to lead host Nashville to a come-from-behind win over Arizona.A version of this article appears in print on December 2, 2015, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: Hot Scorer Leads Avalanche Past the Devils .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.