AdvertisementSupported byBy Scott CacciolaPHILADELPHIA — Kobe Bryant was feeling nostalgic Monday night, so he drove around and visited some of his favorite childhood haunts, including the playgrounds where he honed his game. He recalled how he went scoreless one summer in the Sonny Hill League. He was 11 years old.“I was hoping maybe I could get like a technical free throw,” he said. “Zero points the whole summer. So that became a big motivating thing for me.”Bryant, 37, has seldom lacked motivation as a star with the Los Angeles Lakers, and that remains the case. His public reckoning with age and injury has been playing out at arenas across the country this season. On Tuesday, it was Philadelphia’s turn to witness the spectacle of Bryant coping with the hard realities of his trade.There were moments when the Lakers’ 103-91 loss to the 76ers at Wells Fargo Center felt more like a celebration of all things Kobe: before the game, when Julius Erving, the 76ers great, hugged Bryant at center court; during player introductions, when fans stood for Bryant and chanted his name — “Deeply appreciative, beyond belief; I couldn’t have asked for anything better other than winning the game,” Bryant said — and when he shed his season-long woes, if only for a brief stretch, by sinking three 3-pointers in the game’s first 76 seconds.And then it was gone — his shooting touch, his vigor and any hope of leading his team to a victory, even against a sad-sack organization. Bryant scored 20 points but shot just 7 of 26 from the field as the Sixers (1-18) avoided their 19th straight loss to start the season, which would have set an N.B.A. record.“God knows I can’t sustain that level of energy like I used to,” Bryant said, although that did little to prevent him from shooting even more.It was the Lakers’ first game since Sunday, when Bryant made official what had long been expected: He will retire at season’s end. The next five months promise to be a valedictory tour as the Lakers (2-15) travel from city to city. The festivities kicked off in Philadelphia, which has special meaning for Bryant. He spent many of his teenage years living with his family in one of the city’s suburbs. He attended Lower Merion High School, where he was a prodigy.“In high school,” Bryant said, “I always hoped to be a Sixer.”Yet his history with the city has been complicated. Byron Scott, the coach of the Lakers, described Bryant as the hardest-working player he had ever known, which ought to be a point of pride for Philadelphians. But too often, the perception of Bryant has been clouded by his success in Los Angeles and by his desire to keep Philadelphia at a distance, often for competitive purposes.In 2001, when the Lakers faced the 76ers in the N.B.A. finals, Bryant said that he wanted to “cut their hearts out” — words that lingered. The following year, when Bryant returned for the All-Star Game here, he wore his father’s old 76ers jersey to a media session, gorged on cheesesteaks and pledged to play a style of basketball that would resonate with the crowd. Sure enough, Bryant was extraordinary, scoring 31 points. But fans at the arena booed him throughout.On Tuesday, any hard feelings were forgotten. Tickets, so readily available for games here this season, sold at a brisk pace on the secondary market. Broadcasting his roots, Bryant said he planned to eat a sandwich from Larry’s Steaks after the game.“Really appreciative and really thankful for everyone,” Bryant said. “Those who supported and those who didn’t. It was all just part of the entire journey.”The Lakers have not played exquisite basketball this season. Their level of performance has generally ranged from glum to horrifying. So the Sixers offered a glimmer of hope at the start of an eight-game trip. The Lakers arrived at the arena grateful for the opportunity.Bryant, in particular, has been shuffling along. He is shooting a career-low 30.5 percent from the field and 20.2 percent from 3-point range. In some ways, though, he has resembled his familiar self, a glutton for shots — most of them misses — as younger teammates continue to defer to the aging demagogue in their midst.Diminished in his 20th season, Bryant would love to recapture some of his old magic before he goes. In the meantime, his cohorts have been lining up to throw laurels his way, including Kevin Durant, who chastised the media for what he felt had been unfair treatment of Bryant, and LeBron James, who regretted never having had the opportunity to face Bryant in the finals. “He’s the last of a dying breed,” Scott said, “one of those old-school players that brought it every single night.”Bryant said he had not given much thought to how he would channel his competitive drive in the years ahead, although others have ideas. In Los Angeles on Tuesday, as the Dodgers introduced Dave Roberts as their new manager, Magic Johnson suggested that the 76ers consider hiring Bryant as a consultant.“They need a guy like Kobe Bryant to help them turn it around,” Johnson said.For now, Bryant has more pressing concerns, like finishing the season with dignity — another challenge in a career full of them, and perhaps his toughest one yet.Billy Witz contributed reporting from Los Angeles.Advertisement