AdvertisementSupported byN.F.L. RoundupBy The Associated PressBen Roethlisberger is blaming a headache for his early exit from last Sunday’s loss to Seattle. Steelers Coach Mike Tomlin says his franchise quarterback has a concussion.Either way, Roethlisberger will remain under the N.F.L.-mandated concussion protocol this week as Pittsburgh prepares to face Indianapolis. “We will do what we always do with those guys,” Tomlin said Tuesday. “We will be very diligent about their care. We will lean on the expert advice of our medical team, who always does a great job.”Tomlin’s remarks contrasted with Roethlisberger’s comments on his weekly radio appearance on a Pittsburgh radio station. He described his condition as a “traumatic ocular migraine” that limited his peripheral vision. BROWNS IN QUARTERBACK CHAOS Browns quarterback Josh McCown broke his collarbone in Monday night’s last-second loss to Baltimore, an injury that will cost him the final five games this season and reopen quarterback chaos in Cleveland.With the Browns in a short week before facing Cincinnati, Coach Mike Pettine still hasn’t decided if he’ll re-insert Johnny Manziel, recently benched for off-field antics, into the starting lineup or stick with Austin Davis, who replaced the injured McCown in the fourth quarter. OFFICIATING CREW REASSIGNED The N.F.L. has moved the referee Pete Morelli’s crew off the coming Sunday night game between Indianapolis and Pittsburgh.Instead, the crew will work an afternoon game between the Eagles and the Patriots.Morelli’s group was heavily criticized by both sides after the 49ers-Cardinals game Sunday. Arizona Coach Bruce Arians said the officials “can’t count to three.”There were a combined 20 penalties in the game. RUNNING BACK OUT AWHILE The Arizona Cardinals have placed running back Chris Johnson on the injured reserve/designated to return list. By being on the list, Johnson, whose left leg is injured, can’t resume practice for six weeks and can’t play in a game for eight weeks. Johnson, 30, is fourth in the N.F.L. in rushing with 812 yards.LOS ANGELES DECISION NEAR After two decades without a team in Los Angeles, the N.F.L. is barreling toward a decision to put at least one team back in the nation’s second-largest market.The committee of owners charged with recommending which team or teams may be eligible to move there will hold another meeting in January to consider the two proposals on the table: the plan by the St. Louis Rams owner Stan Kroenke to build a stadium in Inglewood, Calif., and the plan by the owners of the San Diego Chargers and the Oakland Raiders to build their own shared stadium in Carson, Calif.None of the three teams have applied to move yet, and there is no guarantee the Los Angeles committee will vote on either of the two proposals in January.But John Mara, a co-owner of the Giants and a member of the committee, told reporters at an owners’ meeting in Irving, Tex., that “it’s time to get this done.”Like Mara, the other owners do not want the selection process to drag on too long because it would mean less time for a new team to prepare to play in Los Angeles.Many owners continue to waver on which choice they support. Jerry Jones, the Dallas Cowboys’ owner, has been a vocal supporter of Kroenke’s plan for the Rams, while Jerry Richardson of the Carolina Panthers has said he supports the proposal put forward by the Chargers and the Raiders.Few other owners have been as precise.Away from the owners’ meeting Tuesday, Jones said he thought Los Angeles could support two stadiums. While that is technically feasible, the league would most likely balk at such a plan because of the additional costs.The league is going to lengths to ensure that the Rams, the Raiders and the Chargers give their host cities time to try to keep the teams from leaving. KEN BELSONAdvertisement