
On Baseball By                     
 TYLER KEPNER
 
DEC. 1, 2015
David Price made his major league debut at the old Yankee Stadium, in the final month of its final season. Some hitters he faced were Xavier Nady, Wilson Betemit and Ivan Rodriguez. Yes, Price goes back a long way with the Yankees, and he will go forward against them for many years, too.Price reached an agreement with the Boston Red Sox on a seven-year, $217 million deal that will be the richest for a pitcher in major league history. A person with direct knowledge of the negotiations confirmed the deal but requested anonymity because the team had not announced it. This presumably ends Price’s hopscotching around the American League. He has helped the Tampa Bay Rays, the Detroit Tigers and the Toronto Blue Jays to the postseason, getting there in five of the last six years.The Yankees have made it in only four of those seasons, including 2015, when they stayed for just three hours and scored no runs in a wild-card loss to Houston. Price’s 9-1 record in 11 starts for Toronto helped doom the Yankees to second place, but did not compel them to chase him in free agency.Instead, the Red Sox were the desperate team, and desperation drives free agency. When the Yankees missed the playoffs in 2008, their desperation to return, no matter the cost, fueled a spending spree for Mark Teixeira, C. C. Sabathia and A. J. Burnett. A championship immediately followed.AdvertisementOf course, that was the Yankees’ only trip to the World Series in the last 12 seasons, and their more recent lavish winter returned them to reality. Two off-seasons ago, the Yankees committed $458 million to sign Masahiro Tanaka, Jacoby Ellsbury, Brian McCann and Carlos Beltran. That group has not yet competed in a postseason series.The Yankees seem to understand that their best hope of long-term success, and some semblance of payroll sanity, is to integrate younger players while waiting for bloated contracts to expire, improving around the margins to contend in the meantime.AdvertisementThere will always be chances to spend big again. Three years from now, Washington right fielder Bryce Harper will be eligible for free agency at age 26. Harper, the National League most valuable player, might be a wiser investment than the one the Red Sox made Tuesday.That is a long way off, and no sure thing, in any case. But greater flexibility would be a powerful weapon in the Bronx — if paired with the young, cheap talent the Yankees believe they have coming. When they held onto it last July, they got instant contributions from Luis Severino and Greg Bird.The Red Sox have a deeper stable of prospects, though, and reached into it last month to acquire an elite closer, Craig Kimbrel, from San Diego. They also reached a contract agreement with the former Yankees outfielder Chris Young. Those moves, and the Price signing, completed Dave Dombrowski’s three-step plan to lift the Red Sox out of last place.Last August, on their way to finishing last in the A.L. East for the third time in four seasons, the Red Sox hired Dombrowski to run their baseball operations. Dombrowski had spent aggressively in previous stops — for the Florida Marlins, before current Red Sox owner John Henry owned that team, and for the Tigers. Now he has gotten Henry to sign a 30-year-old pitcher for $31 million per season.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Jon Lester turned 30 before the 2014 season, after leading the Red Sox to a World Series title. The team initially offered to extend his contract for $70 million over four years, a concept so far under market value that it still seems laughable. Lester was traded that July to Oakland for Yoenis Cespedes, who was dealt to Detroit for Rick Porcello.This season, Porcello begins a four-year, $82.5 million deal, after going 9-15 with a 4.92 E.R.A. in his first season in Boston. He was part of a staff without an ace, and the acute need for one compelled the Red Sox to overwhelm Price with a contract worth $2 million more than Clayton Kershaw’s guarantee from the Los Angeles Dodgers.AdvertisementKershaw will be only 32 at the end of that seven-year contract. Price will be 37 at the end of his, unless he exercises a reported opt-out clause after 2018. Price has everything you could want in an ace — a clean health history, a refreshing sense of accountability, and an evolving mix of pitches to go with a 94-mile-an-hour fastball that has held steady his whole career. But the risk is substantial, even in a market flush with cash.The Blue Jays, who had by far the majors’ best offense last season, have scaled back, essentially replacing Price with J. A. Happ, who signed last week for three years and $36 million. Happ, 33, had an ordinary career until a late-season renaissance with Pittsburgh. But he is not much different from the rest of the Boston rotation after Price, and Marcus Stroman could assume Price’s role as the Blue Jays’ ace.The A.L. East, which has sent all five of its teams to the playoffs in the last three seasons, will continue to be fascinating. The majors’ home run leader, Chris Davis, could leave the Baltimore Orioles as a free agent. The Tampa Bay Rays’ Chris Archer could be a serious candidate for the Cy Young Award. The Red Sox are fortified, and the Blue Jays are the reigning champions.The Yankees will still carry the A.L.’s highest payroll. Five players (Teixeira, Sabathia, Ellsbury, Tanaka and Alex Rodriguez) will make more than $110 million combined next season. Price may lead the Red Sox to glory, or his contract may burden the team even further. Either way, the Yankees will watch his saga unfold — up close, as always.A version of this article appears in print on December 2, 2015, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: Passing Up Costly Ace, Yanks Will Face Him .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »