By NAILA-JEAN MEYERSDEC. 1, 2015
Every Tuesday, The New York Times will look at the week ahead in the N.H.L., highlighting hot — or not so hot — teams and players. Minnesota Wild at Chicago Blackhawks, Tuesday, 8 p.m., NBCSNBlackhawks forward Patrick Kane has scored a point in 19 straight games, compiling 11 goals and 20 assists in that span. He will go for his 20th in a row as Chicago returns home from a six-game Western trip. Sidney Crosby in 2010 was the last player to record a point in 20 straight games. Don’t get too excited about Kane breaking the N.H.L. record for point streaks, though. It is 51 games, set by Wayne Gretzky in 1983-84.Rangers at Islanders, Wednesday, 8 p.m., NBCSNThe Rangers (17-6-2) have lost three of their last four. Worse, center Derek Stepan is out four to six weeks with broken ribs, and Kevin Klein, their most consistent defenseman this season, will miss two to three weeks after sustaining a strained oblique Monday against Carolina. The Rangers head to Brooklyn for their first game at Barclays Center, playing the rival Islanders for the first time this season. The Islanders (13-8-4), who have won three of four, are expected to have their first sellout since opening night in October.Washington Capitals at Montreal Canadiens, Thursday, 7:30 p.m.Entering Tuesday’s games, Montreal led the N.H.L. with 39 points, but faced a second long stretch without goaltender Carey Price, who will miss at least six weeks with a lower-body injury (more on that later). With a five-game winning streak, Washington (17-5-1) has caught up to the Rangers in the Metropolitan Division. Goalie Braden Holtby has won his last seven starts and leads the N.H.L. with a 1.95 goals-against average.Buffalo Sabres at Edmonton Oilers, Sunday, 8 p.m.This was supposed to be the first N.H.L. game between the rookie phenoms Connor McDavid of Edmonton and Jack Eichel of Buffalo. But with McDavid out with a broken collarbone, can we interest you in Jack Eichel vs. Leon Draisaitl? Since McDavid was injured on Nov. 3, Draisaitl, a 20-year-old German who was the No. 3 pick in the 2014 draft, has five goals and six assists. In only 15 games, Draisaitl is second on the Oilers in scoring, with 18 points. Eichel, the No. 2 pick in the June draft after McDavid, has eight goals and four assists, and is seventh among rookies in points.AdvertisementSidney Crosby is still struggling to score for the Penguins, but his teammate Evgeni Malkin is heating up, with seven goals and three assists in his past six games. In fact, entering Tuesday’s game at San Jose, Malkin had scored Pittsburgh’s last four goals, including this spin-o-rama against Edmonton on Saturday.Montreal goaltender Mike CondonThe Canadiens started the season with the reigning Vezina and Hart Trophy winner in their net. They now have an undrafted 25-year-old rookie carrying the load.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Carey Price missed nine games earlier this season, but during his third game back, Wednesday against the Rangers, he aggravated the injury. He is expected to miss six weeks, putting the spotlight back on Mike Condon.AdvertisementA native of Needham, Mass., who played college hockey at Princeton, Condon started his journey to the Canadiens by trying out for an E.C.H.L. team during his spring break in 2013. After spending the past two seasons in the minor leagues, Condon beat out Dustin Tokarski in training camp for the backup job.Condon is 8-2-3 with a 2.19 goals-against and .916 save percentage, including a 5-2-2 record during Price’s previous absence.He may be this season’s Cam Talbot, the Rangers’ late-blooming backup who held down the fort last season when Henrik Lundqvist missed almost two months.For now, Condon is getting used to the attention that comes with being the starting goalie for a storied franchise.“I was taking my suits to the dry cleaner, some guy had a huge lens camera and stopped right in front of me and took a picture,” Condon told reporters Monday. “I was just like, ‘What’s up?’ He didn’t even say anything. He just kept walking.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.