By BENJAMIN HOFFMANDEC. 1, 2015
Settling the debate once and for all, the N.B.A. issued a statement on Tuesday clarifying that it would not alter its policy of not crediting wins and losses to interim coaches in most instances. Golden State Coach Steve Kerr will receive credit for the Warriors’ record under Luke Walton, who has been running the team in Kerr’s absence.In a nod to the unusual circumstance of Walton’s leading the Warriors to a 19-0 record as Kerr recovers from back surgery, the league announced that interim coaches like Walton would be eligible for coach of the month honors, which had been a sticking point for many critics of the policy.And sure enough, when the award was announced on Tuesday afternoon, Walton was named coach of the month for the Western Conference. While he has worked with Kerr at practices, Walton has handled all in-game duties as the defending champion Warriors set the record for best start in N.B.A. history. The team has 19 wins, five more than any other team this season. The Warriors lead the N.B.A. in scoring and average margin of victory.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Many people called for Walton to receive credit for the wins. The broadcaster Jeff Van Gundy spent long parts of a nationally televised game demanding a change, and Kerr has strongly supported his assistant in interviews. A policy change, though, had the potential to create some messy situations. For Walton to receive credit for wins was one thing, but to saddle other interim coaches with losses might have been seen as unfair, especially if they were filling in for far shorter stretches.AdvertisementThe concept of an interim coach is somewhat fluid in the N.B.A., and perhaps it caused some confusion. In Walton’s case, he is an assistant coach filling in for a head coach until the head coach can return, but the term is also used for a coach who steps into a head-coaching role at midseason after a head coach is fired. In those instances, when a team has not appointed a new head coach, the interim is credited with the wins and losses.AdvertisementThe N.F.L. faced a similar issue in 2012 when Bruce Arians of the Indianapolis Colts coached 12 games in place of Chuck Pagano, who had been found to have leukemia. Arians did not receive credit for the team’s 9-3 record, but he was named the N.F.L.’s coach of the year.Even if the league had changed the policy, a source said, there was little consideration given to going back through history to alter coaching records based on the use of interim coaches. By not changing, the N.B.A. avoids the potential for a major record upheaval, because Don Nelson, the N.B.A.’s leader in coaching victories, received credit for at least 10 wins in games coached by an interim replacement. Nelson’s lead over Lenny Wilkens for career wins is three, and an examination of both of their records could have resulted in a change at the top.With the clarification, Kerr’s career coaching record is 86-15 (102-20, if you count the playoffs), and Walton’s remains 0-0. Golden State will to try to extend its record to 20-0 (and Walton’s to 0-0) on Wednesday night in a road game against the Charlotte Hornets.A version of this article appears in print on December 2, 2015, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Walton, at 0-0, Is Named West’s Coach of the Month.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.