By SCOTT CACCIOLADEC. 1, 2015
WHITE PLAINS — Tony Hammel, who coached Jimmer Fredette for four years at Glens Falls High School, still connects with him every couple of weeks. They text or chat on the phone, even as Fredette continues to hopscotch the country on a seemingly endless basketball odyssey.“And every time I talk to him,” Hammel said, “it’s always the same: ‘Don’t worry, Coach. Everything is good. I’m happy where I’m at.’ ”Fredette, an N.B.A. lottery pick whose career has been a source of mild fascination for fans who witnessed his shot-making pyrotechnics as a college star at Brigham Young, is newly employed by the Westchester Knicks of the N.B.A. Development League. Fredette, 26, has earned more than $8 million in N.B.A. salary since he was drafted in 2011. But after stints in recent weeks with the San Antonio Spurs and the New Orleans Pelicans, he is suddenly searching — for minutes, for stability, for another job.“Sometimes,” he said, “you’ve got to go backwards in order to get back up to where you want to be.”AdvertisementOn Monday night, Fredette made his D-League debut at Westchester County Center, where a sparse but enthusiastic crowd featured his parents, several foam-finger-waving fans and, in a highly unusual twist, the boxer Floyd Mayweather Jr., who arrived early in the second quarter with a massive entourage. Mayweather, who is friends with Jordon Crawford, a reserve guard on the D-League Knicks, sat courtside and did not keep his opinions to himself.Advertisement“He just kept telling me to shoot the ball,” Fredette said. “So I did.”Fredette assembled some highlight footage. In a performance that, depending on your perspective, was either an indictment of the D-League (Fredette has labored to find firm footing in the N.B.A.) or another mythmaking example of his offensive prowess (the ball still has to go in the basket), Fredette collected 37 points and eight assists as Westchester ran past the Grand Rapids Drive for its sixth straight win to start the season.Afterward, Fredette posed for about a dozen photos with fans, including one with a young man who was wearing a Stephen Curry jersey, then offered an abridged sales pitch.“I need to get into a rhythm,” he said, “and then hopefully get onto a team where I can provide a spark off the bench and have a team that wants me to get consistent minutes.”Fredette went on to use the word “when” to describe his potential return to the N.B.A., and not “if.” The Knicks do not hold his rights — he is free to sign anywhere — but it seemed clear that he enjoyed his newfound freedom. He supplied 41 minutes in the 102-90 victory. In a four-game stint with the Pelicans this month, he played a total of 13 minutes.“A lot of people would not have stuck with it,” Hammel, his high school coach, said in a telephone interview.Hammel reminisced about his early years with Fredette, who averaged about 32 points a game as a high school senior. As the longtime coach at Glens Falls, Hammel favored offensive sets that called for high screens. But with Fredette, Hammel basically ran three plays.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Jimmer to the right, Jimmer to the left and Jimmer up the middle,” Hammel said. “Those always worked.”AdvertisementFredette enjoyed similar liberties at Brigham Young, where he led the country in scoring as a senior. Life in the N.B.A. proved more restrictive, however, and it did not necessarily help his development that the Sacramento Kings, who acquired his draft rights from the Milwaukee Bucks, cycled through three head coaches in his two and a half seasons with the team.“There were a lot of things with the Kings that weren’t real good for Jimmer,” said Tim Moseman, the coach of Fredette’s Amateur Athletic Union team.Fredette occasionally emerged from obscurity. In February 2014, he scored 24 points in a win over the Knicks at Madison Square Garden. In the next game, he played four minutes. Eight days later, the Kings waived him. He spent last season on the far reaches of the Pelicans’ bench, where his confidence sagged. He shot 9 of 48 from 3-point range.Fredette spent much of training camp with the Spurs, and Moseman said he thought it was a good fit. But the Spurs cut him, too.“I’m sure when he’s by himself that there are times when he may be a little discouraged,” Moseman said. “But he’s never said that to me. He’s always positive and moving in the right direction: ‘If I get better, I can play at that level.’ ”Scoring has seldom been an issue for Fredette, who shot 12 of 17 from the field against Grand Rapids. Defense is the more pressing concern, and even he acknowledged that he gave up a couple of backdoor layups — an area of his game that he wants to improve, he said. As a 6-foot-2 shooting guard, he would probably need to be paired with a larger guard to offset his lack of size at the N.B.A. level. In addition, his lateral movement has never been regarded as a strength.“He’s got to become quicker on defense,” Moseman said. “It’s probably what has held him back. But he can get there.”Fredette said he had options other than the D-League. He could have gone to Europe, where the contracts are more lucrative. But he wants to return to the N.B.A. Asked about the perception that he has been a bust, Fredette said that people were free to their opinions. He tries not to worry about any of it. He reflected on his wandering journey.Advertisement“Sometimes that happens for people in this league,” he said. “For a lot of guys in this league, actually.”On Monday, Fredette joined his new teammates for pregame warm-ups. He wore a shooting jersey that featured an advertisement for a Yonkers car dealership. And then he went about his business, scoring from every conceivable angle. More than anything, he said, the game was a lot of fun. He knew enough to avoid predicting the future.“Whenever an opportunity arises that you feel is right for you, you’ve got to take advantage of it,” he said.A picture caption with an earlier version of this article misspelled the surname of the player making his debut with the Westchester Knicks. He is Jimmer Fredette, not Freddette.A version of this article appears in print on December 2, 2015, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Shooting Star Lands in Westchester.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.