By ROB HUGHESDEC. 1, 2015
LONDON — Now, more than ever, sports need to be sure-footed in their dealings with governments. Soccer was among the targets of the terrorist attacks in Paris last month, and with the 24-team European Championships scheduled for next June and July in France and the 2018 World Cup set for Russia, security for those events will inevitably involve those countries’ armed forces.Just as clear, however, is that soccer has never been more exposed or more leaderless. Sepp Blatter, the head of FIFA, and Michel Platini, the leader of UEFA, the European governing body, are suspended from office and face possible life bans from the sport.There is a vacuum of leadership that is unlikely to be filled before next spring at the earliest. FIFA’s authority lies buried beneath the avalanche of allegations that committee members helped themselves with impunity to the game’s cash or sold votes for World Cup hosting rights.But who rules in this vacuum? Who conducts the urgent discussions with national security forces to ensure that going ahead with the major tournaments will be safe?AdvertisementIn soccer as in the Olympics, the power behind the scenes is moving toward where the new money is. The front-runner in the FIFA presidential race is Sheikh Salman bin Ebrahim al-Khalifa, the president of the Asian soccer confederation and a member of Bahrain’s royal family. A growing power broker in soccer and the International Olympic Committee is Sheikh Ahmad al-Fahad al-Sabah of Kuwait.AdvertisementAnd a group based in Qatar, the International Center for Sport Security, wants to set itself up as the guardian for safety, security and integrity in all sports.Given where the European leadership has led FIFA, there is the impression that nothing could be worse than the status quo. But the fight to replace Blatter and company has barely begun, in part because nobody knows how far down the chain of command the corruption extends.Right now, though, urgent and far-reaching decisions are required to safeguard soccer’s next two big events.France 2016 is uncomfortably close and will involve 10 stadiums and 51 games next June and July. Qualifying games have already begun in Africa, Asia, North America and South America for the 2018 World Cup.But Russia, the Cup host, has just crossed a line that FIFA normally reacts vociferously to. Vitaly Mutko, who doubles as the Russian sports minister and the head of the country’s soccer federation, told the R-Sports news agency that Russian clubs would be barred from signing Turkish players in the January transfer window.The statement came after Turkey shot down a Russian warplane last week, which strained relationships between the two countries and prompted Moscow to impose limited trade sanctions.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.If a club wants to sign a Turkish player “during the upcoming transfer window, there will not be such a possibility,” the agency quoted Mutko as saying, according to Reuters.Asked whether the sports ministry was categorically telling the clubs not to sign Turks, the minister replied: “Of course, absolutely.”AdvertisementMutko said that the ban would not affect any player currently playing with a Russian club, such as Gokdeniz Karadeniz with Rubin Kazan. And two Turkish construction companies working on the building of stadiums for the 2018 World Cup would be allowed to continue under their contract, Mutko said.The sports ministry also “recommended” that Russian clubs cancel their winter training camps planned in Turkey. The clubs Spartak Moscow, Lokomotiv Moscow, FC Krasnodar and Kuban Krasnodar confirmed that they would heed that advice and find somewhere else to practice during Russia’s winter break.Had Blatter still been in charge at FIFA, we could have expected him to question, at the very least, whether this constitutes government interference in Russian soccer.Normally, FIFA is swift to move against state involvement in soccer affairs. Ethiopia, Brunei, Cameroon, Indonesia, Nigeria, and even France in recent years have discovered how quickly FIFA moves when the authority of local soccer administrations is threatened by governments.“We are clean and clear on this,” Blatter said at a news conference in Johannesburg in 2010 when France made a humiliating exit from the World Cup in South Africa. French politicians wanted the national soccer federation and team coach to provide answers to the National Assembly. “Definitely, I can tell you that political interference will be dealt with by FIFA, notwithstanding what kind of interference and what is the size of the country,” Blatter added.No word of warning has been issued to Russia this week.The other place where FIFA hesitates to tread is Kuwait. FIFA suspended Kuwait in October after the local federation complained of governmental interference. Kuwait was banned twice before over similar arguments, and a World Cup qualifier against Myanmar, scheduled for last week, was called off. FIFA simply stated that “the match did not take place, the matter has been referred to the FIFA Disciplinary Committee for its consideration.”The FIFA president is silent. Soccer is in limbo, and these are extraordinary times that threaten the very future of major tournaments.A version of this article appears in print on December 2, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.