
DEC. 3, 2015

A new wave of charges against soccer officials was made public Thursday in the ongoing FIFA corruption investigation. The 16 officials charged include five current or former members of FIFA’s ruling executive committee, the current presidents of Concacaf and Conmebol, a Guatemalan judge and a former president of Honduras.
Related Article
A new wave of charges against soccer officials was made public Thursday in the ongoing FIFA corruption investigation. The 16 officials charged include five current or former members of FIFA’s ruling executive committee, the current presidents of Concacaf and Conmebol, a Guatemalan judge and a former president of Honduras.Hawit, a Honduran lawyer and a former professional soccer player, has been the president of Concacaf since May, when his predecessor, Jeffrey Webb, was detained in the first round of FIFA arrests in Zurich. That appointment also meant that Hawit, 64, took over Webb’s seat on the FIFA executive committee, where he serves as a vice president. “We are at an important moment for the game, a moment that we must not squander,” Hawit said after he replaced Webb. “Concacaf stands ready to assist in the process of rebuilding FIFA in a way that strengthens the game for many years to come.” Instead, Justice Department officials contend, it was business as usual, in the form of bribes and kickbacks. Hawit, who is also the president of the Honduran soccer federation, joins Webb and Jack Warner as former Concacaf presidents now facing corruption charges in the United States.Napout, 57, of Paraguay, has been the president of Conmebol, the South American soccer confederation, since 2014. That job has proven troublesome, to say the least, in recent years. Napout succeeded Eugenio Figueredo of Uruguay, who was arrested in May in Zurich along with several other top FIFA officials. Figueredo, meanwhile, had replaced Nicolás Léoz of Paraguay, the longtime Conmebol chief, who also was charged by the United States Department of Justice in May. Napout’s ascension, and subsequent re-election early this year, as Conmebol president also made him a vice president of FIFA, and a member of its executive committee. Napout is also one of six members of FIFA’s powerful finance committee. He has spent much of his career in soccer roles, first in club management in his native Paraguay and then as president of the country’s soccer federation from 2007 to 2014.Del Nero, 74, was elected president of Brazil’s soccer federation in 2014 but has been a member of FIFA’s executive committee since 2012, when he took the place of his countryman Ricardo Teixeira, who resigned that year amid accusations of bribery and corruption and who was also arrested Thursday. Del Nero’s predecessor as president of the Brazilian federation, José Maria Marin, was among the FIFA executives arrested in May in Zurich. Del Nero slipped out of Switzerland after the raids and returned to Brazil, where he has remained — perhaps out of fear that he too would be arrested if he returned. (Brazil’s constitution does not permit the extradition of Brazilian citizens to another country.) Unwilling to travel, and thus unable to fulfill his duties to FIFA, Del Nero resigned his seat on the FIFA executive committee last week. He remains the president of the Brazilian federation, however. At least temporarily.Teixeira, 68, was the most powerful figure in Brazilian soccer — and one of the biggest players in FIFA — for almost two decades, serving as president of his national federation from 1989 to 2012. But he quit all of his soccer posts — as head of the Brazilian federation, chairman of the 2014 World Cup organizing committee and his seat on FIFA’s executive commitee — in 2012 just as Swiss authorities and news reports revealed that he and his one-time father-in-law, the former FIFA president João Havelange, had used their positions to collect more than $40 million in bribes and kickbacks in a variety of sponsorship and television rights deals. The latest charges against Teixeira will only add to his legal problems; he is already facing charges of money laundering and tax evasion in Brazil. Alvarado, the former president of Panama’s soccer federation, served on the Concacaf executive committee until announcing his resignation in 2013. A lawyer, he is a member of the FIFA disciplinary committee, where as recently as August he heard evidence and handed down sanctions against a national team coach. He was inducted into the Concacaf hall of fame in 2013.Callejas, 72, was the president of Honduras from 1990 to 1994 and later moved into soccer administration, serving of president of the country’s soccer federation during one of the brightest periods in its history, as Honduras qualified for consecutive World Cups in 2010 and 2014. He currently serves on FIFA’s marketing and television committee. In April, he joined Alvarado in the Concacaf hall of fame during a ceremony presided over by Webb and FIFA’s president, Sepp Blatter.Salguero, the former president of Guatemala’s soccer federation, gave up his seat on FIFA’s executive committee in May. He had joined the committee in 2007, meaning he was among the members who cast votes in the controversial bidding process for the 2018 and 2022 World Cups. Russia and Qatar won, amid widespread accusations of bribery and vote-trading. Asked by FIFA to name his biggest disappointment in soccer, he replied, “Nothing,” adding, “I’ve always believed you get back what you put in.”Jiménez, yet another Guatemalan official caught up in the corruption investigation, is known for his big bonuses, radial businesses and scandals as federation president. He declared in May that neither he “nor any other Guatemalan official had absolutely anything to do with the corruption network.” Furthermore, he boasted that he had set an example in recent years as a member of FIFA’s committee for fair play and social responsibility.A judge on Guatemala’s constitutional court, Trujillo was the second in command to Jiménez in the country’s soccer federation. He was one of three Guatemalans charged on Thursday, all of them accused of profiting from television rights deals. He is said to have discussed bribes and kickback schemes as recently as this summer – after the FIFA scandal broke.The one-time president of El Salvador’s federation, Vasquez and several other officials is accused of soliciting and accepting at least two six-figure bribes in television rights negotiations. Burga, 58, served multiple terms as the president of Peru’s soccer federation. In addition to public criticism for the national team’s regularly poor performances in continental competitions, Burga also faced a government investigation this year related to accusations of embezzlement of federation funds. Burga serves on FIFA’s development committee. “I’m at ease with my conscience,” he said in May. A confidant of the former FIFA powerbroker Julio Grondona of Argentina, who died in 2014. Meiszner, in addition to his role as Conmebol general secretary, was for years a top official of the Buenos Aires club Quilmes. Argentine news media reports linked him to questionable overseas accounts this year. Like most of the South Americans charged on Thursday, he is said to have demanded bribes and kickbacks in exchange for delivering valuable television rights.Another close associate of Grondona, Deluca quit as Conmebol’s general secretary in 2011, citing health reasons. Deluca had served as a deputy to Conmebol’s longtime president, Nicolás Leoz, who was charged in May. Deluca is also reportedly a target of Swiss investigators. Chavez was dismissed as the president of Bolivia’s soccer federation this summer, when he was jailed as part of a corruption investigation involving, among other things, the misappropriation of funds raised in a 2013 friendly between Bolivia and Brazil. Detained in the notoriously overcrowded Palmasola prison, a defiant Chavez proclaimed his innocence in a statement, saying “nothing has been proven.”Chiriboga, the president of Ecuador’s federation since 1998, won re-election for the fourth time in January. He caused concern at home last week by traveling to Brazil amid reports that he was meeting with United States investigators, but Chiriboga said that he was merely attending a Conmebol meeting, and that he was grateful Ecuador had not yet been pulled into the FIFA scandal. “With so many problems that have occurred in the region, he is proud to see that so far Ecuador has not been mentioned,” a federation spokesman said at the time, paraphrasing Chiriboga. “Let’s hope it stays that way.”A Bolivian, Osuna was a signatory on several contracts involving Conmebol and the disgraced marketing company Traffic Sports. He serves on FIFA’s audit and compliance committee. That committee is led by Domenico Scala, the Italian who has proposed a major set of governance reforms for FIFA.Webb, a former FIFA vice president and executive committee member, was president of Concacaf, the regional confederation representing North and Central America and the Caribbean, until his arrest in May in Zurich. Webb had been widely hailed as a voice for change in world soccer, and he had publicly pressed FIFA to be more proactive in fighting corruption and mismanagement, all while he was soliciting and receiving bribes from television and marketing executives. On Nov. 23, he pleaded guilty to racketeering conspiracy, three counts of wire fraud conspiracy and three counts of money laundering conspiracy. As part of his plea, he agreed to forfeit $6.7 million.Bedoya is a Colombian soccer administrator and a member of FIFA’s executive committee. Bedoya served as president of Colombia’s soccer federation from 2006 until November, when he adbruptly resigned citing “reasons of a personal nature.” Those reasons were most certainly his guilty plea on Nov. 12 to charges of racketeering and wire fraud. As part of his plea, he agreed to forfeit unspecified “funds on deposit in his Swiss bank account, among other funds.” Burzaco, an Argentine sports marketing executive, is the former chairman of Torneos y Competencias. He pleaded guilty to racketeering, wire fraid and conspiracy, and the indictments accuse him in a longrunning scheme to pay bribes to soccer officials in the Americas. In pleading guilty, he agreed to forfeit $21.6 million.Jadue resigned as the president of Chile’s federation in November and promptly traveled to the United States, reportedly to become an informant in the FIFA case. He had been under pressure since May, when several other top regional soccer officials were arrested or implicated in the corruption scandal, accused of taking bribes in exchange for granting lucrative television rights deals. “If I were involved, I would not be speaking with you,” Mr. Jadue said in a radio interview on the day of the arrests. “I have nothing to hide.” Turns out, he did: he pleaded guilty on Nov. 23 to racketeering and wire fraud, and agreed to forfeit unspecified funds.Davis, the only woman charged so far, is the president of a New Jersey company, International Sports Marketing. She pleaded guilty to wire fraud conspiracy and filing false tax returns, and agreed to return $2 million. The Daily News first reported ISM’s ties to the case in June, shortly after Davis, reportedly an associate of the disgraced former FIFA official Chuck Blazer, secretly pleaded guilt on May 26. Davis’s company held the exclusive marketing rights to the Copa Lbertadores, the South American club soccer championship, for which she paid bribes and kickbacks to at least two defendants, Nicolas Leoz and Eduardo Deluca.Tordin is the former president of Traffic Sports USA, a company deeply linked to the scandal, and more recently worked as an executive with another sports marketing company, Media World. Tordin pleaded guilty in November to multiple counts of wire fraud and tax evasion, and agreed to return $600,000.Margulies, a Brazilian, was the last of the original 14 defendants to surrender. He is accused by federal officials of serving as an intermediary between sports marketing companies and soccer officials. He pleaded guilty to racketeering, wire fraud and money laundering.Advertisement