AdvertisementSupported byKnicks 99, 76ers 87By Scott CacciolaSeconds before halftime, the crowd at Madison Square Garden seemed to be slipping into a comfortable slumber. The Knicks were playing well after four straight losses. It was of no small consequence that their opponents on Wednesday night happened to be the Philadelphia 76ers, who daydream of mediocrity.As has so often been the case this season, it was left to Kristaps Porzingis to wake everyone up. After cluttering the first half with rebounds and nifty bounce passes, Porzingis, the Knicks’ 7-foot-3 power forward, drifted to the perimeter for a rainbow 3-pointer that had fans chanting his name and had the 76ers reeling.The Knicks sailed to a 99-87 victory that was much needed after recent struggles with their shooting and late-game execution. The 76ers provided a soft pillow after several restless games.Porzingis, who found his path largely unimpeded because of the absence of Philadelphia’s Jahlil Okafor, finished with 17 points and 10 rebounds. Carmelo Anthony, after missing Sunday’s loss to the Houston Rockets with an illness, returned to score 12 points.The 76ers were less than 24 hours removed from defeating the Los Angeles Lakers for their lone win of the season. The Knicks (9-10) led by as many as 23.“We didn’t want to take any chances,” Anthony said. Porzingis, who recorded his ninth double-double of the season, had been anticipating a meeting with Okafor, a fellow lottery pick from June’s draft. But about an hour before the game, the 76ers (1-19) announced that they had suspended Okafor for two games after a second video surfaced of Okafor throwing punches outside a bar in Boston last week.Brett Brown, the coach of the 76ers, said that Okafor felt embarrassed. Brown said he was concerned for Okafor.“I think that if lessons are to be learned,” Brown said, “and this 19-year-old young man has to learn the responsibility of wearing a 76er uniform and carrying an N.B.A. logo, and it has to be done in the magnitude and the national media spotlight to make our point, then I say that’s not a bad thing.”Okafor appeared to be involved in at least two separate incidents on the same night. After TMZ posted the first video last week, Okafor approached Brown and relayed, in general terms, what had happened. The team chose not to suspend Okafor at the time. On Wednesday, after TMZ published the second video, the team decided to act.“The further details that came out surprised me, surprised us,” Brown said, adding: “He has made a mistake, and nobody is denying it; nobody is hiding from it. We own it.”Brown acknowledged that the 76ers were an atypical organization. The team is extremely young, which means there are few experienced voices in the locker room to guide players like Okafor, who spent one season at Duke before the 76ers selected him with the third pick in the draft.Porzingis, on the other hand, has probably benefited from being around veterans like Anthony, Jose Calderon and Sasha Vujacic, who has acted as Porzingis’s unofficial mentor.“We hope it’s helping him to understand what you need to do to play five years, eight years, 12 years, 13 years in the league like Carmelo has,” Coach Derek Fisher said. “Just to observe guys who have been in the league and been successful, how they do things. What can you take from them? What can you improve on?”Porzingis has worked to add pieces to his game since the start of the season, and he appears to be exercising more patience. In the first quarter, Porzingis caught the ball on the low block and recognized that defenders were closing on him. So he tossed a bounce pass to Robin Lopez for a layup. The Knicks led by 54-39 at the half.Before the game, Phil Jackson, the Knicks’ president, delivered his first public comments since training camp. In a radio interview with Sirius XM, Jackson said he had been surprised by Porzingis’s play this season, particularly his ability to supply big minutes. Jackson said he thought it would take longer for Porzingis to develop the necessary strength and stamina.“There’s the magical element to this young man that has caught the admiration, I think, of the fan base here in New York City and people around the country that do follow the Knicks,” Jackson said. “In seeing this guy, he’s got the right temperament, the right attitude, and he carries himself well.”Jackson said he had also been impressed by Porzingis’s approach. Porzingis has not earned many calls from officials, Jackson said, but he has kept his composure.“I see growth almost from game to game,” Jackson said.REBOUNDSCleanthony Early pulled off a rare doubleheader by playing in two games on Wednesday. He spent his morning scoring 16 points for the Westchester Knicks of the N.B.A. Development League. He returned to the parent club in the evening and played the final three minutes.Advertisement