AdvertisementSupported byIslanders 2, Rangers 1 | ShootoutBy Allan KredaAn early December game between the Rangers and the Islanders in Brooklyn on Wednesday had the buildup of a playoff clash. And the Islanders’ taut, 2-1 shootout win had all the tension that fans could have envisioned.“The fans were great; the atmosphere was great; that was the best all year,” said Islanders goaltender Jaroslav Halak, who made 33 saves and blanked the Rangers in the shootout after his teammate Kyle Okposo scored against Henrik Lundqvist. For the Rangers, many of whom live in Manhattan — closer to Barclays Center than their Islanders counterparts living on Long Island — the game had a peculiar feel, starting with the optional morning skate.Rangers Coach Alain Vigneault generated a few chuckles when he answered a question about what it was like to travel for a road game so close to Madison Square Garden.“It was still a hike this morning, a good 45 minutes,” Vigneault said of the commute from the West Side of Manhattan. “But we found our way to get here.”John Tavares gave the Islanders a 1-0 lead on a power play 12 minutes 22 seconds into the second period before Viktor Stalberg tied the score just over six minutes later. The Rangers held a 6-3 shots advantage in overtime, which included a power play.Lundqvist made 36 saves for the Rangers, who fell to 17-6-3 and lead the Islanders by 5 points in the Metropolitan Division.“I thought the fans really got their money’s worth tonight,” Islanders Coach Jack Capuano said after his team improved to 9-4-2 on home ice and 14-8-4 over all.The teams have taken different paths to this fresh chapter in their rivalry. The Rangers have lost four of their last five games after winning 16 of their first 21. But they had history on their side, entering the game with a 15-5-1 record in their last 21 road games against the Islanders.“I thought both teams weren’t giving too much,” said Rangers defenseman Dan Boyle, who lost control of the puck on the Rangers’ final shootout attempt. “Both sides were respectful of each other.”The Islanders have been playing winning hockey at home, even with a new game-day routine that involves commuting by train to Brooklyn and waiting hours for the puck to be dropped, rather than taking a pregame nap at home.Capuano said his players would have no trouble focusing on the Rangers.“It’ll be tough if you’re a player not to get up for this game when you get on the ice and see the atmosphere and emotion running through the building,” he said.The buzz was palpable before the game as many fans wearing the blue sweaters of their favorite players chanted, “Let’s go, Rangers,” as they walked through the main atrium gates.Just after the opening face-off, another pro-Rangers chorus commenced, but it was quickly countered with a hearty “Let’s go, Islanders!” refrain.“We know the crowd is going to be split, but this is our home, and we have to show it,” said Jennifer Schaber of Huntington, N.Y., who was wearing a blue No. 91 John Tavares jersey while joined by her friend Adam Lafleur, in the No. 19 sweater of the former Ranger Brad Richards. “We’ll just have to be louder.”There was a buzz outside Barclays Center, too. Across the street from the arena, at Patsy’s Pizzeria on Dean Street, the owner Anton Raja was excited to witness an all-New York hockey battle in Brooklyn. Both teams were represented outside and inside the restaurant, which opened in June. A blue Islanders flag billowed above its front door, and the walls near the bar were festooned with autographed photos of past Rangers and Islanders luminaries, including Adam Graves and Mike Bossy.The Islanders faced that conundrum when the Rangers invaded Nassau Coliseum over the past 43 years. Seas of blue Rangers jerseys often sprung up when the visitors scored, much to the chagrin of the home team.“We’re used to a great atmosphere at the other rink there on Long Island,” the Rangers’ captain, Ryan McDonagh, said earlier in the day. “So I’m expecting similar here in Brooklyn. It helps raise the intensity of the game, every play is magnified.”That certainly was the case through 65 minutes and more of this first Rangers-Islanders game in Brooklyn. Vigneault also took a lighthearted jab at the Coliseum, which debuted in 1972, well before all the modern amenities of Barclays Center existed in hockey arenas.“For us, the coaches, the rooms are a lot bigger than the closets we had in the past,” he said. SLAP SHOTSThe announced crowd of 15,795 was the second sellout at Barclays; the first came on opening night against the Blackhawks. Advertisement