By DAVE ANDERSONDEC. 2, 2015
Mickey Corcoran, a prominent figure in New Jersey athletics who coached Bill Parcells in high school basketball and then mentored him throughout Parcells’s Hall of Fame career as the coach of four N.F.L. teams, died on Sunday at his home in Dumont, N.J. He was 93.His wife, Dolores, said he had a brain tumor.Parcells confided in Corcoran whenever he was confronted with a career decision, as happened in January 2002.Parcells had spent the 2001 National Football League season as an ESPN studio analyst after resigning from the Jets as their director of football operations. Then the Tampa Bay Buccaneers offered him a four-year, $16 million contract to be their head coach.“I talked to Mickey,” Parcells said at the time, “and he told me, ‘If you have any doubts, don’t do it.’ ”AdvertisementParcells did have doubts and declined the job.During Parcells’s eight seasons with the Giants, 1983 to 1990, in which he led the team to two Super Bowl championships, Corcoran often attended practices and traveled with the team in an unpaid capacity. Parcells later coached the Jets as well as the New England Patriots and the Dallas Cowboys.AdvertisementHis relationship with Corcoran developed at River Dell High School in Oradell, N.J., where Corcoran was his basketball coach.“Bill was a pain, but he was a competitor,” Corcoran said in an interview in 2003. “Hoping to lift his spirits after a 2-point loss, I told him, ‘To stay so close was a moral victory.’ But turning to me, this 15-year-old player said: ‘Coach, there are no moral victories. Winning is all that counts.’ That’s when I knew Bill was different. When he graduated, we kept in touch. He always called me ‘Coach.’ ”In 1966, after Parcells began his coaching career at Hastings College in Nebraska and Wichita State in Kansas, Corcoran recommended him to Tom Cahill, the Army coach, who had been the River Dell football coach. Cahill hired Parcells as an assistant coach.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.William Joseph Corcoran was born on May 4, 1922, in Englewood, N.J. He played basketball and football at St. Cecilia High School there when Vince Lombardi, later the legendary coach of the Green Bay Packers, coached both sports while teaching Latin and other subjects. Lombardi gave him his nickname, originally calling him “Mickey Mouse” because of his diminutive size.Corcoran served in the Navy during World War II as an athletic instructor at the naval air base in Sea Island, Ga., where John Wooden, later the renowned U.C.L.A. basketball coach, was the coach. Corcoran succeeded Wooden as the base coach.He graduated from Springfield College in Massachusetts in 1948 with a degree in education and taught mathematics and physical education while coaching the junior varsity basketball team at Horace Mann School in the Bronx.He moved to River Dell High School as the varsity coach in the late 1950s and then to Northern Highlands High School in Allendale, N.J., in 1967. He was the athletic director and basketball coach there for 18 years. He also officiated high school basketball games from 1948 to 1980.Corcoran is survived by his wife, the former Dolores McGrath, whom he married while in the Navy in 1945; a daughter, JoAnne Kehoe; three sons, Michael, Billy and Mark (who is known as Rookie); 13 grandchildren; and one great-grandchild. Another daughter, Patricia, died in the early 2000s.“He was everything that a 14-year-old guy needed,” Parcells said of Corcoran in his autobiography, “Parcells: A Football Life” (2014), written with Nunyo Demasio. “He was a coach, a teacher, a disciplinarian, a butt kicker.”Daniel E. Slotnik contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on December 3, 2015, on Page B19 of the New York edition with the headline: Mickey Corcoran, 93, Mentor to Parcells.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.