By TOM PEDULLADEC. 2, 2015
FLORHAM PARK, N.J. —  The anticipated matchup between Odell Beckham Jr., the Giants’ highlight-reel receiver, and Darrelle Revis, the Jets’ premier cornerback, appears increasingly unlikely to occur when the teams meet Sunday at MetLife Stadium.Revis has yet to practice since he sustained a concussion during the Jets’ 24-17 road loss to the Houston Texans on Nov. 22, and Coach Todd Bowles said Wednesday that Revis, 30, was continuing to follow the N.F.L.’s protocol for such injuries.Bowles said Revis had been limited to “light physical activity” but added that Revis was “getting better every day.”Marcus Williams, who started in place of Revis on Sunday, was also unable to practice. He has a sprained medial collateral ligament.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Speaking about the availability of Williams, Bowles said: “There’s hope. I don’t know how much. I’ve got to see him run.”AdvertisementWilliams leads the team with five interceptions — two more than Revis has.If Revis remains sidelined, Bowles appears likely to use a combination of cornerbacks on Beckham, including Antonio Cromartie, Darrin Walls and Dexter McDougle. He also raised the possibility that Buster Skrine, who typically shadows the slot receiver, might occasionally move outside.Advertisement“We’re all prepared to play,” Walls said. “We know injuries happen. We have guys who are up for the challenge, and we practice that way.”Safety Calvin Pryor said the Jets would focus on keeping Beckham from making game-changing plays.“We accept all challenges,” he said. “It’s a team game. The game still has to be played, with Revis or not.”Bowles emphasized that a victory, which would buoy the wild-card playoff hopes of his 6-5 team, would require more than stopping Beckham, who has 72 receptions for 1,005 yards and nine touchdowns.“It’s not one-on-one,” Bowles said. “It’s Giants versus Jets.”A version of this article appears in print on December 3, 2015, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Revis Still Out.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.