AdvertisementSupported byBy Ken BelsonIRVING, Tex. — N.F.L. owners are leaning toward voting on whether to allow one or two teams to move to Los Angeles when they meet next month for a special session.The owners were briefed Wednesday on the progress the Oakland Raiders, the San Diego Chargers and the St. Louis Rams had made in their plans for moving to Los Angeles, if the league approves. The Chargers and the Raiders hope to build a stadium together in Carson, Calif., while the Rams would like to build a stadium in Inglewood, Calif.The owners want to resolve the issue of which team or teams can move to Los Angeles as soon as possible to give them time to sell tickets, find sponsors and relocate staff in a new city.Commissioner Roger Goodell said the cities of Oakland, San Diego and St. Louis had until Dec. 29 to submit their plans to keep their teams from leaving. The owners will consider those proposals and the two plans for stadiums in the Los Angeles market when they convene for a meeting in Houston on Jan. 12.The owners would like to hold a vote then, but if they are in a stalemate, the vote could be set aside. At least three-quarters of the owners, or 24, must approve a proposal to move a franchise.Jim Irsay, the owner of the Indianapolis Colts, said neither proposal had 24 votes yet. He added that having two teams in Los Angeles was not a stumbling block to either proposal.One option discussed at Wednesday’s meeting involved a letter sent last week from E. Stanley Kroenke, the Rams’ owner, to the committee overseeing the league’s options in Los Angeles.In the past, Mr. Kroenke said he would welcome a second team in his building, but as a tenant, which is a less appealing because it could limit the revenue a second team would receive.But in the letter, Mr. Kroenke said he would welcome a second team as an equity partner in the stadium he hopes to build in Inglewood, several miles from downtown Los Angeles. The second team — either the Chargers or the Raiders — would share half the costs and half the revenue from the stadium, but would not have a stake in the real estate development planned around the stadium, according to a copy of the letter viewed by The New York Times.It was unclear if the Chargers or the Raiders were interested in Mr. Kroenke’s proposal. They have their own plan to build a stadium together in Carson. In October, Robert A. Iger, the chief executive of the Walt Disney Company, said that he would advise the Chargers on their stadium project if they were allowed to leave San Diego. Some N.F.L. owners viewed the announcement positively because Disney has experience running entertainment properties and because Mr. Iger could attract sponsors and ticket holders.The Chargers, the Raiders and the Rams are expected to apply to relocate on Jan. 4, presumably after their seasons end. All of them have losing records and may not qualify for the playoffs.Mr. Goodell said that the owners would consider efforts by Oakland, San Diego and St. Louis to keep their teams. Among the cities, St. Louis is considered the furthest along because a proposal to build a $1 billion stadium has cleared several legal hurdles and has a commitment from a naming-rights partner.The financial backing, however, must still be completed. Still, with so many moving pieces and no more than two of the three teams allowed to relocate, owners said the decision on who could move to Los Angeles might come later than January.“It’s musical chairs, but the music hasn’t stopped yet,” said Steve Tisch, the chairman of the Giants. “This may go into overtime.”Advertisement