AdvertisementSupported bySports of The TimesBy Michael PowellPHILADELPHIA — There came a point Tuesday night, as the 76ers clanked jumpers and missed defensive assignments so completely as to appear to be defensive mimes, that a thought bubbled into your consciousness:This was almost unfair.The 76ers were playing poorly enough to extend their legendary 18-game losing streak and so set the N.B.A. record for ineptitude to start a season. But the Los Angeles Lakers, with their clueless performance, matched the Sixers play for execrable play. It was as if Kobe Bryant, with his autumn-of-the-patriarch insistence on shooting and shooting and missing and missing, was willing the Sixers to victory.Bryant finished 7 of 26 from the floor, and the 76ers won for the first time this season, 103-91.You took the trip two hours south from New York City in hopes of examining this laboratory experiment. There are losing teams, like the Knicks, who this season linger a couple of games under .500 and show flickers of genuine promise. Then there is the overwhelming, catastrophic state of loss that suggests a team so far removed from winning that its players and coaches appear nigh to being struck deaf and blind.That team is the Philadelphia 76ers.(Note to connoisseurs of failure: The 76ers actually initiated their losing streak in March last season. They picked up that baton this fall, reaching 28 total losses in a row before the Lakers ruined matters.)“It’s gonna be beautiful,” Bryant said of his final return home to Philadelphia. It really wasn’t.What sets the 76ers apart is that loss is wrapped in the tinfoil of high hoop theory, known here as the Process. The owner of the Sixers, the private equity investor Josh Harris, and the team president, Sam Hinkie, have turned losing into a cult, arguing that the seeds of a championship can be sown only in earth fertilized by the ashes of loss.Fail to win for long enough, goes this theory, trade enough veterans and collect enough young players and draft picks, and someday you will cultivate a transcendent player like Kevin Durant, LeBron James or Russell Westbrook. And he will lift the 76ers into the stratosphere of championship contention.To this end, Hinkie has sold off assets like cheap suits. In 2014, Michael Carter-Williams was awarded rookie of the year. Hinkie traded him for draft picks. A center seemed handy. Please have him pick up his severance package.Analysts bow cautiously toward this cracked brilliance. Zach Lowe, an incisive N.B.A. scribe, typed these words for Grantland: “The Sixers may be taking the first baby steps toward semi-respectability.”He wrote that in December 2014, and added that this uptick was driven by the development of three young players. Soon after, Hinkie traded two of them. Soon after that, the 76ers commenced their epic losing streak.Harris, the owner, is a thoroughly modern plunger. He has yet to build anything of value on the N.B.A. earth. The team’s television ratings are near flatlined. Most nights, Wells Fargo Center is 70 percent full, the worst percentage among the league’s arenas. Clumps of fans sit in the upper seats, like forlorn shepherds in their mountain fastness.Yet Harris has more than doubled the value of his investment. He and his fellow investors bought the team for about $280 million in 2011. Four years later, the N.B.A. is thriving, and the team is worth $700 million, according to Forbes.Life really is grand.The Sixers’ kids have their moments. Their roster is chockablock with 21- and 22-year-olds, and they are athletic. (Forward Robert Covington, a genuine Development League find, is 25 and the grand old man of this smooth-cheeked crowd.) Forward Jerami Grant, brother of the Knicks guard Jerian, was named the 76ers’ player of the month for November. He shot 41 percent in the month, and advanced metrics show he contributed less than a league average player.Whatever; mazel tov.Hinkie’s strategy could work, eventually, maybe. Find enough young, talented players and they might cohere. Their coach, Brett Brown, previously worked for the San Antonio Spurs, the Harvard of the N.B.A., and he is by all accounts an excellent teacher and strategist who relies on biometrics and science. (Before the game, his assistants sat with players and pored over analytics on computer screens.)But more than half the roster has turned over since last year, and Brown’s three-year record is 38 wins and 145 losses. He carries the hard vowels of his native Maine, and he speaks of his team’s prospects with the honesty of a lobsterman steering into a nor’easter. How long will it take to build a winner?“We’d all be fooling ourselves if we didn’t say this is going to take time,” Brown said after Tuesday’s win. “As far as putting a number and how many years does that mean, I don’t know.”Hinkie has perhaps not helped his coach by pursuing his fixation with drafting exceptionally large players, preferably when coming off serious injuries. In 2013, he obtained Nerlens Noel, a 6-foot-11 young man with great athleticism and the wingspan of a pterodactyl. Noel missed his first year with a torn knee ligament. He is an energetic shot blocker and rebounder, and not much of a shooter. He spent the summer working on his touch. So far this season, he is putting up the same 10 points and 8 rebounds. And his shooting percentage has dropped precipitously.In 2014, Hinkie drafted Joel Embiid, a 7-foot Cameroonian wunderkind. Embiid had already had surgery on his right foot, which caused him to miss his first season. Then he broke the same foot again. His career has entered the shadow land of doubt.In last summer’s draft, Hinkie again passed on young point guards — his team has none worth the name — and drafted his third very big man, taking the 6-foot-10 Jahlil Okafor.Okafor spent a year matriculating at Duke Coach Mike Krzyzewski’s Finishing School for Insanely Talented Young Men. He has silken moves and a powerful body, and is averaging 17 points and 8 rebounds a game. Unfortunately, the 20-year-old’s off-court growth has turned painful.In October, he got into an argument outside a nightclub and had a gun stuck in his face. Last week, outside a bar in Boston, according to video, he pushed a couple of people to the ground and threw a roundhouse punch. He was also caught driving more than 100 miles per hour and used a fake ID to cadge a drink.These are not terminal problems. Those of us who did not act stupidly at age 19 should now raise our hands.But the Sixers lack a veteran presence who might sidle over to Okafor, sling an arm around his shoulders and say: Yo, fool. Grow up. So Wednesday, the 76ers suspended Okafor for two games and, without him, proceeded to lose to the Knicks, 99-87, at Madison Square Garden. (The 76ers have also assigned security to accompany Okafor him on his nocturnal wanderings.)For Philadelphia, there is also the problem of melding its collection of big men at a time when the N.B.A. is trending smaller and speedier and more athletic. “I’m tormented daily trying to make Jahlil and Nerlens coexist and make it work,” Brown acknowledged. “It’s a challenge.”As it turned out, the game Tuesday was entertaining after an ugly fashion, like a FIFA soccer play-in in which mediocre teams audition for the grown-up league. Bryant began by sinking 3-pointers and hitting a floater. Then his body reminded us that it was a 1975 Buick with a balky transmission, and shut down.Passes went flying in errant directions. Shots were blocked. Big men kept finding themselves wide open under the basket.In the second half, Lakers center Roy Hibbert began shoving one, two, three 76ers players out of the lane. He even gave a shove to a referee.The referees conferred and, to the surprise of more or less everyone in the arena, they allowed Hibbert to stay in the game. Perhaps they decided that was the greater punishment.Email: powellm@nytimes.comAdvertisement