AdvertisementSupported byOn TennisBy Christopher ClareyThe big gaps at the top of the rankings speak for themselves at the official end of the tennis season, which is not quite the real end of the tennis season, with the International Premier Tennis League relaunching in Japan on Wednesday.Novak Djokovic has a record 16,585 points, putting him more than 7,000 ahead of No. 2 Andy Murray.Serena Williams has 9,945 points, nearly 4,000 more than No. 2 Simona Halep, even though Williams skipped the final two months of the season.It was a year of rare double dominance, with Djokovic and Williams each winning three of the four major singles titles and Williams coming within two matches of the first true Grand Slam since 1988.Despite Williams’s sparkling record in the biggest events, the women’s tour was on balance a much less stable workplace than the men’s tour.“I just thought it was a really good year for women’s tennis,” said Pam Shriver, a former star who is now an ESPN analyst. “A lot of it had to do with Serena, but there were also some other really interesting runs. In a lot of the big events, I thought the women matched the men’s story lines or even bettered them for the first time in many years.”The hierarchy after Williams was certainly more fluid. On the ATP Tour, only one player — Kevin Anderson — made his debut in the top 10. On the WTA Tour, six women punched through that barrier for the first time: Ekaterina Makarova, Carla Suárez Navarro, Lucie Safarova, Garbiñe Muguruza, Karolina Pliskova and Timea Bacsinszky.Eugenie Bouchard, who soared to No. 7 in 2014, plummeted to No. 49 by the end of this season.Six men, including the rising young players Jack Sock and Dominic Thiem, won their first tour-level singles titles compared with 11 women, including the teenagers Belinda Bencic and Ana Konjuh. There was also Flavia Pennetta, the effervescent Italian who won her first Grand Slam singles title at the United States Open at age 33 and then retired at the end of the season.Charming outsiders had no such luck on the ATP Tour, where the main men remained the main men and a new generation that had made inroads in 2014 — led by Kei Nishikori and Milos Raonic — surprisingly lost ground in 2015, as did Marin Cilic and Grigor Dimitrov, the flashy Bulgarian who slumped to No. 28, from No. 8 in 2014.“These guys have been so stingy at the top, it’s amazing,” said Paul Annacone, a former coach of Roger Federer. “How long have we been talking about Milos and Grigor and this next group?”Several years is the answer, but the reality in 2015 was that the band formerly known as the Big Four — Djokovic, Federer, Murray and Rafael Nadal — combined for 277 victories, their highest total in any season. Their combined winning percentage of 84.45 was higher than in 2014, despite Federer’s celebrating his 34th birthday in August and despite Nadal’s struggles with his trademark forehand and his self-belief for the first half of the season.Djokovic’s phenomenally consistent high level of play — 11 titles and a 31-5 record against the top 10 — was deservedly the main theme. But Federer was often brilliant, too, hitting high notes at Wimbledon and during the American summer hardcourt swing that few believed he would reach again.“Is Roger ever going to get old?” Annacone said.To put it another way, is men’s tennis is ever going to get young? The average age of the year-end top 10 was 30 years and nearly 2 months, the oldest since the ATP rankings began in 1973.Murray, still 28, was resurgent and pushed through the tape, becoming the final member of the Big Four to win the Davis Cup by leading Britain to its first title in 79 years, claiming the decisive point against Belgium on Sunday in Ghent.There was also Stan Wawrinka, who backed up his Australian Open victory in 2014 by playing what looked very much like the match of his life to win the French Open over Djokovic. The level of baseline bravado required to stop Djokovic was too much to ask of anyone else in a best-of-five-set match, although the big-hitting Anderson came close in the fourth round of Wimbledon before losing in five sets.That escape was one of the key moments of the season. “That was a big one,” Annacone said. “But it was the Stan match at the French Open that could have totally derailed his year.“I understand Novak was pretty deflated after that. His ability to emotionally recover from that says a lot about his maturity.”Federer’s three victories over Djokovic, in eight attempts, all came in best-of-three-set matches on hardcourts. But he lost when it mattered most: in the Wimbledon final, the United States Open final and the final of the year-end championships.That evened their career series at 22-22, and it is difficult at this stage not to see Djokovic finishing with head-to-head advantages in all of his Big Four rivalries when the final numbers and forehands have been crunched. He and Nadal are even at 23-23, and he leads Murray, 21-9.What was striking in 2015 was the way Djokovic crushed the suspense out of close matches with lopsided decisive sets: a 6-0 third set over Murray in the Miami final and a 6-1 fifth over Murray in the French Open semifinals were typical.Djokovic had staying power. He had focus. He had, despite all the millions (he earned a record $21,592,125 in official prize money in 2015), hunger.Can he remain ravenous? Quite likely, with his longtime rivals still in the game and prestigious records there to be broken. His decisions to pull out of the Asian-based International Premier Tennis League and not play in the upcoming exhibition event in Abu Dhabi indicate that he will keep making the smart scheduling decisions necessary to stay fresh in the head and the legs.The five-team league, the brainchild of the former Indian doubles star Mahesh Bhupathi, was set to start its second season on Wednesday. It brings the sport to some Asian cities that are underserved by it, including Manila, New Delhi and Kobe, Japan.“Any event that grows the popularity of tennis, everybody should embrace it,” Bhupathi said.But even though the tours classify it as an exhibition and matches are just a single set, it clearly does extend the regular season for players who might be better served by complete rest. Williams, for example, skipped the WTA Finals in Singapore in late October, citing injury and fatigue, but is scheduled to play in the International Premier Tennis League, which has a franchise in Singapore.The new International Tennis Federation president, David Haggerty, like many in the game, has concerns.“I’m more ambivalent about it,” he said of the league. “I think the players work so hard, train so hard for such a long season that sometimes unintended consequences happen when you prolong a season even if you aren’t playing at the level of taking it as serious as others might be. You don’t want injuries. You don’t want people being tired at the beginning of the year. It can shorten careers, and that would be a shame.”It is also true that no one is forcing the players — expected to include Federer, Nadal and the often-injured Nishikori — to accept the money and the jet lag and participate.“If you play the I.P.T.L.,” the veteran coach Wim Fissette said, “I don’t think there is one reason to complain next year that the season is too long.”Advertisement