

      By MARC TRACY

DEC. 4, 2015

We will learn which four teams have qualified for this season’s College Football Playoff when the final rankings are released early Sunday afternoon. For those just tuning in, here are some answers to the more pressing questions.Start with Oklahoma (11-1). The selection committee seeded it third the past two weeks, with the chairman, Jeff Long, calling that position “solid” Tuesday. Wins over the Big 12’s other three ranked teams allowed Oklahoma to “overcome,” in Long’s word, an embarrassing loss to Texas. The Sooners have no more games – that is, no more games to lose. Count them in.The situation for Iowa (12-0), ranked fourth and one of just two undefeated teams in the Football Bowl Subdivision, and Michigan State (11-1), ranked fifth and boasting road wins over Michigan and Ohio State, is pretty simple: the winner of Saturday night’s Big Ten championship game in Indianapolis is in, and the loser goes home (or at least to a sunny, nonplayoff bowl game).Second-ranked Alabama (11-1) is a lock if it wins the Southeastern Conference championship game in Atlanta on Saturday afternoon. Which is to say, Alabama is nearly a lock: it is a 17-point favorite against Florida (10-2). Finally, as the No. 1 team, Clemson (12-0) is obviously a likely contender. And it will be in if it beats North Carolina (11-1) in the Atlantic Coast Conference title game. But there is a reason the Tigers are favored by less than a touchdown Saturday: their defense has looked vulnerable, and the Tar Heels’ offense has been dominant. A Clemsoning is still possible.The opportunity for chaos is limited, with only one or two potential spaces available in the event of Alabama and/or Clemson losses.Even if it beats Alabama, Florida has looked mediocre ever since losing its starting quarterback, and it would need to climb over a lot of teams to get in. North Carolina is a better bet to grab an open spot, but only if it beats top-ranked Clemson.The next team to consider is the fifth major-conference champion – the Pacific-12’s. If this is Stanford (10-2), which is currently seventh in the playoff rankings, the Cardinal would be a promising candidate.But even if Clemson and Alabama lose their conference championship games, they could retain their spots. Statistics and the eye-test both indicate these are two of the country’s best teams.And lurking at No. 6 is Ohio State (11-1). The defending national champion, the Buckeyes have the second-best scoring defense and they just blew out Michigan on the road. In addition to rooting against Clemson and Alabama, Buckeyes fans should hope Southern California (8-4, 6-3) beats Stanford Saturday night in Santa Clara, Calif.: the win would keep the Cardinal out, yet the Trojans are not a viable playoff candidate.The No. 1 team in the final rankings plays the No. 4 team, and No. 2 plays No. 3. The semifinals are at 4 pm and 8 p.m. Eastern on Dec. 31 at the Orange Bowl in Miami Gardens, Fla., and the Cotton Bowl at AT&T Stadium in Arlington, Tex. For more on the challenge of staging these events on New Year’s Eve, see here.The top seed will be placed where it has more of a home-field advantage. This year, that could lead to the awkward situation. If the playoff were being set today, it is likely that Clemson would be placed in the Orange Bowl, forcing No. 2 Alabama to effectively cede home-field advantage by playing No. 3 Oklahoma in Texas. The committee has said it will not rank the teams with any eye toward such considerations.The finalists will play the national championship game on Jan. 11, 2016 in Glendale, Ariz.The “New Year’s Six” include the two semifinal games and the four other prominent bowl games (which in other years host the semifinals). The Peach Bowl kicks off at noon Eastern Dec. 31. The Fiesta Bowl starts at 1 pm Eastern on New Year’s Day, and is followed by the Rose Bowl and then the Sugar Bowl.The Rose Bowl and the Sugar Bowl will feature, respectively, a Big Ten team versus a Pac-12 team and an SEC team versus a Big 12 team. If any of those conferences’ champions are not playoff semifinalists, they will go to their designated bowl. If not, those bowls technically may choose any bowl-eligible team from those conferences, although a Rose Bowl official indicated to ESPN that it would likely choose based on the committee’s final top 25 rankings.The bowls’ conference affiliations could lead to a lopsided pairing: should Stanford make the playoff, the Rose Bowl would likely feature a fifth or sixth-ranked Big Ten team against a Pac-12 team ranked in the 20s.The American Athletic Conference was easily the strongest of the Group of 5 conferences this season. The winner of its championship game on Saturday, between No. 22 Temple (10-2) and No. 19 Houston (11-1), should get this berth.Advertisement