By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSDEC. 4, 2015
RALEIGH, N.C. —  After the Devils’ latest road win this season, Mike Cammalleri pointed to the balanced effort that had led to the victory.Cammalleri scored twice, the backup goalie Keith Kincaid stopped 30 shots, and the Devils beat the Carolina Hurricanes, 5-1, on Thursday night.Adam Henrique scored his team-leading 12th goal of the season, and Stephen Gionta and Jacob Josefson each got their first of the season. Cammalleri increased his team-leading point total to 26 as the Devils won for the second time in three games and improved to 8-4 on the road.“We feel like we accomplished something as a team tonight,” Cammalleri said. “The result followed.”AdvertisementBrad Malone scored for Carolina, and Eddie Lack finished with 22 saves. The Hurricanes lost their third straight and their fourth in the last five games.Advertisement“It was a tough night,” said Eric Staal, the Hurricanes’ captain. “We needed to have more of a competitive edge to our game. It wasn’t there to start. We weren’t on our toes. We spent more time in our end fighting to get pucks under control, and they were more aggressive than we were.”Cammalleri opened the scoring with 4 minutes 43 seconds left in the first period.The Devils then scored twice in a 2:07 stretch in the second. Henrique scored on a power play with just under nine minutes left in the period. Gionta made the score 3-0 with 6:50 remaining, just after a double-minor high-sticking penalty on Carolina’s Jeff Skinner had expired.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Malone put Carolina on the board with just under two and a half minutes left in the period.Josefson restored the Devils’ three-goal lead with 1:03 to go in the second, and Cammalleri capped the scoring with 7:13 left in the third.Kinkaid said he had seen many of the shots Carolina fired at him.“That’s a credit to our guys for keeping their shot to the outside,” Kinkaid said. “I had one little hiccup, but everything else we did out there was spot on.”Devils Coach John Hynes said he thought his team had played well without Travis Zajac, who left during the first period with an upper-body injury.“It was important for guys to be able to step up, and we played a bit short-handed,” Hynes said. “Obviously, Travis is a big loss, but I liked the way we responded.”The Devils went 1 for 4 on the power play, and Carolina was 0 for 2.Slap ShotsThe game drew Carolina’s second-smallest crowd of the season, with an announced attendance of 9,245. ... The Devils put together their first “Dads’ Trip” and had a total of 84 people in their traveling party to Carolina. ... Hurricanes forward Elias Lindholm ended his streak of five games with at least a point. ... The Devils’ Tuomo Ruutu and Jiri Tlusty were scratches and did not have a chance to play against their former team.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.