By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSDEC. 3, 2015
Chris Wagner and Matt Duchene scored 4 minutes 16 seconds apart in the second period on Thursday night to lead the Colorado Avalanche to a 2-1 win over the Rangers at Madison Square Garden.Semyon Varlamov stopped 24 shots as Colorado won consecutive games for only the second time this season. The Avalanche, who played the three teams in the New York area teams over a four-day stretch, were coming off a 2-1 win against the Devils on Tuesday night.Colorado’s longest winning streak this season was three games between Nov. 10 and Nov. 14.Oscar Lindberg scored and Antti Raanta stopped 16 shots as the Rangers lost for the fifth time in six games (1-4-1).The Rangers’ best chances were J. T. Miller’s jam shot attempt in the first that Varlamov stopped, and Chris Kreider’s attempt with six minutes left in the third. Kreider never got a shot off as the puck rolled off his stick blade.Advertisement“I think we need a little more traffic, get inside a little more, stuff like our only goal,” the Rangers’ Dan Giradi said. Lindberg’s “inside, a little rebound and goal. A little more of that and we would have been O.K.”AdvertisementCAPITALS 3, CANADIENS 2 T. J. Oshie’s second goal of the game broke a tie in the third period and lifted Washington to a victory at Montreal.Tom Wilson also scored for the Capitals, who won their sixth straight despite being outshot by 35-19.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Washington improved to 10-0-2 at Bell Centre since 2009, and goaltender Braden Holtby stopped 33 shots to improve his career record against Montreal to 7-0-2.Lars Eller and Brian Flynn scored for Montreal, which lost in regulation for the first time in seven games (5-1-1).RED WINGS 5, COYOTES 1 Niklas Kronwall and Gustav Nyquist scored 18 seconds apart in the first period, and the Detroit won at home against Arizona, earning at least one point in a ninth straight game.Justin Abdelkader, Danny DeKeyser and Darren Helm also scored for the Red Wings, who had played five straight overtime games before opening a 3-0 lead in the first period.SENATORS 4, BLACKHAWKS 3 Mike Hoffman scored his second goal of the game 30 seconds into overtime to give Ottawa a victory over visiting Chicago.AdvertisementBobby Ryan and Mark Stone also scored for the Senators, and Craig Anderson stopped 35 shots.Patrick Kane, who had a goal and two assists for Chicago, tied the franchise record for consecutive games with a point at 21, which Bobby Hull set in 1971-72.PANTHERS 2, PREDATORS 1 Roberto Luongo made 32 saves to lead Florida to a win at Nashville.Quinton Howden and Jonathan Huberdeau scored for Florida, which won its fourth straight despite being outshot by 33-16.WILD 1, MAPLE LEAFS 0 Devan Dubnyk made 28 saves for his fourth shutout of the season, Matt Dumba scored a power-play goal, and Minnesota won at home over Toronto.An Associated Press report in the N.H.L. roundup in some editions on Friday about the Rangers’ 2-1 loss to the Colorado Avalanche misspelled, in some copies, the surname of an Avalanche forward who scored in the second period. He is Matt Duchene, not Duchesne. The article also misstated, in some copies, the number of shots the Rangers recorded. It was 25, not 22.A version of this article appears in print on December 4, 2015, on Page B16 of the New York edition with the headline: Rangers Fall as Avalanche Score Twice in Second Period.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.