AdvertisementSupported byBy Simon Romero and Elisabeth MalkinRIO DE JANEIRO — No one epitomizes the ups and downs of Brazilian soccer quite like Ricardo Teixeira.As the leader of Brazil’s powerful soccer federation for more than 20 years, Mr. Teixeira helped land the 2014 World Cup. But as public rage erupted over spending for the tournament, demonstrators burned his effigy — replete with his signature jowls, sturdy frame and tailored suit — in street protests.Even after his resignation in 2012 amid claims of illicit enrichment, Mr. Teixeira, 68, kept a high profile. Shuttling among luxurious homes in Monaco, Miami and Rio de Janeiro, he became a symbol for the excesses of the Brazilian sports world and the failings of Brazil’s legal system in prosecuting corruption.But on Thursday, Mr. Teixeira came to represent something else entirely when he figured among 16 of the most powerful figures in Latin American soccer who were charged in the latest chapter of the United States’ broad investigation of corruption in international soccer. Joining Mr. Teixeira on the list, in a region that is a pillar of world soccer, were members of the elite of several countries who led or played a role in regional soccer federations, including Rafael Callejas, a former president of Honduras; Marco Polo del Nero, the president of Brazil’s soccer federation; and Héctor Trujillo, a magistrate on Guatemala’s highest court.Virtually every head or former head of soccer in Central America was charged, and the heads of Concacaf, the regional soccer governing body for North and Central America and the Caribbean, and Conmebol, the body that covers South America, were also charged and arrested in Zurich before a FIFA meeting.The indictment accuses the group of routinely accepting bribes and kickbacks that sometimes reached six figures, through the sale of lucrative marketing and media rights for an array of tournaments and matches.The charges, coupled with a round of indictments in the spring that first shook up world soccer, mean three successive presidents of both Concacaf and Conmebol have now been charged, puncturing soccer leadership’s air of invincibility in a region that has long struggled with corruption and impunity.“There have been various attempts to investigate the business practices of the Brazilian Football Federation, but the political favoritism and cultural capital of football in Brazil have always limited these attempts,” said Christopher Gaffney, a scholar at the University of Zurich who studies the politics of soccer. “While we may question the role of the United States as a global watchdog in many respects, this is one instance in which the extraordinary power of the Justice Department is working in ways that benefit the world at large.”A number of analysts were stunned at the audacity of some of the officials, who made arrangements for bribes at meetings in the United States and, in some cases, even after the latest scandal first broke in May, despite worry about investigators.“Nothing should be said over the telephone. Nothing! ... Nothing! Nothing!” the indictment quotes Brayan Jiménez, the president of the Guatemala soccer federation, as saying at a meeting in Chicago in July to negotiate an alleged bribe payment.The indictment sent shock waves through soccer heavyweights like Brazil and Argentina as well as smaller countries like Guatemala and Costa Rica. Mr. Callejas, the president of Honduras from 1990 to 1994 and the president of the Honduran football federation for 13 years until this past August, was quick to defend Alfredo Hawit, the current head of the Honduras federation and Concacaf president, after his arrest in Zurich, and early in the day Mr. Callejas seemed unaware that the investigation was closing in on him, too.Later, when prosecutors announced that Mr. Callejas had been charged, he appeared ashen-faced as he addressed local reporters. “I wasn’t expecting this,” he said, admitting it was “a complex, difficult situation.”Mr. Callejas said he was innocent and added, “I did not take one single dollar or lempira from” the Honduran football federation.In May, shortly after the first arrests and newly installed as the president of Concacaf, Mr. Hawit declared his innocence to the Honduran newspaper Diez and denied he was under investigation.Mr. Hawit was named president of Concacaf in May to replace Jeffrey Webb, who was arrested when the scandal broke in May. Mr. Hawit had spent many years as the secretary of the Honduran federation and then took it over from Mr. Callejas on Aug. 1. He was on the law faculty of the National Autonomous University of Honduras, the country’s main university.The indictment’s accusations against Mr. Callejas and Mr. Hawit were repeated in variations against the region’s federation bosses. According to prosecutors, a sports marketing company, Media World, paid a bribe of $600,000 in December 2012 for the rights to Honduran qualifier matches in advance of the 2022 World Cup. The pair was also accused of taking bribes for the rights to 2014 and 2018 World Cup qualifier matches.In a situation similar to that of Mr. Hawit, Mr. del Nero, the president of the Brazilian football federation, had recently replaced José María Marin, the octogenarian soccer grandee who led the organization until April. Mr. Marin was arrested in May in Zurich in the first sweep and was extradited to the United States.Mr. del Nero returned to Brazil at the time of the arrests. Last week, he resigned from FIFA’s executive committee and was replaced by Fernando Sarney, a scion of the Sarney political dynasty from northeast Brazil.The indictment describes a meeting in Miami in April 2014 when José Hawilla, a Brazilian sports marketing executive, asked Mr. Marin if he needed to keep paying bribes to Mr. Teixeira. “It’s about time to — to have it coming our way. True or not,” Mr. Marin replied. Mr. Hawilla, who is cooperating with the investigation, agreed that it was.The indictment also accuses Mr. Teixeira of soliciting and receiving millions of dollars in bribes from 1990 to 2009 in connection to the media rights for the Copa do Brasil tournament.Efforts to reach Mr. Teixeira, who recently sold two luxurious homes in South Florida, were unsuccessful. Brazil’s football federation said in a statement Thursday night that Mr. del Nero had requested a leave of absence to defend himself. It also said that he believed he would prove his innocence.During his leave, Marcus Antônio Vicente, the federation’s vice president, will take his place.In neighboring Argentina, there are now five defendants in the FIFA case. In addition to the sports marketing executives Alejandro Burzaco, and Hugo and Mario Jinkis, the investigation now involves former Argentine officials at Conmebol.José Luis Meiszner has been an influential figure in Argentine soccer. He was president for three decades of Quilmes, a soccer team in Buenos Aires that named its stadium for him. After leaving the presidency in 2011, he became the secretary general of Conmebol. But Mr. Meiszner announced his resignation last week, according to local news media reports, explaining that he wished to give the new federation president freedom to fill the post.Mr. Meiszner was being investigated this year by Argentine authorities over his personal finances. He was a close aide to Julio Grondona, a strongman of the region’s soccer politics who led the Argentine federation for three decades before his death last year.The indictment of Mr. Meiszner and Eduardo Deluca, a former representative to Conmebol, came before the tectonic plates of Argentina’s soccer politics seemed set to shift.As the news broke, soccer directors were preparing to vote for Mr. Grondona’s successor. Of the two candidates, Luis Segura, an interim president, has been viewed as a fusty continuity of Mr. Grondona’s rule. Marcelo Tinelli, a popular TV host, is proposing a revitalization of Argentine soccer, which is plagued by violence and corruption. Tapping into anger over the corruption scandal, Mr. Tinelli was retweeting news of the arrests Thursday.“They are reaching people who we thought were untouchable,” Sebastián Fest, a sports columnist at La Nación newspaper, said of the indictments against Mr. Meiszner and Mr. Deluca. “The efficiency of the investigation is striking. Its scope will undoubtedly grow.”Mr. Fest said the investigation was now touching the heart of Argentine soccer politics, pointing to the trusted relationships that Mr. Meiszner and Mr. Deluca had with Mr. Grondona, who was continually shrouded in corruption accusations but never convicted of a crime. “These were essential people to Grondona,” he said. “They were his ambassadors at Conmebol.”The investigation implicated smaller countries, too, nearly all of the ones in Central America.Mr. Jiménez and Mr. Trujillo, general secretary of the Guatemalan football federation, as far back as 2010 accepted a six-figure bribe for the rights to Guatemala 2018 World Cup qualifier matches, according to the indictment. The money was allegedly shared with a former Guatemala federation president, Rafael Salguero, who was on the FIFA executive committee. In 2014, a similar arrangement was made for Guatemala’s 2022 qualifiers.Mr. Trujillo, who has been executive secretary of the federation since 2009, said after the 2013 investigation into the former Concacaf president Jack Warner: “It is really devastating what we have heard and it cannot remain like this. It’s a scandalous fraud, a theft committed against Concacaf and FIFA.”But behind the scenes, the indictment said, Mr. Trujillo and Mr. Jiménez met with Fabio Tordin of Media World in Chicago, where Mr. Jiménez gave his exhortation about not using the telephone.On Sept. 2, 2015, Mr. Tordin met with Mr. Salguero in Miami to discuss bribes for another scheme. Mr. Salguero said that he, along with Ariel Alvarado of the Panamanian Federation and Mr. Hawit, could all be in trouble because of the investigation.Mr. Alvarado, who was president of the Panamanian Football Federation between 2000 and 2011 and a well-known lawyer, served on the Concacaf executive committee for several years before resigning in 2013.Telephone calls to him were not answered Thursday.At the Miami meeting, Mr. Salguero grew anxious.“The three of us are in the same” mess, he said, according to the indictment, though a stronger word than mess was used.Simon Romero reported from Rio de Janeiro, and Elisabeth Malkin from Mexico City. Reporting was contributed by Vinod Sreeharsha from Rio de Janeiro, Paulina Villegas from Mexico City, and Jonathan Gilbert and Sol Lauria from Buenos Aires.Advertisement