AdvertisementSupported byN.F.L. RoundupBy The Associated PressAaron Rodgers threw a 61-yard touchdown pass to tight end Richard Rodgers with no time left to give the Green Bay Packers a 27-23 victory over the Detroit Lions on Thursday night.The Packers got the untimed down after Detroit defensive end Devin Taylor was called for grabbing Aaron Rodgers’s facemask on a tackle on what would have been the last play.The Packers (8-4) had lost four of five. The Lions (4-8), who had won three straight, blew a chance to sweep the season series for the first time since 1991.“Unfortunately, this counts as one win,” Packers Coach Mike McCarthy said. “It feels like more.”Matthew Stafford connected with Calvin Johnson on his second touchdown pass of the first quarter to help Detroit build a 20-point lead that it could not keep.Aaron Rodgers scored on a 17-yard run with three minutes four seconds left, pulling the Packers within 2 points.Stafford connected with T J Jones to convert a third-and-12 from the Detroit 18 after Green Bay called its final timeout with 2:54 to go. The Lions needed one more first down to seal the victory, but Green Bay forced them to punt and got the ball back on the 21 with 23 seconds left.Following two incompletions, including one in which Detroit appeared to get away with pass interference, Aaron Rodgers threw a pass to James Jones and the ball was lateraled twice, leaving the quarterback with the ball and no one behind him to pitch to keep the play alive.But Taylor grabbed Aaron Rodgers’s facemask, giving the Packers another play.Aaron Rodgers scrambled long enough to give his receivers time to sprint to the end zone and got to the outside. He threw the ball, and Richard Rodgers found a way to get to it in front of a slew of players from both teams and leapt for the catch.“I knew I was going to have to buy some time to allow them to get into the end zone,” Aaron Rodgers said. “I knew once I got outside the right that I was going to be able to set up and throw.”Aaron Rodgers finished 24 of 36 for 289 yards with two touchdowns.Stafford was 23 of 35 for 220 yards and two scores.“Tough one to lose,” Lions Coach Jim Caldwell said. “Those are the ones that eat at you. The guys are upset because they gave so much, but we needed one more play. It is never over in this league.”COLDPLAY AT SUPER BOWL The Super Bowl halftime show is all about star power, with multiple top-tier pop acts joining forces in recent years for maximum wattage. Among the performers scheduled for Super Bowl 50: the British rock band Coldplay, whose new album, “A Head Full of Dreams,” has the kind of all-star guests that the big stage commands.The group’s appearance was announced during halftime of the Packers-Lions game. The news was first reported by The Wall Street Journal.Super Bowl 50 will be played Feb. 7 at Levi’s Stadium in Santa Clara, Calif., and broadcast by CBS.Coldplay follows in the footsteps of Katy Perry, who performed with Missy Elliott and Lenny Kravitz in 2015, and Bruno Mars, who was joined by the Red Hot Chili Peppers the previous year. Perry’s performance was the most-watched Super Bowl halftime show ever, drawing 118.5 million viewers.Led by Chris Martin and known for piano-based hits like “Clocks” and “Yellow,” Coldplay will release “A Head Full of Dreams,” its seventh studio album, on Friday. The album features vocals by Beyoncé (who performed at the Super Bowl in 2013) and Gwyneth Paltrow, Martin’s ex-wife. Should they not be available for cameos, there is always President Obama, whose emotional rendition of the hymn “Amazing Grace” is sampled on the album. JOE COSCARELLIFOLES TO START FOR RAMS Case Keenum has not been cleared to play as he recovers from a concussion, and the St. Louis Rams will start Nick Foles at quarterback for the second straight week.Coach Jeff Fisher said that if Keenum were cleared Friday, he would be the backup against the N.F.C. West-leading Arizona Cardinals on Sunday.Foles threw three interceptions — one returned for a touchdown — in a loss at Cincinnati last week.The back of Keenum’s helmet struck the turf hard as he was knocked down near the end of a loss at Baltimore two weeks ago, but he was in the game for two more plays. He was later found to have a concussion. (AP)REVIS UNLIKELY TO PLAY Jets cornerback Darrelle Revis sat out practice again, and it appears unlikely that he will play Sunday against the Giants. Revis sustained a concussion at Houston on Nov. 22 and has not practiced, played or even attended meetings since. (AP)Advertisement