AdvertisementSupported byBy Harvey AratonCHARLOTTE, N.C. — More than an hour after Stephen Curry had turned another road arena into a cozy backyard with the friendliest of rims, he mingled with those who had come hoping for or expecting no less. And still he had astonished them with a 28-point third quarter, including an exhilarating flurry of long-range exactitude, 19 points over 3 minutes 42 seconds that turned an 8-point lead into a 21-point blowout.He had blitzed the buzz out of the Charlotte Hornets with 40 points over all in a shade over 30 minutes played — 40 points on 18 shots from the field, 14 made, for the Golden State Warriors, who have not lost a game since June of last season.His father, Dell, had begun Wednesday night as the family’s designated honoree. Now he was another admiring spectator, standing courtside in a pinstripe suit with a black backpack hitched to it as his internationally famous son moved about the lower stands, navigating the dozens of people who had known him since his pint-size days, when Dell was the Curry with the Midas touch.These were not anonymous fans stepping up for an autograph, photo or hug as much as they were catching Curry up — “Steph, this is my granddaughter” — on more conventional lives that had influenced or touched him on the way up.“I can tell this brings some normalcy back to his life, especially after the run they had last year and all the accolades,” Dell Curry said. “He’s a guy that always wants to be as normal as possible and getting back to his roots — his family, his high school, his college — kind of puts things back in perspective, as opposed to being on that stage.”Dell Curry was asked if he might get his son out of the building before midnight. He checked his watch — quarter to 11 — and shook his head.“I’m actually concerned about the workers,” he said.Some of them, holdovers from the elder Curry’s playing days in another arena a short ride from downtown, were part of the extended family. No chance they would abort this Curry-flavored reunion and pitch-perfect homecoming.Stephen Curry returned to Charlotte as the leader of the N.B.A.’s defending champions and the reigning most valuable player. He was set to leave town with those 40 points, a 116-99 victory and a league-mocking 20-0 record.“A cool atmosphere to be playing in,” he called his annual visit to Time Warner Cable Arena, coordinated with the halftime ceremony to honor his father, the first player taken by the Charlotte franchise in the 1988 expansion draft, its career leading scorer and television analyst.Curry and the Warriors had flown in from Salt Lake City on Tuesday afternoon. They held a short practice called by their interim coach, Luke Walton, substituting indefinitely for the ailing Steve Kerr. Curry showered and dressed; pulled a teammate, Jason Thompson, from the team’s downtown hotel; and then connected with his parents, Dell and Sonya, and off they went to watch Davidson College play at the University of North Carolina at Charlotte.The college game had been scheduled for Wednesday night, but the U.N.C.-Charlotte 49ers’ coach, Mark Price, a former N.B.A. All-Star guard and a pretty fair 3-point shooter himself, agreed to move it up a day to avoid any Curry-related conflicts.Upon entering the gym, Stephen Curry hustled over to Bob McKillop, on the Davidson bench, as the teams warmed up. McKillop coached him at Davidson — about 20 miles north of the city on Interstate 77 — for three years, taking a chance on a baby-face, 160-pound teenager out of Charlotte Christian when none of the big-timers from the state’s Atlantic Coast Conference titans would give him a shot.McKillop, a native of Queens, is slender, 65 years old, gray and not especially given to the hyperbole of his more famous peers. But the day before Curry came home, McKillop said in an interview, “For people around here, it’s feeling like an iconic event, like someone really important coming to New York to speak at the U.N.”With one exception, McKillop said: Curry would not expect to be wined and dined at the fanciest restaurant in town.He cited Curry’s last visit home, in mid-September, when he brought the championship trophy — not the M.V.P. hardware — to share with the city. In preparation for Curry’s visit to Davidson — a private liberal arts college with an enrollment of about 1,800 students and a scenic campus seemingly capable of accommodating a few thousand more — McKillop asked Curry: “What would you like us to do — some kind of ceremony? Get the fire trucks out and have a little parade down Main Street?”Curry told him he just wanted to speak with the students and then get something to eat at the college’s Vail Commons.“The Commons, you sure?” McKillop said.“Where else?” Curry said.Curry watched Davidson obliterate the 49ers on Tuesday night, with Jack Gibbs, a Wildcats guard, scoring 41 points. Gibbs and his backcourt partner, Brian Sullivan, combined for 12 3-point shots with some magic dust from, as McKillop would say, “Baryshnikov in the stands.”This is a guy who, a decade ago, could not get a sniff from the state’s celebrity coaches, North Carolina’s Roy Williams and Duke’s Mike Krzyzewski. Now he is the industry standard for excellence and entertainment. How has this happened?Forget those who would not offer Curry a scholarship, said Shonn Brown, who coached him at Charlotte Christian. He would never forget the Division I program he once called to ask if Curry might merely walk on.“They said no way,” Brown said, cackling and declining to divulge the name. “If we created a story on that now, they’d look like complete idiots.”In his office at the school’s campus, spread across 60 wooded acres about 15 minutes from downtown Charlotte, Brown was facing a signed photo of Curry with the former N.B.A. commissioner David Stern on draft night in 2009.“Thanks for everything,” read the inscription.“It’s real simple,” Brown said. “Stephen didn’t pass the eye test. We would tell these coaches that he could shoot the ball as well as anyone on their team. But when you looked at him and saw a kid who looked like he was 13, very frail, they didn’t want to take a chance.“Then senior year, we were in a tournament, the Chick-fil-A Classic, played a team in the final with Jodie Meeks and Al-Farouq Aminu. Nobody gave us a shot, and we won. A lot of coaches in the gym were like, unbelievable, this kid can change speeds, slow to fast, fast to slow. But he’d already committed to Davidson.”Brown smiled, contentedly. He believed his guy had influenced the rules of recruiting.“More coaches now, because of what happened with Stephen, I think are saying, he may not pass the eye test, but what can he do skillwise?” he said. “They’re thinking, I can give him the muscle, but the intangibles of seeing the play happen before it actually does, maybe I can expand on that but I can’t give him the foundation.”Charlotte Christian, as always, was one of the stops on the Curry itinerary; he visited with Brown on Wednesday morning before the Warriors’ game-day shootaround, watched by his father, sitting alongside McKillop. The ensuing media availability turned partly into an opportunity for local reporters to grill Curry on his love of the N.F.L.’s Carolina Panthers, who also happen to be undefeated.Curry, who took a turn on what the Panthers call their “Keep Pounding” drum when he attended a home game in September, has playfully predicted the Warriors will lose before the Panthers do — but perhaps not until just before the Super Bowl on Feb. 7.Seriously, he said, the notion of being undefeated a quarter into the N.B.A.’s regular season “doesn’t even sound right, to be honest.”The streak, next on the line on Saturday in Toronto, has made the Warriors that much more a nationwide phenomenon and the 27-going-on-17-looking Curry all the N.B.A. rage, supplanting the seemingly ancient (or soon-to-be-31) LeBron James.Raymond Ridder, the Warriors’ vice president for public relations, said he noticed the transcendence occurring late last season. With the N.B.A. title won, he said, Currymania now meets them everywhere.“His pregame workouts are becoming like batting practice used to be for Reggie Jackson and Mark McGwire,” Ridder said. “We had 2,000 people in the stands in Denver last week an hour and a half before the game.”On Wednesday evening, a few minutes before 5, a stream of Curry watchers filled nine rows in the lower stands, except they were part of an organized event for Davidson alumni, decked out in red or black, waiting for Curry to begin his pregame routine by dribbling two balls.The event was organized by Lauren Biggers, who handles Davidson’s off-campus alumni activities. When Curry was a freshman, she was the college’s assistant sports information director. They became friends. In her office, on the wall, is a slightly blurred photo of Curry taken in 2012 when he returned during the N.B.A. lockout to take courses in pursuit of his degree (he remains a few credits short).Curry signed the photo: “To Lisa” — a joke, Biggers said. He calls her Lisa because she calls him Stephen, with a long e in the first syllable, mimicking the interview requests reporters would make “back in the days when he was a nobody.”Cheers rang out when Curry appeared after a half-hour wait. Biggers stood nearby in her Warriors’ Curry jersey, hoping he would wave. Nearby, C. T. Talevi, 24, wearing a black Davidson No. 30 jersey with Curry on the back, said: “I was a freshman when he would’ve been a senior. This will be my first time seeing him live.”Curry did not force the issue early on, deferring to Klay Thompson, biding his time as the Hornets’ Kemba Walker defended aggressively on the perimeter — and maybe until Brown, delayed by his children’s school concert at Charlotte Christian, was in the building. But guarding Curry is like trying to subdue a Slinky with appendages and a brain. After a while, his nonchalant fluidity, present even in his body language during formal interviews, became a torrent of aggression. When his father’s halftime fete — Stephen was out there with the family — was over, he seemed to say, “My turn now.”The 19-point explosion included four 3-pointers in 1:50 — all from 25 to 30 feet out, Curry’s range making the average 3-pointer look like a midrange jumper. It was breathtaking to watch — for Dell Curry and family, for the Davidson alumni and for everyone else in the arena, rooting preference notwithstanding.Even Walton sounded in awe of his star. “I’m not so certain this was a road game for him,” he said.The postgame scene confirmed it was not.Still, Curry seemed less than amazed. His 40 points were one short of what Davidson’s Gibbs had scored on Tuesday.“He got me by 1,” Curry said. “Something to work for.”Advertisement