AdvertisementSupported byBy Sam BordenZURICH — Hours after the police arrested two more high-ranking FIFA officials on corruption charges here, the other leaders of world soccer’s governing body agreed on Thursday to a wide array of governance reforms while also discussing the possibility of expanding the World Cup field to 40 teams from its current 32.The meeting on Thursday morning of FIFA’s executive committee took place without Alfredo Hawit and Juan Ángel Napout, two vice presidents taken into custody by the Swiss police in an early-morning raid at the hotel Baur au Lac. The mood, according to several officials at the meeting, was muted by the arrests, but the agenda went on as planned, and committee members voted unanimously to send a package of suggested reforms to the FIFA Congress in February.The proposed reforms include term limits for top officials of three four-year mandates; a defined division of powers between FIFA’s day-to-day operational division and its strategic leaders; and increased gender diversity rules to promote women in the game, including a requirement that each of FIFA’s confederations elect at least one woman to the organization’s governing board. Despite criticism by governance experts, the reforms did not include adding independent members to a new executive committee, although there will be independent members on selected advisory committees.More than 40 defendants have been charged by the United States Justice Department in the continuing corruption case focused on international soccer. In all, the charges encompass 24 nationalities, most in North, Central and South America.“FIFA does not control justice,” Issa Hayatou, the acting president of FIFA, said at a news conference. “They are conducting their investigations and we are undertaking our reforms.”He added, “From our point of view, the events that have taken place this morning underscore the necessity to establish a complete program of reforms.”According to documents produced by FIFA before the meeting, the expanded World Cup proposal was initially expected to be rolled into the reform package. That changed, however, as the executive committee reversed course, perhaps mindful of the strange juxtaposition that would exist if it introduced comprehensive reforms that reduced its unilateral power at the same time it made a massive change to FIFA’s most popular event.Instead, the proposal to expand the World Cup will be examined further, FIFA said.Such an increase would have ramifications on virtually every level of world soccer, further highlighting the absurdity of trying to slip it in to a slew of unrelated proposals. Research on the issue will cover everything from the mechanics of adding eight more teams to a tournament that usually stretches more than a month to how holders of television rights will adapt to greater demands for coverage.How that decision is handled will reflect on the efficacy of the proposed reforms as FIFA attempts to move away from a long-established culture of back-room negotiations and patronage. Markus Kattner, the organization’s acting secretary general, said FIFA was in the middle of what it sees as a three-part transformation process.Mr. Kattner, using PowerPoint slides, explained that FIFA’s task is to “manage the challenges” from now until February, when a special election will be held to replace Sepp Blatter, the current president who is suspended amid an ethics investigation. From then until next December, the organization must “restore credibility” with the public. And from December 2016 until December 2018, FIFA will “recover and consolidate,” Mr. Kattner said, as it stages a World Cup in Russia.It is, Mr. Kattner acknowledged, an ambitious plan, particularly given the current climate. Two members of the executive committee are suspended (Mr. Blatter and Michel Platini), and two more are now contesting their extradition to the United States. FIFA also is expected to report a loss of about $100 million this year — some of it legal fees and other costs related to dealing with multiple corruption investigations — and the public image of the organization is foundering.Nonetheless, Mr. Kattner said, it is important to look forward.“Our goal,” he said, “is to be seen as a modern and trusted professional sports organization.”Advertisement