AdvertisementSupported byBy Rebecca R. Ruiz, Matt Apuzzo, Sam Borden and William K. RashbaumWASHINGTON — The investigation into corruption and bribery in soccer that in May rocked FIFA, the sport’s multibillion-dollar governing body, metastasized on Thursday when United States officials unsealed a new indictment that alleged an even more extensive network of criminal behavior across dozens of countries and that involved some of the most powerful people in international soccer.Sixteen new defendants were identified, with charges including wire fraud, money laundering and racketeering, aimed almost entirely at individuals from Central and South America. Among them were a former president of Honduras, a judge on the Constitutional Court of Guatemala and the current and former presidents of Brazil’s national soccer federation.Some defendants, federal officials said, participated in bribes involving broadcasting rights for major soccer matches. Others had obstructed justice by trying to hide criminal actions after finding out that they were under investigation.“This case has been nothing short of one of the most complex, worldwide financial investigations ever conducted,” said Richard Weber, the chief of the criminal investigation unit of the Internal Revenue Service, who added that the investigation had traced funds through at least 40 countries. “We have identified hundreds of millions of dollars, proceeds that went through bank accounts throughout the world.”About 14 hours before the indictment was unsealed, Swiss authorities conducted predawn arrests in the broad investigation, led by United States officials — notably the United States attorney’s office for the Eastern District of New York, the New York field office of the F.B.I. and the I.R.S. By day’s end, a huge case that has upended FIFA had doubled in size.The arrests took place at the same luxury hotel where other FIFA officials were arrested in May. The Swiss police entered the hotel, the Baur au Lac, through a side door at 6 a.m. local time. A hotel manager told visitors in the lobby that they had to leave the property because of “an extreme situation.”The 16 new defendants charged were: Alfredo Hawit; Ariel Alvarado; Rafael Callejas; Brayan Jiménez; Rafael Salguero; Héctor Trujillo; Reynaldo Vasquez; Juan Ángel Napout; Manuel Burga; Carlos Chávez; Luís Chiriboga; Marco Polo del Nero; Eduardo Deluca; José Luis Meiszner; Romer Osuna; and Ricardo Teixeira.Mr. Callejas is the former president of Honduras. Mr. Trujillo is the judge. Mr. del Nero and Mr. Teixeira are the current and former presidents of Brazil’s federation.Mr. Hawit is the president of Concacaf, the regional confederation that includes North and Central America and the Caribbean. Mr. Napout is the president of Conmebol, the South American confederation. Both are FIFA vice presidents and members of the organization’s governing executive committee.Taken together with the charges unsealed last spring, the United States has now taken criminal action against the three successive presidents of both Concacaf and Conmebol, a signal of the systemic nature of the allegations that span decades. All six of those men were at various times also among FIFA’s top leadership.Hours before the Justice Department disclosed that he, too, was indicted, Mr. Callejas, the president of Honduras in the early 1990s and a former general secretary of the nation’s soccer federation, denied he was implicated and voiced regret that Mr. Hawit was implicated in the case.More than 40 defendants have been charged by the United States Justice Department in the continuing corruption case focused on international soccer. In all, the charges encompass 24 nationalities, most in North, Central and South America.When a local news reporter asked about social media speculation that he could face charges, Mr. Callejas said: “Why me? I was never a member of Concacaf or FIFA. People are wondering because they want to wonder. There are some who have evil in their soul, but there is no reason to be associated with these issues. Here, everyone presumes something.”In a news conference on Thursday afternoon, Attorney General Loretta E. Lynch described what federal officials believe is evidence of corruption. “Consistent with the intergenerational nature of the corruption schemes, they involve payments relating to tournaments that have already been played, as well as matches scheduled into the next decade,” she said.Thursday’s charges, coming as FIFA’s leaders gathered in Zurich, served as a high-profile reminder that despite the organization’s promises of reform, soccer’s top officials remain under intense legal scrutiny by the investigation, which involves several government agencies.“When criminals bring their corrupt activity to our shores and our banks, they will play by our rules,” said Diego G. Rodriguez of the F.B.I.’s New York field office.FIFA released a statement that said it would “continue to cooperate fully with the U.S. investigation as permitted by Swiss law, as well as with the investigation being led by the Swiss Office of the Attorney General.”Swiss authorities said on Thursday morning that they had taken two FIFA officials, Mr. Hawit and Mr. Napout, into custody and that they were accused of accepting millions of dollars in bribes related to the sale of marketing rights for World Cup qualifying matches and soccer tournaments in Latin America. Switzerland’s Federal Office of Justice said Mr. Hawit and Mr. Napout were contesting their possible extradition to the United States. Switzerland will ask the United States to submit formal extradition requests; the Americans have 40 days to complete those requests.The Justice Department unsealed a 236-page indictment on Thursday that described charges against some of the most powerful leaders of international soccer.In May, United States officials announced charges against 18 people of 12 nationalities. They described two decades of rampant corruption in which officials steered marketing and broadcast contracts in exchange for bribes — paid out through convoluted financial deals and briefcases full of cash. Sepp Blatter, FIFA’s president, quickly announced plans to resign.The Justice Department also announced on Thursday the guilty pleas of eight defendants, three of whom had been publicly charged in May: Jeffrey Webb, former president of Concacaf; and Alejandro Burzaco and José Margulies, sports marketing executives from South America.United States authorities have long predicted more charges in the case, but the number of people involved was not expected.The arrests came about three hours before members of FIFA’s executive committee were to begin the second part of their two-day meeting to discuss governance reforms.On Wednesday night, a group of about 40 to 50 soccer officials — including the executive committee members and their spouses or companions, as well as many top FIFA administrators such as Markus Kattner, the acting secretary general, and Marco Villiger, the organization’s chief lawyer — attended a lavish dinner at Sonnenberg, an upscale restaurant known for its view of the city. A wide array of choices were available — the restaurant is known for its meat dishes — and afterward a number of officials went to the bar at the Baur au Lac for the customary nightcap.The hotel, which sits along the banks of Lake Zurich, gained notoriety after it was the site of the arrests in May but has had a long relationship with FIFA. In the aftermath of the May arrests, FIFA approached soccer officials who were coming to Zurich for business trips in subsequent months and offered the choice of booking accommodation at another hotel in the city (provided, of course, the rates were not substantially higher than the negotiated package rates FIFA receives at the Baur au Lac, where rooms for the public start at $650).A few officials accepted the offer, choosing to stay at other hotels, like the Park Hyatt, during meetings in July and September. For the most part, however, tradition ruled and, despite its history, the Baur au Lac was full with soccer leaders yet again this week.As one official, speaking in the lobby of the hotel on Wednesday, said, “Things change slowly around here.”Members of the executive committee were meeting in Zurich to approve a set of reform measures. The group is under pressure not just from investigators but also from sponsors. Five World Cup sponsors, including Adidas, McDonald’s and Coca-Cola, signed a letter this week urging FIFA to ensure independent oversight of the reforms.A new election to select a replacement for Mr. Blatter is set for February. He has been under suspension, along with several other top officials, since Switzerland announced in late September that he was the focus of a separate criminal inquiry. Several other countries, including Brazil and Trinidad and Tobago, have opened investigations in response to the United States allegations revealed last spring.The arrests in May were met around the world with a mixture of praise and derision. Many soccer fans were thrilled that American law enforcement officials had set their sights on FIFA, which had been dogged by corruption allegations for years but faced few consequences. Mr. Blatter, however, said the charges were retribution for the United States’ not being chosen to host the 2022 World Cup.More broadly, the case has raised questions about how the American government interprets its own authority to prosecute people for crimes committed overseas. To do so, the law requires some link between the crime and the United States. In the FIFA case, the government has said American banks were used in the scheme.The latest indictment brings the number of people and entities that have been charged to at least 40. The ranks of soccer officials who have not been implicated are thinning, though still more charges are expected.“Our work is not done,” said Robert Capers, the United States attorney for the Eastern District of New York.Rebecca R. Ruiz and Matt Apuzzo reported from Washington, Sam Borden from Zurich and William K. Rashbaum from New York. Michael S. Schmidt contributed reporting from Washington and Calum MacKenzie from Zurich.videoAdvertisement