By RAPHAEL MINDERDEC. 3, 2015
MADRID —  Real Madrid keeps running into difficulties, as much off the field as on.First came the fax problems that scuttled the club’s signing of a star goalkeeper from Manchester United. And now the team could be disqualified from the Copa del Rey because of another administrative gaffe: It fielded an ineligible Russian player in its victory over lowly Cádiz on Wednesday night.The player, Denis Cheryshev, made an unexpected but notable appearance, scoring the opening goal in Real’s 3-1 victory. However, Cheryshev, 24, was supposed to be serving a suspension after receiving three yellow cards during the same competition last season, when he was playing for Villarreal.On Thursday, Cádiz lodged a formal complaint with the Spanish soccer federation about Cheryshev’s appearance in the game. While Real is likely to appeal any decision to exclude it from the competition, the federation removed another club, Osasuna, earlier this season for fielding a suspended player.After the match, Real’s management insisted it had not known that Cheryshev was ineligible. Emilio Butragueño, a former player who is now a director of the club, said Cheryshev had not known about his suspension, nor did the federation or Villarreal tell Real Madrid about it. He said that Cheryshev was replaced during the game once the team found out about his suspension, in order “to show our good faith.” Butragueño added, “This week has not been easy, and neither has this night.”AdvertisementIndeed, Real and its coach, Rafael Benítez, have recently come under pressure after falling behind in the Spanish league and being crushed at home by Barcelona, 4-0, in the recent Clásico. During that match, a large section of the Real fans called for the resignation of the club’s president, Florentino Pérez, who then held a news conference in which he vowed to continue at the helm and to keep Benítez as coach.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.At the start of the season, the transfer of the Spanish goalkeeper David de Gea from Manchester United to Real Madrid collapsed in bizarre fashion, with the two clubs trading accusations of having failed to fax documents on time. Real sent de Gea’s registration to the Spanish league almost a half-hour after the official transfer deadline.AdvertisementWriting on Thursday in Marca, Spain’s largest sports newspaper, the columnist Orfeo Suárez said Real Madrid was starting to look like “the club of the Marx Brothers,” reflecting problems in its management structure, including the lack of a sporting director. The blunder in the Cádiz game, he argued, was “unthinkable for a club with such means and budget — over 500 million euros — and will have serious consequences for Madrid in sporting, economic and institutional terms, as well as image.”Pérez is also facing a challenge in court after a shareholder complaint about how he changed the rules for candidates for the club’s presidency. Pérez, 68, has been president of the club since 2009, after a spell in charge from 2000 to early 2006. In 2013, Pérez, who also runs one of Spain’s largest construction companies, pushed through an amendment to the club statutes that toughened the criteria for becoming president, raising the financial guarantees that candidates must provide as well as doubling the amount of time that candidates must already have been club members before seeking election.A judge is expected to rule on the case in the coming weeks, but the public prosecution sided last week with Pérez, saying that the new rules were not discriminatory. Pérez said at the news conference that he would appeal any ruling against the rules, arguing that they were designed to protect the club against a takeover by a foreign tycoon with no connection to Madrid.A version of this article appears in print on December 4, 2015, on Page B17 of the New York edition with the headline: Sports Briefing | Soccer; Real Madrid Could Be Out.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.