By THE NEW YORK TIMESDEC. 3, 2015
More soccer officials have been charged by United States authorities with racketeering, wire fraud, money laundering and other offenses. At least two top FIFA officials were arrested early Thursday morning in Zurich, part of the latest sweep in an investigation into corruption in world soccer. Charges for those two officials and possibly 10 others are expected to be unsealed on Thursday.Among those newly charged are Alfredo Hawit, president of the confederation for North and Central America and the Caribbean, and Juan Ángel Napout, president of the South American confederation.The CaseThe Department of Justice, the United States Attorney’s office for the Eastern District of New York, the Internal Revenue Service and other government agencies have described what they believe is systemic corruption that reached the highest levels of international soccer. Law enforcement officials say the corruption went on for decades.Among the many charges, United States officials say sports-marketing executives from the United States and South America paid more than $150 million in bribes and kickbacks in exchange for media deals associated with major soccer tournaments.AdvertisementFirst Sweep, in MayFIFA was plunged into crisis when, just before Sepp Blatter’s re-election as president in May, several top FIFA officials and a group of marketing executives were arrested in Zurich on corruption charges brought by the United States. Days later, Mr. Blatter announced that he would relinquish his post and called for a special election to choose his successor.Loretta E. Lynch, the United States attorney general, announced new indictments of officials from FIFA, soccer’s world governing body.United States officials announced charges against 18 people of 12 nationalities — 14 who were arrested or turned themselves in, and 4 others who had secretly pleaded guilty earlier. Investigators described two decades of corruption in which officials rigged World Cup bids and steered marketing and broadcast contracts in exchange for bribes — paid out through convoluted financial deals or sometimes just briefcases full of cash.The LatestHigh-ranking FIFA officials were arrested on Thursday. Individuals from South and Central America were expected to bear the brunt of this round of charges. The Department of Justice scheduled a news conference for 1:30 p.m. in Washington.AdvertisementWhat’s NextMore indictments are certainly possible. The United States is expected to begin extradition proceedings against the individuals who were arrested on Thursday, but it could take months. The officials arrested in Zurich in May remain in Swiss jails as they contest extradition.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.