By GARY SANTANIELLODEC. 3, 2015
Yale’s Ingalls Rink, designed by Eero Saarinen and opened in 1958, and Quinnipiac’s TD Bank Sports Center, a $52 million multisport facility not yet 10 years old, are separated by eight miles of Whitney Avenue, which connects New Haven and adjacent Hamden to the north.The histories of the two universities’ hockey programs are even more stark, but they enter their first meeting of the season Friday as one of the most compelling rivalries in college hockey, even though the teams never met before 2005.Quinnipiac, ranked No. 3 in the USCHO.com poll, is one of Division I’s two unbeaten teams, at 13-0-2. No. 10 Yale is 5-2-2 after a loss to top-ranked Providence, the other unbeaten, on Saturday.As has become the custom at either rink, the game has been sold out for weeks. It will be televised nationally on the American Sports Network.AdvertisementPlayers hardly need the schedule to tell them when the game approaches.“You kind of know the week you’re playing Yale,” Quinnipiac forward Sam Anas said. “One year one of my professors wore our hockey jersey to class.”AdvertisementYale Athletic Director Tom Beckett added, “Everyone circles these games on their calendars, and their winter schedules are dictated by these matchups.”The only comparable college hockey rivalry, featuring teams from the same conference in such proximity, is Boston College versus Boston University of Hockey East. Separated by three miles, those two teams have played 256 times since 1918, and each has won five national titles.Connecticut’s rivalry has a less extensive history.Yale hosted college hockey’s first game in 1896. Until 1951, Quinnipiac was a business college in New Haven originally known as the Connecticut College of Commerce. The university did not sponsor hockey until 1975 and did not join Division I until 1998, seven years before it joined E.C.A.C. Hockey.The rivalry took flight in 2013. Yale lost both regular-season games to the Bobcats that year by a combined 10-3 score, then lost again, 3-0, in the conference tournament. But they would meet a fourth time, in a surprising all-Connecticut N.C.A.A. title game in Pittsburgh.This time, Yale, the No. 15 seed,  beat top-seeded Quinnipiac, 4-0.“They got the most important one,” said Jack McDonald, the athletic director at Quinnipiac for 20 years before he retired earlier this year. “They’ve got the banner hanging.”Since then, Quinnipiac has not lost to Yale. In fact, excluding that championship game, Quinnipiac is 7-0-4 in its last 11 games against Yale, and leads the overall series, 13-6-5. The teams’ two games last season ended in 2-2 ties.“The game has become, without question, Connecticut’s best college rivalry in all sports,” McDonald said.AdvertisementProof, particularly from the Quinnipiac perspective, is the difficulty of getting a ticket to the game.The senior captain Soren Jonzzon recalled the scene in his freshman dorm when the online ticket portal opened.“All of a sudden I heard kids down the hall screaming because they got tickets for the Yale game,” he said.Yale’s archrival has always been Harvard, and its primary objective each year is beating its five Ivy League brethren in E.C.A.C. Hockey for the Ivy title. Yale Coach Keith Allain acknowledged that Quinnipiac did not have much in common with his program.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“It’s interesting that we share a league and we share geography, but the programs are very, very different,” Allain said, noting that they recruit different players and that Yale does not offer athletic scholarships. “But there are different ways to skin a cat.”Rand Pecknold, who has coached Quinnipiac since 1994 and has not had a losing season since the Bobcats joined Division I, said he understood his team’s place in the hierarchy.“I’m O.K. if Yale doesn’t want to call it a rivalry,” he said. “I respect that. We’re the new kid on the block.”There is also little common history among the players from the two teams, although Quinnipiac’s Travis St. Denis and Yale’s Carson Cooper were roommates on the winning western Canadian team in the 2011 World Junior A Challenge. Cooper said players from the two teams often see each other on weekend nights in New Haven.Advertisement“We definitely don’t hate each other,” said Cooper, a senior forward, “but we can hate each other for 60 minutes each time we play.”The Bobcats might not have risen to national prominence if not for Tim Taylor, who coached 28 seasons at Yale and guided the United States Olympic hockey team at the Lillehammer Games in 1994. When Vermont left E.C.A.C. Hockey for Hockey East, Quinnipiac was one of five programs vying for the opening.“It would’ve been real easy for Tim Taylor, with his prestige and influence, to squash our chances,” Pecknold said. “But he pushed for us. That was very selfless of him, knowing he’d be competing with somebody down the street for fans.”Now, both programs are flourishing. In the last six seasons, Quinnipiac and Yale have combined for eight N.C.A.A. tournament appearances and seven 20-win seasons. Each team has spent time ranked No. 1.And, of course, there was that title game in Pittsburgh on April 13, 2013. Which is why, when the teams meet now, as Jonzzon said, “Everyone knows it’s coming.”A version of this article appears in print on December 4, 2015, on Page B16 of the New York edition with the headline: Heated Rivalry Spans 8 Miles but Barely 10 Years .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.