AdvertisementSupported byBy Kelley McMillanBOSTON — After almost a year away from competition because of injury, Aksel Lund Svindal of Norway returned to ski racing last weekend in dramatic fashion, winning the World Cup circuit’s opening speed events in Lake Louise, Alberta. Svindal’s back-to-back victories in Saturday’s downhill and Sunday’s super-G dispelled doubts about his form and announced him as a serious threat at this weekend’s races in Beaver Creek, Colo., and as a contender for the season’s overall, downhill and super-G trophies.“It was a bit surprising that I won both races in Lake Louise. I knew I was fast. But this was more than I had hoped for,” Svindal, 32, said. “It will for sure not be that easy the rest of the winter, but I expect to be fast. And if I’m fast, then I’m one of the guys you have to beat if you want to win races this winter.”Svindal’s success in Lake Louise came after he spent last season rehabilitating the Achilles’ tendon in his left leg, which he tore in October 2014 while kicking a ball around with teammates after a training session. After surgery to repair it, he was off snow for about three months and used the time away from the slopes to broaden his horizons. “I didn’t want to sit on the couch and focus on the bad stuff, which was the fact that I couldn’t ski,” said Svindal, a three-time Olympic medalist. “So I wanted to take the opportunity to do something I’ve always wanted to do. Basically my first thought was: I want to learn something,” So, Svindal headed to Silicon Valley, where he spent three weeks in December 2014 learning about investing and meeting with start-ups, venture capitalists and entrepreneurs.“I really like spending time with people who are good at what they do. When I couldn’t do that in the skiing community, I thought it was time to get far away from skiing and spend time with other people who are inspiring,” he said.Despite his best efforts to get away from skiing, he did not make it very far. Svindal took what he learned in Silicon Valley and invested in a Swiss start-up called Skioo, a platform and app that offers lift passes for ski resorts in the Alps.By January, he was back on skis, and a month later he returned briefly to competition at the Alpine World Championships in Beaver Creek, where he finished sixth in both the super-G and downhill. “It was a fun challenge trying to make it back for the World Championships in Vail, even though I didn’t get a medal,” Svindal said. “But it was a challenge in and of itself to prove everyone wrong and see if I could make it back in less than three months.”Despite his relative success at the world championships, he decided against returning to the World Cup circuit full-time after the event, opting instead to wait until his injury fully healed and he was in prime form.During his time away from the sport, Svindal’s teammate, Kjetil Jansrud, emerged as the fastest man on the men’s circuit, winning seven races and earning the World Cup downhill and super G season trophies.“Last season, he really got the expression in his whole body that he wants to go fast, and that was the big difference last year,” Christian Mitter, the new head coach for the Norwegian men’s alpine team, said about Jansrud, 30.Though he flourished last season, Jansrud missed his close friend Svindal.“We push each other to be better. It’s been like that for many years, and you notice it when it’s gone,” said Jansrud, a three-time Olympic medalist who finished second to Marcel Hirscher of Austria in the 2015 World Cup overall rankings. “But it’s not just training. We’re a small team and losing out a guy, a third of the speed team, for easy things like dinner and being social and doing stuff, you notice that.”Svindal and Jansrud’s close friendship extends deep into their skiing. They share course information, ski technicians and equipment, including skis, though they have a gentlemen’s agreement on who gets priority on race day: Whoever is ranked higher in the overall standings gets to pick his skis first.The pact reflects the healthy rivalry that exists between them.“The level of competition between them is very friendly and very professional,” Mitter said. “There are no secrets between them in terms of skiing. It’s not at all cut-throat competitiveness, but when they’re in the start, they each want to win.”Svindal and Jansrud will likely find themselves battling neck-and-neck against each other in the fight for the World Cup overall title, which does not faze either of them.“There’s room for both of us. If we can share the podium in every race, then that’s enough points for both of us to be fighting for the globe,” said Jansrud, whose best finish in Lake Louise was seventh in the super-G.But Svindal is not dreaming of discipline titles and overall trophies just yet. Instead, he is excited about the fight just to get there.“Skiing is the most exciting when you can fight for the win, for the podium every weekend,” he said. “That’s when the margins are really important and there’s big consequences if you do well and if you do badly. That’s really where the adrenaline is. That’s where I want to be. To get back there as soon as possible is the ultimate goal.”Advertisement