AdvertisementSupported byBy Tyler KepnerThe Arizona Diamondbacks improved by 15 games last season, to 79-83, but their progress was easy to miss. The Los Angeles Dodgers, with marquee talent and the game’s highest payroll, won the National League West. The San Francisco Giants, with three recent championships, finished second.The Dodgers and the Giants were considered the front-runners for Zack Greinke, a star pitcher and a prize of the free-agent market. But in a surprise twist, the Diamondbacks snared Greinke on Friday with a six-year contract agreement.The deal was confirmed by a person with knowledge of it who was granted anonymity because Greinke must pass a physical to make it official. Ken Rosenthal of Fox Sports reported that the Diamondbacks had guaranteed Greinke more than $206 million, though much of that would be deferred.By any accounting, Greinke is certain to eclipse the average annual value of David Price’s contract with the Boston Red Sox, which was announced on Friday. Price, who starred for Detroit and Toronto last season, will average $31 million through his seven-year, $217 million agreement with the Red Sox.Price’s deal has an opt-out clause after three years, just like the deal Greinke abandoned to become a free agent this off-season. Greinke went 51-15 with a 2.30 E.R.A. in three years with the Dodgers, and his 1.66 last season was the best in the majors since Greg Maddux’s 1.63 in 1995.The deal carries substantial risk for the Diamondbacks, because Greinke just turned 32 years old. But Greinke is something of an intellectual on the mound, throwing his fastball only about half the time and flummoxing hitters with a four-pitch mix. And the Diamondbacks’ bold pursuit was consistent with their organizational mind-set.The Diamondbacks hired Tony La Russa, the Hall of Fame manager, to run their baseball operations in mid-2014, while they were on their way to a major league-high 98 losses. But the Diamondbacks have one of baseball’s best hitters, the 28-year-old Paul Goldschmidt, signed through 2018. They want to build a winner around him quickly, while he is still in his prime.“We can identify three major needs,” La Russa said last summer, in an interview before a game at Chase Field. “If we can fill one of them, we’re this much better, two or three and we’re as good as anybody: rotation, closer, and a veteran hitter behind Goldy.”The Diamondbacks went on to finish second in the N.L. in runs scored and were ranked as the majors’ best defensive team by the Fielding Bible. After starter Johnny Cueto turned them down in free agency, they reached even higher and came down with Greinke. He will help them challenge the glamour teams in a division that is suddenly a lot more intriguing.Advertisement