AdvertisementSupported byKnicks 108, Nets 91By Andrew KehForty years ago, Lionel Hollins was a rookie on the Portland Trail Blazers, a highly touted point guard out of Arizona State picked sixth in the 1975 draft.In just the fifth game of his professional career — and the first of his career on the road — he found himself in a nerve-racking position, standing on the court at Madison Square Garden between Walt Frazier and Earl Monroe of the Knicks.“My knees were shaking, and they’re patting me on the butt, and then you got to go out and compete,” said Hollins, the coach of the Nets, who lost, 108-91, to the Knicks on Friday. “I mean, I had Clyde Frazier’s picture over my bed in my dorm room, but now I’m in the N.B.A. It’s over. There’s no more idolization.”The experience that Hollins described, that continual cycle of life in professional sports, echoes reliably through the league year after year. New players arrive wide-eyed, awed to be alongside the players they grew up watching, and take some time to find their legs.Hollins’s story felt particularly resonant on Friday because much of the talk around the arena centered on Kristaps Porzingis, the Knicks’ rookie big man, who has been shedding whatever vestiges of hesitance he might have at an astonishing rate.Looking poised, Porzingis, 20, added another notable performance to his brief, impressive résumé. He finished the game with 17 points, 10 rebounds and 2 blocks in 26 minutes, while shooting 3 for 4 from 3-point range. It was his 10th double-double of the season, and he became only the second Knicks rookie to record 10 double-doubles in his first 20 games. Willis Reed was the first.The Nets’ defense kept losing track of Porzingis, letting him slip from spot to spot on the offensive end.“I don’t know how they missed him; he’s seven, eight feet tall,” said Carmelo Anthony, who scored a game-high 28 points. “He’s a guy who’s still trying to find his way, still trying to figure this game out. He’s getting better, game in and game out.”Porzingis had 10 points, 5 rebounds and 1 block in the first quarter. Midway through that quarter, the Knicks showed a montage of his highlights on the Jumbotron before announcing that he had been named the Eastern Conference rookie of the month for the games played in October and November. The award, announced Thursday, was a bit of national validation to accompany the scorching hype he has attracted in New York. In the team’s first 19 games, Porzingis averaged 13.7 points, 9.3 rebounds and 1.89 blocked shots.“My individual success is always secondary,” Porzingis said. “The first is the team. If we can win, I’m happy.”In ways big and small, Porzingis has continued to invigorate the organization. Before the game, Coach Derek Fisher talked about how his presence was helping relieve some pressure for other players on the team, namely Anthony. Fisher was happy with how his team moved the ball and the fact that they had 25 assists.“That’s a good number to see,” Fisher said of the assist total.Anthony remains the team’s focal point and leader. Still, he has felt the spotlight shift from him ever so slightly, both on and off the court, as Porzingis has captured the attention of fans and opponents alike.“He can have all of it,” Anthony said of the crowd’s attention, laughing. “I’ll give it to him.”The game was nationally televised, and ESPN focused its marketing efforts during the week on Porzingis. The network featured his highlights in a commercial with a song about him by the Latvian rappers Transleiteris.Porzingis even gamely tried to inject some heat into the tepid Knicks-Nets rivalry.“Sometimes I see someone with a Brooklyn hat on, I say: ‘What is that? You need a Knicks hat,’ ” Porzingis said Thursday.Porzingis kept the excitement going late in the game on Friday, opening the second half with a thunderous dunk after carving a semicircle route around the entire Nets defense. On the next possession for the Knicks (10-10), he made a tough jumper from the right corner as the shot clock was winding down. The crowd chattered excitedly like middle school students in a crowded lunchroom.The Nets (5-14) imploded early. They trailed, 42-21, after one quarter and never got close. Joe Johnson was ejected early in the fourth quarter for elbowing Jose Calderon. Brook Lopez led the team with 21 points.“Well, that was a nightmare,” Hollins said. “I guess everybody can quit talking about rivalries.”The memories were nicer before the game, even as Hollins recalled that Monroe had torched him for 28 points in that game 40 years ago. Monroe, Hollins recalled, told reporters after the game that Hollins would be fine. And Hollins went on to be named to the all-rookie first team that season.Porzingis seems assured of at least that much.Advertisement