AdvertisementSupported byBy Fred BiermanNo. 5 Michigan State vs. No. 4 IowaBig Ten championship, Indianapolis8 p.m., FoxA College Football Playoff spot is on the line in what is shaping up to be the most intriguing of the conference championship games. Iowa has gone 12-0, but has thus far avoided playing the conference heavyweights. Now the Hawkeyes have a chance to prove whether they are for real or if their first undefeated regular season since 1922 was a fluke of scheduling. Iowa may not have many household names, but some of their lightly recruited players have emerged as legitimate stars. Iowa quarterback C.J. Beathard is a clutch performer who has never lost as a starter, running back Jordan Canzeri has 12 touchdowns in 10 games and cornerback Desmond King leads the nation with eight interceptions.Michigan State (11-1) seems to be peaking. The Spartans are looking healthy on the offensive line, Connor Cook is back under center, the running game is on track and receiver Aaron Burbridge is one of the best playmakers in the conference. His battle against King will be a good one. The Spartans lost to Nebraska on a disputed no-call, but found a way to win at Ohio State without Cook in a game that basically gave them the conference crown. Oh, and they beat Michigan on one of the most memorable plays in college football.In the college football playoff rankings, many analysts focus on the teams. That’s the wrong way to think about the playoff picture.Michigan State is often underrated, as is Mark Dantonio. Before he arrived in 2007, Michigan State had two 10-win seasons in program history. They have won 11 games in five of the last six seasons and played some of their best games on the biggest stages.No. 8 North Carolina vs. No. 1 ClemsonAtlantic Coast Conference championship, Charlotte, N.C.8 p.m., ABCOklahoma is likely to have a spot in the playoff. The winner of the Big Ten will get a spot. Alabama is a heavy favorite in the Southeastern Conference title game. Clemson (12-0) is the top-ranked team in the nation and will get in the playoff with a victory. The question is: Will North Carolina (11-1) earn a playoff spot if it finds a way to win here? The Tar Heels would be tough to ignore, but anything is possible in college football.Clemson has run the table with signature victories at home over Notre Dame and Florida State. Quarterback Deshaun Watson can succeed in many ways: He can toss the long ball, throw a dart into tight coverage and come up with a big run to convert on third down. The Tigers have a good defense, but it has given up the occasional big play. Of course, Clemson has laid an egg in big spots, which others have come to call Clemsoning. Here is its chance to try to shake that label for good and get a spot in the playoff.North Carolina is led by quarterback Marquise Williams, a fifth-year senior who has set 20 school records, including rushing touchdowns by a quarterback and rushing yards by a quarterback. The Tar Heels have reeled off 11 victories in a row after a season-opening loss to South Carolina, which took place at this site. North Carolina’s offense has put up tons of points and done so with big plays. The Tar Heels protect the quarterback, allowing a mere seven sacks this season, but they will be tested against a Clemson front anchored by Shaq Lawson, who leads the nation in tackles for a loss.No. 18 Florida vs. No. 2 AlabamaSoutheastern Conference championship, Atlanta4 p.m., CBSThese teams play great defense, but only one of them plays any offense. Alabama (11-1) is playing as well as anyone else in the country since its loss to Mississippi. Its defensive front is ridiculous and it has the second ranked defense in the nation, allowing 264 yards a game. Derrick Henry, one of the most physical running backs you will see, is all but a lock to win the Heisman Trophy. His 295 carries are the most in the SEC and second most in college football. The Crimson Tide will hand him the ball, and the offensive line will grind down its opponent. Florida’s defense is ranked second in the conference to Alabama’s, but the Gators (10-2) struggled to score 2 points last week in a loss to Florida State. They are struggling at quarterback and in the kicking game. The Tide are the only team from last year’s final four with a chance to get back in. Alabama is an 18-point favorite; it would hardly be a surprise to see the Gators shut out.No. 24 U.S.C. vs. No. 7 StanfordPac-12 championship, Santa Clara, Calif.7:45 p.m., ESPNIs Stanford (10-2) still alive for a playoff spot? If Clemson loses and the Cardinal have a statement game, could they sneak in? It seems unlikely. Stanford’s loss to Oregon really hurt its cause. Southern Cal, on the other hand, must be thrilled to be in this position. A spot in this title game seemed unlikely after the Trojans (8-4) lost two of their first three conference games and fired their head coach. But Clay Helton won over the locker room and U.S.C. won five of its last six to win the South Division. This week, Helton’s interim tag was removed; he is the head coach. Stanford opened the season with a loss to Northwestern, then reeled off eight victories before that loss to Oregon. It knocked off Notre Dame last week, but those two losses will be hard to overcome. Keep an eye on Cardinal running back Christian McCaffrey, one of the best all-around players in college football. Last week, he broke Reggie Bush’s conference record for all-purpose yards and Barry Sanders’s N.C.A.A. record is within his sights.No. 20 Temple at No. 17 HoustonAmerican Athletic Conference championshipNoon, ABCThis has been an entertaining season in the A.A.C. Memphis knocked off a good Mississippi team. Temple took Notre Dame to the wire. Navy quarterback Keenan Reynolds enjoyed a record-breaking season. Houston knocked off Memphis and Navy down the stretch to win its division. Now Houston and Temple square off with a spot in a New Year’s Six bowl game on the line.Advertisement