By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSDEC. 4, 2015
The Jets are taking on Odell Beckham Jr. and the Giants without Darrelle Revis.Coach Todd Bowles said Friday that Revis, the Jets’ star cornerback, would miss Sunday’s game because of a concussion. Revis has not practiced or played since sustaining the concussion at Houston on Nov. 22.Revis did, however, attend meetings Friday for the first time since being injured. “It’s a step forward,” Bowles said. “I don’t know how much, but it is a step forward.”Marcus Williams, Revis’s backup, is listed as doubtful with a sprained left knee, and Bowles said that he was skeptical Williams would be able to play.The Jets could use a combination of Buster Skrine, Darrin Walls, Dexter McDougle and Dee Milliner in Revis’s spot. Antonio Cromartie could draw the assignment of covering Beckham.Advertisement“If Marcus can’t go, they’re interchangeable,” Bowles said of the other backs. “We practice everybody there, anyway.”AdvertisementThe challenge for Bowles and the defensive coordinator Kacy Rodgers will be drawing up a game plan to cover Beckham, who has 72 catches for 1,005 yards and nine touchdowns.“He’s a challenge even if we had them,” Bowles said of Revis and Williams. “Great players like that always challenge you, game-plan-wise.”MIXED BAG FOR GIANTS The Giants’ offensive lineup appears to be getting healthier, but defensively, the Giants lost two more starters to injury this week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Guard Justin Pugh is expected to return after sitting out the last two games with a concussion. Center Weston Richburg, who did not play against Washington, seems to have improved after an ankle sprain and will probably play. The final determination on Richburg’s availability will be made after Saturday’s practice.Right tackle Robert Newhouse, who has started every game this season, had severe back pain the day after the Washington game. The Giants may wait until Sunday before deciding on his availability.Linebacker Devon Kennard, who has hamstring and foot injuries, and safety Brandon Meriweather, who has a knee strain, were ruled out.BILL PENNINGTONLUCK OUT; HASSELBECK IN Quarterback Matt Hasselbeck will start for the Colts against the Steelers on Sunday night in place of Andrew Luck, who has a lacerated kidney and a partially torn abdominal muscle and has not played since Nov. 8. Hasselbeck is 4-0 this season and is trying to become the first quarterback in his 40s in the Super Bowl era with five straight wins. (AP)BRADFORD EXPECTED TO RETURN Eagles quarterback Sam Bradford is expected to return when Philadelphia visits the New England Patriots on Sunday.Bradford missed the last two games with a concussion and a left-shoulder injury sustained in a loss to Miami on Nov. 15. (AP)Advertisement FALCONS ACTIVATE HESTER Atlanta has moved Devin Hester, a receiver and return specialist, to the active roster. Hester had a turf toe injury and has not played this season after earning his fourth Pro Bowl berth in 2014. He set an N.F.L. record with his 20th career return for a touchdown last season, when he had 38 catches for 504 yards and two touchdowns. (AP)A version of this list appears in print on December 5, 2015, on Page D3 of the New York edition with the headline: Jets May Use Committee to Cover Beckham .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.