By TIM ROHANDEC. 4, 2015
Members of the news media gathered in a conference room at Citi Field on Friday for the annual off-season luncheon with Mets executives, including the chief operating officer Jeff Wilpon, the assistant general manager John Ricco and the top front-office aide J. P. Ricciardi.Sandy Alderson, the general manager, was missing.Wilpon read a prepared statement announcing that Alderson had learned that he had cancer, which meant he would miss the winter meetings next week in Nashville and begin eight to 12 weeks of chemotherapy. Wilpon grew emotional as he spoke, although he noted that doctors had told Alderson the cancer was “very treatable.”Wilpon said Alderson, 68, was expected to continue to fulfill his duties for the most part, while Ricco and Ricciardi would keep him apprised of anything he missed.The Mets would not comment on the type of cancer Alderson had and would not take specific questions, citing his desire for privacy.AdvertisementAfter winning the National League pennant for the first time in 15 years, the Mets must decide the best way to carry the momentum into 2016. They have decisions to make on their free agents Yoenis Cespedes and Daniel Murphy. They already have one veteran free agent, Ben Zobrist, in their sights. Alderson will be involved in those negotiations, between treatments.Advertisement“The nature of our business is, we’re all moving around a lot all the time,” said Ricco, who has worked alongside Alderson since 2010. “It’s not your typical, where everyone shows up at 9 in the morning, meets and goes through the day. A lot of it is done by phone. J. P. and Paul DePodesta are out scouting. That’s not going to be that big of an adjustment. We’re going to have plenty of access to Sandy. We talk to him all the time.”In early November, Alderson fainted during an interview session with reporters in which a contract extension for Manager Terry Collins was announced. The Mets played down the incident, saying Alderson had not eaten breakfast and had felt lightheaded under the glare of the room’s bright lights.A week later, Alderson missed the general managers’ meetings for an unspecified medical procedure, which, the Mets announced Friday, showed that he had cancer.The Mets hired Alderson as general manager in 2010, and he quickly began to rebuild the team, trading expensive stars for prospects. After six consecutive losing seasons, the Mets made a surprising run last season to the World Series, where they lost to the Kansas City Royals. Baseball America recently named Alderson the executive of the year.The Mets said Alderson was heavily involved when they hosted Zobrist on Wednesday. The Mets briefed Zobrist on their organization, including the support staff, and took him and his family on a tour of the suburbs, showing them potential places to live.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Zobrist, who finished last season with the Royals, is a versatile fielder, capable of starting at second base and filling in at third when David Wright needs a break. He is skilled at getting on a base, a trait Alderson covets and emphasizes among his players.That is why, perhaps, the Mets may be willing to sign Zobrist, though it would come at a relatively hefty cost. He is looking for a four-year deal because he is 34 and this is likely to be the last lucrative contract he will be able to demand.Because of the high interest in him — about 10 teams are said to have expressed interest in him — he seems poised to get it. After talking with the Mets, Zobrist had a few more visits scheduled.AdvertisementThe Mets, who indicated Friday they would be willing to give Zobrist a four-year deal, insisted that they had enough money to make other deals, too, for complementary players in the bullpen and in the outfield, where they want veterans to platoon with Juan Lagares and Michael Conforto.“Moneywise, we’re in a pretty good place, so I don’t think we’re operating where it’s ‘either-or’ at this point,” Ricco said, referring to Zobrist. “I think we can do what we need to do. The decisions right now are really more about — and this is how Sandy has operated — not spending money just because you have it to spend, but spending it the right way.”Ricco referred to Alderson and his philosophy several times while discussing the Mets’ plans. “He’s a phone call away,” Ricco said.INSIDE PITCHLou DePaoli, the Mets’ chief revenue officer, announced Friday that Coca-Cola will become the team’s new official soft-drink sponsor, starting Jan. 1. Pepsi had been the team’s sponsor since Citi Field opened in 2009. The second level of seating in right field had been named the Pepsi Porch, and a large Pepsi Cola sign had stood above it. After the Mets’ run to the World Series, Coca-Cola “made a phenomenal offer,” DePaoli said.The Mets are still debating how to rebrand the seats in right field.A version of this article appears in print on December 5, 2015, on Page D6 of the New York edition with the headline: Alderson Has Cancer; Mets Say He’ll Remain Very Involved.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.