AdvertisementSupported byOn BaseballBy Tyler KepnerThe hitting coach is the busiest person on a baseball team. If you see him in the pregame hours, he is almost always scurrying somewhere — bouncing over to the video room to study swings on a laptop, ducking into a conference room to share scouting reports, wheeling a cart of baseballs into a batting tunnel under the stands. Pitchers, with their delicate arms, cannot throw constantly to shake a slump. But hitters can swing as often as they like.The job is so consuming that baseball now allows a formal assistant, in addition to the primary coach, to be a full-fledged member of a staff. There are so many hitters and so little time. It is a job for two men, at least.The Miami Marlins announced Friday that Barry Bonds would be one of those coaches — the lead hitting coach, in fact, to be assisted by Frank Menechino. After several days of public speculation, it is official: Bonds, the career leader in home runs and a notorious figure of baseball’s steroid era, will be back in uniform. Every day.That means draining cross-country flights and 3 a.m. arrivals at the team hotel. That means hours of driving on Florida highways for March exhibitions in Lakeland and Viera. That means showing up at lunchtime before a night game to work with the backup catcher who hasn’t played in a week — and picking up the baseballs in the cage.Bonds knows this. He played 22 seasons in the majors; his father, Bobby, played 14; and his godfather is Willie Mays. On a conference call Friday, Bonds insisted that he was prepared for the grunt work ahead. “As I got to thinking about this, the only way that I’m going to be able to do this, or to give the information that I have in my brain, is I’ve got to be in the trenches with them,” he said. “That’s what my dad did. That’s what Willie did. I feel that I need to be in the trenches with them to get their attention. It’s easy to walk in for a day and say, ‘I’m Barry Bonds, and I’ve done this.’ You can get their attention for a minute, but what can you fix in a day? But me being there day in and day out, I think I bring a lot to the table for them.”Bonds has worked in recent years with the Chicago Cubs’ Dexter Fowler and the Yankees’ Alex Rodriguez, who is three spots behind Bonds on baseball’s mutated home run leaderboard. Until those sessions, Bonds said, he did not think he would want to coach and did not know if he would be good at it.But positive feedback from Fowler and Rodriguez encouraged him, he said, and Jeffrey Loria, owner of the Marlins, offered him a job. Bonds flew to New York to meet with Loria and the Marlins’ new manager, Don Mattingly. He told Mattingly he would not be a problem.“If I don’t bring any value, you don’t have to worry about me,” Bonds said he told Mattingly. “I’ll go home.”Mattingly said he was “extremely impressed” by Bonds’s desire to be part of the team. Working with a full roster across an unrelenting schedule is different from working privately with star players. But Bonds, who has not played since 2007, wants back in.“I love cycling; I can only ride my bike so much, and I love that sport,” Bonds said. “But baseball’s who I am. This is who I am. This is what I was raised to do. This is what God put me on Earth to do, and this is what God blessed me to do. The only way I’m going to find out is if I try.”He added: “I know some people are going to be upset. Some people are going to be happy. I can’t make everybody happy, and that’s just the bottom line. That’s life.”There will be little steroid-related fallout here. There may be a finger-wagging column or two, but reporters are not a major factor in the workday of a hitting coach. Some fans might boo Bonds, but many more will plead for his autograph — and hitting coaches are mostly out of sight, anyway.Do not expect players to plug “Bonds” and “Balco” into a search engine. Many grew up during Bonds’s prime and revere him. They understand his numbers are so freakishly spectacular that he cannot be dismissed as a pharmaceutical creation. However he did it, Bonds is a hitting expert, like Mark McGwire, the only other man to belt 70 homers in a season. McGwire, an admitted steroid user, is the bench coach for San Diego after full-time instructor jobs with St. Louis and the Dodgers.McGwire’s past does not keep him from doing his job. He succeeds because he knows hitting, relates to players and grinds through the schedule to make them better. Bonds’s arrogance is as famous as his power, but he sounds willing to do the same. It is refreshing, in a way, to have Bonds back. It was dishonest to pretend he never existed. He polls under 40 percent for the Hall of Fame, a long way from the 75 percent needed for induction. Returning to uniform did not help McGwire’s chances, and it will not help Bonds’s. This role has nothing to do with that.“I played my years in baseball,” Bonds said. “Me coming back to the game, I’m in a different capacity. I am now a rookie coach, and that’s all I think about. It’s not about me — it’s about those guys on the team now.”If he really means it, this will be fascinating.Advertisement