AdvertisementSupported byBy Victor MatherThe game was over.A desperation play by the Packers involving a completion and two laterals ended when quarterback Aaron Rodgers was brought down by Devin Taylor with no time on the clock. The Lions had seemingly upset Green Bay in Detroit, 23-21, for their first sweep of their old rival since 1991.But there was a flag. Taylor was called for a face mask on Rodgers. Most of the Lions disagreed. “My personal opinion, I don’t think I did,” Taylor told The Detroit Free Press after the game. Replays showed contact between thumb and the mask, though Taylor did not seem to grab hold of it.That gave the Packers one more untimed play from their 39. With the clock frozen on 0:00, Rodgers, facing a three-man rush, scrambled, giving his receivers time to reach the end zone, eluded Jason Jones, who got a hand on him, then threw the ball 61 yards. Richard Rodgers leapt and caught it.AARON FREAKING RODGERS: https://t.co/fxCTbTAGN9 pic.twitter.com/tYglGBFbWZFinal: 27-23 Packers.The Milwaukee Journal-Sentinel headlined: “Packers’ Hail Mary Answered.” The Free Press went with “Hail No.”“I bet the statistic on that was probably over 99 percent that we were not going to win that game, but it just takes a little miracle like that,” Aaron Rodgers said.He was not wrong. At halftime, with the Packers trailing, 17-0, Football-Reference gave the Lions a 94.7 percent chance to win the game. With about six minutes left and the Packers down by 9, the chance had risen to 99.3 percent.Thursday’s victory was big for the Packers, who had lost four of five after a 6-0 start. They now stand at 8-4, a half-game behind the Minnesota Vikings, who have a tough game against Seattle this week.The play also changed the fortunes of many gamblers. The completion meant the Packers covered the 3-point spread, and also made winners of over bettors, who needed the score to exceed 45½.The successful Hail Mary perhaps erased bad memories of the “Fail Mary” of 2012. With time running out, Seahawks quarterback Russell Wilson threw the ball into the end zone, where both a receiver and a Packers defender grabbed it. The game was being officiated by replacement referees because of a lockout. One signaled touchdown and another a touchback. In the end, a touchdown was the ruling.For the Lions, now 4-8, Thursday’s conclusion was reminiscent of a disastrous late play earlier this year against the Seahawks. Down by 3, quarterback Matthew Stafford hit Calvin Johnson, who seemed headed for the go-ahead score. Just before he crossed the goal line, Kam Chancellor made an athletic lunge and knocked the ball away. As it bounced through the end zone, K. J. Wright helped it on its way by batting it. Nonetheless, a touchback was called, and Seattle ran out the clock and won the game. The call was wrong; Detroit should have gotten the ball inches from the goal line.As a footnote to Thursday’s miracle, the recipient of the Hail Mary, Richard Rodgers, is the son and namesake of a former college player. Richard Rodgers Sr. tossed two of the laterals in the famous final play of the 1982 Cal-Stanford game.The last word should go to long-suffering Lions followers, who have one playoff win since 1957.Advertisement