By BRAD SPURGEONDEC. 4, 2015
Some Formula One seasons, like some Grand Prix races, are more memorable and significant than others.The 2015 season will probably not go down in history as one of the most exceptional, even if the racing was interesting and even if another driver became a three-time world champion, with Lewis Hamilton thus joining some of the greats in the series’ pantheon.In the 65-year history of the series, one season arguably stands out as perhaps the most memorable, tragic and significant: 1994. That was the year when Formula One’s biggest star of the moment, Ayrton Senna, died at the San Marino Grand Prix on May 1. The day before, an unsung rookie driver, Roland Ratzenberger, also died.There have been other years in which there were multiple racing deaths, and there have been other years hit by tragedy. At Monza in 1961, for example, 14 spectators and the leading driver, Wolfgang Von Trips, died in a crash, which allowed the American Phil Hill to be crowned champion. In 1970, for the first and only time there was a posthumous world champion: Jochen Rindt was killed in an accident at Monza but had enough points to take the title after his death.AdvertisementBut these two years came during some of the most deadly periods of the sport’s history, when death was almost accepted as an inevitable price to pay in elite auto racing. Only small, incremental changes were made to try to improve safety after many of these accidents. It was also a time when the series was not yet broadcast live into the living rooms of hundreds of millions of television spectators worldwide, as it would be in 1994.AdvertisementSo it was that millions of television viewers around the world watched Senna, Formula One’s most recognized star of the day, die. Following his death, the series underwent the biggest safety effort in its history. The result, fortunately, was 20 years without a death, until Jules Bianchi died in July, from head injuries he suffered in a crash at the Japanese Grand Prix in October 2014.But 1994 was also a season that, partly in a panic reaction to Senna’s death, was marked by upheavals, accusations, and controversy on and off the track. Most of it surrounded the man who would later become the most successful driver in history, Michael Schumacher, the German driver then racing for Benetton.It was the first year in which electronic drivers’ aids, like traction control and active suspension, were banned. Senna had been among those who pushed for that change, wanting to give drivers more control than engineers.Senna had moved that year from McLaren, where he had won three world titles, to the Williams team, which had won the previous two titles, in 1992 with Nigel Mansell and in 1993 with Alain Prost. Many observers assumed that Senna would now simply cruise ahead of his rivals. But the Williams car had already shown signs of struggling at the end of the 1993 season, and the new Williams of 1994 had some serious teething problems.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In the first three races of the season, Senna, the reigning pole-position king with a then-record 65 poles, managed to qualify on pole. But the Williams car was not up to his standards. He spun out of the first two races.At the start of the third race, the San Marino Grand Prix at Imola, Italy, there was a huge accident. A wheel had flown into the crowd and seriously injured spectators. Once the race got underway, Senna was struggling to hold the lead. Schumacher was hard on his tail when Senna shot off the track and crashed into a concrete wall at the Tamburello corner and died.The day before, Ratzenberger had been killed during qualifying when the front wing snapped off of his Simtek and he lost control of the car.But there was a subtext to the deaths and safety issues that season. Senna and others had suspected that Schumacher’s Benetton was using a form of hidden, banned traction control that was giving him an advantage. In fact, an investigation by the International Automobile Federation, or F.I.A., the sport’s governing body, found that the car still did have the banned software, but the team insisted that it was not being used.AdvertisementIt was impossible for the F.I.A. to prove that the team had actually used the illegal software. But there was retribution of a different kind throughout the season as Schumacher was handed penalty after penalty with large punishments for minor rules infractions.Nonetheless, 1994 was the year that would see the change in guard from the era of Prost and Senna dominating the series to the onset of the Schumacher era: The German driver would go on to win a record seven world titles in the next 10 years, winning his last championship in 2004 at Ferrari.But perhaps the greatest legacies of 1994 are vastly improved safety in the series and the making of Ayrton Senna’s tragic legend.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »