AdvertisementSupported bySpecial Report: Formula One ReviewBy Brad SpurgeonFormula One racing has rarely lent itself well to works of art. Of course there have always been painters of pictures of Formula One cars. And the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York has long had a 1990 Ferrari racing car in its design collection. But recently the series has begun to attract other kinds of artists.What some of these artists find appealing is the sport’s human story as well as the general environment — the cars, of course, but also the geometry of it all, with the tracks, tires, flags, even pit stops.Andreas Gursky, 60, a German photographer known for his large architecture and landscape photographs, often taken from an aerial perspective, has photographed pit stops and tracks. His images of the Bahrain International Circuit, home to the Bahrain Grand Prix, are taken from a helicopter, showing the track’s geometric forms winding through the desert, distorted by digital software. Another series, “F1 Boxenstopp (F1 Pit Stop),” completed in 2007, features panoramic images of pit stops. The works are actually assemblages of different photos of Formula One cars and their colorfully attired crews taken at races around the world. There is something almost biblical about the dramatic composition, at once precise and vast, with an operatic effect, like an army involved in some great undertaking. Gursky’s work is included in an exhibition at the Fondation Louis Vuitton in Paris, “Accrochage 3: Pop & Music/Sound,” through Jan. 4.Playing with the materials, geometry and human stories of Formula One is also a specialty of Mark Dickens, a British collage artist. Dickens began using the series as material for his work in 2008, when he was commissioned by the Yas Marina Circuit in Abu Dhabi to commemorate the first Grand Prix there in 2009. He made 10 paintings, one for each team. In 2011, Bernie Ecclestone, the series’ promoter, commissioned Dickens to make a series of paintings of every race on the calendar. Now Dickens has just completed a two-year project of single-panel, 1-meter-by-1.10-meter collage “portraits” of the 32 Formula One world-champion drivers. The portraits incorporate photographs, paint, ink work, resin, fabric — Jackie Stewart gave some of his tartan cloth for his collage — as well as notes hand-written by drivers, journalists and other people involved in the sport about their favorite champion.“Over the years I’ve built up this language of collage and making photographic images and transfers and building up layer upon layer, and the resin gives it a sense of depth,” Dickens, 52, said in an interview at the Abu Dhabi Grand Prix last weekend. “What I’ve always wanted is every time someone looks at my work they see something different.”“And I think the impact with motor racing is that it lends itself to that, because it is quite dynamic,” he added, “and there are moments of intense energy in my work, and then quieter areas, and I try to incorporate all of that, engender that into my paintings. And what fascinates me is the whole community. It does resonate beyond the track, and I try to capture that — the whole circus, moving from one town to another — to somehow blend this all together in my work.”In a previous project, he made a mural using Pirelli tires and asked Formula One drivers, including Mark Webber, Jarno Trulli and Timo Glock, to ink the tread onto the 10-meter work.“Integral to my work is collaboration,” Dickens said. “I’ve always found that really appealing. It gives it another insight. Especially when you have hand-written text from these drivers. It is very revealing, and it’s such an insight. For example, Bruno Senna writing about his uncle; his writing is very shy and timid. You can see that he lives in the shadow of this great man.”Dickens said he had been inspired to use tires by the American pop artist Robert Rauschenberg, whom he met while studying at the Maryland Institute College of Art in Baltimore. “There is a really famous piece by Robert Rauschenberg, which was a collaboration with John Cage,” he said, referring to “Automobile Tire Print” (1953). “Rauschenberg put ink on one of the tires of his old beaten up truck, and he asked John to drive the car over this ink and he created this really long tire print. And that has always stayed with me, and I always felt that there was space to do something like that in the F1 paddock.”Every Formula One race is photographed by hundreds of racing photographers shooting images for the news media. But some of these photographers have also used the material for art. Darren Heath, 45, a photographer who has exhibited his highly stylized work, said that unless an artist already had a reputation in the art world, it was difficult to be recognized outside the paddock.He said the problem with Formula One was that it is viewed as a niche sport attracting “anoraks,” British slang for geeks or nerds. “It is not seen by the trend-setters and people in the art world as something that is worthy of adoration,” he said.Another Formula One regular, Moko, who is part of the Chrome Hearts jewelry company, said the appeal of the series for artists was the technology.“You have high technology, and even between the human being and the machine is art,” he said. “It’s like you give a blank canvas to Matisse, Modigliani and so and so, and that blank canvas turns into $100 million. Art is everywhere. The Coca-Cola canvas turns into money, Polaroid turns into money, and here it is the technology. And in the technology there is a lot of creativity.”Advertisement