By BRAD SPURGEONDEC. 4, 2015
The following is a look at how the 10 teams and 20 drivers fared in the 2015 Formula One season, presented in the order of the teams’ finishing positions in the championship.Mercedes For the second year in a row, Mercedes dominated the series, winning all but three races, just as it did in 2014. The team was superior in virtually every sector, somehow improving on the previous year’s success in terms of strategy and car development. The team’s success has been attributed largely to its engine, but other teams also use the Mercedes engine and some of those teams saw their performance decline this year while the Mercedes team results remained steady. Unlike last year, though, the German team’s challenge in 2015 was how to deal with the final few races of the season, once both Lewis Hamilton and the team had won the drivers’ and constructors’ titles but Hamilton’s teammate, Nico Rosberg, had yet to clinch second in the drivers’ standings. It required careful balance to keep Hamilton happy as the team supported Rosberg, who raised his game, winning the last three races and scoring the six final poles of the season.Ferrari Although Ferrari finished fourth in the series last year, underwent a major overhaul of the top directors, and has the four-time world champion Sebastian Vettel, few people could have imagined the turnaround that the Italian team made over the winter. The most important developments came in the engine, which went from being the weakest in the series last season to the second-most powerful. The car, too, was vastly improved. James Allison, the technical director, managed to implement changes, notably to the layout of the oil tank, gearbox and exhaust. Vettel’s teammate Kimi Raikkonen appeared to return to one of his periodic states of lethargy, performing invariably less well than Vettel, who became one of the season’s stars, winning the only three races not won by Mercedes. The new team director, Maurizio Arrivabene, had aimed for two victories this year, so the team exceeded its objective. But this winter will be crucial for car and engine development, determining whether Ferrari can improve enough to truly challenge Mercedes.Williams Mercedes Williams was a revelation in 2014, when it changed to the Mercedes engine and continued to overhaul its leading staff. This year, it was generally expected to be the team that would challenge Mercedes for victories this year — if improvements continued at the same rate. From that point of view, the season was something of a disappointment: Williams managed only four podium finishes, compared with nine last year, and never challenged for a victory. On the other hand, it was consistent, and finished third in the constructors’ standings for the second straight year. The driver Valtteri Bottas continued to have the upper hand on his older teammate, Felipe Massa, who nonetheless showed that he remains a surprisingly strong driver and one of the most experienced in the series.AdvertisementRed Bull Renault Last season, despite having one of the weaker engines (made by Renault), Red Bull was the only team that really challenged Mercedes, thanks to yet another great chassis designed by Adrian Newey and his aerodynamics team. The team and its leading driver, Daniel Ricciardo, won the only three races not won by Mercedes. In fact, Red Bull and Vettel had dominated the four previous seasons, from 2010 to 2013, and it looked as though 2014 was just an off-year, with Red Bull expected to bounce back in 2015 with even more victories. But the Renault engine did not substantially improve, and the Red Bull chassis was ostensibly worse. In the early part of the season it appeared to be inferior even to that of its junior team, Toro Rosso. And so it was Ferrari that picked up the three race victories this year, while Red Bull won none. The team’s new recruit, Daniil Kvyat, started the season well behind Ricciardo. But by the end of the season he had found his marks and finished just ahead of Ricciardo in the standings.AdvertisementForce India Mercedes Force India again surprised, maintaining its strong position as a leading midfield team, ahead of other better-financed or traditionally stronger teams. It was not until a car upgrade during the season that the team’s drivers were able to show what they could do. The combination of Sergio Pérez of Mexico and Nico Hülkenberg of Germany is one of the strongest on the grid, with the surprising slight upper hand in results going to Pérez, who again scored a podium, while Hülkenberg has yet to do so. Still, the German’s reputation grew when he combined sports car racing with his Formula One career, the only driver to do so. Driving for Porsche, he won the prestigious 24 Hours of Le Mans in June. Force India is rumored to be preparing big changes in the winter, including a possible name change, which all could bode well for its future, given the quality of its staff and drivers.Lotus Mercedes Lotus has had one of the most mysterious seasons. After a poor 2014, it dropped the Renault engine and opted for the Mercedes, which looked like a great move in this era of the great Mercedes engine. Yet Lotus suffered another poor season, as did one of its drivers, Pastor Maldonado, who had so many accidents that a website was created to announce each new one. The team announced Thursday it is changing ownership, with Renault buying it out and renaming the team to Renault. It is keeping Maldonado for next year, but is losing the solid Romain Grosjean — who scored a podium at the Belgian Grand Prix this year — to the new Haas team. This team that has a long history of winning titles under different names, but there will be much work to bring it back to its historic levels.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Toro Rosso Renault Few people could have imagined the surprise in store this year at this team, which had hired two rookies, creating the youngest driver paring on the grid: Max Verstappen, 18, and Carlos Sainz Jr., 20. Not only did they do the job perfectly for the team, they also sometimes stole the spotlight from the more experienced drivers at the parent Red Bull team. The team produced a chassis at least the equal of the parent team’s, and if not for some bad luck and poor reliability, the team would surely have had many more points.Sauber Ferrari Last year was the team’s worst Formula One season since it began in the series in 1993. But with improvements in the Ferrari engine over the winter, Sauber started 2015 on a stronger footing. With continuing budget problems and shifts in management, as well as two inexperienced drivers, the team faces a lot more work before it returns to its highest levels of a decade or more ago.McLaren Honda The second-most successful team in the history of the series reunited this season with Honda, the engine manufacturer of its glory years in the late 1980s and early 1990s. Therefore, no one could have imagined that McLaren would have its worst year since 1967. It struggled through the season with problems of engine power and reliability, and Honda has so far failed to come to terms with the new hybrid engines. Finishing second to last is as good as finishing last for this team, and it was catastrophic for its two world champion drivers, Fernando Alonso, who rejoined the team from Ferrari and Jenson Button. Still, the team and drivers never lost their optimism. If their claims come true, McLaren Honda will be back with a vengeance next year.ManorThe miracle of the season was Manor, a team born out of the ashes of the bankrupt Marussia team. But it is essentially the same team, and it showed just how well a group of people can do with the smallest budget, a chassis that is essentially from last season and with last year’s Ferrari engine. The team had fabulous reliability, its drivers finishing almost every race. But it failed to score any points, though the late recruit Alexander Rossi came close at his home race, the U.S. Grand Prix in Texas in October, where he equaled the team’s best finish of the season, finishing 12th, as Roberto Merhi had done at the British Grand Prix in July.But next year remains a huge question mark for Manor: The team’s two founding directors, John Booth and Graeme Lowdon, have announced that they will be leaving the team because of differences with the new owner.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »