By BRAD SPURGEONDEC. 4, 2015
Staying on Track.  The Autobiography. By Nigel Mansell. 384 pages.  Simon & Schuster. $15.45.If ever the home country of Formula One, Britain, had a “people’s driver,” it would have to be Nigel Mansell. The winner of the drivers’ title in 1992 — and the runner-up three times — not only found his greatest popularity among his compatriots, he also won more races in England than he won anywhere else.He achieved the first of his 31 career victories there, in 1985 at the European Grand Prix at Brands Hatch. The following year he won the British Grand Prix at Brands Hatch and would go on to win it three more times at Silverstone.The adoration of the British fans was dubbed “Mansell mania.”The feelings between driver and fans were mutual. “If you needed a lift in the race, the crowd always seemed to know and they’d respond,” he writes in his autobiography, “Staying on Track.” “I’m not sure if anyone has ever studied whether home support like that effectively cut a few tenths from your lap times, but I certainly felt like it did.”Mansell’s book does a lot to explain just why he was so popular with his home public. The son of an aerospace engineer, he grew up in a suburb of Birmingham and had little aptitude for school. He tells of being bullied as a child. In his own telling, this driver whom his legendary Formula One boss, Colin Chapman, called “a funny bugger” seems to be, more than most of the illustrious British world champions, an average bloke.AdvertisementAlthough Mansell, now 62, had a ghostwriter help him with the book, the style is so loose and conversational that it is difficult to imagine what the writer did. This makes for a fascinating and entertaining story, told as if Mansell were recounting his life and career off the cuff in his living room in Florida (where he now lives).AdvertisementAt the same time, it is almost a litany of death, destruction and macabre tales from beginning to end, appearing on virtually every page and occurring not only in racing accidents but throughout his life. Amid it all, Mansell emerges as an unusual character, one whose reputation on the track as a fearless go-for-it-first-think-about-it-later kind of driver ends up making perfect sense.There are tales of near-death experiences, incidents of losing consciousness, temporary paralysis, hearing problems, back injuries, near-drownings and other encounters with physical limits. Two anecdotes in particular sum up the man’s character.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mansell tells of how as a teenager, when he had begun to have success in go-karting, he was chosen to drive for Britain in an international event.“The school announced the exciting news in assembly one morning that I would be going to Holland for two weeks to race for my country, and that I had been given a special two-week leave of absence,” he writes. “This did not go down well with the bullies. That afternoon, I was attacked viciously with a cricket bat in the playground, which put me on crutches for six weeks.”The second anecdote concerns his mother’s death from cancer in 1984, at age 60, when Mansell was 30 and already driving in Formula One. Writing that even now, 30 years later, he still has not gotten over her death, he tells of his father insisting that he drive the hearse to the cemetery. The undertakers were not amused. But Mansell, though distraught, assured them that nothing would go wrong and drove the hearse.What emerges from all the stories is a man who appears to be one of the most emotional Formula One drivers ever. Given all of his macabre thoughts and apparently uncontrollable emotions, his world title now appears to be all the more admirable.That makes “Staying on Track” a gripping read as it follows him from the Lotus team, when Chapman died of a heart attack at 54, to the Williams team, where he won his first races in 1985, to Ferrari before he returned to Williams, where he won the world title. He also writes of his period in the IndyCar series, where he won the title in 1993, the year after his Formula One triumph.Throughout it all, Mansell has remained married to the same woman, with whom he has three children. He comes across in the telling as very much a family man and an all-around good guy. No wonder he is popular with the British fans.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »