AdvertisementSupported byOn College FootballBy Marc TracyWhen No. 5 Michigan began the 2007 season by losing to Appalachian State, a team then in the lower-tier Football Championship Subdivision, words used to describe the ignominious, unforeseen defeat included “upset,” “stuns” and “unfathomable.” When James Madison, another F.C.S. team, beat No. 13 Virginia Tech in 2010, “shocks,” “unexpected” and, again, “stuns” were employed.But should unbeaten and top-ranked Clemson (12-0, 8-0) lose the Atlantic Coast Conference championship game on Saturday night to No. 8 North Carolina (11-1, 8-0) and then miss out on a berth in the College Football Playoff, many would use a decidedly nongeneric word to describe the event: Clemsoning.The definition of Clemsoning is simple: losing a game you should have won, preferably in an ostentatious manner.The implication is that Clemson is particularly susceptible to it. But actually, in the past few years, few teams have Clemsoned less often than Clemson.“I don’t know why it stuck with Clemson more,” said Lawton Swann, the host of Clemson Sports Talk, a radio show.In the college football playoff rankings, many analysts focus on the teams. That’s the wrong way to think about the playoff picture.If fans did not know the term before Oct. 10, they heard it after Clemson’s 43-24 win over Georgia Tech when a reporter asked Coach Dabo Swinney about it. Then Swinney, 46, who is in his eighth year as the Tigers’ head coach, unleashed a minutes-long soliloquy on the subject.“I’m sick of it,” he said. “I don’t know why we even bring up the daggone word. How about some of these other teams out there that lose to unranked opponents all the time? That’s our 33rd win versus an unranked opponent. We ain’t lost to anybody unranked since 2011, but I have to come to a news conference in 2015 and get asked that.”Swinney’s recall of precisely how many unranked opponents Clemson had defeated since losing to North Carolina State on Nov. 19, 2011, perhaps betrayed a sensitivity to the term. (Later, he added, “We’re 7-3 versus top-10 teams.”)Swinney, who seemed aware that Clemsoning had been discussed that morning on ESPN’s “College GameDay,” added, “It’s like everyone’s sitting around, waiting on us to lose a game so they can say, ‘Oh, well, there you go again.’ ”The tirade went viral, with several hundred thousand views on YouTube. Swinney spoke with anger and dramatic pauses. He called to mind a character Will Ferrell played on “Saturday Night Live,” a beleaguered father who insists, dubiously, that he deserves more respectful treatment. “I drive a Dodge Stratus!” he pleads.The difference is that Swinney drives a Ferrari. Over the past four seasons, including this one, Clemson has gone 44-7 and 3-0 in bowl games. Every time Clemson lost, its opponent was ranked. Clemson also beat favored teams like Georgia, Ohio State and Louisiana State.And, of course, Clemson is perfect this season, ranked No. 1 in the Associated Press poll and by the Playoff selection committee, with victories over then-No. 6 Notre Dame and then-No. 11 Florida State.Asked in a subsequent teleconference whether the term had become passé, Swinney said, “I don’t know why people keep asking questions like this.”“Passé” may be the right word. In the twilight of Tommy Bowden’s tenure as head coach in the late 2000s, Clemson indeed was Clemsoning frequently. It was about this time, many suspect, that the term arose.“Clemsoning” experienced a renaissance midway through the 2011 season, Swinney’s third full campaign as head coach. After upsetting Florida State and Virginia Tech and rising to No. 6, Clemson lost three of its next four games, two of them to unranked teams. Worse, after managing to win the A.C.C. anyway, Clemson was manhandled by 23rd-ranked West Virginia, 70-33, in the Orange Bowl.Therein lies the other aspect of Clemsoning: losing in a particularly brutal way. In a 2008 loss to unranked Maryland, the Tigers were ahead, 17-6, at the half; they did not score again. In last year’s loss to Florida State — which was not, strictly speaking, a full-on Clemsoning — Swinney elected not to kick a 33-yard field goal in overtime. Even in that Orange Bowl beating, Clemson led after the first quarter before giving up five touchdowns in the second.But that was nearly four years ago. At TigerNet, a Clemson online message board, a fan who goes by acevans compiled a list of every game a ranked team lost to an unranked team since Clemson last did so. Through Oct. 9, there were 57 instances. The worst offender, with six, was, in acevans’s terminology, “USC (the real one).”The euphemism is telling. To put acevans on the couch for a moment: There is an obvious bit of resentment in the dig acevans takes at Clemson’s in-state rival — the University of South Carolina — by referring to the University of Southern California as the real U.S.C.Indeed, several recent Clemson losses have come against South Carolina, which tended to have the inferior football program until Steve Spurrier beefed it up in the 2000s. Even so, Clemson has always played the part of rural, overlooked underdog to South Carolina’s glamorous, urban favorite.No wonder the sports columnist Gene Sapakoff hypothesized this year that “Clemsoning” originated “in a fashionable Columbia ‘Man Cave’ where seven Gamecock fans and a Boykin spaniel regularly gathered to watch the Tigers struggle against Wake Forest.”Like all neuroses, then, Clemson fans’ sensitivity may derive as much from anxiety about change as from disrespect. Everyone takes some degree of comfort in the familiar, even if familiarity is losing winnable games.“I think they’re confident going in against North Carolina,” Swann, the radio host, said about Clemson fans. But then he could not help hedging: “Obviously the Tar Heels have won their fair share of high-scoring games and have a potent offense. But I think Clemson feels pretty secure in their defense — even though they’ve kind of let them down the past couple of weeks.”A letdown, it seems, may never be too far from Clemson fans’ thoughts.Advertisement