By BENJAMIN HOFFMANDEC. 6, 2015
Chiefs (6-5) at Raiders (5-6)4:05 p.m. Eastern time. Line: Chiefs by 2½N.F.L. Week 13 scores and highlightsIn Al Davis’s long run as owner of the Raiders, he often seemed obsessed with returning to the team’s days of Daryle Lamonica stretching the field with deep passes to Warren Wells. No quarterback — not even Ken Stabler and Jim Plunkett, who combined to win three Super Bowls — seemed to satisfy him, and no wide receiver was ever fast enough.Derek Carr may not be as flashy with the deep ball as Lamonica, who was known as the Mad Bomber, but Carr’s 24 touchdown passes this season have him on a pace to match Lamonica’s franchise record of 34, set in 1969. Unlike Lamonica, Carr has done it efficiently, with only six interceptions. In terms of adjusted passing yards per attempt, Carr’s 8.21 would be the third best mark in team history behind Stabler and Jay Schroeder.Helping matters considerably has been the emergence of Amari Cooper and Michael Crabtree as one of the best receiver combinations in the game. Cooper’s 851 receiving yards through 11 games are the fifth most by a rookie wide receiver since 1960, and Crabtree has 715 yards and six touchdowns.AdvertisementThe Chiefs have been surging, with five consecutive victories giving them an improbable shot at the playoffs after a 1-5 start. But injuries could play a large factor for them this week. In last week’s win over the Buffalo Bills, Kansas City’s offensive line was so beat up that Jeff Allen, a guard, had to stay in the game after an ankle injury because the team had no players left to take his place. The biggest blow might have been when Justin Houston, the Chiefs’ top pass rusher and the key to their defensive strategy, left with a knee injury.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Houston is now listed as questionable, and if he is unable to go, Carr will have plenty of time to carve up the Chiefs’ secondary.To win, Carr will probably need to be perfect, as the Chiefs’ offense has not turned the ball over in five consecutive games and should not have much trouble scoring against the subpar Oakland defense. But with a chance to complicate the playoff hopes of a division rival, Carr and the Raiders have a fighting chance.AdvertisementPICK: RAIDERSWe’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.