By MARC TRACYDEC. 6, 2015
INDIANAPOLIS — The biggest play of Michigan State’s season was essentially a lucky hop, late on an October afternoon, when Michigan’s punter, with his team ahead and 10 seconds left in the game, botched a low snap that bounded into the arms of Michigan State’s streaking Jalen Watts-Jackson, who ran it in for the winning touchdown as time expired.But at what point is so much good fortune no longer a matter of luck?Wherever that point is, Michigan State passed it this season.When it mattered most — in the Big Ten championship game, with a College Football Playoff spot on the line — the ball continued to bounce Michigan State’s way. The No. 5 Spartans (12-1, 8-1 Big Ten) prevailed in a 16-13 slugfest that will probably send them to the College Football Playoff.No. 1 Clemson and No. 2 Alabama also won their conference championship games Saturday, while No. 3 Oklahoma, a “solid” third seed, according to Jeff Long, the Playoff selection committee’s chairman, did not play. So entering Sunday, when the Playoff bracket will be announced shortly after noon, those three teams and the Spartans seemed likely to form college football’s final four.AdvertisementA fairy-tale season for No. 4 Iowa (12-1, 8-1), which has not won a national championship since 1958 yet ended the regular season as just one of two undefeated teams in the Football Bowl Subdivision, ended in crushing fashion.Advertisement“Time ran out on us,” said Coach Kirk Ferentz, who is in his 17th season. “Congratulations to them. Time ran out.”Sunday’s game ended on a drive epic in both its stakes and duration. It involved 22 plays and covered 82 yards, and took up more than nine minutes of the game clock. With time running low, Connor Cook, Michigan State’s pro-style quarterback, converted a fourth-and-2 inside the 5-yard line on an apparent designed run.Three plays later, the freshman running back L. J. Scott, who had only 96 carries during the regular season, managed to reach the ball into the end zone even as he was manhandled by several Iowa defenders.Spartans Coach Mark Dantonio, who also gave Scott the ball seven times on a prior drive, said after the game that he just felt the back was “in a rhythm.”Scott finished with 22 carries for 73 yards and the Spartans’ only touchdown.But the most consequential play may have come late in the first half. It prevented Iowa from scoring at least 3 points — the game’s final margin. And it came on a bounce.With Iowa up, 6-3, and driving on the Spartans’ 5-yard line, Iowa quarterback C. J. Beathard dropped back, hopped confidently for a few beats and fired the ball to tight end George Kittle, who held it briefly before being sandwiched by two defenders, popping the ball loose. It fell on the shoulder of one of the defenders, Riley Bullough — who was by that point facedown on the ground — and popped up like a lightly tossed rubber ball, just in time for safety Demetrious Cox to nab it with an outstretched arm for a touchback.“It all seemed pretty fast to me,” Cox said after the game, seemingly still amazed.The Spartans further showed their resilience by withstanding an 85-yard bomb from Beathard to wide receiver Tevaun Smith at the beginning of the fourth quarter. Beathard finished 18-of-26 passing for 216 yards, one touchdown and one interception.AdvertisementThat was the defense’s one misstep in an otherwise superb game, in which Iowa made it to the red zone only twice, capitalizing on those trips with just a single field goal.The defense’s star was Shilique Calhoun, a senior defensive end, team captain and prospective first-round N.F.L. draft pick. Calhoun compiled two sacks and six tackles. On one of the sacks he forced a fumble that Iowa recovered, but the play resulted in a loss of 13 yards that ended the prospect of the Hawkeyes’ tacking on more points in the second quarter, when they seemed to have a bit of momentum.If there are several different kinds of football games, then Michigan State has played all of them this season. The Michigan game was a gift, victory nabbed from the mandibles of defeat. A home win over then-No. 7 Oregon in the Spartans’ second game was a feel-good, redemptive win. Persevering over Ohio State in a Columbus rainstorm with the program’s all-time most prolific quarterback on the sideline was a spiritual as well as more temporal triumph.Even a 39-38 road loss to Nebraska was the one that got away. This? This was the game that didn’t. (Even if kicker Michael Geiger missed two 52-yard field-goal attempts — one as the first half ended that bounced off the crossbar.)Cook, who was injured in a Nov. 14 victory over Maryland, did not play on Nov. 21 against Ohio State and returned last week against Penn State, appeared not to be in full form, and admitted as much after the game.“Obviously,” he said,” I wasn’t 100 percent.” He finished 16-of-32 passing with 191 yards and one interception. Several times, because of mechanics or miscommunication with would-be receivers, he over- or underthrew his man.It did not help that Michigan State’s offensive line did not play up to its typical standard against Iowa’s smash-mouth defense. Having given up just 15 sacks in the previous 12 games, the Spartans’ line conceded two on Saturday.That statistic did not account for a play on Michigan State’s second drive of the game during which the freshman defensive end Parker Heese broke free and charged Cook.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Just before Cook was thrown to the ground, he got rid of the ball — right to the Iowa sophomore linebacker Josey Jewell.AdvertisementBefore the game both coaches compared his team to the other’s, with Dantonio going so far as to say that when he began tenures as a head coach — at Cincinnati in 2004, and then at Michigan State three years later — he modeled his teams in part after Iowa, which Ferentz has led since 1999.For much of the game the teams played like mirror images, and the offenses had about as much success against the defenses as someone dancing in front of a mirror has of outrunning his reflection.In the first quarter, they traded turnovers deep in each other’s territory, followed by chip-shot field goals.While Iowa has relied on a running back by committee because of injuries this season, with three different players splitting most of the carries, Michigan State spread around the running duties on Saturday, with Madre London carrying the ball 12 times and even Cook making five rushes for 8 total yards.Going forward, the Spartans’ challenge will be to maintain its finely wrought identity as an underdog against the reality that they have beaten four of the top 20 teams in the country.“Coach always tells us, ‘Whether we’re 12-0 or 0-12, you create the chip on your shoulder,’ ” Darien Harris said.As if to prove Harris’s point, Calhoun added: “There’s always going to be some level of disrespect. I like it.”An article in some copies last Sunday about Michigan State’s victory over Iowa in the Big Ten championship game in college football misidentified the Michigan State player off whom the football bounced, leading to an interception by the Spartans’ Demetrious Cox. He is Riley Bullough — not Byron Bullough, who is Riley’s brother and also a member of the Spartans.A version of this article appears in print on December 6, 2015, on Page SP1 of the New York edition with the headline: Spartans Take Big Ten Title By an Arm’s Length.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.