AdvertisementSupported byN.B.A. RoundupBy The Associated PressMichael Carter-Williams, the Bucks’ only healthy true point guard, had 20 points off the bench, and the Bucks used a 21-4 run in the third quarter to pull away for a 106-91 win over the Knicks on Saturday night in Milwaukee.Jabari Parker added 17 points, with a dunk and a jumper during the decisive spurt, which pushed Milwaukee’s lead to double digits.Defense, which has been a problem this season for the Bucks, was a strength against the Knicks. Carmelo Anthony led the Knicks with 18 points but was just 6 of 17 from the field.O. J. Mayo, a veteran shooting guard who started the game at point guard for the Bucks with three ballhandlers out, set the tone on offense and finished with 17 points.“One turnover for a guy who we would say likes to shoot it,” Coach Jason Kidd said. “I think he showed what it means to be a true teammate.”Mayo had five assists and was 8 of 12 from the field.“Whatever we need, you know,” Mayo said when asked about running the offense.The Knicks, playing for a second straight night, looked out of sorts.The Knicks trailed by 21 with 7 minutes 4 seconds left in the third quarter when Jose Calderon drew a technical foul at the end of the run and Coach Derek Fisher replaced his entire starting five.The fresh lineup settled the team, although the Knicks could get no closer than 9 points the rest of the night.“We didn’t start the third quarter in any way shape or form like we wanted to win the game,” Fisher said.The rookie Kristaps Porzingis, who had 12 points for the Knicks, drew sneers after slipping to the floor while fouling Johnny O’Bryant on a drive. But he impressed the crowd later in the second quarter by swooping by three defenders around the bucket for an athletic putback off a rebound.Anthony appeared to be in discomfort on the bench in the first quarter after bumping into the Bucks’ Giannis Antetokounmpo, and trainers treated his left knee. Anthony returned after a couple of minutes and played 32 minutes on the night.“They wanted it more than us on both ends of the court,” Anthony said. “They were more physical than us.”He said that his knee felt numb after receiving treatment but that otherwise it was “nothing serious.”Carter-Williams had lost his starting job because of inconsistency. But he played well on both ends against the Knicks, finishing with five assists and two turnovers.“He did a really good job attacking the paint, being able to finish, and also set up his teammates,” Kidd said.WARRIORS 112, RAPTORS 109 Stephen Curry made nine 3-pointers and scored 44 points, leading unbeaten Golden State to a victory at Toronto.Curry was 14 for 24 from the field and 9 for 15 from beyond the arc as Golden State pushed its N.B.A.-record start to 21-0. Klay Thompson scored 26 points for the Warriors, and Draymond Green had 16 points, 9 rebounds and 6 assists.According to the Elias Sports Bureau, the win pushed Golden State past the St. Louis Maroons of the Union Association, a predecessor to Major League Baseball, for the best start to a season by a professional sports team.HEAT 99, CAVALIERS 84 Dwyane Wade scored 19 points and took the fourth quarter off, Tyler Johnson had 19 points, and Miami took advantage of Cleveland’s decision to hold out LeBron James, beating the visiting Cavaliers. James was given the night off to rest.HORNETS 102, BULLS 96 Nicolas Batum scored 12 of his 24 points in the fourth quarter, and Charlotte beat host Chicago.Jimmy Butler scored 25 points for the Bulls.ROCKETS 120, KINGS 113 James Harden scored 31 points, Dwight Howard added 22, and host Houston outlasted Sacramento for its third straight win.SPURS 108, CELTICS 105 LaMarcus Aldridge scored 17 points, and San Antonio stayed unbeaten at home this season, holding off Boston.NUGGETS 108, 76ERS 105 Danilo Gallinari had 24 points, scoring on a go-ahead dunk with less than a minute remaining, to lead Denver to a win at Philadelphia.Will Barton added 16 points for the Nuggets, who ended a five-game trip by winning their second straight. They had ended an eight-game skid on Thursday.Robert Covington scored 18 points for Philadelphia, which dropped to 1-20.The Philadelphia rookie Jahlil Okafor sat out the second game of a two-game suspension imposed by the team on Wednesday after the release of a second video from a nightclub fight in Boston on Nov. 25.BLAZERS 109, T’WOLVES 103 Damian Lillard overcame a slow start to finish with 19 points and 7 assists, and visiting Portland rallied from 17 points down in the third quarter to beat Minnesota.Lillard missed nine of his first 12 shots. But his driving layup with 18.8 seconds left helped hold off a charge from the Timberwolves.Advertisement