AdvertisementSupported byAlabama 29, Florida 15By Ray GlierATLANTA — Something about Alabama quarterback Jake Coker runs contrary to the perception that he is merely a game manager, a quarterback with enough skill as a passer not to lead No. 2 Alabama to victory, but only to keep it from losing. The distinguishing characteristics of the Crimson Tide are a stingy defense and a dominant running back in Derrick Henry. But the success of Alabama is also tied to Coker, who runs through arm tackles, dives on loose balls and scrambles to avoid negative plays. Alabama won its 25th Southeastern Conference championship with a 29-15 win over No. 18 Florida on Saturday, and Henry gained 189 yards on 44 carries and was an obvious catalyst. But Coker dived on his own fumble in the first quarter in Alabama territory after being blindsided by a rusher, and he led a key second-quarter drive with his first zone-read run of the season, a 17-yard gain. He kept Alabama in field-goal range while the game was close by throwing a left-handed pass to avoid a sack, and he made many other competitive plays as the night went on.“I’ve been saying since Day 1, Coker is one of the toughest guys we have on this team, one of the hardest workers, one of the most competitive guys you will ever meet,” center Ryan Kelly said. “We’re glad to have him on our team.”With its second straight SEC title, Alabama (12-1, 7-1) will most likely get a berth in the College Football Playoff when the pairings for college football’s final four are announced Sunday. “I would be surprised if anybody has a lot of doubt about whether we should or shouldn’t be in the Playoff,” Alabama Coach Nick Saban said.A look at the top players in contention for college football’s highest honor.The Alabama run defense, the running of Henry and the superb special teams are the trademarks of the Crimson Tide, but Coker is just as responsible, as his play on Saturday indicated. He completed 18 of 26 passes for 204 yards and two touchdowns. “The guys out there bust their butts as hard as they can, so I can’t imagine not doing the same for them,” Coker said.Florida (10-3, 7-1) managed just 15 yards rushing, and quarterback Treon Harris was sacked five times and finished 9 0f 24 with one interception. The Gators, who have struggled offensively since quarterback Will Grier was suspended after a failed N.C.A.A. drug test at midseason, had 180 total yards.Florida’s stubborn defense made it difficult in the first half on Henry, who set the SEC single-season rushing record (1,986 yards), and the Gators held Alabama to 2 of 7 on third-down conversions in the half. The Tide clung to a 12-7 lead at the intermission. Coker fueled a second-quarter drive for a field goal with his 17-yard run, on which he pulled the ball back from Henry and kept it. His 55-yard pass to the freshman receiver Calvin Ridley set up Henry’s 2-yard run for a touchdown late in the second quarter of a game that Alabama — and the SEC — had to win to get into the Playoff.“I don’t think I’ve pulled one all year; I think that was the first one,” Coker said of the 17-yard dash.Before that play, the Tide had struggled for traction on offense. Alabama took a 2-0 lead in the first quarter when it blocked a punt out of the end zone for a safety. The Gators came back with an even bigger play on special teams when the freshman Antonio Callaway returned a punt 85 yards for a touchdown with 11 minutes 53 seconds left in the second period. It left Alabama, a 17 ½-point favorite, stunned and trailing, 7-2, before an announced crowd of 75,320.Coker then started making plays with his feet. His 17-yard run on the zone-read play along with a 10-yard run led to Adam Griffith’s 28-yard field goal to make it 7-5 with 5:45 left in the second.On Alabama’s next possession, Ridley got behind the Florida defense down the middle of the field on a 55-yard pass from Coker. Ridley caught it at the Gators’ 3-yard line, and Henry bashed into the end zone two plays later. Griffith’s kick made it 12-7 with just over two minutes remaining in the half.In the third quarter, Alabama finally found a way to crack the Florida defense. The Tide used wide receiver ArDarius Stewart to gain 5 yards on an end run. Coker then completed a 12-yard pass to Stewart for a first down. The Tide faced a fourth-and-2 from the Florida 38 when they came to the line quickly for the snap, and Coker sprinted right and completed a 16-yard pass to Stewart for a first down. The drive stalled at the Gators’ 16, but in a game in which points were hard to come by, Alabama kicked a 30-yard field goal for a 15-7 lead.The Florida defense was being stretched, and that left more of the middle of the field for Henry, who started to roll through the weary Gators. The Gators’ offense was stymied, with eight series in which the team ran three plays and punted. Florida was also 0 for 11 on third down.It was little wonder that Florida’s defense buckled in the second half. Coker connected with Stewart for a 32-yard touchdown in the third and with Richard Mullaney on a 9-yard touchdown catch in the fourth. Alabama had the ball for 43:29, compared with 16:31 for the Gators.Advertisement