AdvertisementSupported byKeeping ScoreBy Ben BerkonIt is not difficult to spot a star player in the major leagues. For the most part, statistics of herculean nature speak for themselves.For instance, Mike Trout reached base 40 percent of the time in 2015 and slugged 41 home runs. The average “true distance” of Trout’s homers even registered 10.9 feet farther than the league average, according to ESPN’s Home Run Tracker. Trout is a star.The equally dominating Clayton Kershaw stymied hitters with a Koufaxian 2.17 E.R.A. last season. He also led the major leagues with 301 strikeouts, the highest total for any pitcher since 2002. Kershaw is indisputably a star.A star is not typically a player whose career batting average sits at a pedestrian .265 and who has averaged only 12 home runs over the past three seasons.Those numbers belong to Ben Zobrist, a statistical muse of sorts among members of the sabermetric community. Isolating his recent offensive output put Zobrist in the “superutility” category — not a star, but a player who is nevertheless expected to garner a healthy raise from his $7.5 million salary. It is unlikely that Zobrist, 34, will leave this week’s winter meetings unsigned. The Mets, the San Francisco Giants, the Atlanta Braves and the Washington Nationals are among his suitors. He met with the Mets’ chief operating officer, Jeff Wilpon, and General Manager Sandy Alderson on Wednesday and toured available real estate in Westchester County and Connecticut.In a free-agent class brimming with nine-figure aspirants, Zobrist is of particular intrigue. He is entering the final chapter of an unlikely but successful career, in which he has combined position flexibility, stellar defense and base-running skills to fashion an Excel column of his own.This off-season, Zobrist is arguably the only player every team could find a fit for. So if he is such a precious jewel, how important is it that his fellow free agents Johnny Cueto, Yoenis Cespedes, Chris Davis and Justin Upton shine brighter and more frequently in traditional baseball achievements? “The game has changed,” said the former Mets general manager Jim Duquette, who has closely followed Zobrist’s career. “Players who are valued highly in metrics like wins above replacement get paid. Sabermetrically inclined front offices value players like Zobrist higher. In the past, superversatile players were undervalued. But in general, Zobrist-type players are now being valued differently.”Based on fWAR, FanGraphs’ version of the metric, Zobrist (37.2) has been the fifth most valuable position player since 2009, behind Miguel Cabrera (40.8), Andrew McCutchen (40.3), Trout (38.5) and Joey Votto (38.1).Zobrist first won attention in 2009. He batted .297 and smacked 27 home runs. But it was his 8.6 fWAR — the metric that, for better or worse, best encapsulates the breadth of a player’s skill set — that began to earn him respect. As exciting as it has been for fans to watch Zobrist shift around the diamond and play each position with soft hands and uncanny expertise, his coaches have truly appreciated his versatility and mental fortitude. “Managers love him; Joe Maddon gushed about him over the years,” Duquette said. “Besides the offensive production that he provides — making contact, taking a walk, moving runners over, base running — the ability to play above-average defense in multiple positions is not easy to do. In fact, it’s incredibly rare that you see that. And that’s what Zobrist brings to the equation; that’s what makes him so valuable.”According to two advanced fielding metrics, defensive runs saved and ultimate rating zone, Zobrist’s defense ranges from passable to elite. In FanGraphs’ statistics glossary, a player who has 15-plus D.R.S. or U.Z.R. while logging at least 500 innings in a season should be considered Gold Glove caliber. Zobrist has accomplished that twice at second base, in 2009 and in 2011. He also has near-elite numbers in right field, the position he has played the most after second base. “Zobrist could be thrown anywhere,” Duquette said. “A manager can put him in the defensive spot that best fits the matchup on a given day or in a given situation.” Given Zobrist’s skill set, placing a value on his future production is tricky. While Zobrist has recovered from the tear to his left medial meniscus that he sustained in April, his best days are behind him. But Dan Szymborski, an ESPN statistical analyst and the creator of ZiPS, a set of computer algorithms that estimate future performance, put Zobrist’s combined WAR at 7.5 over the next four seasons. That means Zobrist could be worth almost $63 million over that span, with 1.0 WAR equaling $8 million and 5 percent annual inflation.Numbers aside, Zobrist’s impressive résumé is a testament more to intangibles like his diligent mental preparation than to the sabermetrics that have prompted a discussion about what makes a star.“Zobrist’s mind-set was never coming to the ballpark assuming he was going to play any one position,” Duquette said. “He came to the park saying, ‘I’m going to be in the lineup — just play me.’ He put his work in before the game started to be prepared at any position — and in any situation — for his team.” He added: “It’s easier said than done — to do a little of everything well. That’s why he’s enticing. That’s why he’s going to get paid. To me, that’s what makes him a star.”Advertisement