AdvertisementSupported byRoundupBy The Associated PressJamie Vardy’s record scoring streak came to an end on Saturday, but Leicester still moved to the top of the Premier League standings with a 3-0 win at Swansea and with Manchester City’s 2-0 loss at Stoke City.Vardy, who had scored goals in 11 consecutive matches, was held scoreless, but Riyad Mahrez made up for it with a hat trick. Xherdan Shaqiri assisted on two Marko Arnautovic goals in Stoke’s win, which dropped City to third. Arsenal moved to second, 2 points behind Leicester, with a 3-1 home victory over Sunderland that ended a three-game winless streak. Fourth-place Manchester United was held to a 0-0 draw against visiting West Ham. Tottenham drew, 1-1, at West Bromwich Albion to stay 3 points behind United. Chelsea sank to a new low, losing at home, 1-0, to lowly Bournemouth.Joleon Lescott put Aston Villa in front at Southampton, but Oriol Romeu scored an equalizer, and the 1-1 draw extended Villa’s winless streak to 14 games. Watford moved into the top half of the standings by beating Norwich, 2-0, at home. FIRST LOSS FOR BAYERN MUNICH Fabian Johnson helped Borussia Mönchengladbach to a 3-1 home win that ended Bayern Munich’s unbeaten Bundesliga start. Johnson sealed the result in the 68th minute, two minutes after Lars Stindl made the score 2-0.Franck Ribéry, after missing 269 days to injury, came on with 15 minutes remaining and scored what proved Bayern’s consolation in the 81st minute.Shinji Kagawa scored in the third minute of injury time to give Borussia Dortmund a 2-1 win at Wolfsburg and cut Bayern’s league lead to 5 points.Elsewhere, Hertha Berlin defeated 10-man Bayer Leverkusen, 2-1, at home; Augsburg won, 1-0, at Cologne; Mainz won, 3-1, at Hamburger SV; and Ingolstadt drew, 1-1, with visiting Hoffenheim, which tied the score in the fifth minute of injury time.TWO GOALS FOR TROUBLED STRIKER Karim Benzema scored his first goals since being implicated in a blackmail case, and Real Madrid beat visiting Getafe, 4-1, and moved 4 points behind Barcelona, which leads the Spanish league.Barcelona’s Luis Suárez scored in the 59th minute at Valencia, but Barcelona allowed a late goal and settled for a 1-1 draw.Benzema scored in the fourth and 16th minutes, Gareth Bale added a third goal for Real Madrid in the 35th, and Cristiano Ronaldo scored in the 38th to give the team a needed victory.Real Madrid remained 2 points behind Atlético Madrid, which won at Granada, 2-0.INTER RECLAIMS LEAD Inter Milan moved back atop Serie A in Italy with a 1-0 win over visiting Genoa. Roma’s poor run of results continued as Torino snatched a 1-1 draw at home.Inter moved to 2 points above Napoli, which visits Bologna on Sunday.KEY U.S. PLAYER HURT Megan Rapinoe, who played for the United States as it won the Women’s World Cup, tore a knee ligament and will need surgery, jeopardizing her chances of playing in the Rio Games.Advertisement