AdvertisementSupported byRoundupBy The Associated PressChristian McCaffrey ran for 207 yards and a score, threw a touchdown pass, caught another and broke Barry Sanders’s single-season all-purpose yardage record to lead No. 7 Stanford to the Pacific-12 Conference championship on Saturday with a 41-22 win over No. 24 Southern California in Santa Clara, Calif.Kevin Hogan caught the touchdown pass from McCaffrey, threw another one and ran for a third, and Solomon Thomas scored on a 34-yard fumble return for the Cardinal (11-2), who are also No. 7 in the College Football Playoff rankings. Stanford will almost certainly play in the Rose Bowl as the Pac-12 champion.Cody Kessler threw for 187 yards and a touchdown and ran for another score for the Trojans (8-5), who lost in their first game since removing the interim tag from Coach Clay Helton.McCaffrey added 105 yards receiving and 149 return yards to give him 461 all-purpose yards for the game, a program record, and 3,496 for the season. That broke Sanders’s single-season record of 3,250 yards, set in 1988, although McCaffrey took two extra games to do it.With several conference championships on Saturday, here’s a look at how the College Football Playoff might shake out.HOUSTON 24, TEMPLE 13 Less than a year after arriving from Ohio State, Coach Tom Herman led No. 17 Houston (12-1) to a high-profile bowl for the first time in more than 20 years with a win at home over 20th-ranked Temple (10-3) in the inaugural American Athletic Conference championship game.Greg Ward Jr. ran for 148 yards and two touchdowns to secure Houston’s spot as the Group of Five representative and earn the Cougars a trip to the Peach Bowl or the Fiesta Bowl.TEXAS 23, BAYLOR 17 Tyrone Swoopes threw for 151 yards and a touchdown and ran for a score in his first start since the opener, and visiting Texas (4-7, 4-5 Big 12) held on to knock No. 12 Baylor (9-3, 6-3) out of Sugar Bowl contention in a game marred by a bench-clearing scuffle.After the game, the Baylor junior receiver Corey Coleman, the Football Bowl Subdivision leader with 20 touchdown catches, said he would bypass his senior season for early entry into the N.F.L. draft. KANSAS ST. 24, WEST VIRGINIA 23 Wide receiver Kody Cook led Kansas State to two touchdowns, the emergency quarterback Morgan Burns returned a kickoff 97 yards for the go-ahead score, and the Wildcats (6-6, 3-5 Big 12) beat West Virginia (7-5, 4-6) to become bowl eligible.COLGATE 44, JAMES MADISON 38 Jake Melville threw two touchdown passes and ran for two more, leading Colgate (9-4) to an upset at James Madison (9-3) in the second round of the Football Championship Subdivision playoffs. Colgate will face Sam Houston State in the quarterfinals.In the college football playoff rankings, many analysts focus on the teams. That’s the wrong way to think about the playoff picture.SYRACUSE HIRES A COACH Syracuse hired Bowling Green Coach Dino Babers to be its new coach, bringing his Baylor-style offense to the Carrier Dome.Babers, 54, led the Falcons to a 34-14 victory in the Mid-American Conference championship game on Friday night and has gone 18-9 in two seasons at Bowling Green. TAR HEELS RETAIN COACH North Carolina agreed to terms on a seven-year contract with Coach Larry Fedora, Athletic Director Bubba Cunningham said.HIRING REPORTED AT RUTGERS Rutgers has an agreement with the Ohio State defensive coordinator Chris Ash to become the Scarlet Knights’ new coach, according to multiple news reports.ARIZONA COACH WILL STAY Arizona Coach Rich Rodriguez has turned down an offer to become South Carolina’s coach, a move confirmed on Twitter by Arizona’s athletic director.Advertisement