
On Pro Basketball By                     
 HARVEY ARATON
 
DEC. 5, 2015
Ask around for the principal reason for the stunning first quarter of Kristaps Porzingis’s rookie season, and the answers are as varied as his skills.Before Porzingis, a 7-foot-3 Latvian, racked up his 10th double-double with 17 points and 10 rebounds in the Knicks’ 108-91 demolition of the Nets on Friday night at Madison Square Garden, Coach Derek Fisher said it was Porzingis’s consistency, competitively and behaviorally.The resurgent point guard Jose Calderon emphatically went with the work ethic of the 20-year-old Porzingis. “When you do anything they ask you to, and you work hard, usually it works out well,” Calderon said.The reserve Nets forward Sergey Karasev, a Russian who familiarized himself with Porzingis while playing in Europe and dined with him and Porzingis’s older brother, Janis, explained that Porzingis had come to America with unusual fortitude and conviction, cultivated by a basketball family that convinced him he was destined to succeed. “You could see that being around them,” Karasev said.AdvertisementLast week, Phil Jackson, previously quiet on his most significant decision as president of the Knicks, weighed in with the view from atop his Zen-bathed lighthouse. “There’s a magical element to this young man that’s caught the admiration of the fan base and around the country who follow the Knicks,” Jackson told Rick Fox, his former player with the Los Angeles Lakers, on Sirius XM radio.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Jackson said more, but “magical element” was the money quotation that made the talk show rounds. On ESPN’s “Pardon the Interruption,” Tony Kornheiser wasn’t impressed by Jackson’s indirect tribute to his own talent evaluation. He reminded viewers that Jackson’s prior public take on Porzingis, the fourth pick of June’s draft, had compared him to Shawn Bradley, best known over a 12-year N.B.A. career for being three inches taller than Porzingis.It made for a clever sound bite but was also a cheap joke, wildly out of context to the point of near fabrication.AdvertisementWhat Jackson told Charley Rosen, his longtime pal, for a summer installment in a series of ESPN.com dispatches on the Knicks’ horrendous 2014-15 season was that he worried Porzingis “might almost be too tall for the game” — meaning that “his core strength might never be good enough and that he might not be able to get low enough to get himself into prime defensive position to body power rebounders or drivers.”With rare exceptions, high draft picks come with flashing warning labels stamped to their foreheads. In that same posting, Jackson also spoke of what sold him on Porzingis, who, in 2015, has finally made the great melting pot of New York a meaningful participant in the league’s globalization movement of the late 20th century.It was a game tape provided to him by Clarence Gaines, his “primary adviser” and “superscout.” Porzingis’s team, Baloncesto Sevilla, needed to defeat Barcelona to avoid being downgraded to a lower division.Jackson said: “Although the competition in the Spanish League is more physical, more consistent and more advanced than even the best D-I college teams over here, K. P. more than held his own. He had a long, lively body, a well-developed basketball IQ, a soft shot with terrific range, and he didn’t back down from anybody. Plus, he showed an amazing athleticism for somebody his size.”In other words, the characteristics that have — like elementary magic — lifted the decade-plus despair from the Knicks’ fan base.Yes, there was a healthy dose of serendipity involved in Jackson’s landing of Porzingis. Karl-Anthony Towns was the nearly universal choice to go first to Minnesota. But the Lakers took a long look at Porzingis and instead chose point guard D’Angelo Russell. Philadelphia — the 76ers, bless them, also took Shawn Bradley, with the second pick of the 1993 draft — went with a third successive big man (Jahlil Okafor) with limited ability to play outside 10 feet in a league of tall folks with increasingly diverse skills.To Jackson’s credit, he had plenty of experts calling for a more known quantity — a Justise Winslow, a Willie Cauley-Stein, a (heh heh) Frank Kaminsky, or the explosive point guard Emmanuel Mudiay. Given a rare opportunity to affect the Knicks’ future and to polish an already dulled front-office legacy, Jackson wasn’t settling for an upgrade to Carmelo Anthony’s support group; he imagined, in Porzingis, an eventual centerpiece and talent magnet that Anthony, 31, could no longer be, if he ever was.Jackson can say now, as he did last week: “He’s got the right temperament, right attitude, carries himself well.” But he couldn’t possibly have known Porzingis would adapt so quickly, so firmly, so unhesitatingly.AdvertisementAsked if his on-court calm was as authentic as it appeared, Porzingis admitted to being nervous, but only before the Knicks’ first preseason game at the Garden. “I wanted to show the crowd who I am,” he said. “Now I’m really relaxed; I try to stay calm through bad calls and stuff like that.”There is a quality about Porzingis that is difficult to quantify, a manner of speaking that suggests he knows his place while simultaneously sharing the belief, in no uncertain terms, that he belongs. This is rare in players so young, who are usually given to extremes, one way or the other.A decade ago, the Spaniard Rafael Nadal emerged in tennis with a similar approach, unusually respectful but self-assured, if also more flamboyant in an individual sport. Nadal won the French Open at 19. The Knicks are not soon claiming an N.B.A. title. At 10-11, and in an improved Eastern Conference, they remain a long shot to make the playoffs.But in Porzingis, who scored 12 points in a 106-91 loss at Milwaukee on Saturday night, the Knicks suddenly have a skilled big man who does little things, like the gentle back-tap he made on a surprisingly quick second jump in a third-quarter tangle around the rim Friday night. He kept alive a possession that resulted in his third 3-point shot of the game.Some of these contributions show up in the box score; some do not. In fact, Porzingis was on the bench when the game statistician added a rebound to his total, securing the double-double.He was unaware of this in the postgame locker room, meaning he hadn’t reached for a box score as soon as he could. Add another explanation for why he was named the league’s rookie of the month and why this is looking to be the Knicks’ turnaround year.A version of this article appears in print on December 6, 2015, on Page SP8 of the New York edition with the headline: Secrets to Rookie’s Success: Skill, Consistency, Hard Work, Magic.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »