
On Tennis By                     
 CHRISTOPHER CLAREY
 
DEC. 5, 2015
Tennis’s often-questioned antidoping program took some new hits last month when Andy Murray called for more investment and Roger Federer called for more testing.“I’m always surprised,” Federer said at the ATP World Tour Finals in London. “I win a tournament. I walk off the court, and it’s like, ‘Where’s the doping guy?’ ”When Federer arches an eyebrow and complains, it soon goes global, all the more so at a moment when Russia has been barred from international track and field by the sport’s governing body, the International Association of Athletics Federations, for operating what investigators said was essentially a state-sponsored doping program — and all the more so when institutional corruption seems to be all the rage in global sports (see FIFA’s expanding rap sheet).“I think when you have news like you do, the I.A.A.F. and Russia, it raises alarms, as it should, and it makes us look at everything we do,” David Haggerty, the new president of the International Tennis Federation, said from London last week. “It makes us want to make sure we are the best we can be and have programs that really have integrity, whether it’s antidoping, anticorruption or governance.”AdvertisementThe idea of a federation administering doping tests to its own athletes and meal tickets has been flawed from the start. It has never looked more untenable than in light of the allegations that Lamine Diack, president of the I.A.A.F. for 16 years, took bribes to cover up positive doping tests.AdvertisementDiack has yet to be proved guilty, but whatever the verdict, there will be fallout. The I.A.A.F., or what is left of it, is calling for outsourcing, and the World Anti-Doping Agency has been asked by the International Olympic Committee to study the possibility of assuming responsibility for all federations’ testing duties.That is a lot easier to study than to enact. If the system becomes centralized, it will carry its own risks — who monitors the new monitor? — as well as a big price tag. But at least the inherent conflict of interest would be gone.“I absolutely see that point, and I think there’s merit to that,” said Haggerty, an American and a former tennis industry executive.What Haggerty wants to explore is the idea of an external watchdog that could monitor a much broader range of activities at the I.T.F. than simply antidoping efforts.“I think there’s a way to look at this holistically and to have a unit within your federation — your company, so to speak — along with external audit,” he said. “Because to me, I think good governance in federations is the biggest issue today we face.”But antidoping needs to remain a top priority, even if it may eventually be the responsibility of WADA or some other umbrella organization.“I can see a number of challenges that would, at the very least, preclude that from becoming realistic for three to five years,” said Stuart Miller, the I.T.F. executive who oversees the program. “I don’t think we can sit on our hands while that process goes on.”AdvertisementHaggerty, who has consulted with the other tennis leaders whose groups contribute to the program’s funding, said the consensus was there to increase both resources and budget when the next long-term antidoping plan is enacted in 2017. The current annual budget, which has not been made public, is believed to be about $4 million.“We’ve said to Stuart, ‘Look, resources aren’t an issue — come up with an idea and a plan that is best for tennis, and then we look at it,’ ” Haggerty said. “But I think we do have a plan that has integrity that will work for ’16, and it’s not as if we are going to triple in ’17, which would mean we are so bad in ’16. I think we are comfortable with where we are.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Despite Murray’s and Federer’s criticisms, the I.T.F. has improved its game and its numbers significantly since 2012, adding a biological passport program. About 600 players now have profiles, Miller said. He also said out-of-competition tests, a vital element in any antidoping program, would be “close to 50 percent of the total” this year, up significantly from 15 percent in 2012.That year, the I.T.F. reported that it had administered just 63 out-of-competition blood tests; in 2014, the reported number was 1,139. Some tests classified as out-of-competition are being conducted at tournament sites on players who have been eliminated, but Miller said those represented only about 10 percent of the total.“I think they are pretty well on track, and I think the areas they have improved in are quite significant,” David Howman, WADA’s director general, said recently. “I think the major thing, though, is the absolute commitment that the top players are showing to the program by speaking out, and that is something that is almost unique if you look around the place and look at other sports. If you reflect back to 2009, there were a lot of the same top players — not Federer, I have to say, but Andy Murray and Rafael Nadal, who were complaining about the whereabouts system and a few other issues in the code that was introduced then. So there has been a 180-degree swing from the attitude of the players, which I find commendable.”Miller took a sanguine approach to Federer’s complaint about the absence of testers at tournaments, a situation partly explained by the consensus in antidoping circles that in-competition testing is unlikely to catch anyone other than the uninformed or unintelligent cheater.“Firstly, it suggests to me that he’s got the expectation he is going to be tested, and that’s a good thing,” Miller said of Federer. “But as anybody knows, and in any antidoping program in any sport around the world, you can’t test every player in every event in every round of the competition. You pick and choose to provide a balance of detection and deterrence. In a lot of events, we test right at the end. In some other events, we go and get a larger number of players who play the first round who, once they’ve lost, might be lost to the program for a little while. We need to maintain variety. We need to maintain unpredictability.”The desire to remain unpredictable is why Miller rejected Nadal’s call to publicly announce that a player had been tested. Miller wants to avoid providing clues to testing patterns.AdvertisementSignificant concerns remain, along with the nagging sense that tennis is not catching enough players or enough stars, although in 2013 Marin Cilic and Viktor Troicki were sanctioned before having their suspensions reduced on appeal.“We’ve had doping violations for Mariano Puerta, Martina Hingis, Richard Gasquet and Marin Cilic; these are all top-10 players,” Miller said. “And there have only been 80 violations over the last 25 years, so that’s 6 or 7 percent of them who have been top-10 players. So I don’t think that a broad-brush statement that we don’t catch stars or whatever that means is necessarily true. But it’s important that we don’t just test the very top players.”Yet out-of-competition testing for players outside the top 50 was still worryingly low in 2014, and testing remains very low at the entry level of the professional game. “Really, you don’t get tested,” Jean-Yves Aubone, a 27-year-old American playing at the Futures level, said last month.Miller said the plan was to increase the program’s Futures presence, but Howman emphasized that some of that responsibility lay with the national antidoping organizations, or NADOs. The I.T.F. is expected to account for about three-quarters of all the testing of pro tennis players this year, Miller said, which means that NADOs are carrying much less of the testing load in tennis than in many other sports.“My knowledge of what NADOs do is they look at risks within sports, and maybe they don’t regard tennis as a high risk,” Howman said.That seems misguided. Tennis is a true power game now, with a huge emphasis on quickness and recovery. It has also had a strong, if diminishing, Russian presence at the top in the last 20 years. How concerned is Miller that some cheaters might have escaped detection?“One of the good things about tennis in that regard is that players don’t stay in their home countries a lot,” he said. “We have had testing programs that include testing of Russian players outside of Russia, so it’s not a bleak scene in that regard.”Russia no longer has an approved international antidoping laboratory now that the Moscow lab has been decertified by WADA. Some samples in Russia were destroyed, but Miller said his team had accounted for all 186 samples that were collected from tennis players in the last three years and that passed through the Moscow lab. He said the I.T.F. was trying to get them out of the country, with plans to retest some of the samples.The more pressing challenge is exporting and testing new samples from Russia, particularly blood samples, which are time sensitive. But then tennis is hardly alone in that race against the clock.A version of this article appears in print on December 6, 2015, on Page SP2 of the New York edition with the headline: I.T.F.’s Antidoping Policy Poses Test for New Leader.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »