By ALLAN KREDADEC. 5, 2015
Closing in on 600 career goals, Colorado Avalanche forward Jarome Iginla is thinking only of his next game.“I’m definitely fortunate to be close to such a cool milestone,” Iginla, 38, said recently. “I just want to keep playing and keep going. I try not to think about numbers too much.”Iginla, who remained at 597 goals after going scoreless in Saturday night’s 3-0 loss to the Minnesota Wild, would have every right to brag about his offensive prowess. Now in his 19th season, he is second to Jaromir Jagr in goals among active players. Iginla twice led the N.H.L. in goals and had a stretch of 11 straight seasons with 30 or more goals. He led the Avalanche with 29 goals last season and has eight this season as he nears the 600 mark, which only 18 players in league history have reached.“I would definitely be kidding you if I had guessed this kind of goals total,” said Iginla, whose earliest hockey lessons came from his maternal grandfather while he was growing up in Edmonton. “It’s a neat job, a great job for sure.”AdvertisementIginla still swoops down the wing with the same force and speed he displayed when he joined Calgary as a teenager in a trade from Dallas before he ever laced up skates for the Stars.AdvertisementAgainst the Rangers on Thursday at Madison Square Garden, where he recorded his first hat trick in March 2002, Iginla skated on a line with his former Flames teammate Alex Tanguay, 36, and the 21-year-old center Mikhail Grigorenko.Tanguay, who played five seasons with Iginla in Calgary, called him a “down-to-earth good guy and a really hard worker.”Tanguay added: “We’ve been friends for a long time. He’s a leader and a future Hall of Famer. It’s great to have him around.”Iginla, whose father is Nigerian, has been a trailblazer in hockey. He is frequently cited as the first black captain in league history since the Flames gave him the C in 2003.Now he is an alternate captain in Colorado, where he is enjoying being an elder statesman in his second season with the talent-laden but underperforming Avalanche.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.He has been a role model for Colorado’s offensive core, which is led by Nathan MacKinnon, 20; the team’s captain, Gabriel Landeskog, 23; and the 24-year-old Matt Duchene.Iginla spent much of his time on the bench during Thursday’s 2-1 victory over the Rangers talking with Grigorenko, gesturing to him and good-naturedly offering words of advice.Advertisement“Part of the role of a veteran is to share with the young guys and have fun,” said Iginla, who credits his former Flames teammates Dave Gagner and Theo Fleury with mentoring him in his rookie year. “You’re not trying to teach all the time, but I try to share what I can during a game.”Avalanche General Manager Joe Sakic, the captain of the franchise’s two Stanley Cup winners during his Hall of Fame playing career, speaks with reverence of Iginla, an Olympic teammate with Team Canada.“Jarome commands a lot of respect,” Sakic said. “And nearing 600 goals is an amazing accomplishment, especially in the era he’s done it in. It’s tough to score goals now.”Rangers Coach Alain Vigneault is plenty familiar with Iginla’s fierce competitiveness. He saw plenty of Iginla’s dynamic skills during the seven seasons he coached the Vancouver Canucks, while Iginla was Calgary’s captain and perennial leading scorer.“He’s a real big-time competitor — there’s no doubt on the skill and the shot,” Vigneault said. “I remember some battles we had in Calgary and Vancouver. A lot of times we were better off letting him — I don’t want to say sleep because it’s not the right word, but not disturbing him too much because when he got wound up and fired up, he was really tough to handle.”Craig Conroy, who had his best season centering a line with Iginla in 2001-2 with the Flames, said there was no reason his former teammate could not replicate what Jagr is achieving by playing well into his 40s.“Jarome just has a desire to score goals,” said Conroy, now the assistant general manager for the Flames. “And he’s a Jagr-type guy, the way he trains and takes care of himself. As long as he does that, he will continue to be productive.”Jari Kurri (601 goals) is next ahead of Iginla on the career list, followed by Dino Ciccarelli (608), Bobby Hull (610) and Iginla’s boss — Sakic — at 625.Iginla also keeps striving for a return to the postseason. He came closest to a Stanley Cup in 2004, when the Flames led the finals, three games to two, before the Tampa Bay Lightning won Game 6 in double overtime and took Game 7, 2-1.Advertisement“I sure wish we could have won, but that’s part of sports and part of life,” Iginla said. “It was still a great experience to go that far and be that close. Obviously I’d like to win the Stanley Cup, but all the stuff in between has been pretty cool too.”A version of this article appears in print on December 6, 2015, on Page SP7 of the New York edition with the headline: At 38, Iginla Chases a Milestone With No Shortage of Force or Speed.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.