AdvertisementSupported byOn BaseballBy Tyler KepnerIf Billy Wagner had his way, he would not have pitched when he did, from 1995 through 2010. His grandparents loved baseball and taught him about the pioneers.“I’m a traditionalist at heart,” Wagner said by phone the other day. “I would love to have played when you were wearing fedoras and suits, and there wasn’t a disconnect between fans and players — that golden age. That’s the era I wanted to play in. That’s what I wish.”On Monday, at the winter meetings in Nashville, the Hall of Fame will announce the first part of its 2016 class. A panel of Hall of Famers, executives and writers is considering 10 candidates from the era before integration. Four were born before the Civil War. All of them are dead.This is where candidates go when the Baseball Writers’ Association of America passes them over. They can resurface forever, for another look by a smaller committee. The days of fedoras and flannel uniforms are always under review.In recent years, with so many strong candidates on a ballot limited to 10 choices, a batch of terrific players has failed to survive for a second turn on the writers’ ballot. Candidates need 75 percent of the vote to be elected, but they must maintain 5 percent to stay on the ballot for up to 10 years.John Franco (424 saves), Carlos Delgado (473 homers), Kenny Lofton (622 steals) and Kevin Brown (211 wins) never made it to Year 2. Should they have plaques in Cooperstown? Maybe not, but such a swift dismissal seemed hasty, given their impact.This brings us back to Wagner, a left-hander who will make his first appearance on the writers’ ballot, due at the end of the year. (The New York Times does not allow its reporters to vote.) There are 17 holdover candidates, including 10 who got at least 24.6 percent last year: Mike Piazza, Jeff Bagwell, Tim Raines, Curt Schilling, Roger Clemens, Barry Bonds, Lee Smith, Edgar Martinez, Alan Trammell and Mike Mussina. The others are Jeff Kent, Fred McGriff, Larry Walker, Gary Sheffield, Mark McGwire, Sammy Sosa and Nomar Garciaparra. Newcomers include Ken Griffey Jr., Trevor Hoffman, Jim Edmonds and Wagner.In other words, there are a lot of compelling names for voters to digest. But Wagner makes a better case than you might think, even with advanced statistics playing down the importance of the one-inning closer.“You talk to writers and they say a lot of the same things, until they look at the numbers and they say, ‘Well, wait a minute,’ ” Wagner said. “Most writers that I’ve talked to, they go, ‘Well, we don’t even worry about saves.’ Well, O.K., if you’re not looking at saves, I’m probably the best. There’s no numbers to dispute that I wasn’t better than anybody else.”Wagner ranks fifth on the career saves list with 422, trailing Mariano Rivera (who is not yet eligible for the Hall of Fame), Hoffman, Smith and Franco. Among that group, Wagner has the best WHIP (walks plus hits per inning pitched), at 0.998. His 2.31 E.R.A. ranks second to Rivera’s, which was 10 points lower. His save percentage (85.9) trails Hoffman’s (88.8) and Rivera’s (89.1).Then there are statistics that measure pure dominance. Of all major league pitchers with at least 900 innings, Wagner ranks first in opponents’ batting average (.187) and strikeouts per nine innings (11.92). Not bad for a natural right-hander who was 5 feet 5 inches and 135 pounds coming out of high school and said he played clean in the steroid era.“It’s a credit to me that whoever took the steroids, they did it because they had to compete with me,” Wagner said before citing a well-known, confirmed user. “The peace of mind that I have is A-Rod took steroids because he had to compete against somebody like me who, by all rights, had no business being on the same field. But you had to take that, and you still couldn’t beat me. That’s what I like, and that’s what I’m happy about.”Not counting Dennis Eckersley and John Smoltz — who also spent many years starting — there are essentially four closers in the Hall of Fame: Hoyt Wilhelm, Rollie Fingers, Goose Gossage and Bruce Sutter. All won the World Series, and all won the Cy Young Award except Wilhelm, who retired as the career leader in games pitched.Wagner (like Rivera, Hoffman, Smith and Franco) did not win a Cy Young Award. He helped the Houston Astros and three other teams reach the postseason, but he had an odd playoff career: a 10.03 E.R.A. in seven series, yet only four save chances, of which he converted three. He never pitched in the World Series.In Game 7 of the 2006 National League Championship Series, in the ninth inning of a tie game at home, Mets Manager Willie Randolph used Aaron Heilman for a second inning of work against St. Louis instead of turning to Wagner. Wagner, who had given up two runs in a victory the night before, watched from his seat as Yadier Molina homered.“I’m sitting there, I’m in the bullpen, warmed up, ready to go, and I mean — I don’t know,” Wagner said. “That was one of those things.”Wagner’s last game came in the playoffs for Atlanta in 2010. He was 39 and had just earned 37 saves with a 1.43 E.R.A. He retired to Virginia to help raise his four children, and he now coaches high school and travel baseball. He has no regrets.“I could have probably pitched another year, but what would it have cost me?” Wagner said. “You’re past the point of financial security. You’re playing strictly for Hall of Fame numbers and to win a championship, which, for me, didn’t come. The relevance is, ‘How were you when you played?’ Not ‘Why did you retire?’ but ‘How were you when you played?’ ”When Wagner played, few hitters could touch him. Such dominance is worthy, at least, of a long look.Advertisement