AdvertisementSupported byBy Bill PenningtonEAST RUTHERFORD, N.J. — Week after week this season, players on teams preparing to face the Giants have braced themselves for a distinctive line of questioning from reporters. Compelled to appraise the Giants’ incandescent Odell Beckham Jr., opponents have responded with a mixture of genial regard, passive-aggressive reluctance or outward irritation.As the Jets prepared last week to face the Giants on Sunday for the 13th regular-season game between the teams, it was hardly surprising when much of the conversation once again turned to Beckham, the 23-year-old who in 23 games of a two-year career has helped recast the image of the modern N.F.L. wide receiver. Increasingly, the likeness of someone at Beckham’s position would be a figurine of a player diving across an end zone, his arm outstretched to make an acrobatic one-handed catch.This is the world Beckham has created, and for a week the Jets were forced to intersect its orbit, with Beckham the biggest subplot in the latest chapter of the 45-year-old Jets-Giants rivalry.On Thursday, Beckham nodded and grinned when told that he was a hot topic in the opposing locker room.“People have their eye open,” he said. “I don’t think there’s a big surprise or a big elephant in the room that needs to be addressed.“If I cross their minds, that’s fine. If I don’t cross their minds, that’s fine, too.”Beckham has undoubtedly crossed the Jets’ minds, especially since their top cornerback, Darrelle Revis, will not be available to shadow Beckham from sideline to sideline. One Jets defensive back, Darrin Walls, even hinted that the Jets would be borrowing tactics used by New England cornerback Malcolm Butler, who stripped the ball from Beckham to negate a likely game-winning touchdown when the Giants played the Patriots last month.Walls’s comment drew Tom Coughlin, the typically reserved Giants coach, into the all-things-Beckham banter during the week. When informed of Walls’s intimation, Coughlin raised an intrigued eyebrow.“I didn’t know about this quote,” Coughlin said. Referring to Beckham, Coughlin continued, “But now that you give it to me, I’ll make sure he hears it.”Beckham could not stay out of the repartee about how to stop him, either.“That’s their job,” Beckham said of the notion that defenders would make it a point of emphasis to strip the football from him. “It’s surprising that somebody is just now saying that. Obviously, that’s what you have to do.”Then there were the comments from Jets safety Calvin Pryor, who was either trying to appease and soften up Beckham and his teammates or playing possum as he waved a white flag.“Whenever the ball is thrown to him,” Pryor said of Beckham, “whether it’s with two hands, one hand, no hands — he’s going to try to catch the ball. He’s a heck of a player.”How can my team make the N.F.L. playoffs? It’s a simple question, but answering it can be devilishly complicated. This interactive simulator walks you through the scenarios.Lost in all the wordplay is something seemingly new to the rivalry. There may never have been so much focus on a Giants wide receiver in the buildup to a Jets-Giants game.A top pass-catching threat for the Jets — whether it was Wesley Walker, Al Toon or Keyshawn Johnson — has occasionally found the pregame spotlight in the rivalry, but a Giants wide receiver has seldom been the most feared offensive weapon consuming the attention of Jets defenders.The Giants and the Jets first played each other in the regular season in 1970. From that year until 2005, the Giants did not have a Pro Bowl wide receiver.It is true that the last Jets-Giants game, in 2011, may be best remembered for Victor Cruz’s 99-yard touchdown gallop. But in a telling indication of just how worried the Jets were about Cruz, Revis, the Jets’ Pro Bowl cornerback, was 35 yards across the field during the play, covering another Giants receiver.Neither Cruz nor Hakeem Nicks, the Giants’ top pass-receiving threat that season, got special attention during that Christmas Eve game.Everything will be different Sunday in a game with significant playoff implications. Beckham has been charged with resurrecting the Giants’ season, especially since the Giants rushed for only 33 yards in last weekend’s loss in Washington.Beckham has become the focus of the offense. About 35 percent of the passes thrown by Eli Manning last week were intended for Beckham, and 27 percent of all Giants plays last week were throws in Beckham’s direction.What bothered the Giants in defeat last week was that Beckham, who had nine receptions for 142 yards and a touchdown, nevertheless caught only half the passes Manning threw to him.“I know he had a great one-handed catch, but I thought we had too many throws to Odell that we didn’t complete down the field,” Manning said. “He and I have to get together on that and figure out how to make some of those plays. It’s not about forcing the ball to him; it’s about giving him a shot to make some plays.”Manning met with Beckham on Tuesday — normally an off day for players — to see if they could determine what had been going wrong.“It’s really the littlest things,” Beckham said. “It could have been my angle 20-something yards down the field on a go route. It could be anything. It’s a game of inches, where if you’re one inch out of position, the play can’t be made. So we talked about those things. We need to be on the same page. That’s our plan.”Back at the Jets’ compound, as an old rivalry welcomed new faces, one name still remained on the tips of many tongues. Jets coaches were devising strategies to stop Beckham for the first time in their careers.Jets Coach Todd Bowles conceded that Beckham had the Jets guessing. Against man-to-man pass coverage, Bowles acknowledged, Beckham will make his share of plays. But Bowles added, “You can’t double him the entire game.”The solution?“It’s going to be a chess match,” Bowles said.Ben Shpigel and Tom Pedulla contributed reporting.Advertisement