AdvertisementSupported byBy Rebecca R. RuizBERN, Switzerland — As Swiss authorities again carried out the wishes of United States law enforcement early Thursday, arresting two global soccer officials in Zurich who had been indicted in Brooklyn federal court, American prosecutors praised Switzerland as a critical partner in the Justice Department’s corruption case.But in contrast to that publicly harmonious partnership, government officials from the two countries have hardly worked in lock step. Swiss authorities have been wary of appearing as puppets of the United States, according to people familiar with the thinking of Switzerland’s Office of the Attorney General, and they are eager to telegraph that the United States is not Switzerland’s most vigilant policeman.Several United States government agencies — notably the United States attorney’s office for the Eastern District of New York, the New York field office of the F.B.I. and the I.R.S.’s criminal investigation unit — have spent years investigating what they call a global network of soccer officials and businessmen who have participated in corruption schemes amounting to hundreds of millions of dollars. They have needed cooperation from many countries, especially Switzerland because it is home to FIFA, soccer’s world governing body, based in Zurich.But Switzerland’s privacy laws have stoked a behind-the-scenes competition, keeping potential key evidence out of the immediate reach of American prosecutors at the same time that Swiss prosecutors have trumpeted their own independent criminal inquiry into global soccer’s top leadership.“They’re playing a game of Ping-Pong,” said Mark Pieth, a professor of criminal law at the University of Basel. “Switzerland has direct access to FIFA’s documents, which has its advantages, and the United States has defendants in its case who are now talking.”In the United States indictments unsealed in May and on Thursday, FIFA — a nonprofit with more than $1.5 billion in cash reserves — was framed as the victim. The organization has not been charged with any crime.The 16 men arrested Thursday include five current or former members of FIFA’s ruling executive committee and the current presidents of Concacaf and Conmebol.Responding to the United States’ allegations, FIFA hired top white-collar defense lawyers from the American firm Quinn Emanuel to conduct an internal investigation. A principal aim of that inquiry was to share information with American prosecutors, FIFA said.But since the summer, Swiss law has blocked the organization from sending the results of that inquiry to the United States, according to people familiar with the internal investigation and with FIFA’s communications with American and Swiss authorities. Swiss officials indicated unusual reluctance to waive the law in question, those people said, and the situation for months left FIFA caught between two federal powers — while also leaving United States investigators without access to potentially critical information to advance their case.Vanessa Alarcon Duvanel, a lawyer with White & Case in Geneva with expertise in introducing evidence from Switzerland into United States legal proceedings, said it was not unusual to have the law, Article 271 of the Swiss criminal code, waived.The circumstances for FIFA, presenting a potential choice between pleasing one government and alienating another, recalled the United States’ tax evasion case settled against UBS in 2009, in which the same law forbade banks to fulfill American authorities’ requests for the names of account holders. The two governments later signed a treaty to resolve future conflicts specific to banks.The law’s relevance to the FIFA case, however, shines a new light on Switzerland as a bastion of privacy, not just for financial institutions but also for the many sports organizations headquartered there.In recent months, the people running FIFA’s internal investigation weighed sharing documents with the United States and facing jail time for violating Swiss law, or not sharing documents and jeopardizing the organization’s status as a cooperating victim, possibly risking a suit from American prosecutors, according to people familiar with the situation.To avoid either scenario, FIFA considered filing civil lawsuits in United States court against the people indicted by the Justice Department — not only to recover money but also to bring documents into American jurisdiction without violating Swiss criminal law.The Justice Department unsealed a 236-page indictment on Thursday that described charges against some of the most powerful leaders of international soccer.This past week, as the governments came together to orchestrate another round of arrests, the three parties — FIFA, American authorities and Swiss authorities — reached a tentative agreement, according to people involved in those discussions, to soon allow the potential evidence into the United States.But in the months leading to that tentative agreement, Switzerland’s Office of the Attorney General, which had not formally investigated FIFA until last spring, strategically publicized that it was now taking a hard look at soccer’s top leadership.In late September, Michael Lauber, Switzerland’s attorney general, announced that his office had opened a criminal inquiry into Sepp Blatter, FIFA’s president, who is not a defendant in the United States’ case. In response, FIFA’s ethics committee suspended Mr. Blatter and several other top officials.For Swiss prosecutors to publicly identify the subject of such a criminal investigation is unusual, said Mr. Pieth, the criminal law professor in Switzerland, who also formerly led FIFA’s independent governance committee.Like the United States, Switzerland presumes people to be innocent until proven guilty. The country, however, permits the identification of individuals under investigation in cases in which the information may “warn or reassure” the public, or because of “special circumstances.”Doing so, however, allows the person under investigation, Mr. Blatter, to gain access to the attorney general’s investigative file on him, giving his lawyers the opportunity to build a defense before any possible charges might be brought.Still, Switzerland seized those special circumstances, announcing the inquiry in a high-profile fashion last fall, when FIFA’s top leadership had congregated in Zurich.“The Swiss attorney general learned from Loretta Lynch,” Mr. Pieth said, referring to the United States’ May announcement by Ms. Lynch, the United States attorney general, which coincided with a meeting of hundreds of members of FIFA from around the world. (Thursday’s actions, too, came as the organization’s top two dozen people had descended on Zurich for meetings.)“The Swiss suddenly see this as a chance,” Mr. Pieth said. “Mr. Lauber is in a way making his reputation, as is Loretta Lynch, and I think he likes to be seen with her onstage.”Asked on Thursday about Switzerland’s decision to publicly name Mr. Blatter as a suspect, Ms. Lynch noted that she had appeared at a news conference with Mr. Lauber days before that announcement. “I congratulated him on the investigative work that his office had taken and thanked him again for their great cooperation with us,” she said.Mr. Pieth said he did not expect the dynamic to affect either country’s investigation; authorities are not pursuing redundant inquiries, as each is focused on potential crimes that fall within its own jurisdiction, he said. The United States has focused on tracing money trails from abroad to American bank branches to justify charges that touch dozens of countries.The Swiss agency that has directly supported the United States in its investigation is distinct from the Office of the Attorney General. It is the Swiss Federal Office of Justice that has made arrests, held defendants in jail and ruled on requests to extradite those people to the United States, while also managing United States requests to freeze bank accounts and share financial information.The Federal Office of Justice is situated downhill from the Office of the Attorney General in a squat modern building in the shadow of Switzerland’s Parliament House. According to a spokesman, the office has assigned significant resources to assisting the United States. There has not, however, been universal support or understanding of the office’s mutual legal assistance agreement with the United States. The spokesman said that some in Switzerland had criticized it for being “under stars and stripes.”Advertisement