AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressASHBURN, Va. — When running back Matt Jones made a 78-yard touchdown on a screen play for the Washington Redskins against the New Orleans Saints in Week 10, the Pro Bowl left tackle Trent Williams was rumbling nearly 30 yards beyond the line of scrimmage to block a cornerback and to help clear Jones’s path.“I always ask Coach: ‘Can I enter into the screen? Can I enter into the screen?’ ” Williams said. “He always tells me: ‘No. Just take care of your assignment.’ And so, that time, I kind of felt like a kid just sneaking out of the house. I had a blast. I ended up making the one block that helped spring the touchdown. So it all worked out.”It is all working out with increasing frequency for N.F.L. teams, which are throwing more screen passes — to running backs, yes, but also to wide receivers or tight ends — in pursuit of easy gains and, occasionally, long ones. Entering Sunday, 6.23 screens have been completed per game, a slight increase from last season’s 6.02 and about one and a half times more than three years ago, according to Stats L.L.C. This season’s rate is the highest since 2009, which is as far back as the Stats data goes.On a typical screen, various players, including linemen and receivers, move to one side of the field to set up a wall of blockers that escorts the receiver.How can my team make the N.F.L. playoffs? It’s a simple question, but answering it can be devilishly complicated. This interactive simulator walks you through the scenarios.“It involves a lot of people on the move, so it’s as close to a special teams play as you’re going to get,” said Kansas City Chiefs Coach Andy Reid, whose team completes a league-high 5.36 screens per game, followed by the Chicago Bears at 5.27. “So you’ve got to get it all synchronized, and everybody has to be dancing the same dance.”When choreographed properly, screens take advantage of defenders who have trouble tackling, a trend this season. Screens also keep opposing defenses honest by making them wary of getting caught on a blitz.“It slows them down a little bit — and we have some linemen that are very athletic and can get out in space,” said Redskins Coach Jay Gruden, whose team is averaging an N.F.L.-best 10.24 yards per attempted screen, according to Stats.“If you have a young quarterback or an offensive line that might be struggling a little bit, those are great ways to get the ball out of the quarterback’s hand. Easy completions,” Gruden said. “Even when they don’t work, they’re usually incomplete — a throw in the dirt is fine — or even gain 1 or 2 yards.”Redskins quarterback Kirk Cousins, who connected with Jones on a 45-yard screen during last week’s victory over the Giants, said: “It’s very easy to execute and, unless a defense can sniff it out and detect it, it becomes very hard to defend. Teams are all about running plays that are low-risk, high-reward, and screens fall into that category.”Entering Sunday, quarterbacks were completing 84.2 percent of their screen passes, and 0.5 percent of screen passes were intercepted, Stats said. For all other passes, the completion rate is 60.6 and the interception rate 2.7 percent.Some teams, such as the Patriots, essentially use screens in place of running plays.Others, such as the Chiefs and Bears, consider screens “a big part of the game plan, each and every week,” Chicago quarterback Jay Cutler said.Adam Gase, the offensive coordinator for the Bears, said screens were a way to help the quarterback and get the ball into a playmaker’s hands. “Instead of standing back there, holding onto the ball and trying to take shots down the field, sometimes you can throw it short and hit home runs,” Gase said.And screens are not just for halfbacks anymore. Cutler’s teammate Eddie Royal is one of five wideouts who rank among the top 10 players in screen catches this season.St. Louis Rams receiver Tavon Austin leads the league with 20.“It’s one of the things I can do well,” Austin said. “It’s about trusting your blockers, and then you’ve just got to hit it when you get it.”Advertisement