

      By PAT PICKENS

OCT. 6, 2015

In many ways, the N.H.L.’s future is bright. Two generational talents, Connor McDavid and Jack Eichel, are entering the league this season. The Islanders have relocated to a state-of-the-art arena in Brooklyn, and the N.H.L. is considering expansion proposals from Las Vegas and Quebec City. But a dark cloud is looming as the season opens Wednesday. Hampered by a recent lockout and a growing concussion lawsuit, the N.H.L. can add legal woes to its public-relations ledger. The Chicago Blackhawks, the league’s marquee franchise, will raise their championship banner with a sexual assault investigation against Patrick Kane hanging over them. The investigation has taken on a life of its own, even though Kane has not been charged with a crime or indicted. As the N.H.L. season begins, the case is not the only story line in play. In any other year, McDavid or Eichel would have fans clamoring for a glimpse in person. Fortunately for the N.H.L., they are entering the league together, creating a Larry Bird-Magic Johnson-style rivalry for a sport desperately in need of talented and marketable players. McDavid, a Canadian playing for Edmonton in the West, and Eichel, an American playing for Buffalo in the East, looked the part in the preseason.They are not the only teenagers who could turn heads. Center Dylan Larkin, a Michigan native and former University of Michigan star, made the opening-day roster of the Detroit Red Wings. Defenseman Noah Hanafin, the No. 5 pick in this summer’s draft, will begin the season with the Carolina Hurricanes.The Stanley Cup has gone back and forth from the Kings to the Blackhawks since 2012. Chicago held serve in 2015, then had to shed salaries, and a suspension for Kane remains a possibility.So the Kings are up. They missed last year’s playoffs and were burdened with off-ice turbulence last season. They are motivated for a fresh start, and they added another Cup winner in the former Bruin Milan Lucic.Down the freeway, the Ducks are coming off a run to the Western Conference finals and have improved their playoff standing in each of the past three years. Anaheim is in win-now mode and is among the favorites in the Western Conference.The usual off-season player shuffle will probably have the biggest impact on the Metropolitan Division. The five-time 30-goal scorer Phil Kessel was traded from Toronto to Pittsburgh, where he is playing on a line with Sidney Crosby. Salary-cap concerns forced Chicago to send forward Brandon Saad, coming off his best season, to Columbus. T. J. Oshie was dealt from St. Louis to Washington, giving the Capitals forward depth and another big body to join their tough and rugged team.Center Ryan O’Reilly was traded from Colorado to Buffalo, bolstering the rebuilding effort that also includes Evander Kane and Eichel. The Dallas Stars, the highest-scoring team in the West last year, just missed the playoffs and upgraded in the off-season, adding Johnny Oduya and Patrick Sharp from the champion Blackhawks. The Blackhawks also had to part with the playoff hero Antoine Vermette, who returned to Arizona as a free agent, and center Brad Richards, who signed with Detroit. He was joined there by the high-scoring defenseman Mike Green.John Hynes (Devils), Dave Hakstol (Flyers) and Jeff Blashill (Red Wings) are in their first seasons as N.H.L. head coaches, but some familiar faces will be on new benches. Peter DeBoer, fired by the Devils, replaced Todd McLellan in San Jose, while McLellan moved on to Edmonton to coach McDavid and the upstart Oilers.Dan Bylsma, who won a Stanley Cup with the Pittsburgh Penguins, is trying to lead the Sabres back to the postseason for the first time since 2011.But no new coach is under more scrutiny than Mike Babcock, who bolted Detroit for Toronto. Babcock has guided teams to a Stanley Cup, Olympic gold medals and world championships, and he is now tasked with turning around the Maple Leafs, who have reached the playoffs only once since 2004.The N.H.L. altered its overtime rules yet again, switching from four-on-four overtime to a five-minute, three-on-three session. That is the biggest change, but not the only one.The league introduced a challenge system for coaches on plays in which goals are disallowed by offside or goalie interference. The challenge system was not active during the preseason, when video review is not used during games, but it will be in full effect starting Wednesday.The league also altered its face-off rules. Instead of the road player putting his stick down first, the player in the offensive zone gets the face-off advantage. This is designed to give teams in the offensive zone more opportunity to remain there and score.The No. 1 overall pick in the 2016 draft is expected to be Auston Matthews, an 18-year-old forward who missed being eligible for this past draft by only two days. Matthews has already started his professional career by venturing to the Swiss Elite League. Matthews is from Scottsdale, Ariz., and if the Coyotes, the local team, are bad enough to earn the No. 1 overall pick — a definite possibility — Matthews could infuse life into the dormant desert market.Advertisement