AdvertisementSupported byBy Benjamin HoffmanHere’s a look at the best games of N.F.L. Week 13, and who we think will win them.1. Chiefs (6-5) at Raiders (5-6)4:05 p.m. Eastern time. Line: Chiefs by 2½In Al Davis’s long run as owner of the Raiders, he often seemed obsessed with returning to the team’s days of Daryle Lamonica stretching the field with deep passes to Warren Wells. No quarterback — not even Ken Stabler and Jim Plunkett, who combined to win three Super Bowls — seemed to satisfy him, and no wide receiver was ever fast enough.Derek Carr may not be as flashy with the deep ball as Lamonica, who was known as the Mad Bomber, but Carr’s 24 touchdown passes this season have him on a pace to match Lamonica’s franchise record of 34, set in 1969. Unlike Lamonica, Carr has done it efficiently, with only six interceptions. In terms of adjusted passing yards per attempt, Carr’s 8.21 would be the third best mark in team history behind Stabler and Jay Schroeder.Helping matters considerably has been the emergence of Amari Cooper and Michael Crabtree as one of the best receiver combinations in the game. Cooper’s 851 receiving yards through 11 games are the fifth most by a rookie wide receiver since 1960, and Crabtree has 715 yards and six touchdowns.The Chiefs have been surging, with five consecutive victories giving them an improbable shot at the playoffs after a 1-5 start. But injuries could play a large factor for them this week. In last week’s win over the Buffalo Bills, Kansas City’s offensive line was so beat up that Jeff Allen, a guard, had to stay in the game after an ankle injury because the team had no players left to take his place. The biggest blow might have been when Justin Houston, the Chiefs’ top pass rusher and the key to their defensive strategy, left with a knee injury.Houston is now listed as questionable, and if he is unable to go, Carr will have plenty of time to carve up the Chiefs’ secondary.To win, Carr will probably need to be perfect, as the Chiefs’ offense has not turned the ball over in five consecutive games and should not have much trouble scoring against the subpar Oakland defense. But with a chance to complicate the playoff hopes of a division rival, Carr and the Raiders have a fighting chance.PICK: RAIDERS2. Panthers (11-0) at Saints (4-7)4:25 p.m. Line: Panthers by 7½In their first game under the new defensive coordinator Dennis Allen, the Saints gave up 362 yards of offense, which qualified as drastic improvement compared with the 424.7 per game they had allowed under Rob Ryan. But part of that was probably because the Houston Texans had little need to produce on offense, since their defense did such a spectacular job shutting down New Orleans. The Saints were held without a touchdown for the first time since 2005 in the 24-6 loss.It will not get any easier this week against the undefeated Panthers.Carolina’s defense has probably not received enough credit for the team’s perfect start. Ranked second in the N.F.L. with 312.5 yards allowed a game, it has held opponents to the third fewest points and produced an N.F.L.-leading 18 interceptions along with 10 fumble recoveries.It was a victory in New Orleans last season that started Carolina’s current 15-game regular-season winning streak, and with Carolina steamrollering its way to a third consecutive N.F.C. South title, a trip to the Superdome no longer carries the intimidation factor it once did.PICK: PANTHERS3. Cardinals (9-2) at Rams (4-7)1 p.m. Line: Cardinals by 7Arizona’s season collapsed last year when quarterback Carson Palmer went down with a knee injury. While he remains healthy, the loss of Chris Johnson (broken leg) for the season drastically affects the team’s ability to run the ball. If Andre Ellington is also forced to sit out this week with turf toe, the Cardinals will need the rookie David Johnson to step to the forefront.There is no doubt that Johnson has the potential to make thrilling plays, having scored four rushing touchdowns, three receiving touchdowns and one kick return touchdown in his 11-game career. But he has had ball security issues and may not be ready for an every-down role for a team with Super Bowl aspirations.Meanwhile, Arizona’s defense, which is among the best in the league at stopping the run, will have to face Todd Gurley, the only running back to rush for more than 100 yards in a game against it this season.The loss of Chris Johnson should not be as crippling to the Cardinals’ chances as Palmer’s injury was last season, and the Rams have played poorly enough recently that an upset is unlikely. But seeing how Arizona adapts to the change in offensive personnel will be interesting going forward.PICK: Cardinals4. Bengals (9-2) at Browns (2-9)1 p.m. Line: Bengals by 10½You have to admire the Browns: Every week they seem to come up with a new way to lose. Monday’s loss came when a blocked field goal attempt was returned for a game-winning touchdown as time expired, but this week things should be a little more typical. The Bengals could seemingly just run their in-state rival into submission with a combination of Jeremy Hill and Giovani Bernard.Hill had 929 rushing yards over Cincinnati’s final nine games last season, including 148 in a victory over the Browns in December, but he has had a difficult sophomore season. Last week, he looked more like himself, rushing for 86 yards on 16 carries, and those numbers could go up drastically against a Browns defense that allows the second most rushing yards in the N.F.L.It is not yet known if tight end Tyler Eifert, who has 12 receiving touchdowns, will be able to play after sustaining a stinger in last week’s victory over the Rams, but he hardly seems necessary to beat the Browns, who will be starting Austin Davis at quarterback.Carlos Dunlap, who sacked Johnny Manziel twice in Cincinnati’s win over the Browns last month, offered an indictment of Cleveland’s quarterback situation.“It really doesn’t matter who the quarterback is because at the end of the day, we have to play our football game,” Dunlap told reporters. “If Johnny’s not playing, it’s a lot less running I have to do.”PICK: BENGALS5. Eagles (4-7) at Patriots (10-1)4:25 p.m. Line: Patriots by 11Rob Gronkowski is so important to the Patriots that after a game in which he was carted off the field with what looked like a devastating knee injury, the tight-lipped team took the unusual step of issuing a statement about his relatively good prognosis of a bone bruise and sprain. It was so out of character for the franchise that Coach Bill Belichick was forced to defend it in a news conference, which he did with his trademark combination of annoyance and condescension.Gronkowski is out this week, as is Julian Edelman (broken foot), but Danny Amendola (knee) is expected to play. Philadelphia is expected to start Eric Rowe, a rookie cornerback, so Tom Brady should be able to pile on the misfortune for the struggling Eagles.Assessing the Eagles this week, Belichick praised the team’s offense, saying they are two deep at several skill positions, including quarterback. While it is true that the Eagles have two quarterbacks, it is not clear why Belichick would concern himself with Sam Bradford or Mark Sanchez.PICK: PATRIOTSBroncos (9-2) at Chargers (3-8)4:05 p.m. Line: Broncos by 4Before Peyton Manning showed up, the Broncos were a team with a good defense and a quarterback who did not do much but always seemed to come away with a victory. Brock Osweiler may not have the fan base or the hype of Tim Tebow, but in his two games at the helm of the Denver offense, he has had similar results. On Sunday night, he became the first Denver quarterback since Tebow to lead the team back from a 14-point fourth-quarter deficit to win (of course, before this season, Manning’s teams were rarely trailing).The switch at quarterback, which has not been declared permanent, has led to a 2-0 record, but it has meant bad things for Demaryius Thomas, who had blossomed into one of the game’s best wide receivers once Manning arrived. Osweiler has targeted him 21 times over the last two weeks, but he has only four receptions to show for it.The formula, however, should not change this week: Denver’s defense will hold down the fort, and Osweiler will have to produce only a modest amount of offense to win.PICK: BRONCOSSeahawks (6-5) at Vikings (8-3)1 p.m. Line: EvenThe Seahawks lost Marshawn Lynch to a sports hernia in Week 10, and last week Jimmy Graham tore a tendon in his knee and is out for the season. Despite that, Seattle’s offense, which had been struggling, has come away with 100 points over the last three weeks.Continuing to succeed without two of the team’s biggest stars would seem difficult in any circumstance. But going on the road to face a Vikings defense that has led the way to six wins in the last seven games is too tall a task even for Russell Wilson, Thomas Rawls and Doug Baldwin, who have each played so well recently.Last week against Atlanta, Adrian Peterson ran for 158 yards and passed O.J. Simpson, Corey Dillon and John Riggins on the career rushing list, putting him in 18th place. Another effort like that would get him past only Steven Jackson into 17th place, but it would probably ensure a Minnesota victory.PICK: VIKINGSColts (6-5) at Steelers (6-5)8:30 p.m. Line: 7½Quarterbacks tend to receive most of the credit for wins and most of the blame for losses, but any rational person should understand that Matt Hasselbeck’s 4-0 record as a starter this season does not create a quarterback controversy in Indianapolis. Yet Coach Chuck Pagano found himself having to address whether the job will still belong to Andrew Luck when he returns from a lacerated kidney.“Andrew is our starting quarterback,” Pagano told reporters. “When he is healthy and he is 100 percent healthy and the doctors and our trainers say he is ready to roll, then he is going to be under center.”The 40-year-old Hasselbeck has been a great story, and he has joined Brett Favre and Warren Moon as the only Super Bowl-era quarterbacks to have four consecutive wins in their 40s. Depending on how limited Ben Roethlisberger is in his return from a concussion, Hasselbeck could very well make it 5-0, but even a Super Bowl win would not wrest the job from Luck.PICK: STEELERSHow can my team make the N.F.L. playoffs? It’s a simple question, but answering it can be devilishly complicated. This interactive simulator walks you through the scenarios.Falcons (6-5) at Buccaneers (5-6)1 p.m. Line: Buccaneers by 1There is plenty of pessimism in Atlanta, as the Falcons have underperformed after a hot start. It seems especially stark this week when they are playing the optimistic Buccaneers. Tampa Bay has won two of its last three games, and Jameis Winston appears to have what it takes to succeed in the N.F.L. with solid results on the field, even if he still manages to be in the news too often for his myriad transgressions in college.Coach Lovie Smith has the Buccaneers believing they are capable of a playoff push, and if they can figure out what went wrong in pass protection last week against the Colts, he may be right.PICK: BUCCANEERSJets (6-5) at Giants (5-6)1 p.m. Line: Jets by 1The debate over which of these teams owns New York has always been a little silly, since both play in New Jersey. But it is especially pointless this season as the answer to which N.F.L. team controls New York is simple: It’s the Patriots, who beat the Jets and the Giants this season.But in the matchup for superiority of MetLife Stadium tenants, it could come down to the status of Jets cornerback Darrelle Revis. He has not been cleared after sustaining a concussion on Nov. 22, and his backup, Marcus Williams, is out with a sprained medial collateral ligament, which would open things up considerably for Odell Beckham Jr.PICK: GIANTSTexans (6-5) at Bills (5-6)1 p.m. Line: Bills by 3Over the last four games, Houston’s defense has performed the way many thought Buffalo’s would when Coach Rex Ryan was hired. The Texans have allowed only 8.8 points a game in a four-game winning streak, and last week held the high-powered New Orleans offense to 6 points.The Bills, despite plenty of talent on both sides of the ball, have been a mess. Their defense, expected to be the biggest strength, is ranked 19th in the N.F.L. with 355.9 yards allowed per game.“I’ve never been in this situation,” Ryan told reporters. “I think the worst I’ve ever been in this league is 11th. I’m not going to press the panic button. But we’ll see. Obviously, we’ve got to improve.”PICK: TEXANSRavens (4-7) at Dolphins (4-7)1 p.m. Line: Dolphins by 4The Ravens started the season 2-7, but despite losing Joe Flacco, Justin Forsett and Steve Smith for the season, they have won consecutive games and are still technically in playoff contention, with Matt Schaub doing his best to replace Flacco.The Dolphins, after a disappointing start to the season, have decided to turn over much of the decision-making on offense to quarterback Ryan Tannehill.A matchup of Schaub against Tannehill does not sound particularly appealing, but if the Dolphins can find a way to get Lamar Miller back into form, they should be able to come away with a victory.PICK: DOLPHINSJaguars (4-7) at Titans (2-9)1 p.m. Line: Titans by 2½The Titans are only three home losses short of the N.F.L.-record home losing streak of 14, which was set by Dallas in 1988 and 1989 and matched by St. Louis from 2008 to 2010. The Titans will look to end the streak this week against the last team they beat in Tennessee: the Jaguars.Allen Hurns is unlikely to play as he works his way through the concussion protocol, but with Allen Robinson and Julius Thomas, Jacksonville should have enough offense to extend Tennessee’s home woes.PICK: JAGUARS49ers (3-8) at Bears (5-6)1 p.m. Line: Bears by 7½ Vic Fangio is doing an excellent job of showing the 49ers what they are missing. He was passed over for a chance at the head coach position in San Francisco, but as the defensive coordinator in Chicago, he has built a unit that is short on star power but long on production. The Bears have struggled some against the run, but it is difficult to pass against them. With Carlos Hyde, San Francisco’s starting running back, expected to be out, it will be up to Blaine Gabbert and the 49ers’ passing game to try to get something going against a fantastic coach with something to prove.PICK: BEARSAdvertisement