AdvertisementSupported byReported by The New York TimesThe rookie linebacker Stephone Anthony returned a blocked kick 82 yards in the second quarter, making the Saints the first team in N.F.L. history to score 2 points defensively on a failed extra-point kick. After New Orleans defensive tackle Kevin Williams pushed through the middle of the line and blocked the kick, the ball bounced to Anthony, who snagged it in stride and went untouched the other way to give the Saints a 16-13 lead and give himself 8 points in the game. He had already scored on a 31-yard return after stripping the ball.In a wild fourth quarter that featured a combined six touchdowns between the Titans and the Jaguars, the most critical score was also perhaps the most impressive: an 87-yard run from the rookie Marcus Mariota that put Tennessee ahead, 35-32, and ranked as the third-longest run by a quarterback dating to 1940. Mariota is the first player in N.F.L. history to have run for more than 100 yards (112), thrown for more than 250 (268) and thrown scoring passes (three) in a game.The Cardinals rookie David Johnson, starting for the first time with Chris Johnson and Andre Ellington injured, ran for 99 yards against the Rams. “Felt like college days where I got a chance to help out my team,” said Johnson, a third-round draft pick out of Northern Iowa. The Cardinals might need Johnson again on short notice, with their next game on Thursday against the Vikings. “That’s going to be new to me,” Johnson said. “I’ll hurry up and try to recover, get in that cold tub.”Among the Broncos’ injured were running back C. J. Anderson (ankle), tight end Vernon Davis (head), linebacker Danny Trevathan (head) and receiver Demaryius Thomas (hand). ... Chargers receiver Dontrelle Inman was immobilized on a backboard, and cornerback Brandon Flowers hurt his knee. ... Bills cornerback Stephon Gilmore hurt his shoulder. ... Two Rams, cornerback Janoris Jenkins and tight end Lance Kendricks, sustained concussions.Information from the Associated PressAdvertisement