AdvertisementSupported byBy Benjamin HoffmanA day that started out with a milestone touchdown ended with another loss for the short-handed New England Patriots.With a 4-yard pass to James White, Tom Brady took sole possession of third place on the career passing touchdowns list with the 421st of his career. He also connected with Danny Amendola on an 11-yard score for his 30th touchdown pass of the season, but turnovers and a lack of offensive punch led to the Patriots losing to the Philadelphia Eagles, 35-28.With the loss, and the Denver Broncos’ win in San Diego, the Patriots, who once seemed unbeatable, have dropped to the No. 3 seed in the A.F.C. With consecutive losses, the Patriots are now officially on a losing streak for the first time since 2012.Coach Bill Belichick did not hold back when assessing his team’s performance.“We didn’t do anything well enough today,” Belichick said at his post-game news conference. “Didn’t do enough on offense, turned the ball over, gave up two third-down touchdowns on defense, didn’t play well in the kicking game. We just didn’t do anything well enough to really win.”Brady echoed Belichick, telling reporters “We’ve got to do a better job. That’s just what it comes down to. No one can do your job for you.”Brady, asked to play without Rob Gronkowski or Julian Edelman, spread the ball around to six different receivers, with Amendola doing his best as the team’s go-to threat. But White, a running back, ended up leading the team with 10 receptions for 104 yards.After going into halftime tied 14-14, the Patriots fell apart early in the second half, digging a hole too deep for them to climb out of.New England’s first four possessions of the second half resulted in a punt, an interception returned for a touchdown, a punt returned for a touchdown, another interception, and other punt. At one point, the Eagles led 35-14.“If I turn the ball over twice, I don’t think we have a chance to win many games,” Brady told reporters as he accepted responsibility for the loss.New England made a comeback attempt, with Brady throwing a touchdown pass to Scott Chandler, and running a touchdown in himself to bring the Patriots within 7 points.The game appeared saved when Kenjon Barner fumbled the ball, giving the Patriots a chance to tie with 1 minute and 2 seconds remaining. But Brady could not summon his typical late-game magic and New England managed just 12 yards on the drive, turning it over on downs when Brady’s last pass of the game fell incomplete.Brady finished the day having completed 29 of 56 passes for 312 yards, 3 touchdowns and 2 interceptions. Sam Bradford, who was seemingly overmatched coming into the game, did not account for nearly as much yardage, but he completed 14 of 24 passes for 120 yards and 2 touchdowns.Advertisement