
Sports of The Times By                     
 WILLIAM C. RHODEN
 
DEC. 6, 2015
EAST RUTHERFORD, N.J. — With Sunday’s overtime loss to the Jets, the Giants are closing in on a third consecutive losing season under Coach Tom Coughlin. It may be his last season.A 48-yard field-goal attempt goes wide left, and the Giants lose, 23-20.The key to the defeat was Coughlin’s fourth-quarter decision on fourth-and-2 on the Jets’ 4-yard line. Instead of attempting a field goal and going up by 23-10, Coughlin gambled that the Giants could score a touchdown.He guessed wrong. Giants quarterback Eli Manning’s pass was intercepted, and the Jets subsequently kicked a field goal.Up by 10 points, most coaches would have taken a field goal, but Coughlin said a touchdown in that situation would have been big.Advertisement“We push the score up to where maybe they can’t beat us with whatever,” Coughlin said. “I stand by it.”AdvertisementCoughlin, for the first time, sounded desperate, like a coach fighting to keep his job. Instead, he may have lost it.“We’ve been in position to win games, and we haven’t won,” Coughlin said. “I’m taking full responsibility.”This was a deflating loss and one that throws the Giants into desperation overdrive.From the beginning of the season, when the Giants lost largely because they mismanaged the clock, to Sunday’s decision, there has been a pattern. Not only this season but also in the two previous seasons. The Giants finished 7-9 in 2013 and 6-10 in 2014.I understand Coughlin’s logic: The Giants’ defense, which ranks 22nd in points allowed per game, is terrible. He wanted to score as many points as possible. More not less.“I have made a decision to be very aggressive at the end of the games,” Coughlin said. So he goes for the touchdown instead of the field goal.Is this the coach’s fault? The general manager’s fault for not supplying better defensive players? The game’s fault for causing many injuries? Is it Jason Pierre-Paul’s fault for acting recklessly and losing fingers in a mindless fireworks accident?Regardless, Sunday’s loss sets the wheels of change in motion.The change may lead to the dismissal of Coughlin, or the dismissal of General Manager Jerry Reese. Or both, though I doubt a franchise like the Giants — famously patient and deliberate, slow to fire, methodical in hiring — will do two searches simultaneously.AdvertisementThe Giants will very likely allow the season to play itself out before making a decision. There could be another late-season run to the playoffs.This would be the first new coaching hire for John Mara, the Giants’ president and chief executive, and it would most likely be his most difficult decision. Coughlin is beloved and well-respected in the organization, with good reason.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Coughlin, in his 12th season, has the N.F.L.’s third-longest head coaching tenure, behind Bill Belichick at New England, in his 16th season, and Cincinnati’s Marvin Lewis, in his 13th.Unlike Lewis, Coughlin has won championships. Unlike Belichick, who has won more titles, Coughlin has no scandals on his résumé.Still, in this bottom-line industry, business is business, even for a benevolent organization like the Giants. For the last two and a half seasons under Coughlin and Reese, business has not been good.In an ideal world, Coughlin should be able to write the script for his exit. I think the Giants would like that very much — especially if that script had him riding off gracefully at the end of a third consecutive losing season with no playoff appearances.For the last few years, Mara and I have had a familiar exchange when we would see each other in the press box at a Giants game. He would say how good it was that The New York Times had decided to give the Giants extra attention, the suggestion being that the Jets always seemed to receive the meat of the coverage. To the extent that is true, the Jets, I would explain, are famously dysfunctional, hence more intriguing to cover.The Giants, with roots in the N.F.L. that go back to 1925, are not controversial. They are grounded and solid.But the last two and a half seasons have made me wonder whether the Giants’ front office and coaching staff are in sync over who the Giants should be. What should be the team’s signature? What style of play? What types of players?AdvertisementIs the front office satisfied with the coaching decisions that Coughlin is making?There have been gaffes in time management. There have been questionable decisions, such as Sunday’s. Last week, the Giants were routed by Washington. On Sunday, they blew a 20-10 lead and lost.Reese and Coughlin share the blame, though sometimes the river simply runs its course. The Giants, under Coughlin, may have run their course.Coughlin is highly respected within the organization. He needs four wins to pass Bill Parcells and Mike Shanahan and move into 11th place for career victories. He is second, behind Belichick, among active head coaches in regular season and total career victories.The only numbers that matter now are wins and losses; thematically all that matters is whether the Giants reach the playoffs.With Sunday’s overtime loss, that is looking less and less likely. The wheels of change have begun to turn.Email: wcr@nytimes.comA version of this article appears in print on December 7, 2015, on Page D2 of the New York edition with the headline: Giants’ Loss May Set Wheels of Change in Motion.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »