AdvertisementSupported byN.H.L. RoundupBy The Associated PressAdam Henrique and Cory Schneider helped the Devils overcome their home-ice disadvantage on Sunday night at the expense of the streaking Florida Panthers.Henrique had a goal and two assists, Schneider made 34 saves, and the Devils cooled off the Panthers with a 4-2 victory.Lee Stempniak and Kyle Palmieri scored first-period goals for the Devils. Mike Cammalleri also scored to help the Devils win for the first time in their last five home games (1-2-2).Aaron Ekblad and Jonathan Huberdeau scored for the Panthers, who had two streaks come to an end. Florida had won five straight over all and a club-record-tying five in a row on the road.Jaromir Jagr had two assists in his first game in Newark since the February trade that sent him from the Devils to the Panthers.Roberto Luongo stopped 14 shots for Florida.The Devils are 8-4 on the road, but it has been a struggle at Prudential Center. The win over the Panthers improved the Devils’ home record to 6-6-3.“It’s been hit and miss at home,” Henrique said. “It’s always important to create that identity in this building, so teams know when they come in it’s going to be a tough game.”It helps to have a tough goalie. Schneider was up to the task, as the Devils were outshot, 29-7, over the last two periods.“There were times we bent but didn’t break,” Schneider said.The key moment came late in the second period when Schneider stopped Huberdeau on a penalty shot with the Devils clinging to a 3-2 lead.“Huberdeau is pretty tricky,” Schneider said. “He likes to make some moves in tight. I just tried to stay with him, and sometimes you have to use the heel of your skate to get a piece of it. I’m glad I kept it out.”Stempniak and Palmieri staked the Devils to a 2-0 lead in the first.Stempniak scored 26 seconds in with a backhander from the slot. He was left completely unchecked to take a feed from Cammalleri, who got his 300th assist.It was the fastest goal by a Devils player this season to start a period.Palmieri doubled the advantage at 12 minutes 55 seconds, roofing a wrist shot over Luongo from the right circle.The Panthers, sluggish most of the period, got going in the final two minutes. Reilly Smith had the best chance, a shot from the left hash marks.Florida carried that momentum into the second period, and Ekblad scored 45 seconds in. Aleksander Barkov won a draw in the Devils’ end, and Jagr pushed the puck back to Ekblad at the top of the right circle. His shot appeared to change direction as it handcuffed Schneider.The Devils answered when Henrique deposited a wraparound inside the right post at 3:43 to put the Devils up, 3-1.Huberdeau was the key figure in the late stages of the period. He scored at 13:07 as the Panthers wore down the Devils’ defenders with an extended shift in which they dominated play.Huberdeau had a golden opportunity to even the score on the penalty shot with 2:06 left.The Panthers continued to press in the third, but it was Cammalleri who scored at 6:44 to put the Devils up, 4-2.“We had some good chances the second part of the game, but we kept playing from behind,” Panthers Coach Gerard Gallant said. “It was a battle, but we lost the game in the first period. We talked this morning about playing 60 minutes, and we didn’t do it.”Devils center Travis Zajac missed a second straight game with an upper-body injury. The Devils also scratched defenseman Jon Merrill and right wing Bobby Farnham. HURRICANES 5, COYOTES 4 Justin Faulk scored a power-play goal with 17 seconds left to lift Carolina over visiting Arizona.Faulk, tied for the league lead with nine power-play goals, sent a shot from near the blue line past Coyotes goalie Anders Lindback after Martin Hanzal took a penalty for Arizona with 2 minutes 15 seconds left.Before the game, the Coyotes claimed forward Viktor Tikhonov off waivers from Chicago and placed the captain Shane Doan on the injured reserve list with a lower-body injury.DUCKS 2, PENGUINS 1  Chris Stewart had the go-ahead goal in the second period, Corey Perry also scored, and host Anaheim overcame a disallowed goal to edge Pittsburgh.John Gibson made 23 saves in his sixth straight start for the Ducks, who are 10-5-2 after a 1-7-2 start. The Penguins are 5-5-2 following a 9-1 stretch.BLACKHAWKS 3, JETS 1 Teuvo Teravainen scored from a sharp angle 21 seconds into the third period to break a tie, and Marian Hossa had a goal and an assist as host Chicago beat Winnipeg to end a three-game losing streak.Chicago right wing Patrick Kane assisted on Artemi Panarin’s empty-net goal with 1:46 left to extend his point streak to 22 games, breaking Bobby Hull’s team record. Kane has a goal or an assist in 25 of the Blackhawks’ 27 games this season.OILERS 4, SABRES 2 Taylor Hall and Teddy Purcell each had a goal and an assist to help Edmonton subdue visiting Buffalo for its third straight win.Jordan Eberle and Luke Gazdic also scored for the Oilers, who have won four of their last five to move three points behind a playoff position. Anders Nilsson had 32 saves.Jack Eichel and Ryan O’Reilly scored for the Sabres, losers of two of their last three. Chad Johnson stopped 24 shots.HAMSTRING SIDELINES BLUES’ OTT St. Louis Blues forward Steve Ott will be sidelined for three months with a hamstring injury after being hurt in the first period of a loss to Toronto on Saturday. The team said on its website that Ott would have surgery on both hamstrings next week.CANUCKS’ PRUST DRAWS FINE Vancouver Canucks forward Brandon Prust was fined $5,000 by the N.H.L. for spearing Boston Bruins forward Brad Marchand on Saturday night. Prust was assessed a 10-minute misconduct penalty for the incident in the Bruins’ 4-0 victory in Vancouver.Advertisement