AdvertisementSupported byRangers 4, Senators 1By Dave CaldwellFaced with the grim prospect of playing without the valuable and versatile center Derek Stepan for the foreseeable future, Rangers Coach Alain Vigneault took a time-tested route Saturday to rouse his punchless and stagnant team: He juggled his lines.The Rangers responded Sunday with a whopping two goals at even strength. But they also scored two first-period power-play goals, and goaltender Henrik Lundqvist once again made enough stops for a 4-1 triumph over the dead-legged Ottawa Senators at Madison Square Garden.Afterward, Vigneault said he would have to watch video from the game to determine whether his new lines were worth keeping. But the Rangers (18-7-3) largely played with much more precision and will start a three-game Western trip on a positive note.“It’s going to be good to get away for a week,” Rangers center Derick Brassard said after scoring twice. Still playing next to Mats Zuccarello, but not Rick Nash, Brassard scored his eighth and ninth goals of the season, including an even-strength goal on a slap shot on a semi-breakaway midway through the third period.Lundqvist made 23 saves — giving up only a goal on a second-period shot that had been tipped by defenseman Marc Staal — to improve his season record to 13-5-3. Defenseman Ryan McDonagh scored a goal and assisted on both of Brassard’s goals.“The whole game was really smart and poised, and our power play set the tone in the first,” Lundqvist said.The downside: Ottawa was playing its second game in two nights, and neither even-strength goal was a beauty, not that the Rangers were quibbling.McDonagh fired a stretch pass to Brassard, who slipped behind Ottawa’s Chris Wideman. The puck bounced over Wideman’s stick to Brassard, who beat Senators goaltender Craig Anderson to make it 3-1. Jesper Fast added an empty-net goal in the final two minutes.Still, the effort resulted in a victory, just the second since Boston forward Matt Beleskey broke Stepan’s ribs in the Bruins’ 5-4 victory over the Rangers on Nov. 27. Vigneault said early last week that Stepan would be out four to six weeks.“We wanted to play well at home,” McDonagh said after the team ran its home record to 12-4-1. “We felt like we were coming along, and our decision-making tonight was pretty close to 60 minutes there as far as not turning pucks over.”But the Rangers also needed an attack. They scored only 10 goals in their previous six games, five of which they lost. So Vigneault broke out new lines for Sunday’s game. Brassard and Zuccarello were joined by Kevin Hayes, who has only one goal in his last 12 games.Vigneault crafted a line that included the rookie Oscar Lindberg between Nash and Chris Kreider, who has four goals this season. A third line was centered by Dominic Moore, who was flanked by J. T. Miller and Fast. But the Rangers took the lead on the power play.With Kreider screening Anderson, McDonagh flipped a shot from the point that zipped past Anderson at 8 minutes 40 seconds of the first period. It was McDonagh’s fourth goal of the season, and his second on the power play. The Rangers had one power-play goal in their previous four games.“Goalies are so good these days that you have to take away their eyes,” Rangers defenseman Keith Yandle said.Later in the period, the tempestuous Tanner Glass, a shiner under his left eye, jousted with Ottawa defenseman Erik Karlsson in the Senators’ zone, and a fight broke out in the corner. The Senators’ bench received an unsportsmanlike-conduct penalty. Brassard tipped in a shot by McDonagh 31 seconds later.The fourth-line center Jarret Stoll lost a face-off to Dave Dziurzynski in the Rangers’ zone, with the puck kicking from Shane Prince to defenseman Marc Methot at the left point. As he retreated to catch up to Ottawa forward Chris Neil, Staal chopped at the flying puck.Unfortunately for the Rangers, Staal made contact, slapping the puck to the ice. It then bounced past Neil and Lundqvist at 6:01 of the second period for Methot’s second goal of the season.“It’s a tough goal to swallow on a face-off play,” Staal said.The Rangers later killed an interference penalty on Kreider, and Lundqvist made a brilliant glove save on a shot by Dziurzynski in the final minute of the second.After the puck squirted from a pile of players at the face-off circle, Dziurzynski located it and walloped a shot at Lundqvist, who lunged to snatch the puck, earning another “Hen-rik!” chant from the crowd.The Rangers held the Senators to three shots in the third period, generating 12 of their own, so by that measure, the changes accomplished something.“Sometimes it’s good for your team,” Brassard said of the changes. “Coaches have to find a different chemistry, a different energy.”Advertisement