By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSDEC. 6, 2015
Cam Newton passed for five touchdowns, the final one a 15-yard strike to Jerricho Cotchery with 1 minute 5 seconds to go, and the Carolina Panthers clinched the N.F.C. South with a 41-38 victory over the Saints in New Orleans.Carolina, the only remaining undefeated team in the N.F.L., has the ninth 12-0 start in the Super Bowl era. The Panthers have won 16 straight regular-season games, a streak that began in the Superdome last season.Newton, who threw for 331 yards, twice had to lead the Panthers back from fourth-quarter deficits as the Saints tried desperately to avoid a four-game losing streak.Newton narrowly pulled off the final touchdown drive, finding tight end Greg Olsen for a first down as he rolled left on a fourth-and-4. Olsen had to fall to the ground to make a fingertip grab of the underthrown pass, which was so close to hitting the ground that fans at the Superdome were roaring at replays as Saints Coach Sean Payton asked for a review.AdvertisementEAGLES 35, PATRIOTS 28 Najee Goode scored on a blocked punt, Malcolm Jenkins returned an interception 99 yards for a touchdown, and Philadelphia held on for an improbable road victory.AdvertisementDarren Sproles returned a punt 83 yards for the Eagles’ second special-teams touchdown, giving Philadelphia a 21-point lead, but New England came charging back, with Tom Brady throwing for a score and then, after an onside kick, running the ball in from the 1 to cut the gap to 7 points with three minutes left.New England’s second onside kick failed, but the Patriots forced a third-down fumble to give Brady one more chance. The rally fell short when Brady’s passes bounced out of his receivers’ hands.The Patriots are now on a regular-season losing streak for the first time since 2012.49ERS 26, BEARS 20 Blaine Gabbert ran for a tying touchdown late in regulation and threw a 71-yard scoring pass to Torrey Smith in overtime to push San Francisco past host Chicago.Gabbert’s big touchdown run came after the Bears’ Ka’Deem Carey ran for a score with 3:32 left in regulation. Chicago’s Robbie Gould then missed a 36-yard field-goal attempt at the end of the fourth quarter.The Bears forced a 49ers punt to start overtime but went three-and-out, and Gabbert found an open Smith along the left sideline on the first play of the ensuing possession.CARDINALS 27, RAMS 3 Visiting Arizona rolled up 524 yards and won its sixth straight as Carson Palmer completed 26 of 40 passes for 356 yards. And in this game, unlike the previous three, Palmer did not need to lead a late scoring drive.Larry Fitzgerald topped 1,000 receiving yards in a season for the seventh time. Fitzgerald, who caught eight passes for 55 yards, also became the youngest player to reach 1,000 career catches.AdvertisementThe Rams, who have lost five in a row, announced that 51,115 tickets had been distributed, a season low and about 15,000 shy of a sellout.BRONCOS 17, CHARGERS 3 Brock Osweiler hit Demaryius Thomas for a 3-yard score on the opening drive, and Danny Trevathan intercepted a Philip Rivers pass and returned it 25 yards for a touchdown as Denver won at San Diego. Osweiler moved to 3-0 since taking over for the injured Peyton Manning.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.San Diego has lost five straight at home and five straight against A.F.C. West foes.Running back Melvin Gordon, the Chargers’ first-round draft pick this year, lost a fumble and was benched.CHIEFS 34, RAIDERS 20 Derek Carr passed for 283 yards and two touchdowns, but he also threw three fourth-quarter interceptions that sank Oakland against visiting Kansas City, which won its sixth straight.Two of Carr’s interceptions led to Jeremy Maclin touchdown catches, and Tyvon Branch returned the third for a game-clinching score.The Raiders, who have lost four of five, were leading by 6 points and driving when Carr’s mistakes changed the tide of the game.BILLS 30, TEXANS 21 Tyrod Taylor threw three scoring passes, including a 40-yarder to Charles Clay with 1:53 left, and he had a rushing score to help Buffalo secure a home win.Taylor passed for 211 yards, was sacked just once and added 28 rushing yards. He showed little fear in throwing into double coverage, completing two 53-yard passes to Sammy Watkins. And Taylor played with poise in finding Clay for the decisive touchdown after the Bills’ offense had sputtered, with five punts and a missed field-goal attempt on the team’s first six drives of the second half.AdvertisementBENGALS 37, BROWNS 3 Cincinnati’s Andy Dalton threw two touchdown passes and ran for a score to notch his 50th career win, sending host Cleveland to its seventh straight loss.Dalton threw for 220 yards, becoming the second quarterback, after Peyton Manning, to pass for at least 3,000 yards in each of his first five seasons. A. J. Green caught five of his passes for 128 yards, becoming the second receiver, after Randy Moss, with at least 1,000 yards in each of his first five seasons.Austin Davis, who passed for 231 yards while playing ahead of the demoted Johnny Manziel, was the Browns’ 24th starting quarterback since 1999. The loss was Cleveland’s most lopsided since 2005.DOLPHINS 15, RAVENS 13 Matt Schaub threw two second-quarter interceptions that led to touchdowns 20 seconds apart, and Baltimore’s rally fizzled at Miami.Schaub threw for 308 yards, and the Dolphins managed only eight first downs, but the Ravens’ two turnovers and squandered scoring chances doomed them. They had the ball in Miami territory twice in the final six minutes and failed to score. A 55-yard field goal attempt that would have put Baltimore ahead in the final three minutes went wide right.STEELERS 45, COLTS 10 Ben Roethlisberger threw for 364 yards and four touchdowns, and Pittsburgh shook off a slow start to dominate visiting Indianapolis over the final three quarters.Antonio Brown caught eight passes for 118 yards and two touchdowns and returned a punt 71 yards for a touchdown for the Steelers.Matt Hasselbeck left in the fourth quarter because of neck and shoulder pain.TITANS 42, JAGUARS 39 Tennessee ended the N.F.L.’s longest home skid at 11 games. The Titans had not won on their own field since Oct. 12, 2014, when a blocked field-goal attempt helped them beat, coincidentally, Jacksonville.This time, the teams combined for six touchdowns in the fourth quarter. Only one game since 1940 has featured more in a fourth quarter, according to Stats L.L.C.AdvertisementThe Jaguars’ Blake Bortles threw for 322 yards and five touchdowns, setting a franchise record for touchdown passes in a season (27).A version of this article appears in print on December 7, 2015, on Page D4 of the New York edition with the headline: Panthers Secure Division Title and Remain Unbeaten.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.