AdvertisementSupported byTimbers 2, Crew 1By Brian SciarettaCOLUMBUS, Ohio — On a chilly night in central Ohio, the 20th season of Major League Soccer concluded with a first title for one of its youngest teams.The Portland Timbers, making just their second playoff appearance since joining M.L.S. in 2011, used two goals in the first seven minutes to defeat the Columbus Crew, 2-1. The fast start to the game was as surprising as the dogpile celebrations that ended it.The final began amid a festive atmosphere despite the cold, as the stadium was mostly full an hour before kickoff, with fans from both teams singing and chanting. Portland, one of the league’s most popular clubs, sold its allotment of 1,000 tickets in only minutes last week, and those fans helped fill the stadium’s south side.Although they had earned home-field advantage for the final, the Crew got off to a sluggish start. Only 35 seconds into the game, Crew goalkeeper Steve Clark received a routine back pass but struggled to get rid of the ball. Timbers midfielder Diego Valeri quickly closed in on Clark, sliding in at the final moment to deflect his clearance back into the goal for a stunning early lead.“We came out to press high and our press in the first 10 minutes was right,” Portland forward Fanendo Adi said. “So we’re proud of our coaches, because they told us the right thing to do.”The Timbers struck again in the seventh minute in an attack that began with controversy. Crew players believed they had won a throw-in when a Portland pass rolled over the sideline near midfield — television replays showed they were right — but the linesman missed the call, and in the confusion, the Timbers sprinted away with possession. Midfielder Darlington Nagbe received a quick pass and promptly played Lucas Melano into a strong position on the right side of the penalty area. Melano delivered a perfect cross that was headed home by Rodney Wallace for a 2-0 lead.As Portland’s players celebrated the goal, angry Crew fans showered them with bottles, drawing a warning from the stadium’s public-address announcer.Despite the poor early start, Columbus found its way back into the match in the 13th minute through Kei Kamara, who finished the regular season tied for the league’s scoring title.After Portland goalkeeper Adam Kwarasey failed to punch away a cross in the goal mouth, Kamara poked the ball free in a swarm in front of the net. Pivoting free with a quick right turn, he blasted a low shot under Kwarasey and a scrambling defender and into the net to reduce the deficit to 2-1.“We were never in danger,” Timbers Coach Caleb Porter said. “We were comfortable and tight. That’s what the game called for in the second half. We could have been better on the counter, as we had some good moments to put the game away. But we saw the game out. We shut it down and we were tight. That’s a part of winning.”In the second half, both teams struggled to create opportunities, but Portland eventually came to life and started to find chances.“We knew they were going to open their players up and that we were going to find some opportunities,” Portland left back Jorge Villafana said. “Unfortunately for us, we created three opportunities we should have put in the back of the net.”Its best came in the 60th minute when confusion in the box resulted in a failed clearance, sending the ball off the post. It fell to the Columbus captain Michael Parkhurst, who appeared to commit a handball during his clearance that was missed by the referee, Jair Marrufo. Minutes later, Adi came close again for Portland, but his header went off the post.“I think we could have been more methodical in getting the ball to the flanks, penetrating and getting crosses in,” Columbus Coach Gregg Berhalter said. “You’re down, 2-0, and you want to stick to the plan, but it’s difficult.”The championship punctuated a stunning turnaround for the Timbers, who were struggling in the league as recently as September and needed a late-season surge just to make the playoffs. Porter made a series of tactical adjustments down the stretch, leading to the championship run. Portland went 8-1-2 in its final 11 to win the third seed in the Western Conference, then eliminated Sporting Kansas City, the Vancouver Whitecaps and F.C. Dallas to earn its berth in the final.Portland was the better team throughout but, after its early scoring flurry, could not solve Clark, who made several difficult saves in the final minutes to keep the game close. But his teammates could not produce the shot that might have forced extra time.When the final whistle sounded, Portland players mobbed one another and then went to the south side of the stadium to celebrate with their scarf-waving fans.“A lot of has been made of it not being smooth,” Porter said of the Timbers’ season, “but that is M.L.S.”He added: “Every team goes through rough patches, but that is a big part of succeeding in this league. You have to survive and you have keep the guys together. That’s why you build your locker room with character guys and guys who bring intangible qualities.”Advertisement