

 Ben Shpigel
 

ON PRO FOOTBALL
DEC. 6, 2015
EAST RUTHERFORD, N.J. — They huddled together on the Jets’ sideline, the receiver and his quarterback, traded and released — discarded, really — too many times to recall. Except that they do. They remember these things, and as the Giants lined up in overtime for the 48-yard field-goal attempt that would either extend Sunday’s game or end it in favor of the Jets, Brandon Marshall drew Ryan Fitzpatrick close.“I’ve been in the league 10 years and never made the playoffs,” Marshall told him. “You, 11. We’ve bounced around from team to team. The football gods are hearing us right now.”Josh Brown had not missed a kick all season, but before he even struck the ball, Marshall knew. He watched it hook left, trailing wide of the upright, and then he and Fitzpatrick hugged and sat there, paralyzed by emotion, while the rest of their Jets teammates ran onto the field to celebrate Jets 23, Giants 20.Actually, they weren’t sitting. They fell on top of each other. Fitzpatrick lay on his back. Marshall was on top.Advertisement“It was weird,” Marshall said. “It was awkward.”It was ecstasy.There are moments that can galvanize teams, moments that, with the benefit of hindsight, emerge as lines of demarcation in their seasons. In this matchup four years ago, it was Victor Cruz’s 99-yard touchdown. The Giants never lost again, rampaging to a Super Bowl title. The Jets imploded after that, going 18-31 in the balance of Rex Ryan’s coaching tenure, and have yet to visit the playoffs again.AdvertisementWith four games remaining, the Jets — led by a quarterback and a receiver acquired in separate trades in March for the low, low price of two late-round draft picks — are 7-5 and the No. 6 seed in the A.F.C.“I don’t know if it’s a playoff turning point,” Coach Todd Bowles said, “but I hope we grew up a little bit from this game.”Much of the Jets’ roster has grown up. Twelve players have played at least eight seasons, and aside from linebacker Calvin Pace, Fitzpatrick is the oldest member of the team.He does things that veteran players do, like mentoring Bryce Petty and counseling Geno Smith and setting an example, not missing a game after having surgery to repair a torn ligament in his thumb. He also does things that have occasioned this nomadic life, playing for his fourth team in four seasons, like throwing fourth-quarter interceptions that sank the Jets in defeats to Buffalo and Houston. After that loss to the Texans, his job security dangled for a day.In two games since, Fitzpatrick has completed 66.7 percent of his passes (58 of 87) for 667 yards with six touchdowns and no interceptions.“That presence is what this team needs,” Pace said.The Jets needed it, and he supplied it, even as they staggered through a miserable first half Sunday. This column was originally allotted 900 words, and during the third quarter, it became apparent that extra space would be needed solely to catalog all of the Jets’ mistakes: personal fouls and lost fumbles, broken coverages and special-teams blunders and penalties — so many penalties.Then the Giants, leading by 20-10 midway through the fourth quarter, got a little greedy. Instead of going for a field goal on fourth-and-2 from the Jets’ 4-yard line, the Giants, on the 17th play of their drive, tried a pick route that ended with, well, a pick by Rontez Miles.AdvertisementThe Jets responded with a field goal, then stuffed the Giants to set up a drive that Fitzpatrick will long treasure.“All we talked about was poise and doing the right things in the fourth quarter,” Bowles said. “He was under control. The guys followed him.”The Jets had all three timeouts, and the two-minute warning, with the ball at their 29-yard line. Their season hinged on the next 2 minutes 40 seconds.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“We had time; we knew we had time,” running back Bilal Powell said. “I know we knew that we had the players there to come back.”It began with a 20-yard screen to Powell, who exploited one-on-one matchups with linebackers throughout the game. A 10-yard sidearm toss to Marshall on third-and-9 soon followed, and then came a fourth-and-6 at the Giants’ 36. Bowles, laughing, said he did not remember the play call — “it was a pass, I can tell you that much” — but Fitzpatrick saw a gap in the defense and improvised, scrambling for 15.“He’s going to do something to take over,” Marshall said. “It’s almost like a basketball player in the clutch.”Marshall thinks of himself much the same way. Across the fourth quarter and overtime, Marshall caught all six passes thrown in his direction, none more critical than the 9-yard touchdown pass he leapt to grab — after boxing out cornerback Prince Amukamara — to tie the score with 32 seconds remaining.“That dude, he makes my job so easy,” Fitzpatrick said.This season, he has. Marshall ended Sunday with 12 catches for 131 yards, becoming the first player in league history to surpass 1,000 yards with four teams — a remarkable, if telling, statistic. Players with Marshall’s talent are not disposed of without reason, but joining the Jets has centered him.AdvertisementHe and Fitzpatrick text each other with ideas and video clips. They FaceTime on their iPhones. They snuggle on the sideline. They make the playoffs a possibility for the first time, for each of them.“Other than Christmas,” Fitzpatrick said, “December is never really a fun time for me for some reason.”Maybe this year, it will be different. Maybe this year, the fun will last into January. At this point, anything else would be weird and awkward.The On Pro Football column on Monday about the Jets’ 23-20 victory over the Giants misstated, in some copies, the number of plays run by the Giants during a second-half drive that ended with an interception. It was 17, not 22.A version of this article appears in print on December 7, 2015, on Page D1 of the New York edition with the headline: Embracing a Shot at the Playoffs, With a Snuggle.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »