

 Marc Tracy
 

ON COLLEGE FOOTBALL
DEC. 6, 2015
When Mack Brown left North Carolina after the 1997 season to become head football coach at Texas, he received some parting words of wisdom from Dean Smith, the celebrated Tar Heels men’s basketball coach.“Don’t make football like basketball,” Smith told Brown, “where there’s only one happy team at the end of the year.”Smith, who died in February, knew that the 1998 season would inaugurate the Bowl Championship Series, which was college football’s first postseason that could truly claim to crown a consensus national champion.As the College Football Playoff selection committee announced Sunday, this season that champion will be one of four teams: No. 1 Clemson will play No. 4 Oklahoma in the Orange Bowl, and No. 2 Alabama will face No. 3 Michigan State in the Cotton Bowl on Dec. 31. The winners will play Jan. 11 in Glendale, Ariz.AdvertisementThe committee did its job extremely well. It selected the best four teams and placed them in compelling matchups, so that the national champion will be nearly indisputable.AdvertisementIt is worth remembering, though, what the committee could not do, which is recreate the previous, funky norm of college football.For decades, the season concluded with several unrelated or loosely related bowl games. A national title was a nebulous thing, and so a greater premium was placed on beating one’s archrival and winning a conference title. Then there was the bowl game, sunny and extravagant, which ideally resulted in victory. Several groups voted on which was the best team. Sometimes they agreed; sometimes they did not.
                A look at the top players in contention for college football’s highest honor.            But as the stubbornly provincial sport grew more popular and national, fans clamored to know who the best team was. Thus the B.C.S.; and thus the Playoff, which was not a retreat but an advance, with more postseason and more credibility.Did football become like basketball?“That’s what has happened,” Brown, who won one B.C.S. title and is now an ESPN analyst, said Sunday.He added, “Now, you haven’t really been successful if you get to the four unless you win it all.”All four teams have something special to recommend them. At 13-0, Clemson is the Football Bowl Subdivision’s last undefeated team, and the Tigers beat a whopping three of the other teams in the committee’s top 10. Alabama won the Southeastern Conference, features the Heisman Trophy front-runner Derrick Henry at tailback and has a fearsome defensive front seven. And is Alabama. Michigan State figured out how to win every kind of game this year, including one without its quarterback against Ohio State, the defending national champion. Oklahoma reeled off a string of victories over ranked conference rivals and may be playing the best football of anyone.Referring to the Sooners in a call with reporters, Jeff Long, the selection committee’s chairman, said, “Being strong on both sides of the ball gave some committee members a feeling that they could beat anybody in the country right now.”AdvertisementClemson is seeking its first national title since 1981. Nick Saban will take on Michigan State, the first place where he was a top-tier head coach, during which time the Spartans’ current coach, Mark Dantonio, was an assistant. Michigan State must come to terms with not being so disrespected after all. Oklahoma found a new offensive coordinator and a quarterback, a walk-on, one year after an 8-5 season culminated in an ugly 40-6 loss in the Russell Athletic Bowl — to Clemson.The teams’ and coaches’ styles vary greatly. Michigan State’s classic smash-mouth line-of-scrimmage philosophy contrasts wildly with Oklahoma’s Air Raid passing attack. In one single postgame celebration, complete with dancing and dabbing, Clemson Coach Dabo Swinney mustered the same amount of enthusiasm that Saban does over the course of a whole year (assuming it was a good year). The teams come from three very different regions of the country — or four, if you ask upstate South Carolinians.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Speaking of regions, the final rankings codified what slowly became apparent this season: In the Playoff era, the Big Ten is the top conference. Last year, it supplied the national champion, Ohio State; this year, it supplied five teams in the committee’s top 14, and three in the top seven.By contrast, and despite Stanford’s impressive 41-22 thrashing of Southern California on Saturday in the Pacific-12 championship game, the Pac-12 was the major conference left out of the Playoff this year.Not that there is necessarily cause for anxiety out West, where anxiety is frowned upon anyway. The structurally disadvantaged conference remains the Big 12, because it continues to lack a championship game. Long, the selection committee chairman, pointed to Michigan State’s victory “in their 13th game” as a prime reason for the Spartans’ leapfrogging of the Sooners, who were No. 3 last week but did not play Saturday, and for Stanford’s jumping over Ohio State, which was also off Saturday.“We talk about the eye test,” said Brown, who suggested that the Big 12 should schedule premier matchups on the days when other conferences stage title games. “When you’re not fresh and familiar, I do think it matters.”Another reason that the Pac-12 need not worry too much is this was clearly a transitional year, with coaching turmoil and turnover at U.S.C. and new quarterbacks at Oregon and U.C.L.A.Besides, Stanford was not left with what is referred to in yet another region of the country as bupkis. The Cardinal will play on New Year’s Day in the Rose Bowl against Iowa, exactly 25 years after the Hawkeyes’ last appearance in Pasadena.The other so-called New Year’s Six bowls include the sepia-toned Fiesta Bowl matchup of Notre Dame and Ohio State as well as, in the Peach Bowl, Florida State against Houston, which received the Group of 5 conferences’ designated bid as the American Athletic Conference champion.AdvertisementWhen the four Playoff teams were announced early Sunday afternoon, it seemed as if they were all that social media could gab about. But a few hours later, Twitter seemed less engaged to learn about Stanford’s fate or who would play in the Sugar Bowl. After all, none of those teams will be crowned national champion. And by then, the N.F.L. games had started.A version of this article appears in print on December 7, 2015, on Page D1 of the New York edition with the headline: Fans Get Their Wish: A Postseason Free of Quirks .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »