AdvertisementSupported byRoundupBy Tim RohanThe Mets arrived at the winter meetings in Nashville on Sunday and turned a hotel suite into a makeshift war room. They put about a dozen chairs and a projection screen around a long conference table. They set up an easel and a whiteboard large enough for a college lecture. They needed a place for the multiple meetings they would host here.Coming off their best season in 15 years, the Mets had no trouble scheduling them. “People want to hear our story now,” J. P. Ricciardi, the special assistant to the general manager, said Friday. “They realize that we are a viable place for people to come and play. And that puts us in an opportunity — not so much that we can handpick who we want all the time — but it puts us in a better spot to identify guys who better fit what we’re trying to do.”The Mets have meetings scheduled with teams, agents and players. They plan to speak with representatives for Ben Zobrist (their top free-agent target), free-agent relievers and a few of their own free agents: Jerry Blevins, Bartolo Colon and Yoenis Cespedes, although it appears “unlikely,” John Ricco, the assistant general manager said, that he will return.And the Mets would hold these meetings while communicating from afar with General Manager Sandy Alderson, who was recently found to have cancer.Ricco sat at the conference table and spoke to the news media for about 20 minutes, outlining what may be an important and busy week here, something of a new phenomenon for the Mets.The Mets’ plans, for the moment, hinge on what Zobrist decides. They think he could start at second base and fit into their offensive philosophy. The issue is that, at one point, about 10 teams coveted him for those reasons. After taking a few recruiting visits, Zobrist has whittled his initial list of suitors down to four, including the Mets and the Washington Nationals, their division rival. The Nationals are expected to meet with Zobrist in person here because he lives in the area. Ricco said it might not be necessary for the Mets to see Zobrist in person again, after they hosted him, his wife and his newborn daughter for a day trip last week in New York. A source close to Zobrist indicated that he enjoyed the visit. The Mets have said they are willing to give him a four-year contract, which is a point of emphasis for Zobrist, who turns 35 next year.It appears that Zobrist could sign somewhere as early as by the end of the week.If Zobrist signs elsewhere, the Mets did not seem to have a clear fallback plan. Ricco said they would be interested in re-signing Daniel Murphy then, depending on his contract demands, “the dollars and length, and what else we’re going to do.” But Ricco warned that the market to sign Murphy would be competitive, especially after his playoff performance.The Mets have said that they would be comfortable starting Dilson Herrera, 21, at second base and bringing in a veteran to play now and then to relieve pressure on him. Or they could pursue a free-agent shortstop and slide Wilmer Flores over to second base.“Some of it may depend on timing and who’s still available,” Ricco said. “Some of it may depend on discussions we have here, in terms of whether we can fill certain positions better via trade, or easier via trade. Or not.” The Mets would like to add complementary players in the bullpen and the outfield. Because they want to play Michael Conforto and Juan Lagares regularly, they are not looking for an “everyday” outfielder, Ricco said, but more of a veteran who could platoon with them.That definition effectively ruled out the possibility that the Mets would re-sign Cespedes, the outfield slugger who became a fan favorite last year. Cespedes has said that, entering his 30s, he is looking for a six-year contract, and pundits expect it to exceed $100 million. During Alderson’s regime, the Mets have shied away from giving aging veterans that much money. “I think it’s unlikely right now that he ends up a Met, I think that’s fair to say,” Ricco said. “I think we will end up meeting with his agent. Right now, I still think he’s looking at a deal that would be north of what we would consider.”Looking for relievers, the Mets plan to have meaningful conversations with the representatives for Blevins and Colon. An arm injury effectively kept Blevins out all season, and Colon is listed at 42 years old, but the Mets received reports that Blevins should recover smoothly and that Colon is open to relieving, as he did in the playoffs.Signing Colon would also give the Mets insurance if they decide to deal Jon Niese. Ricco said the Mets were not “actively shopping” Niese, but, he said, “If we think there’s a deal that involves him and makes us better, I think we would definitely consider it.”Every move the Mets make this off-season will be viewed differently. Every signing, every trade, every decision will be judged by whether it improved a pennant-winning roster. “This team showed us that we’re pretty close, and the goal is to win a championship,” Ricco said. “To the extent that we do take some risk, it would be with that in mind.”BIG MOVES BEFORE MEETINGS There were a flurry of signings even before the winter meetings officially got underway. The biggest move was Arizona’s six-year, $206 million deal with Zack Greinke, the 32-year-old right-hander who starred for the Los Angeles Dodgers for the past three seasons.That deal was completed Friday, and a day later, San Francisco, which had hoped to sign Greinke, instead gave the 30-year-old right-hander Jeff Samardzija a five-year, $90 million contract. Back in 2014, Samardzija was acquired by Oakland in midseason in a bold effort by the A’s to go deep into the postseason. Now, after a 2015 detour to the Chicago White Sox, Samardzija is back in the Bay Area, but this time with a team with a better track record in October.The Chicago Cubs also got busy, signing the veteran right-hander John Lackey to a two-year deal worth $16 million, according to multiple reports. The 37-year-old Lackey pitched effectively for St. Louis in 2015 — compiling a 13-10 record in 33 starts with a 2.77 E.R.A. — and he even shut down the Cubs in Game 1 of their postseason division series in October. The Cubs went on to win that series, and now they have Lackey, too. In coming to Wrigley Field, he will reunite with Jon Lester, with whom he helped Boston win the World Series in 2013. He will also meet up again with Cubs Manager Joe Maddon, who was part of the Anaheim Angels’ coaching staff in 2002 when the team captured the World Series and Lackey, then a rookie, emerged as the winning pitcher in Game 7.A fourth right-handed pitcher cashing in this weekend was Ryan Madson, the 35-year-0ld reliever who did not pitch in the major leagues from 2012 to 2014 but made a comeback with Kansas City this past season and ended up a valuable member of a deep bullpen that was a key part of the Royals’ march to a championship. For his efforts, Madson has been rewarded with a three-year, $22 million deal by the A’s, according to multiple reports. And another right-handed reliever, the 33-year-old Darren O’Day, was apparently close to re-signing with Baltimore. Over the last four seasons with the Orioles, O’Day has been an uncanny model of consistency, appearing in 69, 68, 68 and 68 games while compiling an outstanding E.R.A. that stayed between 1.52 and 2.28.There was at least one nonpitcher making up his mind as to where he would play in 2016. Chase Utley, the longtime Philadelphia star who joined the Dodgers last season as a backup player and pinch-hitter, was said to be close to signing a new deal with the club.In 124 at-bats with the Dodgers in 2015, Utley hit just .202 with three home runs and nine R.B.I. In the 2015 postseason, however, Utley created a controversy with an aggressive slide into second base that broke the leg of Mets shortstop Ruben Tejada. Utley’s apparent decision to stay in the National League next year means Mets fans may have more chances to boo him. JAY SCHREIBERAdvertisement