By BENJAMIN HOFFMANDEC. 6, 2015
In a bizarre game that featured double-digit leads for both teams, the Carolina Panthers staved off the biggest threat yet to their perfect season. And with the team’s suffocating defense struggling to contain the New Orleans Saints, they did most of it on the arm of Cam Newton, beating their division rival, 41-38.It was often ugly for Carolina, who struggled with turnovers in the first half and went down 14-0 before recovering to go into halftime down by 16-13. But the second half proved to be more of a traditional shootout, with both sides refusing to yield.
            Highlights from around the league.        
Drew Brees showed there is still a little magic left in his aging arm, scoring 22 second-half points against one of the best defenses in the N.F.L., but Newton proved that he is a legitimate candidate for Most Valuable Player with his resilient play. No matter how many times Brees willed his team back into the game, Newton drove Carolina down the field with numerous passes and runs that defy description.“He was able to win a shootout and to take a drive in the fourth quarter and give us a chance to win,” Coach Ron Rivera said at his post-game news conference. “It goes back to his whole development as a quarterback in this league.”AdvertisementIf Newton was not taking a fourth-and-1 sneak for a jaw-dropping 30-yard run, he was throwing deep passes into the waiting arms of his wide receivers, who had no problem outrunning a limited Saints defense. Newton ended up completing 28 of 41 passes for 331 yards and five touchdowns. He also ran the ball 8 times for 49 yards and nearly ran in a touchdown, enduring a vicious helmet-to-helmet hit and staying in the game to finish the drive with a touchdown pass. A single first-half interception proved to be the lone blemish on his day.AdvertisementAfter the big hit at the goal line, Newton was seen running into the locker room. There was some confusion as to why he went in, with Rivera saying he was using the bathroom, but while he was away from the bench he was evaluated for a concussion.Newton acknowledged after the game that slowing up as he was about to score opened him up for the big hit.“I deserved it,” Newton told reporters.Newton now has thrown 5 touchdown passes in two of the last three weeks.
            CAM NEWTON!!!! pic.twitter.com/BFQMlRUIvv The offensive show by Newton could have been even more impressive. At one point in the third quarter, he had a franchise record streak of 15 consecutive completions broken up on a perfect deep pass to Ted Ginn Jr. that would likely have resulted in a 72-yard touchdown as Ginn had easily outrun Brandon Browner. Two passes later, Newton seemingly missed another surefire touchdown when Corey Brown could not catch up with a pass after easily blowing past Browner. That drive resulted in a punt.In the fourth quarter, Ginn once again dropped what looked like a sure-thing touchdown as he was all alone downfield when the ball went in and out of his hands. But Newton marched down the field and finished the drive with a 15-yard touchdown pass to Jerricho Cotchery that put Carolina ahead to stay.Cotchery claimed to have been excited as soon as he heard the play called in the huddle.“I knew it was good money,” Cotchery told reporters. “Man coverage.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.It was hardly a pretty game for Carolina’s defense, with the unit allowing 38 points, which is the most they have given up since Week 10 of last season, but having done a lot of the heavy-lifting this season, for them to endure a bad game and still come away with a win is a strong endorsement for the team’s viability in terms of completing a perfect season.In a strange twist, the Panthers had their most difficult win of the season on the same day that an Atlanta loss gave them their third consecutive division title. Before the Panthers, no N.F.C. South team had won consecutive titles.The Panthers now have four games remaining in their pursuit of a perfect record, with none of their remaining opponents having a record better than 6-6.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.