By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSDEC. 6, 2015
MINNEAPOLIS —  Russell Wilson and the Seattle Seahawks have found a rhythm at the right time.Wilson threw for three touchdowns and rushed for one, Seattle’s defense did not allow a score, and the surging Seahawks won their third straight game, a 38-7 romp over the Minnesota Vikings on Sunday.Doug Baldwin had two touchdowns and 94 yards receiving, and Thomas Rawls rushed for 101 yards and a score as the Seahawks (7-5) did just about anything they wanted with the ball against an injury-depleted Vikings defense. Seattle finished with a 433-125 edge in total yards.“Everybody’s fired up on the sidelines,” said Wilson, who has passed for 11 touchdowns without an interception, and an average of 293 yards with a 76.7 completion percentage during the winning streak. “It’s special to watch. It really is.”Minnesota’s Adrian Peterson, the N.F.L’s leading rusher, was limited to 18 yards on eight carries, and the Vikings (8-4) needed a 101-yard kickoff return by Cordarrelle Patterson in the third quarter to avoid a shutout.AdvertisementThe Seahawks, the two-time defending N.F.C. champions, climbed further into the playoff picture after a 2-4 start. The Vikings fell back into a tie with Green Bay for the N.F.C. North lead three days after the Packers beat Detroit on a desperation pass with no time on the clock.AdvertisementThe Vikings, who had lost by 30-13 to Green Bay in their previous home game, took their most lopsided loss in Minnesota since a 34-3 defeat by Chicago on Nov. 25, 1984.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Coming off a career-best five-touchdown performance with 345 yards passing against Pittsburgh, Wilson did not miss a beat, completing 21 of 27 for 274 yards. He was at his elusive best, taking just one sack and netting 51 yards on nine rushes.The Seahawks’ star-laden lineup on defense, vulnerable at times this season, limiting Teddy Bridgewater to 17 of 28 passing for 118 yards.Antone Exum, starting at safety for the Vikings for the second straight game because of injuries to other players, forced and recovered a fumble by Rawls at the Minnesota 30 on Seattle’s opening possession.The next time the Vikings’ defense was on the field, Seattle marched 81 yards in 12 plays, the last one a short, bruising run by Rawls.A version of this article appears in print on December 7, 2015, on Page D2 of the New York edition with the headline: Seattle Routs Minnesota and Gains in Playoff Race.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.