AdvertisementSupported byBy Jonah Engel BromwichEvery week, The New York Times will choose one essential game to watch, highlighting hot teams, winning and losing streaks and statistical intrigue in the N.B.A.Golden State at Indiana, Tuesday, 7 p.m. Eastern, NBATVConventional wisdom says that missing a season to injury can be ruinous to a player’s career. So what does Paul George think he is doing?George, a 6-foot-9 star for the Indiana Pacers, played only six games last season after breaking his leg in August 2014. It was a tough sight, especially for fans of teams in the Eastern Conference’s Central Division, who have become used to seeing potential superstars hampered by injuries.George was named the N.B.A.’s most improved player of the 2012-13 season and was a contender for the Most Valuable Player Award in 2013-14. In both those seasons he led the Pacers to the conference finals, where they succumbed to the Miami Heat each time.George, 25, has made a point of upgrading his skill set each season, but he certainly earned a temporary pass on that with his gruesome injury. Still, before this season started, he told USA Today that he had become the best player in the league, saying that “everything is just enhanced having a year out from the game.”That might have seemed laughable, but George has played well enough to back up the assertion.At 27.6 points per game, his scoring average is nearly 6 points higher than it was in 2013-14, his last full season, and his field-goal percentage (.452) would be his highest in a season since his rookie year, 2010-11, when it was .453. George is also on pace for career highs in 3-point percentage (.454), rebounds (8.2 per game) and assists (4.2 per game) — all while playing at a new position, power forward. His array of skills was on display on Saturday when he scorched the Utah Jazz for 48 points, going 8 for 11 from behind the arc.The Pacers’ successes and failures over the last few seasons have been hitched to George. Now that he is back and better than ever, the dismal lows of last season’s 38-44 performance can be forgotten. They are a faster, more exciting team with the addition of fleet scorers like Monta Ellis and Rodney Stuckey, neither of whom was on the roster in George’s last good season.Forward C. J. Miles, another addition from last season, has provided flexibility and reliable shooting that have significantly increased the potency of the team’s offense. And the Pacers’ defense remains as stingy as always under the supervision of Coach Frank Vogel.Indiana is 12-7, a record that puts it fourth in the conference, but only a half-game behind the conference-leading Heat. The Pacers have beaten some of the league’s best teams, including the Heat, the Chicago Bulls and the Los Angeles Clippers. And they will get a chance to knock off the Golden State Warriors in Indiana on Tuesday night. The Warriors extended their undefeated start to 22 games by defeating the Nets on Sunday.Ever since the Warriors’ streak reached double digits, pundits have wondered which teams on the schedule possess the best chance of ending that run. But it has been difficult to predict which opponents will challenge these historically great Warriors. The Clippers have played them tough, but so have the Nets, the Jazz and the Toronto Raptors. In two of their last three games, the Warriors have squeaked to victory by just 3 points. And yet, even in the midst of a seven-game trip, they have yet to lose.Stephen Curry is having a transcendent season. George may be his closest competitor for the M.V.P. Award, but “close” is a stretch in this instance. Tas Melas, an analyst for NBATV, said last week that Curry was the most efficient player to average more than 20 points a game since Wilt Chamberlain. The stats prove Curry to be unguardable; he has shot absurdly well even when guarded tightly by a defender. He is also playing the best defense of his career, entering Sunday as the third best thief in the league, with an average of 2.29 steals a game — extraordinary, given his output on the other end.Last season, the Warriors were the ultimate model of team basketball. But as Curry has bloomed, it has become easier to refer to the rest of the team as his supporting cast. Klay Thompson, for instance, has taken a step back this year, averaging fewer points on fewer field-goal attempts.What is chilling about the Warriors, though, is the potential lurking in their roster. In their game against the Raptors on Saturday, it was Thompson who provided Curry with the most support, scoring 26 points on 15 field-goal attempts. There are at least six other players on the team who can erupt for 20 points or more and present a similar threat to opponents.The first team to beat the 2015-16 Warriors will not earn instant bragging rights. Streaks always come with their own sense of entropy, and Golden State’s first loss is an inevitability, one that will hardly diminish the team as it chases some of the best regular-season teams of all time. But if Indiana does manage to earn a victory at Bankers Life Fieldhouse on Tuesday, it will be evidence that the Pacers have indeed returned to the upper echelons of the N.B.A. after a season-long break that seems only to have made the team, and its superstar, even better.Advertisement