By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSDEC. 6, 2015
Lindsey Vonn won a super-G race Sunday to complete a sweep of World Cup races at Lake Louise, Alberta, for the third time in her career.Vonn, an American, finished in 1 minute 19.79 seconds, beating Tamara Tippler of Austria by 1.32 seconds. That is the largest margin of victory in women’s super-G since 1997, according to information provided by the United States Ski Team. Another Austrian, Cornelia Hütter, was third.Vonn, who has 70 career World Cup victories, captured downhill races Friday and Saturday for the Lake Louise hat trick. Vonn also accomplished the feat there in 2011 and 2012, and the resort is now sometimes referred to as Lake Lindsey because of her dominance.“It was a big deal,” Vonn said of her victory. “I feel like there were some people that doubted whether I could win today.”AdvertisementFour American racers finished in the top 20, including Laurenne Ross at 12th. Mikaela Shiffrin, the Olympic and world slalom champion, made her speed debut and finished 15th.AdvertisementAUSTRIAN CRUISES TO VICTORY Marcel Hirscher of Austria held on to his first-run lead and easily won a World Cup giant slalom race in Beaver Creek, Colo., on a day when the American Ted Ligety and some other top rivals crashed.Fresh off a surprise super-G win on Saturday, Hirscher finished in a combined time of 2:32.58 and beat Victor Muffat-Jeandet of France by 0.98 of a second. Henrik Kristoffersen of Norway was third.Hirscher became Austria’s career leader in giant slalom victories, with 15, surpassing Hermann Maier and Benjamin Raich.“We are getting closer to these records that I think are pretty heavy,” said Hirscher, seeking a fifth straight overall title. “It’s great to be on top of those.”Ligety and the French racers Thomas Fanara and Alexis Pinturault crashed out in a row. Ligety, the big favorite on this course, had not failed to finish in a first run of a World Cup giant slalom since 2013. But he struggled in snow conditions that changed drastically when the temperature dropped significantly overnight, turning the course from icy to aggressive. Ligety hooked an edge, tumbled to the snow and crashed through a gate before stopping.Pinturault was taken to a hospital for evaluation after hitting his head.Aksel Lund Svindal of Norway, who won Friday’s downhill race, did not compete because of an illness.AMERICANS AGAIN ON TOP Brittany Bowe beat Heather Richardson-Bergsma to win the women’s 1,500 meters in the second American 1-2 finish in two days at a speedskating World Cup event in Inzell, Germany.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Bowe, who also won the 1,000 meters on Saturday, finished in 1:54.68 to edge Richardson-Bergsma by 0.26.AdvertisementMarrit Leenstra of the Netherlands was third, 1.11 seconds behind.Bowe leads Richardson-Bergsma by 20 points in the standings after three races.Lee Sang-hwa of South Korea won the second of the weekend’s sprints in 37.36 seconds, beating Richardson-Bergsma by 0.48. Artur Was of Poland won the second men’s sprint. Denis Yuskov of Russia won the men’s 1,500 meters.Irene Schouten of the Netherlands edged Ivanie Blondin of Canada by 0.02 of a second to win the women’s mass start in 8:18.41. Victory in the men’s mass start went to Alexis Contin of France.ANOTHER SWEEP FOR GERMANY In the second four-man bobsled World Cup meet of the season, Francesco Friedrich led a second German sweep of the podium.Pushed by Martin Putze, Jannis Baecker and Thorsten Margis, Friedrich posted runs of 55.35 and 55.23 seconds in Winterberg, Germany, for a combined time of 1:50.58 to edge Maximilian Arndt’s team by 0.05 of a second.Nico Walther’s team was third, 0.16 of a second behind.CLOSE WIN IN BIATHLON Kaisa Makarainen of Finland earned a narrow victory in the women’s biathlon pursuit in Ostersund, Sweden. Makarainen took the lead on the last lap to beat Dorothea Wierer of Italy by 1.9 seconds. Franziska Hildebrand of Germany was third, 3.3 seconds backMartin Fourcade of France held off his chasers to win the men’s event, overcoming three missed targets to finish in 31:22.4. Arnd Peiffer of Germany finished in second, 35.1 seconds back.DOMINANT AT HOME Norway had the top three teams in a men’s cross-country skiing relay in Lillehammer, Norway, becoming the first country to sweep the podium of a World Cup relay. Norway won the women’s race by nearly two minutes.Also in Lillehammer, Kenneth Gangnes of Norway earned his first ski jump World Cup victory by winning a normal hill event after missing out on a victory in Saturday’s event by 0.1 of a point, and Magnus Krog of Norway won a World Cup Nordic combined event by holding off Fabian Riessle of Germany in the cross-country skiing race.A version of this article appears in print on December 7, 2015, on Page D8 of the New York edition with the headline: Vonn Earns 3rd Straight Win, by Big Margin.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.