By KEN BELSONDEC. 6, 2015
TAMPA, Fla. —  When the Tampa Bay Buccaneers made the Heisman Trophy-winning quarterback Jameis Winston the first overall pick in this year’s N.F.L. draft, they bet that he would ignite a franchise that had not had a winning record in five seasons.Winston has had an uneven start to his pro career, throwing nearly as many interceptions as touchdown passes and losing three of his first four starts.But with the team’s playoff hopes hanging in the balance, Winston lived up to his billing as a quarterback capable of creating big plays with his feet or his arm.With Tampa Bay trailing by 3 points against the division rival Atlanta Falcons with less than three minutes remaining, Winston was pushing his team down the field. From the Atlanta 43 on third-and-19, he dropped back to pass and saw his receivers covered and the pocket collapsing, so he took off running.AdvertisementAbout 10 yards down the field, he fell on top of two defenders, and the play looked over. But the whistle never blew because Winston’s knee had not hit the ground. He quickly popped up, spun around to his right and ran for another 10 yards for a first down.
            Highlights from around the league.        
In the huddle four plays later, Winston said, he asked his teammates, “Who wants to score a touchdown?” Wide receiver Mike Evans replied, “Me, me, me.”AdvertisementWinston then threw Evans a 6-yard pass in the corner of the end zone for a touchdown and a 4-point lead. Moments later, the Buccaneers sealed a 23-19 victory when Falcons quarterback Matt Ryan threw an interception.“How about the run by Jameis?” Buccaneers Coach Lovie Smith said to reporters after the game. “Tell me a better running quarterback in the league right now than Jameis Winston.”With the win, the Buccaneers moved to 6-6, the same record as the Falcons. By winning both matchups this season, the Buccaneers own the tiebreaker against Atlanta.Both teams remain in the hunt for a playoff spot, but they are going in opposite directions. After winning their first five games, the Falcons have lost five of their last six. Their loss Sunday also allowed the Carolina Panthers to clinch the N.F.C. South for the third consecutive season, which means the Buccaneers and the Falcons must compete with the Green Bay Packers, the Seattle Seahawks, the Minnesota Vikings and other teams for a wild-card berth.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“The truth is right now we’re a .500 club, and we’re playing like it,” Falcons Coach Dan Quinn said. “So for us to say, ‘How can we play our best football?,’ we’re going to find that answer, and we’re going to do that together. So that was the message I had for the club, and that’s what we’re going to go back right to tomorrow.”The Buccaneers have the easier remaining schedule. They must play the Panthers once, while the Falcons have to play them twice.AdvertisementStill, Smith said he was happy to be talking this late in the season about the possibility of making the playoffs.“We haven’t had six wins in a long time,” he said.While Winston, who also ran for a 5-yard touchdown in the first quarter to put the Buccaneers up, 7-0, was showered with cheers and was high-fived by fans as he ran off the field, his college past lingers. On Friday, USA Today reported that an officer in the Tallahassee Police Department had acknowledged that there were missteps in the investigation in 2013 into a rape accusation against Winston by a former student at Florida State, where Winston played.The officer’s comments were in addition to mistakes made by the police that were reported by The New York Times in 2014.Dealing with domestic violence scandals involving stars like Ray Rice and Greg Hardy, the league has tried to clean up its image. To that end, Commissioner Roger Goodell met with Winston in April before the draft, which Winston did not attend.A version of this article appears in print on December 7, 2015, on Page D2 of the New York edition with the headline: Winston Delivers as Bucs’ Fortunes Shift in a Blur .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.