By BILL PENNINGTONDEC. 6, 2015
EAST RUTHERFORD, N.J. —  Leading the Jets by 10 points in the fourth quarter Sunday, the Giants marched authoritatively down the field, keeping the football for more than 11 minutes. The Jets’ defense was in disarray, having committed two penalties on third-down plays and another on a punt to prolong the Giants’ drive.Finally, the Giants faced a fourth-and-2 at the Jets’ 4-yard line with about nine minutes remaining in the last quarter. A successful, short field goal would most likely force the Jets to score two touchdowns to regain the lead. But if the Giants could convert on fourth down and eventually score a touchdown, their 17-point lead would mean the game was probably over.Giants Coach Tom Coughlin, ridiculed for his late-game decision-making in several losses already this season, decided on Sunday to go out with guns blazing. It was a bold move. But Coughlin, in what may be his final season coaching, appears to be unremittingly star-crossed in the closing moments of tight games this year.Shunning the field goal, Coughlin approved a pass play that resulted in an interception.From that moment on, until they roared to a 23-20 overtime victory, the Jets played as if suddenly filled with a new energy, aplomb and efficiency. Perhaps the Jets’ newfound dynamism was stolen from a Giants team that just as abruptly began to play as if it intuitively recognized the runaway train that was coming down the tracks.AdvertisementThe Jets scored 10 unanswered points to tie the game, kicked a field goal on the opening possession of overtime and then watched as Giants kicker Josh Brown, who had not missed a field-goal try in nearly a year, hooked a 48-yard attempt left of the goal posts to end the game.
            Highlights from around the league.        
When these teams last played four years ago, a startling 99-yard touchdown reception by the Giants’ Victor Cruz changed each team’s season. Indeed, the play may have altered the paths of each franchise for years to come.AdvertisementUntil the final minutes of Sunday’s game, the Jets appeared on their way to another damaging defeat. Now the Jets (7-5), after winning a pivotal game without their injured Pro Bowl cornerback Darrelle Revis, remain in the hunt for an A.F.C. playoff berth.“It was a turning point,” Jets Coach Todd Bowles said afterward, referring to the Giants’ failed fourth-down attempt, although he was not above suggesting that the Jets’ victory might catapult his team through its final four games.Bowles continued: “I don’t know if it’s a playoff turning point, but I hope we grew up a little bit from this game. Going forward I think it gives us a boost.”Conversely, the Giants (5-7) are slumping badly, mired in a three-game losing streak. Their playoff prospects, so bright on Thanksgiving, have grown dim in December. With the devastating late-game collapses mercilessly accumulating, a disastrous third successive losing season looms — something a head coach rarely survives.Nonetheless, Coughlin was unbowed in defeat.“I thought that was the right play at the time — I still do,” he said of his decision to forgo the short field-goal attempt. “Yeah, we could have made them score two touchdowns to beat you.” But if the Giants had scored a touchdown on fourth down, he added, “we push the score up to where maybe they can’t beat us with whatever; I stand by it.”Giants quarterback Eli Manning agreed.“I like the call,” Manning said. “We’ve just got to put it in right there.”AdvertisementBut Manning’s face seemed to betray weariness from the late leads squandered this season.“It does seem like every loss is a tough one,” he said.The Jets’ players, including safety Rontez Miles, who intercepted Manning’s fourth-down pass, were shocked that the Giants had not chosen to take the probable 3 points.“I thought they would kick the field goal, honestly,” Miles said. “But it just gave us an opportunity to make a play.”The interception by Rontez Miles on fourth-and-2 from the Jets’ 4-yard line stalled a 22-play drive and prevented the Giants from building on their 10-point lead in the fourth quarter. The Jets capitalized on Giants Coach Tom Coughlin’s decision to eschew a field goal and mounted a 10-point comeback that sent the game into overtime.
		That was Ryan Fitzpatrick’s passing yardage, the most by a Jets quarterback since Vinny Testaverde threw for 481 in the 2000 season finale, according to Pro-Football-Reference.com. It was the second most productive passing game of Fitzpatrick’s career.In a tantalizing opportunity to improve their playoff standing, the Jets will host one of the league’s worst teams, the 3-9 Tennessee Titans, and the Giants will try to remain relevant in the N.F.C. East race, on the road against the Miami Dolphins.By BEN SHPIGELDEC. 6, 2015
Miles’s interception was not as critical as the quality pass coverage he executed on Manning’s intended target on the play, Giants wide receiver Rueben Randle. Manning had nowhere to throw the football and tossed into a crowd hoping for a lucky deflection or a defensive pass-interference call.Instead, the Jets took over at their own 14-yard line. While the Jets had played a mistake-filled game to that point, quarterback Ryan Fitzpatrick suddenly found a groove that had the Jets plowing through a backpedaling Giants defense.Fitzpatrick completed seven of 11 passes on the ensuing drive, setting up a 24-yard field goal by Randy Bullock that cut the Giants lead to 20-13 with 4 minutes 24 seconds left in the fourth quarter.The Giants’ offense could gain only 4 yards on three subsequent plays and then punted. This time, Fitzpatrick, who completed 36 of 50 passes for 390 yards with an interception, connected on four of six passes as the Jets moved deep into Giants territory.Fitzpatrick also scrambled for 15 yards on a fourth-and-6 with about a minute left in the final quarter. Two plays later, Jets wide receiver Brandon Marshall outleapt Giants cornerback Prince Amukamara in the corner of the end zone for a 9-yard touchdown, and with the extra point, the game was tied, 20-20, with 27 seconds remaining.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Jets won the coin toss before overtime and received the kickoff. Fitzpatrick, who had been harassed by a swarming Giants pass rush in the first half when the Giants took a 20-10 lead, was now playing with a new poise and precision. He completed five successive passes, but the Jets’ possession stalled at the 13-yard line, and Bullock kicked a 31-yard field goal.AdvertisementThe Giants offense that took the field with the game on the line moved confidently and relied on its best player, Odell Beckham Jr. On a fourth-and-6 at the Giants’ 46-yard line, Manning, who completed 18 of 34 passes for 297 yards, threaded a pass through a crowd and a sliding Beckham skillfully snatched it just before it hit the turf. For Beckham, it was his sixth and last reception.Three plays later, the Giants were compelled to turn the game over to Brown, who had not missed a field-goal attempt since Dec. 21, 2014 — a streak of 29 successful attempts. But this kick started straight and drifted left.“I just trailed off,” Brown said. “If it had been a 46-yarder, it would have been just enough. But it wasn’t.”Perhaps a field-goal attempt missing its mark by inches was fitting for a close late-season game of such import for both teams. But it did not improve the mood of Coughlin, who spent many minutes once again defending his choices with the game on the line.“I have made a decision to be very aggressive at the end of games,” Coughlin said in the final seconds of his postgame news conference. “I don’t have a lot to show for it.”EXTRA POINTSGiants quarterback Eli Manning said he had X-rays after the game for an injury he did not specify.A version of this article appears in print on December 7, 2015, on Page D1 of the New York edition with the headline: Giants Gamble; Jets Cash In.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.