AdvertisementSupported byGlobal SoccerBy Rob HughesLONDON — The Neville brothers of Manchester, England, began one of the great leaps of faith in Valencia, Spain, over the weekend.Gary Neville, the television pundit who is being catapulted into team coaching at the highest level, watched from the stands as the players he will assume responsibility for as head coach with immediate effect fought to a spirited 1-1 tie against the best team in the world, Barcelona.It is seldom cold in the old concrete arena that is Valencia’s stadium, the Mestalla. But when Barça’s renowned front three — Lionel Messi, Neymar and Luis Suárez — wasted a handful of scoring opportunities in the first half, Neville appeared frigid in concentration as he looked down upon the team he will now prepare for a Champions League game against Lyon on Wednesday.Three days, maybe up to five training sessions, to get his ideas across.His younger brother Phil was down on the coaching bench, officially assisting Salvador González — better known as Voro — who, for Saturday’s game was promoted from the backup staff to take charge against Barcelona.Valencia’s first team is riven with injuries to seven senior players, and for almost an hour its remaining players looked like lambs to the slaughter as Barcelona toyed with them. Then, after spurning so many chances, Suárez burst past Valencia’s Aymen Abdennour and from the most acute angle hammered the ball into the roof of Valencia’s goal.Gary Neville was unmoved in his seat. Phil Neville and Voro encouraged the team not to lose faith. The players did more than that. In the 86th minute, born out of youthful optimism and dogged determination, two of them hit back.Paco Alcácer, who at 22 is Spain’s best young striker, controlled the ball high on his chest. With two Barcelona defenders, Gerard Piqué and Javier Mascherano, at his back, Alcácer turned and looked around him.He spotted Santi Mina to his right and, quicker than you could say here’s your chance to score your first ever goal at Mestalla, Alcácer flicked the ball toward Mina. Seconds later, that ball was in the net.Mina, 19, dedicated the goal to his family. Barcelona, normally so prolific, was now chastened for being profligate. Only Messi and Co. will know if, after thrashing everybody with four or six goals of late, they underestimated Valencia.“We recovered our union with the fans,” Voro said at the postgame news conference. “This was a very important starting point for us.”Voro, for the third time in his long and dutiful employment at Valencia, was temporarily filling the void while upper management makes changes. Upper management in this case means Peter Lim, the Singapore business entrepreneur who bought a 70 percent stake in Valencia as it struggled with debt in May 2014.Advised by the ubiquitous Portuguese agent Jorge Mendes, Lim appointed the former Portuguese goalkeeper Nuno Espírito Santo as head coach. The club sold experienced players and speculated on buying youth, mainly in the Portuguese and South American markets.Espírito Santo won over neither the locker room, nor the hugely expectant Mestalla crowd. The coach quit at the end of November.Lim, who worked his way up from driving a cab to billionaire status through the Singapore and Indonesian investment markets, acted swiftly this time.Replacing a coach in midseason is always a gamble, but Lim’s move for the Neville brothers looks like throwing fortune to the roulette wheel.Lim knows the Nevilles from a joint enterprise they have in a small English club, Salford City F.C. The Singaporean put 50 percent of the collateral into Salford, a team in the shadow of Manchester’s Old Trafford stadium where Gary Neville served 19 years, from apprentice to captain, under the management of Sir Alex Ferguson.Brother Philip, already an assistant coach at Valencia, and three other ex United players — Ryan Giggs, Paul Scholes and Nicky Butt — each own a 10 percent stake of Salford. Lim will have seen, through that adventure, just how much Gary Neville has matured from being effectively the foreman in United’s locker room to becoming the most decisive voice at ambitious Salford.And the Valencia owner could see on his Sky Sports subscriber channel the way that Neville, now 40, commanded the studio with his punditry. With his clarity, his knowledge and above all his willingness to speak the devastating truth, Gary surprised many who regard TV chatter from old pros as a soft option.Many, if not most, former players on the pundit’s couch give the impression of biding time, of keeping their face and voice on screen so that club owners think of them when the time comes to roll the dice on a change of coach.The Nevilles do not peddle soft talk. Their insight can be witheringly honest. They hold nothing back, even when commenting about old friends.Now, they have crossed that line between the studio and the managerial hot seat. In his spare time, Gary Neville intends to hold onto his part-time role as assistant to England’s national team manager, Roy Hodgson, while also immersing himself and his family into a new culture, new language, new everything.He has a six-month contract from a Singaporean who is throwing money at his own learning game, running one of Spain’s oldest and most demanding clubs.What Neville witnessed Saturday will be needed in spades in the coming weeks: Hard application, and a mighty dollop of luck.Advertisement