By TYLER KEPNERDEC. 8, 2015
NASHVILLE —  The Boston Red Sox further bolstered their bullpen on Monday, agreeing to a trade with Seattle for Carson Smith and Roenis Elias. In 70 games with the Mariners last season, the right-handed Smith had 13 saves and a 2.31 E.R.A., with 92 strikeouts in 70 innings. He will serve as a setup man to Craig Kimbrel, a closer acquired last month from San Diego in return for prospects, with Elias as a long reliever and insurance for the rotation.The Red Sox sent starter Wade Miley and reliever Jonathan Aro to Seattle. Miley, a left-hander, was 11-11 with a 4.46 E.R.A. for the Red Sox in the first season of a three-year, $19.25 million contract.Miley was expendable because the Red Sox signed starter David Price for seven years and $217 million last week. The Mariners needed a starter to replace Hisashi Iwakuma, who has an agreement to sign as a free agent with the Los Angeles Dodgers.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.By acquiring Smith, the Red Sox telegraphed their intention to leave Joe Kelly in the rotation with Price, Rick Porcello, Clay Buchholz and Eduardo Rodriguez. Kelly would seem best suited in relief, but from Aug. 1 through Sept. 9 last season, he won eight starts in a row with a 2.59 E.R.A., apparently securing his role as a starter.AdvertisementHALL OF FAME VOTING The Hall of Fame announced Monday that no new members had been elected from a group of 10 candidates whose contributions predated the integration era. Candidates needed 12 votes from a panel of 16 to be inducted, and the highest total went to Doc Adams, a 19th-century pioneer, who received 10 votes. All of the candidates were dead.AdvertisementResults of balloting by the Baseball Writers’ Association of America, which is considering such candidates as Ken Griffey Jr., Mike Piazza and Jeff Bagwell, will be announced on Jan. 6.RIPKEN NAMED SPECIAL ADVISER Cal Ripken Jr., the Hall of Famer who has begun a successful youth baseball league in retirement, was named as Major League Baseball’s new senior adviser on youth programs and outreach. Commissioner Rob Manfred has made youth participation a cornerstone objective in his plan to help the game grow.“I’m ecstatic to be in a role where I can help,” Ripken said. “I’ve always wanted to help develop the kids and let them see the joy that baseball can provide. It’s a wonderful, wonderful sport. And I still think it’s a little different than other sports. You don’t have to be the biggest, strongest, and fastest.”A version of this article appears in print on December 8, 2015, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Red Sox Acquire Setup Man From Mariners .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.