AdvertisementSupported byN.F.L. RoundupBy The Associated PressWith a wild finish capping an otherwise dull game filled with turnovers, punts and penalties, the Dallas Cowboys beat the Redskins, 19-16, at Washington on Monday night on Dan Bailey’s 54-yard field goal with nine seconds to play.After combining to score 18 points in the first 58 ½ minutes, the teams put up 17 points in the last 90 seconds. Dallas scored on a 6-yard Darren McFadden run with 1 minute 14 seconds remaining. DeSean Jackson’s fumble during a punt return had set the Cowboys up at the Washington 15.But Jackson caught a 28-yard touchdown pass from Kirk Cousins with 44 seconds left to even the score at 16-16 before Bailey’s winning kick.The outcome further muddled the mediocre N.F.C. East. Washington, Philadelphia and the Giants now have 5-7 records, and Dallas is 4-8. In the second quarter, the Cowboys’ Jason Witten became the second tight end with 1,000 N.F.L. catches, joining Tony Gonzalez.Witten’s second catch of the game, a 7-yard grab of a pass from Matt Cassel that resulted in a first down, allowed him to reach the milestone. Witten, who entered Monday with 998 catches and 11,010 yards, finished the game with five catches for 45 yards. He is in his 13th season, all with Dallas.Gonzalez retired after the 2013 season, his 17th, with 1,325 catches and 15,127 yards for Kansas City and Atlanta.RAMS FIRE COORDINATOR The St. Louis Rams, next to last in offense in the N.F.L., fired the offensive coordinator Frank Cignetti.“All the blame’s not to fall on his shoulders, but that’s the way this business works,” Coach Jeff Fisher said.Rob Boras, assistant head coach for offense and tight ends coach, will take over the coordinating duties.St. Louis (4-8) has lost five in a row and had a season low for points in a 27-3 loss to the Arizona Cardinals on Sunday.Boras, 45, and Cignetti, 50, had been with Fisher since he was hired in 2012.Fisher also said that wide receiver Stedman Bailey was improving from the two gunshot wounds to the head he sustained Nov. 24 near his home in Florida. But Fisher said he was not sure if Bailey, a third-round draft pick in 2013, would be able to return to the N.F.L.JAGUAR CLEARS PROTOCOL Jacksonville Jaguars receiver Allen Hurns cleared the N.F.L.’s concussion protocol and was given the green light to practice this week and play against Indianapolis. But he said he had no recollection of what landed him in the concussion program.“Nah, I don’t remember,” Hurns said. “I remember the third quarter. After that, I remember being in the ambulance.”Hurns was knocked out late in Jacksonville’s Nov. 29 game against San Diego when he landed awkwardly on his head while trying to make a diving catch. He had movement in his legs and arms, but was strapped to a backboard and taken to a nearby hospital for tests. Those tests revealed no structural damage, but a concussion was diagnosed.BRONCOS’ MANNING TO THROW Denver Broncos quarterback Peyton Manning will suit up and throw outdoors this week as he begins his comeback from a torn plantar fascia in his left foot, although it is unlikely he will participate in practice.Brock Osweiler, who is 3-0 in Manning’s place, will start Sunday, when Denver hosts Oakland.Advertisement