AdvertisementSupported byN.B.A. RoundupBy Richard SandomirNike said Monday that it had signed the Cleveland Cavaliers superstar LeBron James to a lifetime contract, confirming the marketing value of sticking with James well into his postplaying career.Nike’s strategy regarding James is similar to the one it has had with Michael Jordan, whose namesake brand remains a prominent part of the company a dozen years after his final retirement.“We can confirm that we have agreed to a lifetime relationship with LeBron that provides significant value to our business, brand and shareholders,” the company said in a statement. “We have already built a strong LeBron business over the past 12 years, and we see the potential for this to continue to grow throughout his playing career and beyond.”James’s lifetime deal comes as a younger superstar, Stephen Curry, 27, is captivating fans and potentially looks to be on the path to becoming as valuable as James or more. Curry led the Golden State Warriors to the N.B.A. title last season in six games over the Cavaliers and was named most valuable player.This year, the Warriors are 22-0, and Curry seems even better than last season. His feathery shooting touch and balletic moves provide a stark contrast to the brilliance of James’s game, with its explosive mixture of speed, size and strength.According to Fanatics.com, which runs the N.B.A.’s online retailing and its soon-to-open flagship store in Manhattan, sales of Curry’s and James’s merchandise are ranked first and second, but sales of Curry’s jerseys are up 500 percent compared with last year.Curry recently extended through 2024 his shoe-and-apparel deal with a Nike rival, Under Armour, which makes the Curry One and Curry Two shoes. A black-and-white Under Armour ad suggests that Curry is heralding a new age in the N.B.A. in which “the step-back three is the new dunk” and “range is the new hang-time.”According to ESPN, Under Armour signed Curry two years ago for a deal worth less than $4 million annually. Another N.B.A. superstar, Kevin Durant, signed a reported 10-year, $300 million deal during the off-season.WIZARDS 114, HEAT 103 John Wall scored 26 points one night after leaving a game with a sore knee, Gary Neal added 21 including a debated 3-pointer with just over a minute left, and visiting Washington beat Miami.Bradley Beal scored 21 points and Otto Porter finished with 13 points and 14 rebounds for Washington, which never trailed in the fourth quarter.The Heat argued that Beal traveled when he lost control of the ball and regained it under the basket with 1 minute 10 seconds remaining. Beal sent the ball to Neal for a 3-pointer from the right corner that put Washington up by 5 points and essentially served as the clincher. (AP)HORNETS 104, PISTONS 84  Cody Zeller had 20 points as host Charlotte ended Detroit’s four-game winning streak.Marvin Williams had 14 points and 12 rebounds, and Kemba Walker had 14 points and 9 rebounds for Charlotte.The Pistons (12-10) were led by Kentavious Caldwell-Pope’s 16 points and Ersan Ilyasova’s 15 points and 11 rebounds. (AP)SPURS 119, 76ERS 68  With their new front office executive Jerry Colangelo sitting courtside in Philadelphia, the 76ers showed him just how far they are from becoming a competitive franchise.Tim Duncan, Manu Ginobili and Kawhi Leonard all sat out, and San Antonio still rolled past the Sixers. LaMarcus Aldridge led the Spurs with 26 points and 9 rebounds.The Sixers fell to 1-21 just hours after Colangelo was named Philadelphia’s chairman of basketball operations. Colangelo, the chairman of USA Basketball, will also serve as an adviser to team ownership. (AP)SUNS 103, BULLS 101  Mirza Teletovic scored 21 points, including a follow basket with 0.3 of a second left, to cap Phoenix’s furious fourth-quarter rally in a win over host Chicago.Phoenix outscored Chicago, 42-24, in the final period. (AP)RAPTORS 102, LAKERS 93 Kyle Lowry had 27 points, Terrence Ross added 22 and Bismack Biyombo posted a career-high 15 points and 13 rebounds as host Toronto ended a three-game skid with a win over Los Angeles. (AP)Advertisement