AdvertisementSupported byBy Ben ShpigelThe Jets’ five losses this season have run the gamut of despair: miserable first halves and fourth-quarter implosions and turnover-filled debacles, each more nauseating than the last. Their victories, though, have been far more uniform — at least until Sunday. Instead of heading into halftime with the advantage or taking the lead early in the third quarter, as they had in their previous six wins, the Jets trailed by 10 points in the fourth quarter — with five minutes left — before beating the Giants, 23-20, in overtime.“I don’t think you become a complete team until you have one of those types of games,” Coach Todd Bowles said Monday during a teleconference. He added: “I’ve been looking for that, and I’m happy that they got to see it themselves more than I got to see it. They need to believe in themselves, and I think they got a chance to see it.”That belief endured as they trailed by 20-10 at the half. In the locker room, players discussed how just two big plays by the Giants — Odell Beckham Jr.’s 72-yard catch and Dwayne Harris’s 80-yard punt return — had left the Jets trailing. They resolved to maintain their poise, as they had discussed all week. “When you have composure,” said running back Bilal Powell, a pivotal figure in the comeback, “you’re able to stick with what you do best.” The victory reaffirmed what the Jets knew, or what they thought they knew. That their quarterback, Ryan Fitzpatrick, who made a game-tying touchdown throw with 27 seconds left in regulation and completed 18 of 27 passes for 194 yards in the fourth quarter and overtime combined, is capable of winning a critical game in December. That their defense, destroyed through the air over the last six weeks, can generate enough pressure without blitzing to mitigate the absences of the injured cornerbacks Darrelle Revis and Marcus Williams. That they are a playoff contender.With four games left, the Jets are the sixth seed in the A.F.C., tied at 7-5 with two other teams: No. 5 Kansas City, which has won its last six games, and Pittsburgh, which lags behind the Jets because of a tiebreaker. Of the Jets’ four remaining opponents, only the final two — New England (10-2) and Buffalo (6-6), who both have beaten the Jets this season — have records of .500 or better.Bowles said he was aware of the Jets’ position, but the only time he monitors the scoreboard, he has said, is to see if his team is winning. “If you don’t win your games, you’re not going to be there long.” Bowles said. “We control our own destiny. We understand that. We’ve got to win out to try to get in there.”Given Bowles’s singular focus — “we can’t look ahead or look around or look behind us” — it is doubtful that he has analyzed the scope of the playoff race. And so it is interesting that he inadvertently acknowledged an odd quirk of the conference standings — that not even winning their final four games would guarantee an entry into the postseason. In the unlikely event that the Jets, the Chiefs and the Steelers all finish 11-5, the Jets could still miss the playoffs, sunk by a tiebreaker (a worse record against common opponents), according to the playoff machine on ESPN.com. For those final spots, there is also other competition, of course. The Bills are a game back, and so are the A.F.C. South co-leaders Indianapolis and Houston (both also 6-6). The Jets have not won three consecutive games since 2011, when they followed that streak by losing their final three to drop out of contention. Fitzpatrick was not a Jet then, nor has he ever played in the postseason, but he intuitively understands that the impact of the emotional victory over the Giants would be diminished if the Jets did not beat the 3-9 Tennessee Titans on Sunday. “It’s a great feeling,” Fitzpatrick said Monday, “but it’s also a feeling that can go away quickly.” EXTRA POINTSTodd Bowles said Darrelle Revis, who has not practiced since sustaining a concussion on Nov. 22, was feeling “a lot better” but had yet to resume strenuous physical activity. Revis remains in the league’s concussion protocol. ... The Jets fear that defensive end Mike Catapano sustained a serious foot injury Sunday that will sideline him for the rest of the season. Bowles said Catapano might have injured his Lisfranc ligament, a band of tissue that is essential in preserving the foot’s alignment. Advertisement