AdvertisementSupported byMavericks 104, Knicks 97By Scott CacciolaJanis Porzingis, whose younger brother was about an hour from taking the court for the 22nd game of his N.B.A. career, stood along the baseline at Madison Square Garden on Monday night and watched as Dirk Nowitzki of the Dallas Mavericks warmed up.“I mean, how many guys can do that?” Porzingis asked as Nowitzki swished 3-pointer after 3-pointer. “It’s ridiculous.”Kristaps Porzingis, his brother, has played well for the Knicks, inviting a boatload of comparisons to Nowitzki in recent weeks. All the chatter has been flattering, Janis Porzingis said, and he understands the connection — “They’re white and tall,” he said — but it is also widely understood that eons separate the players, a gulf between great promise and long-term production.On Monday, Kristaps Porzingis met Nowitzki for the first time, and their resemblance was obvious: the size, the skills, the confidence. All of their shared abilities were on display as the Mavericks escaped with a 104-97 victory. After the buzzer, Nowitzki embraced Porzingis at midcourt and told him to keep working hard.“He’s for real,” Nowitzki said, adding: “He’s probably way ahead of the curve. When I was 20, I was scared to death out there.”Nowitzki, 37, was at his vintage best, scoring a team-high 25 points. Porzingis, 20, was undaunted, finishing with a game-high 28 while shooting 13 of 18 from the field. It was only fitting that they defended each other for long stretches as they went about their business of stretching the floor and creating for teammates.“It was fun,” Porzingis said. “He showed why he’s Dirk Nowitzki.”Once upon a time, Nowitzki revolutionized the power forward position as a 7-footer capable of shooting from distance. A perennial All-Star, he has scored more than 28,000 points. He has won a championship. But against the Knicks, Nowitzki may have caught a glimpse of the future. Porzingis was exceptional.“If he wants a shot anywhere on the court, he can pretty much get it,” Mavericks Coach Rick Carlisle said. “If someone’s on him, he has the footwork and the ball skills to create. So it’s a very potent weapon.”After the Knicks (10-12) trailed by as many as 23, Porzingis led a late rally. With about five minutes remaining in the fourth quarter, Porzingis sent a pass to Jose Calderon for an open 3-pointer. Porzingis then drove the lane for a runner that cut the lead to 7.With 43 seconds left, Porzingis drained another 3-pointer, and the Mavericks (13-9) were clinging to a 101-97 lead. On the ensuing possession, Porzingis blocked Deron Williams at the rim. But Carmelo Anthony was called for an offensive foul, and the Knicks were finally out of answers.Anthony scored 17 points but shot just 6 of 18 from the field. Williams, formerly of the Nets, had 20 points and 7 assists.Mark Cuban, the owner of the Mavericks, recalled encountering disillusioned Knicks fans immediately after this year’s draft. They were questioning the Porzingis pick.“And I’m like, ‘No, you don’t understand,’ ” Cuban said. “We would’ve traded up in a heartbeat to get that kid. We loved him.”Cuban said comparisons to Nowitzki were inevitable. But Cuban cited one difference that was actually favorable to Porzingis.“He’s 7 foot 3,” Cuban said. “Those three inches make a difference.”For whatever reason, it has been impossible for Porzingis to avoid such talk. At the start of the season, Knicks Coach Derek Fisher likened him to Lamar Odom and Robert Horry. Phil Jackson, the team president, has invoked such disparate figures as Shawn Bradley and Pau Gasol. Brett Brown, the Philadelphia 76ers’ coach, said that Porzingis reminded him of Toni Kukoc.Carlisle recalled that when Nowitzki played his first N.B.A. game, in 1999, Carlisle fielded a host of questions about Larry Bird.“And I thought there were similarities, but I thought there were greater differences,” said Carlisle, who cited Nowitzki’s size. “When he came into the league, there was no guy who was the quintessential stretch forward, and he has redefined that position.”It has become something of a prerequisite for power forwards to shoot the ball well. In that way, Carlisle said, Nowitzki influenced an entire generation.“I’m sure Porzingis watched Dirk when he was a much younger kid and followed that example as well,” Carlisle said.In a twist, Janis Porzingis said his younger brother actually grew up hoping to emulate Kobe Bryant; he wanted guard skills.“And I watched Allen Iverson, even though I could never do the things that he did,” said Janis Porzingis, who played professionally in Europe.It was only a couple of years ago that Kristaps Porzingis truly began to study Nowitzki on film. On Monday, the education continued. Nowitzki lulled defenders to sleep, curled around screens and scored 11 points in the first quarter.“He’s so smart,” Porzingis said. “He’s walking around, and then out of nowhere there’s a screen for him, and he gets an open shot.”Nowitzki was asked whether it meant anything to him that a young star like Porzingis respected him so much.“It means I’m old,” he said.Advertisement