AdvertisementSupported byBy Tim RohanNASHVILLE — A horde of news media members waited in the hotel hallway outside the Mets’ winter meetings war room Monday afternoon, waiting to speak with the assistant general manager John Ricco, when two representatives of Ben Zobrist exited the room.The Mets’ off-season plans now hinge on whether they can sign Zobrist; team officials expect Zobrist to sign somewhere by the end of the meetings. So the next few days will potentially have a significant impact on the Mets’ entire winter and how they fill out the rest of their roster.But signing Zobrist will not be easy or come cheaply. The San Francisco Giants and the Washington Nationals, two other National League contenders, have shown heavy interest. On Sunday, Zobrist visited the Giants in San Francisco. He also made plans to meet with the Nationals on Tuesday. Mets Manager Terry Collins said he hoped to informally meet him here, too.Zobrist has garnered so much interest from teams that have enough spending power that, at 34, he is expected to receive at least a four-year deal. The Mets are willing to give him a four-year deal, but it is unclear if they are willing to outbid the Nationals or the Giants.Instead, the strength of the Mets’ pitch may be everything else they have to offer. Ricco said that when Zobrist visited New York last week, the team emphasized that he would not have to be “the guy” in their clubhouse, because they have veterans that “share the load in terms of the pressure, all of the various demands that come with playing in a big market.”The Mets also talked to Zobrist about regularly playing second base, his position of choice, even though he has been a utility man at times in his career. Ricco said Zobrist told them, “It’s easier to have a place to go on a semiregular basis and then move around from there.”Ricco said: “From our perspective, that’s a great fit, and it kind of lines up with what he’s looking for. Ultimately, he’ll have to decide how important that is to him.”It is unclear how much those points will factor in. The Nationals’ clubhouse dysfunction played a large role in their collapse last season, and the Giants plan to play Zobrist in left field, a position that will be harder to play at a high level as he ages and his athleticism declines.The Mets have shown a tendency to splurge, to a degree, when they like certain free agents. They were the only team to offer Curtis Granderson a fourth year when they signed him to a four-year, $60 million contract. And the Mets made an aggressive move when they signed Michael Cuddyer to a two-year, $21 million deal before he accepted the Colorado Rockies’ qualifying offer. The Mets may take a similar chance with Zobrist unless the bidding gets out of hand.“He’s a guy we like,” Ricco said. “He’s a fit. We certainly have a level in mind of what the value is, and if it gets beyond that, then we’ll go in another direction. I think that’s the way we’ve operated here.”Advertisement