By CHRISTOPHER CLAREYDEC. 7, 2015
The next America’s Cup, in 2017, will be contested in the unlikely and isolated location of Bermuda, even though Oracle Team USA holds the trophy.But at least the prologue to the Cup, sailing’s most prestigious event, will have a strong American flavor next year, with a Louis Vuitton America’s Cup World Series regatta in New York City on May 7 and 8.The two days of racing, which will be formally announced on Tuesday, will be part of a global series of preliminary events leading into the next America’s Cup. The regatta in New York will be followed by a World Series event in Chicago in June.“I think this is going to be key to connecting to our U.S. audience and the mainstream audience,” Jimmy Spithill, Oracle’s skipper, said Monday.AdvertisementThe New York races will take place on the lower Hudson River off the Battery Park City Esplanade and will bring the America’s Cup community back to the city that has the longest connection to the trophy, which was held by the New York Yacht Club from 1851 to 1983.“The Cup was bolted down here for a long time,” Spithill said. “So it’s kind of funny that we bring it back, and I think New Yorkers will be in for a bit of a shock when they see what it’s about. Probably a lot of them think it’s raced in the old, slower boats, and they are back with the old perception they had. Once you see these things tearing around the Hudson, they won’t be able to walk past without stopping and just being in a bit of shock, I reckon.”AdvertisementShocking New Yorkers remains quite a challenge, but the America’s Cup has changed drastically from the days when stately monohull yachts engaged in tacking duels that unfolded over several hours.The last America’s Cup, in San Francisco in 2013, was contested in extreme 72-foot catamarans with wing sails that could hit speeds exceeding 40 knots, placing great physical demands on their crash-helmeted crews.The Cup in Bermuda will be contested in smaller catamarans in an attempt to control costs. Those boats are still being developed, and the World Series events will be raced in AC45 catamarans, which are highly maneuverable and relatively easy to transport in shipping containers. That is a good thing, as the first World Series regatta of 2016 will be staged in February in Oman before the circuit travels to North America.“I just got back from Oman,” a weary Harvey Schiller, the America’s Cup commercial commissioner, said Monday. “We are going to have at least six events next year.”Schiller said the series would return to Portsmouth in Britain in July, with other regatta sites being worked out in Asia and Europe, potentially in Japan and France. The idea is to bring the series to the home markets of the teams that will be competing for the 2017 America’s Cup.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The five challengers are Artemis Racing from Sweden, Emirates Team New Zealand, Land Rover Ben Ainslie Racing from Britain, Groupama Team France and SoftBank Team Japan.AdvertisementAll five are expected to compete with Oracle Team USA in New York, where the technical areas for the teams and race management will be at Liberty State Park and Liberty Landing Marina across the Hudson River in New Jersey.Schiller said securing access to the water had not been difficult.“The Coast Guard and Port Authority and everyone else has coordinated,” he said. “The biggest thing they said was never interfere with the ferry traffic, and so we were able to design a racecourse and put the parameters in such a way that doesn’t interfere with any of the everyday kind of traffic along the Hudson or going out into the Atlantic.”The World Series is not a pure exhibition. The racing results will have a minor effect on the America’s Cup regatta itself. Overall ranking positions will determine the starting points score of the teams in the America’s Cup qualifiers in 2017.Those who want a preview can watch in person in New York, where admission will be free and the views from the skyscrapers striking.“I think in terms of the Battery Park area, everything from the residents who live there to the people who come and visit the 9/11 memorials, there’s a large group of people who are local, national and international that visit that area on a daily basis,” Schiller said. “So we hope to be able to draw them in.”A version of this article appears in print on December 8, 2015, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: New York Will Host America’s Cup Warm-Up Race in 2016.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.