AdvertisementSupported byOn Pro FootballBy Bill PenningtonIf each Giants game this season had ended with 75 seconds remaining in regulation on the scoreboard clock, the team’s record would be 9-3.If a 75-second reprieve sounds like asking too much, how about letting the Giants skip the last 37 seconds of their 12 games? That would make the their record 8-4.But certainly, and convincingly, the Giants’ record is instead 5-7. Each loss was deserved.At the same time, think about the grind of an N.F.L. season, which begins with training in March and lasts until at least January. Think about the tens of thousands of hours that the Giants and their coaches have spent practicing and studying game plans this year. Then think about the 728 minutes 27 seconds of playing time that has elapsed during 12 Giants games this season, including overtime on Sunday.Everything about this Giants season could be different if they had not been so inept, physically and mentally, for a total of 6 minutes 15 seconds — the final 75 seconds of regulation in brutal losses to Dallas, Atlanta, New Orleans, New England and the Jets.Instead, this year’s Giants could be headed for a fourth consecutive nonplayoff season — an outcome that probably gets Coach Tom Coughlin fired — because they have fallen down on the job for a total of 375 seconds, or about 0.86 percent of the time they have been on the field. (They also won a game in the final 21 seconds against San Francisco.)“It’s craziness,” Coughlin said Monday.It is craziness. It is also, by this point, no longer just coincidence. “The conclusion I come to — we’ll win when we deserve to win,” Coughlin said.It is true that any one of several different results — a single first down gained, a penalty not committed or an easy interception not dropped — could have changed the course of the Giants’ season. But there are parallels in each debacle. Poor decision-making and clumsy clock management by Coughlin or Eli Manning doomed early games. But in subsequent situations when Coughlin, apparently learning from those missteps, reversed his approach — for example, playing for a touchdown instead of a field goal — that, too, backfired. More than once.The accruing late-game disasters — in almost half the team’s matchups — could now be creating an effect of their own. Late in games, are the scarred Giants playing to win, or not to lose? As the Jets unexpectedly sprang to life in the fourth quarter of their victory Sunday, the Giants’ defense suddenly stopped playing like the unit that had held the Jets to a field goal and a touchdown in the first three quarters.In what seems like a metaphor for the season, the Giants’ defenders always appeared to be backpedaling.The Giants were not technically in a prevent defense, but it looked that way. The furious pass rush that had battered Jets quarterback Ryan Fitzpatrick earlier in the game disappeared. Over and over, a retreating Giants secondary watched as passes were completed in front of them for big gains.The Giants’ body language in these moments — and that goes for the offense, too — is not uplifting. When the Jets pulled to within a touchdown, a reasonably accomplished possession by the Giants offense could have put the game out of reach. The Giants gained 4 yards in three plays and skulked off the field as the ball was punted back to the Jets, who tied the game in roughly two hard-charging minutes.The Giants’ problem could be a lack of on-field leadership, especially on defense. The veteran safety Antrel Rolle was lost to free agency in the off-season, and the vocal middle linebacker Jon Beason has again been injured for most of the season.Coughlin is catching most of the heat, but it is hard to ignore that his defense went into this past weekend’s games as the N.F.L.’s worst statistically. Aware of that shortcoming, Coughlin makes decisions offensively that are overly aggressive. He has watched the late-game fiascoes; can you forgive him if he frets that no lead may be safe?The exasperation is there in the coach’s voice.“We’re all sick of losing; let’s face it,” he said. “We’re all sick of that, going through that. Too many very, very close losses that went the other way at the end of the game for whatever reason.”If it seems like 375 star-crossed seconds have indeed undone the Giants, the truth is that the season is not yet ruined. Amazingly, the Giants are still in the hunt for the championship of the feeble N.F.C. East.It’s still possible that the four remaining games will yield pivotal victories that lead to the playoffs. Perhaps each game will be won in the final 75 seconds. After all the torment and hand-wringing, maybe that’s all it will take: five minutes.Advertisement