AdvertisementSupported byBy Seth BerkmanLate in the second quarter on Monday, the Knicks rookie Kristaps Porzingis guarded the Mavericks’ Deron Williams at the top of the key. Williams looked different from when he played for the Nets — with a closely shaved scalp, a blue headband and a bushy beard. He caught Porzingis with a pump fake, and then drove with his left hand through the lane and switched deftly to his right hand for a layup, avoiding a block attempt by Robin Lopez.The move also looked much different from the displays fans were accustomed to seeing from Williams during his four and a half seasons with the Nets, seasons in which he largely failed to live up to expectations as a franchise centerpiece.In February 2011, the Nets, seeking to make a splash for their impending move from New Jersey to Brooklyn, traded Derrick Favors, Devin Harris, first-round picks in 2011 and 2013, and cash to Utah for Williams. At 26, Williams averaged more than 17 points and 9 assists per game with the Jazz and was often mentioned alongside Chris Paul in a spirited debate over who was the league’s best point guard.In July, after three early playoff exits and seeing Williams average only 13.6 points and 6.4 assists over the last two seasons, the Nets decided he was no longer a part of their future and bought out the final two years of his contract.Williams, who grew up in the Dallas suburbs, signed a two-year deal with the Mavericks in the off-season.The move has proved a more snug fit. The Mavericks are 13-9 after a 104-97 win over the Knicks on Monday night at Madison Square Garden.“It just never went well I don’t think,” Williams said of his Nets career. “It felt like everybody felt like I was the problem, so I’m gone.”Williams said the Mavericks allowed him to have the ball in his hands more, which has helped him flourish.“It’s a lot more positivity in Dallas, and I think I needed that in my life,” he said.Recently, Nets Coach Lionel Hollins said he expected Williams to have more success out of the New York spotlight and without the expectations of having to carry a franchise to a championship.“He’s been playing great,” the Mavericks owner Mark Cuban said. “I’m glad it didn’t work out for him there, and I’m glad he’s here. I mean, correlation isn’t always causation, but he’s sure playing better.”After scoring 20 points with 7 assists, Williams shared some of his thoughts on why the Brooklyn experiment was not fruitful.“Expectations were high, I was injured pretty much the whole time I was there,” Williams said. “Four coaches in three-and-a-half years doesn’t help, as a point guard for chemistry and things like that. It was just constant change. It just didn’t work out.”Williams is averaging 15.2 points and 6 assists — modest numbers and below his career averages — but he has been playing more inspired basketball than in his final years with the Nets. On Dec. 1, he scored 30 points in a 115-112 win over Portland.Without Williams, the Nets have struggled to a 5-15 start with spotty point guard play. Williams said he still had friends on the team and wanted them to do well, but he has moved on.“There’s nothing you can do,” Williams said. “It’s over. I’m past all that. I’m on to a new chapter. I wish things were different, would have happened differently. They didn’t.”After a short session with news media after the game, Williams finally appeared to show some agitation on harping on the Nets, and walked out saying, “I can’t talk about it anymore, I don’t know what else to say.”But he will have to face the past at least one more time, when the Mavericks play in Brooklyn on Dec. 23, and the local fans will possibly see a familiar point guard, posting unfamiliar results.Advertisement