AdvertisementSupported byBy Pat PickensNEWARK — Martin Brodeur is possibly the N.H.L.’s greatest goaltender, and his longtime team will celebrate him as such. Before a crowd of season-ticket holders, and with the team on hand to pay homage, the Devils announced Tuesday that they will retire Brodeur’s No. 30 at a ceremony before their Feb. 9 game against the Edmonton Oilers. The Devils will also unveil a statue of Brodeur outside Prudential Center as part of a weekend full of festivities.“I didn’t expect this to come this early,” Brodeur said. “I think it’s a great honor. I don’t think you can honor a hockey player better than retiring his jersey. And a statue — now I’m going to have to talk to that guy so he can get my good side.”Brodeur has the most wins (691), the most regular-season shutouts (125) and 22 other N.H.L. records accrued over a 21-plus season career.“Very few athletes attain these heights,” said Josh Harris, owner of the Devils, while addressing the crowd at Prudential Center on Tuesday. “Marty is one of the greatest players in the history of the game, and it will be a proud moment for the franchise when his No. 30 jersey takes its rightful place in Prudential Center’s rafters.”Brodeur was in New Jersey as part of the ceremony even though the St. Louis Blues will open their season Thursday against Edmonton. Brodeur has been working in the Blues’ organization since retiring with St. Louis last season, but again he did not rule out a return to the Devils at some point.“Right now it’s a hard question to answer,” he said. “We’ll see what the future will bring. I’m really happy with what I’m doing, so we’ll see.”Fans serenaded Brodeur with a “Mar-ty!” chant as he took the stage here and as he departed. His will be the fourth number retired by the Devils, and the first of a non-defenseman. The jerseys of Scott Niedermayer, Scott Stevens and Ken Daneyko have been hung above the ice.“Those guys were teammates of mine, so to be alongside them is great,” Brodeur said, referring to the three defensemen.Brodeur is the only goalie to lead the Devils to the Stanley Cup finals, doing so five times and winning three championships in 21 seasons with the team. He was awarded the Vezina Trophy, presented to the league’s best goaltender, four times and made 10 All-Star teams. He acknowledged that he was disappointed by his limited playing time in his final year with the Devils, as he split time with Cory Schneider, but Brodeur added that it was “for good reason.”“Look at the guy that you have in between the pipes now,” he said.Brodeur, who was selected 20th over all by the Devils in the 1990 entry draft, was making only his second trip to Newark since announcing his retirement in January.Still, Brodeur called New Jersey his first home in America — with Montreal serving as his home north of the border. His four children, Anthony, William, Jeremy and Annabelle, grew up in New Jersey, and he still keeps a home here. That represents an about-face from his initial reaction to being drafted by the Devils.“I didn’t know where New Jersey was,” Brodeur said. “My agent was happy. He said, ‘That’s American dollars.’ ”Brodeur said that breaking his idol Patrick Roy’s record for most N.H.L. wins — in a 2-1 victory against the Chicago Blackhawks on March 17, 2009, in Newark — was a highlight of his career. Asked who the better goaltender was, Brodeur said, “The stats say.”Advertisement