By TYLER KEPNERDEC. 7, 2015
NASHVILLE —  Major League Baseball will investigate an allegation of domestic violence against Aroldis Chapman, the All-Star closer for the Cincinnati Reds, a league spokesman said late Monday night.According to a Yahoo Sports report, Chapman is alleged to have fired eight shots in the garage of his Davie, Fla., home during an argument with his girlfriend on Oct. 30. The report said that Chapman’s girlfriend had told the police that he pushed her against a wall and “choked” her, although the report said the police did not see injuries or redness around her neck.M.L.B. and the players’ union announced a domestic violence policy in August that allows for discipline by the commissioner, as well as counseling and psychological evaluation. The league said last month that it would investigate an allegation against Jose Reyes of the Colorado Rockies and another involving the Los Angeles Dodgers’ Yasiel Puig.The revelation of the Chapman episode casts doubt on the completion of a preliminary trade agreement between the Reds and the Dodgers. The Reds are rebuilding after going 64-98 — their worst record since 1982 — and have made Chapman available as he heads into his final season before free agency.AdvertisementIt was unclear Monday how much, if anything, the teams knew about the inquiry before the report. Chapman’s lawyer, Jay Reisinger, could not be reached but denied the allegations to news outlets. The Dodgers declined to comment.AdvertisementWalt Jocketty, the Reds’ president of baseball operations, told Cincinnati reporters that the news had come out in the last 24 hours and was not what had held up the Dodgers deal.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“We’ve talked to several clubs,” Jocketty said, according to MLB.com. “I’ve notified them all tonight that we will step back for a couple of weeks or whatever it takes. They were fine.”Chapman has made the last four National League All-Star teams, with 145 saves in those seasons and a career 2.17 E.R.A. His fastball has reached 105 miles an hour on radar guns, and he averages 15.4 strikeouts per nine innings, the best ratio in major league history for pitchers with at least 300 appearances.If he does join the Dodgers, Chapman could bump Kenley Jansen to a setup role, something those who know Jansen said he would not easily accept. Jansen can also be a free agent after 2016, and he has excelled for the Dodgers, with 80 saves over the last two seasons and a career 2.28 E.R.A.Before the Yahoo report, the Dodgers’ new manager, Dave Roberts, said that he believed Jansen could coexist with Chapman if the deal went through.“It’s just managing things,” Roberts said. “Again, this is all hypothetical; we don’t know. May be a pleasant problem.”The problem took a dark turn on Monday night. According to the police report obtained by Yahoo, Chapman’s girlfriend confronted him about something she had seen on his phone. She said that Chapman had pushed her against the wall of his home movie theater and that her brother had separated them. She then ran outside because she was afraid for her and her daughter, according to the report. As she hid in a neighbor’s bushes, the report said, she heard a gunshot.Chapman said in the report that he had poked the woman in the shoulder and that she had fallen to the floor. The brother, he said, pushed him to the ground. He said he had tried to drive away, but when friends would not let him, he took a pistol from his glove compartment and locked himself alone in his garage, where he fired several shots. Friends then took him to his room and locked themselves in it before the police arrived.A version of this article appears in print on December 8, 2015, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Reds’ Chapman Under Investigation in Domestic Violence Claim .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.