By ANDREW DASDEC. 7, 2015
This week is as busy as last week was (relatively) quiet. The soccer editor and shameless Ajax supporter Andrew Das tells you what to watch:Last weekend’s league schedule concludes today, with Everton against Crystal Palace (3 p.m. Eastern, NBCSN), but the biggest teams are bracing for Champions League games on Tuesday and Wednesday. More than half of the field for next year’s knockout stage is set, so let’s put the likes of Real Madrid, Barcelona, Bayern Munich, P.S.G. and Juventus — among others — aside for the moment.Manchester United’s trip to Wolfsburg in Germany is Tuesday’s sexiest matchup (2:45 p.m., Fox Sports 1), with PSV ready to play a spoiler’s role with the right result. Wolfsburg is through with a win or a tie; United can win the group with a victory. A loss or tie would make things a bit dodgier for the Red Devils.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.On Wednesday, Arsenal has (as usual) made a mess of things but (as usual) can still slip out of the noose with a win at Olympiakos (2:45 p.m., Fox Sports 2). In the end, that game will come down to scoreline, but the gist of it is this: Arsenal needs to score a few, and not give up too many. Chelsea, for whom so little has gone right this season, hosts Porto. With a win, the Blues can somewhat incredibly win the group.Thursday brings the final Europa League matchday, and as usual there are about 1,200 games in about 500 countries to decide the final spots in the knockout round next year. Or maybe it just seems that way. Ajax, the greatest club in the world and one you should consider supporting, has, like Chelsea and Arsenal, made a mess of things so far. But if it beats visiting Molde (which has already qualified) and Turkey’s Fenerbahce does not win against Celtic, Ajax will be through to the knockout rounds.Next weekend’s league matches will surely be a comedown after all the midweek excitement.The United States World Cup team has two matches this week as it plays out the string of its Victory Tour. (The games will be actually be played, as best as anyone can tell, making them a bit different than Sunday’s artificial turf disaster in Hawaii.) Thursday’s match is against Trinidad and Tobago in San Antonio (9 p.m., ESPN2), and Sunday’s is against China in Glendale, Ariz. (7 p.m., ESPN2). The Alamodome has artificial turf; University of Phoenix Stadium has a pretty cool roll-in grass field.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.