
On Baseball By                     
 TYLER KEPNER
 
OCT. 7, 2015
The Yankees faced elimination at home against an upstart team and a dominant pitcher on three days’ rest. It felt like 2003, except this time at the start of the postseason, not the very end. Dallas Keuchel played the role of Josh Beckett in Tuesday’s wild-card game in the Bronx, and now the Yankees’ season is over.The Houston Astros bounced around on the Yankee Stadium grass, surviving baseball’s knockout round with a 3-0 victory and earning a division series date with the Kansas City Royals. Those teams combined for 197 losses just three years ago, and now they will play for a spot in the American League Championship Series.Twelve Octobers ago, it was Beckett and the Marlins clinching the World Series at the old Stadium, squeezing the life from the Yankees and muting their fans. The Yankees responded with a late-winter trade for Alex Rodriguez, who has helped them reach the playoffs nine times.Rodriguez led the Yankees to a title in 2009, and in all his other postseasons with the team, he has hit .202. He was 0 for 4 on Tuesday, and Keuchel retired him with runners in scoring position to end the first and sixth innings. Rodriguez, 40, had a strong comeback season, but the Yankees’ utter dependence on him — especially against left-handers after Mark Teixiera’s broken leg — was their failing, not his.Advertisement“The way this team played here down the stretch isn’t reflective of what this team looked like for most of the season,” General Manager Brian Cashman said. “That’s the frustrating part. The wheels were flying off as the season went on. The longer it went, for some reason, the worse we started to get.”
CreditRichard Perry/The New York Times        This was the season of A-Rod, whose return from a yearlong drug suspension was not as awkward as we expected. He said the right things and hit very well, and when he faded at the end, the team did, too. No championship, but all things considered, a successful season.Advertisement“I don’t think a lot of people thought we would be able to play in this game,” right fielder Carlos Beltran said. “We’ve got to consider this a success.”They kept business humming, too, even without a season-long farewell for a beloved, grizzled champion. While missing the playoffs in 2013, the Yankees said goodbye to Mariano Rivera. Last season, it was Derek Jeter.This season? Attendance and ratings fell, but that was all relative. The Yankees led the A.L. in ticket sales for the 13th season in a row, and the YES Network remains an industry model. There was enough star power, and enough victories (87) to keep the fans engaged, even with the Mets rising again in Queens.Even if the Yankees wanted to, they could never retrench. They are blessed and burdened by a philosophy that demands they always go for it.There are limits, of course — they would not give a 10-year contract to Robinson Cano two years ago, or part with Luis Severino, Greg Bird and Aaron Judge at the July trading deadline. They have five starting pitchers under age 30: Severino, Masahiro Tanaka, Michael Pineda, Nathan Eovaldi and Ivan Nova.But no A.L. team outspends the Yankees, or seems likely to do so in the near future.“We’re going to have the pieces to compete to win it all,” closer Andrew Miller said. “It’s just up to us to go out there and do it.”AdvertisementThe Astros played on the same field Tuesday, for the same stakes, while illustrating the other extreme of team-building. Houston got here by undergoing an aggressive teardown that was timed perfectly with baseball’s new collective bargaining agreement.That deal went through in November 2011. The next month, the Astros’ new owner, Jim Crane, hired Jeff Luhnow as general manager. Luhnow, who had built a strong farm system with the St. Louis Cardinals, started fresh.“Let’s forget about how we got here, why we got here, let’s forget about what’s normally done in the industry,” he said, recalling his strategy. “Let’s take that blank piece of paper and figure out what’s a good way to do it. It’s not possible in all markets, I realize that.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.What he meant was the losing. Not intentional losing, Luhnow and the team’s president for business operations, Reid Ryan, insisted. But the inevitable losing that would come with a disciplined rebuilding plan would never work in the Bronx.“Anytime you change rules, there’s going to be somebody that’s going to figure out how to do things a little bit better,” Luhnow said. “That coincided with us taking over in Houston and having the first pick and the largest pool and thinking creatively about how to allocate those resources.”The rules, for the first time, allowed the worst teams to have the largest pool of money to spend in the amateur draft and international free agency. The Astros were coming off the majors’ worst record in 2011 (56-106), and soon it got worse: a 55-107 mark in 2012, and then 51-111 in 2013.With a flood of resources and high picks, the Astros gathered a deep prospect pool that has included Carlos Correa, the rookie shortstop who batted third on Tuesday, and young starter Lance McCullers Jr. By giving multiyear auditions to players they inherited from the farm system, the Astros found a gem in Keuchel.“J.D. Martinez went onto another organization and had success, so it wasn’t perfect by any stretch,” Luhnow said, referring to the outfielder who has blossomed with Detroit after the Astros released him. “But we were able to evaluate our own inventory fairly effectively and continue to build the young talent in high quantity.”The Astros spent for bullpen help last winter, signing Pat Neshek and Luke Gregerson and also bidding for Miller. They added payroll in July with deals for Scott Kazmir, Mike Fiers and Carlos Gomez.AdvertisementBut the years of losing, and a troubled TV deal that limited Astros’ broadcasts to around 10,000 homes until this season, made an impact.“The setbacks this organization had with the amount of 100-loss seasons and not being on television really hurt the club,” Ryan said. “But I think surprisingly, to fans, it’s bounced back. Now, look, we’re not there yet. We need to get back to being good and drawing a lot of people and having one of the best organizations. But this was a breakout year.”About half the homes in their region can now watch the Astros on TV, Ryan said, and attendance has risen by almost 7,000 per game since 2012, to an average of 26,587. That is far below the Yankees’ standards, but trust is returning between the fans and the organization.“People have responded to this team in Houston,” Ryan said, “because folks have gotten to make an emotional connection with our guys.”The Astros will never spend like the Yankees. They were 29th in payroll on opening day this season, at just under $71 million, and eventually they should sit around the middle of teams in payroll.That is quite enough to win, though, in an era when the competition is tougher, and the rules are designed to give teams like the Astros and the Royals a pathway to success. The Yankees keep doing it their way — without the deep valleys, but without the peaks, either.A version of this article appears in print on October 7, 2015, on Page B15 of the New York edition with the headline: Doing It Their Way, Upstarts Outshine Star-Driven Opponents.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »