AdvertisementSupported byMaryland 76, Connecticut 66By Seth BerkmanConnecticut’s first N.C.A.A. tournament appearance came in 1951, and it sent the Huskies on their maiden voyage from Storrs, Conn., to Madison Square Garden.Covering the game, The New York Times reported the “Nutmeg squad” was “virtually certain to be eliminated,” which Connecticut was, by St. John’s, in a 63-52 loss in the round of 16 (then the opening round).Despite the defeat, Connecticut “won the admiration of the spectators” by cutting a 27-point deficit down to 11, propelled by Vince Yokabaskas, who led all scorers with 22 points. When the night began, only about a fifth of the announced 17,107 in attendance were estimated to be UConn supporters.In the 64 years since, the pro-Connecticut crowds have only grown in stature. A large contingent was again on hand for the Huskies’ 114th game at the Garden, Tuesday night in the Jimmy V Classic, but those fans were largely drowned out by red-clad Maryland supporters who saw the No. 6 Terrapins earn a 76-66 win.Melo Trimble scored a game-high 25 points and converted 14 of 15 free throws for Maryland (8-1), which played after No. 10 Virginia upended No. 14 West Virginia, 70-54, in the early game of the doubleheader.Over the years, UConn has used games at the Garden as a launching pad for season-defining victories.At the Garden in March 2014 for the N.C.A.A. tournament, the Huskies became the first No. 7 seed in 30 years to reach the Final Four, and they eventually won their fourth national championship. In 2011 at the Garden, UConn beat five teams in five days to capture the Big East title, which catapulted them to their last national championship under Coach Jim Calhoun.This season, under Coach Kevin Ollie, the Huskies are stocked with talent but lack experience in the team’s system. Rodney Purvis, Shonn Miller and Sterling Gibbs — three of UConn’s top four scorers — began their collegiate careers elsewhere, and only Purvis had played a previous season at UConn.A lack of chemistry has been evident at times through the first month of the season. UConn started 4-0 but dropped consecutive games, to Syracuse and Gonzaga, before handling Sacred Heart last Wednesday.Tuesday’s loss left the Huskies with more uncertainty as they try to work in newcomers like Gibbs and Miller, who are both in their last year of eligibility.Maryland dominated in every facet of the game in the first half, racing out to a 38-22 lead. At times, Miller displayed his athleticism with nifty dunk and reverse-layup attempts, but he converted only 1 of 5 field-goal attempts.The Terrapins, meanwhile, led by Diamond Stone’s 12 first-half points, executed with crisp passes and aggressive offensive rebounding for second-chance points.The UConn fans had one final chance to roar in the second half. With the Huskies trailing by 65-53, UConn’s Amida Brimah blocked a shot from Maryland’s Jake Layman and punctuated the play with a wag of the finger. Daniel Hamilton followed with a 3-pointer, and the Huskies eventually cut the Terrapins’ lead to 67-64 on another 3 by Hamilton.But on the ensuing possession, UConn’s Jalen Adams was called for a foul, and Ollie was assessed a technical foul. Trimble made 3 of 4 free throws, and the Terrapins closed out the victory by allowing only one more field goal.Advertisement