By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSDEC. 9, 2015
Tyler Bozak and Nazem Kadri scored in a shootout, and Garret Sparks made 25 saves to lead the Maple Leafs to a 3-2 victory over the Devils on Tuesday night in Toronto.P. A. Parenteau and James van Riemsdyk scored in regulation for the Maple Leafs. Kadri converted in the fifth round of the tiebreaker for the win.Lee Stempniak and Kyle Palmieri scored for the Devils, and Corey Schneider stopped 36 shots. Mike Cammalleri scored in the shootout.The Leafs went 1 for 5 on power plays, while the Devils scored twice on five chances with the man advantage.AdvertisementRoman Polak took a crosschecking penalty 39 seconds into the game that led to the opening goal from Stempniak, who tipped a John Moore point shot past Sparks to make it 1-0.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Toronto had 10 of the next 11 shots on net after Stempniak scored on the first shot of the game and wound up on the board with a fluke goal from Parenteau.AdvertisementParenteau one-hopped a harmless wrister from just outside the blue line that fooled Schneider over his glove hand to tie the game, 1-1, with 5 minutes 36 seconds left.Schneider was forced to bail his team out late in the first as Toronto kept the pressure on in the Devils’ zone. The Leafs outshot the Devils by 17-7 in the first and by 25-17 through two periods.Matt Hunwick nearly had his first goal of the season when he rang a point shot off the post behind a screened Schneider six minutes in, and Byron Froese almost had his first career N.H.L. goal when he was sprung on a breakaway only to be stopped by Schneider.Toronto took a 2-1 lead at 2:12 of the second when van Riemsdyk tipped Dion Phaneuf’s shot through Schneider’s legs from the top of the crease while on a power play.With Froese serving a holding-the-stick penalty, Palmieri responded midway through the second with a one-timer from the top of the face-off circle to make it 2-2.Neither goalie was busy to start a slower-paced third. The Devils had just three shots on Sparks midway through the period, and the Leafs could only come up with one on Schneider.A version of this article appears in print on December 9, 2015, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: Devils Lose to the Maple Leafs in a Shootout.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.