By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSDEC. 8, 2015
Kyle Okposo scored the only goal of the shootout, Frans Nielsen scored twice in regulation and the Islanders beat the Flyers, 4-3, Tuesday night in Philadelphia.Okposo, the Islanders’ second skater in the shootout, used a stellar move to pull the puck onto his forehand before roofing it over Michal Neuvirth.Jaroslav Halak had 43 saves through overtime and stopped all three Flyers attempts in the tiebreaker, and Brock Nelson also scored to help the Islanders win for the sixth time in eight games (6-0-2).“We just battled through it; we found a way,” Islanders Coach Jack Capuano said. “When you’re in close games like this, you’ve got to find a way.”AdvertisementRyan White, Pierre-Edouard Bellemare and Claude Giroux scored for Philadelphia. Steve Mason gave up three goals on 10 shots before he was replaced about midway through the second period, and Neuvirth had 16 saves.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Giroux, Wayne Simmonds and Evgeny Medvedev all failed to convert against Halak in the shootout.Nielsen’s second goal of the game, 1 minute 14 seconds into the second period, put the Islanders ahead, 3-1, and chased Mason. Nielsen scored on a wrist shot from the slot that went through defenseman Michael Del Zotto’s legs and got past Mason.AdvertisementWhite’s goal from close range three minutes later pulled Philadelphia to 3-2. Halak saved Scott Laughton’s initial shot, but R. J. Umberger got the rebound and passed in front of the crease to White, who lifted it over Halak.The Flyers appeared to tie the game on the power play with 6:07 left in the second, but the goal was overturned after a lengthy replay review determined that Simmonds had used a distinct kicking motion to get the puck past Halak. Philadelphia eventually did tie it on Giroux’s slap shot that deflected off Nick Leddy 2:02 into the third period.BLACKHAWKS 4, PREDATORS 1  Patrick Kane extended his point streak to 23 games with an empty-net goal with 1:36 left, and Chicago beat visiting Nashville.Dennis Rasmussen scored for Chicago in his N.H.L. debut.SENATORS 4, PANTHERS 2  Mike Hoffman scored the go-ahead goal to help visiting Ottawa beat Florida.Craig Anderson finished with 25 saves to help the Senators win for the third time in four games.A version of this article appears in print on December 9, 2015, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: Islanders Beat Flyers With the Only Goal of the Shootout .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.