By DHIREN MAHIBANOCT. 6, 2015
TORONTO —  When Mike Babcock was named the coach of the Toronto Maple Leafs in May, he promised a painful process ahead for the hockey club, which has qualified for the postseason only once in the last 10 years.Babcock came to Toronto after spending 10 seasons in Detroit, each of which ended in a playoff berth. He has reached the conference finals three times as a coach, winning the Stanley Cup with Detroit in 2008.The Maple Leafs, on the other hand, won just nine games in the final three and a half months of last season and finished 27th over all with a 30-44-8 record. Toronto, hockey’s most valuable franchise, also has the league’s longest Cup drought, 47 seasons.“I never came here to make the playoffs,” Babcock said at his introductory news conference. “I came here to be involved in a Cup process, and that goes from scouting and drafting, from developing, analytics, from putting an off-ice team together, an on-ice team together. I love to win. I have a burning desire to win, but I also want to win in the end. I don’t want to just get in the playoffs, I want to win.”AdvertisementThe Leafs did not do much of that in eight preseason games, dropping the last five games while being outscored, 17-7. But Babcock, 52, has seen improvements in his new hockey team through training camp.Advertisement“I think when you’re making progress early and the increments are so small, you can’t see it, you can’t tell.” he said. “But I’m a big believer in process, and you make each day matter, and you come in and you do it right. Then, over a period of time, you look like a team, you act like a team, you play like a team and you win your games.”As the Leafs’ roster took shape for the 2015-16 season this week, it was evident that the process includes allowing young prospects more time to develop. Toronto enters the season with several veterans among its forward group who will become unrestricted free agents next summer.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.With the decision to dress a more veteran lineup, highly regarded prospects like Kasperi Kapanen, William Nylander and Connor Brown were assigned to the American Hockey League on Sunday. Toronto opens its season Wednesday at home against the Montreal Canadiens.“There’s an extremely bright future for all of them, but this is the right decision right now. to make sure that we see exactly who we have here, the veterans and what they bring,” said General Manager Lou Lamoriello, who joined the Leafs in July after 27 years in the Devils’ organization. “The first thing for us to see is where our veterans are at and what type of a team we have, how the people respond to Mike.”Babcock, who led Canada to Olympic gold medals in 2010 and 2014, and Lamoriello, who built three Stanley Cup-winning teams in New Jersey, are the highest-profile pieces in organizational restructuring started by Brendan Shanahan when he took over as the team’s president last year.As Babcock continues to get familiar with his new team, he is also shaking rumors he heard about members of the Leafs while coaching the Red Wings. Defensemen Jake Gardiner and Morgan Rielly were frequent subjects of criticism.“I thought the games of Gardiner and Rielly, even though they make mistakes, they look like important pieces, good pieces that once we get them to be less erratic, they’ll be real good players for us,” Babcock said.AdvertisementSpeaking about Gardiner, Babcock said, “All the things I’d heard about it him, none of them were true.”The players are adjusting to Babcock as well. Dion Phaneuf, the team’s captain, is seeing why his new coach was so successful with the Red Wings.“There’s a lot of work that’s put in especially with a new coaching staff, new systems, new drills,” Phaneuf said. “It was a lot of learning in training camp whether it’d be systems or style of practice, drills.”He added: “We’re going to put the work in and we’re going to have structure to our game, and we’re going to see where that takes us.” We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.