AdvertisementSupported byRoundupBy The Associated PressThe police in Davie, Fla., citing conflicting stories and a lack of cooperating witnesses, said Tuesday that there was insufficient evidence to charge Cincinnati Reds closer Aroldis Chapman with domestic violence and that they had closed their investigation. But the matter appeared to have delayed, for now, a proposed trade sending Chapman to the Los Angeles Dodgers.Joe Torre, Major League Baseball’s chief baseball officer, said there was no timetable in making a decision on Chapman’s status under the league’s new domestic violence policy.Speaking at the winter meetings in Nashville, the Washington Nationals’ new manager, Dusty Baker, created a stir with his responses to questions about Chapman, telling reporters, “I don’t believe reports.”Baker called Chapman “a heck of a guy” and discussed baseball’s domestic violence policy, drawing criticism on social media. Baker said the policy was “a great thing” and added: “I got a buddy at home that’s being abused by his wife. So I think this policy needs to go further than the player. I think the policy should go to whoever’s involved. Sometimes abusers don’t always have pants on.”Baker, who managed Chapman from 2010 to 2013 with the Reds, acknowledged he had not read the allegations against Chapman, which began widely circulating late Monday, but said his son had told him about the accusations.Baker also said that “the No. 1 thing that’s missing, I think, in the game is speed” and that “you’ve got a better chance of getting some speed with Latin and African-Americans.”He added: “I’m not being racist. That’s just how it is.”Later Tuesday, Baker addressed his comments in interviews with Pedro Gomez and Marly Rivera of ESPN.“I did an interview earlier, and apparently I’m in hot water for what I said,” Baker told Gomez. “What I should have said, and what I was trying to say, is that ‘Hey, man, I don’t condone violence at all.’ ”According to the police report, Cristina Barnea, 22, Chapman’s girlfriend, told officers in October that Chapman had pushed her, put his hands around her neck and choked her during an argument at his home. She said that the argument was broken up by family members and that Chapman had left the house.Barnea told the police that she heard gunshots a short time later, went outside and hid in the bushes until she could make contact with the police. She left the couple’s infant daughter inside the home.According to the report, Chapman said that the argument had happened during a party; that he had poked Barnea in the shoulder, telling her not to “talk to him like that”; that she had fallen to the ground; and that Barnea’s brother had pushed him to the ground.Chapman said he left the house and got into the passenger seat of a vehicle with a friend. Chapman said he punched the passenger window with his left fist, lacerating a knuckle. At that point, he told investigators, he got his pistol from the glove box and locked himself in his garage. He fired seven rounds into a concrete wall and fired one round through a window before tossing the pistol aside.AROUND THE LEAGUE The Arizona Diamondbacks acquired starter Shelby Miller from the Atlanta Braves, according to multiple news media reports citing anonymous sources. ... The Colorado Rockies tried to fill big holes in their bullpen by agreeing to two-year contracts with a pair of former closers, guaranteeing $10 million to Jason Motte and $6 million to Chad Qualls. ... The St. Louis Cardinals acquired infielder Jedd Gyorko and cash from the San Diego Padres for outfielder Jon Jay. ... The Detroit Tigers completed an $11 million, two-year contract with Mark Lowe, adding a setup man for their new closer, Francisco Rodriguez. (AP)Advertisement