AdvertisementSupported byOn BaseballBy Tyler KepnerNASHVILLE — The Yankees’ challenge is to recast an aging team with a bloated payroll after years of lavish spending. Like all teams, they crave young, athletic players with reasonable contracts. But those players can rarely be bought.So the Yankees have sat out the free-agent market, for a change, and on Tuesday engineered another deal for the kind of player they need. Starlin Castro is their new second baseman, arriving in a trade with the Chicago Cubs for pitcher Adam Warren and a player to be named. Castro is a three-time All-Star who turns 26 in March.“You want to get younger, athletic and good,” General Manager Brian Cashman said. “That’s what we’re trying to do. It’s always been a priority. I’ll be honest — it’s harder to do.”Cashman would not attribute that difficulty to playing in New York, because the Mets reached the last World Series with a roster of mostly young stars. But he framed the Yankees’ strategy in different terms.The Mets, he said, “went through a lot to get to where they are now, so it can be done.”“It just hasn’t and isn’t part of our D.N.A. to accept that full-blown commitment to a rebuild,” Cashman went on. “Ownership’s comfort level is walking that tightrope, rather than tear down and live to fight another day. The public stated goal is to get younger and compete for the championship every year. That’s what we’re trying to do.”The first part of that mandate, Cashman explained, is why the Yankees did not try to sign the versatile Ben Zobrist. They could have traded Warren and Rob Refsnyder to Oakland for Zobrist last summer but decided it was too high a price for a rental. Zobrist went to Kansas City and helped the Royals beat the Mets in the World Series.Zobrist’s decision on Tuesday to sign with the Cubs, for four years and $56 million, hurt the Mets, who badly wanted him. It also helped the Yankees, because the Cubs needed a place to dump Castro’s contract, which will pay him $38 million through 2019. The Yankees, who tried to trade for Castro last summer, were happy to oblige.Castro, who has played six seasons already, has had a sub-.300 on-base percentage in two of the last three years. He is a free swinger, Cashman conceded, “but a contact free swinger.” Castro had 91 strikeouts in 578 plate appearances last season, and has hit at least 10 homers in each of the last five seasons.“He’s a very talented guy,” said Jim Hendry, a top Cashman adviser and former Cubs general manager. “And offensively, I think we all think his better days are ahead of him. History will tell you that at 26 to 32 or 33, you’ve got a chance to be your most productive. Very athletic kid.”Castro led the National League in hits in 2011 and thrived last season after moving from shortstop to second base in August. Castro hit .353 in 47 games after the switch, which Cashman said the Yankees had always believed he could make.Now the Yankees can pair Castro up the middle with shortstop Didi Gregorius, who was acquired in a trade last off-season and also turns 26 soon. Their November acquisition, outfielder Aaron Hicks, who arrived in a trade with Minnesota, turned 26 in October.All are standout athletes, like Jacoby Ellsbury and Brett Gardner, who are older but — when healthy — form a dynamic top of the order.“I think it’s important,” Manager Joe Girardi said on Tuesday, before the Castro deal. “We have some really good athletes when you look at the Gardys and Ells and Didi. And then we have some players that are home run hitters that don’t run quite as well. We added Hicks, who I think is a great athlete. He will help that.”Of course, Castro and Hicks do nothing to help the rotation. The free agents David Price (Boston), Zack Greinke (Arizona), Jordan Zimmermann (Detroit), Jeff Samardzija (San Francisco), John Lackey (Cubs) and Hisashi Iwakuma (Los Angeles Dodgers) have all signed elsewhere, without the Yankees’ involvement.But winning the winter means nothing. Teams crowned victorious in the off-season have generally collected players coming off performances they might not sustain. Their decline can lead to the disappointment felt last season by the Red Sox, the Chicago White Sox and the San Diego Padres.“People have talked to me a lot about ‘Well, the Yankees are a team that usually makes a big splash,’ ” Girardi said. “Well, we’ve been making a lot of big splashes the last five or six years. You look at our position players, they are all on long-term contracts. You look at our pitchers, they are on long-term contracts. For us to go out and add big pieces, I didn’t expect that to happen.”Girardi has a point: The Yankees have few decisions now because they have already made them in past off-seasons. With seemingly little room to maneuver, they have added Castro, Hicks, Gregorius and starter Nathan Eovaldi (all 26 or younger) in the last two off-seasons, while promoting starter Luis Severino (who turns 22 in February) and first baseman Greg Bird (23) to the majors last August.Cashman said the Yankees had not offered Severino, Bird or outfielder Aaron Judge in any potential deals, which means they have no chance to land the Miami Marlins’ young ace, Jose Fernandez, in a trade. None of the Yankees’ starters logged 170 innings last season, and their offense was dangerously dependent on Alex Rodriguez and Mark Teixeira. They are probably not the favorites in the American League East.But the Yankees have a better chance with Castro than they would have had with Refsnyder or Dustin Ackley at second base. They are also fulfilling their revised mission statement. It is no longer simply to win — period. They must get younger while doing it.“Now we’re hopefully doing what we say,” Cashman said, “and meaning what we say.”Advertisement