By RICHARD SANDOMIRDEC. 8, 2015
A sportscaster is defined by how he calls a game and tells a story. For baseball announcers, a home run call or exclamations like “Holy cow!” are signature phrases. And many live in the memory of fans for how they handled a moment in time: “I don’t believe what I just saw!” Jack Buck said when an injured Kirk Gibson hit a pinch-hit home run to win Game 1 of the 1988 World Series.But how do you judge the career of a baseball voice who worked generations ago on radio with little or no audio available?That was the dilemma facing voters for the annual Ford C. Frick Award, which will be presented Wednesday by the Baseball Hall of Fame from among 10 broadcasters whose work spanned the 1920s to the mid-1950s. They were men like Rosey Rowswell, Hal Totten, Harry Heilmann and Bert Wilson — stars in their own markets — and Graham McNamee, a baritone singer who called a dozen World Series and many other major sports events. All have been eclipsed by contemporaries like Red Barber and Mel Allen, and later generations of personalities like Vin Scully, Curt Gowdy, Harry Caray, Bob Uecker and Tony Kubek, all of them Frick winners.“You can’t judge them without audio clips, but keep in mind it might not be easy to make them available or they may not have them,” John Miley, 84, said from his home in Evansville, Ind. Miley probably knows more about the distant era’s baseball voices than anyone, having collected thousands of game recordings — some called by the Frick nominees — and sold them in cassettes and CDs.Advertisement“I’ll bet you anything that most of the voters, I’m guessing, don’t care what they sounded like, but will just read the stories and vote,” he said.AdvertisementBob Wolff, who grew up in what the Hall calls the broadcasting dawn era, called Washington Senators games from 1947 to 1960, and stayed with them for the 1961 season when they moved to Minnesota. Like the other living Frick winners, Wolff, 95, sits on the 18-member award committee, which is instructed to judge candidates on their longevity, their popularity with fans and their honors.“They don’t use the word talent, so apparently talent doesn’t matter,” Wolff said, chuckling during an interview last week at his apartment in Nyack, N.Y., where his living room window offers a look at the Tappan Zee Bridge and the new one that is being built beside it. “They say nothing about being good at it because that makes it difficult to judge.”NBC’s Bob Costas, who also sits on the committee, said: “Right at the top should be mastery of the craft. To be venerable is good, but excellent is better. And to be both is the best — you’re Vin Scully or Ernie Harwell.”This year’s focus on announcers from as early as the 1920s was initiated in 2013, when the Hall divided the Frick selection process into three eras: the earliest one; the second, from the mid-1950s to the mid-1980s; and the third, from the mid-1980s to the present. One goal of the change was to create a pathway for announcers from the early days to win the Frick. Previously, announcers from all eras were on the ballot, and it became apparent that the oldest and deceased ones were less likely to win when competing with more contemporary broadcasters.“It’s not an equal comparison between Jon Miller and Jack Graney,” said Brad Horn, a spokesman for the Hall, referring to Miller, the San Francisco Giants announcer who for many years called Sunday night games for ESPN, and Graney, a candidate on the current ballot who called Cleveland Indians games for 21 seasons after a modest career with them as an outfielder.Horn said it would be unfair to judge older candidates by the samplings in the Hall’s library, which “in no way capture the essence of a game.” The Hall will provide clips at the voters’ request, but only one asked. The request was not fulfilled.So Horn said that he provides the committee with biographical materials that emphasize the candidates’ careers and major contributions. But the process frustrated at least one voter, Barry Horn, a media writer for The Dallas Morning News (and no relation to Brad Horn). He chose McNamee after consulting with Costas and Eric Nadel, the 2014 Frick winner who is a Texas Rangers broadcaster.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I only voted two deep because it became a blur,” Horn wrote in an email. “This was more frustrating than voting for minor offices in local elections.”AdvertisementCostas suggested changes in the Frick voting that would create a small committee to elect a posthumous announcer, and then elect living television and radio announcers in alternate years.Wolff said that whoever’s name is announced Wednesday — the top vote-getter will have received the most points from a system that awards five points for first place, three points for second place and one point for third place — will be from an era when relatively little was expected in terms of strategy and color. How they sounded on the air was a critical consideration when he listened to any of the 10 nominees.Yet he understands the need to honor them, even with little or no audio to remember them by.“The big thing is in the areas they were in, they were loved,” Wolff said. “They filled the time nicely and were very popular. You don’t need great talent. You need great appeal.”But Miley said he was often struck by the completeness of the older announcers’ calls compared with some of today’s.“Mel Allen would say, ‘O.K., the count is 2-1 and the third baseman is playing three feet behind the base,’ and he would give every outfielder’s positioning,” he said. “How many times do I watch a ballgame now and wonder where the hell are all the players playing? The old announcers gave you a word’s-eye view of what was happening without any screwing around. It’s magical.”Speaking about current Frick candidates, he said: “How do you decide who’s better, Ty Tyson or France Laux? As far as I’m concerned, Laux was better. He was as good as anyone.”A version of this article appears in print on December 9, 2015, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: Honoring Broadcasters, No Audio Required .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.