By TIM ROHANDEC. 8, 2015
NASHVILLE —  As the Mets waited for an answer from Ben Zobrist, their top free-agent target, Manager Terry Collins exchanged text messages with him Tuesday, trying to sell him on joining the Mets. They imagined him as their second baseman, as another clubhouse leader, as the addition that would keep their momentum going after they won a National League pennant.“We want you,” Collins said he told Zobrist, who had toured the team’s facilities last week.Even as the San Francisco Giants and the Washington Nationals had pursued Zobrist, the Mets remained self-assured. But as the process wore on and Zobrist and his wife debated where to go, that confidence began to waver. And then the Chicago Cubs, the team the Mets swept in the N.L. Championship Series, swooped in and signed Zobrist to a four-year, $56 million deal on Tuesday night here at the winter meetings.At least one N.L. team offered Zobrist, 34, a four-year, $60 million deal, according to an official for one of the teams in the Zobrist talks, who requested anonymity so he could candidly discuss private negotiations. It was unclear what the Mets had made as a final offer.The Mets’ assistant general manager, John Ricco, said of Zobrist’s decision: “I don’t think this was about money. I think it was about finding a place that fit. I think he liked a lot about what we were. But he has a history with the manager in Chicago. It is a little closer to home for him.”AdvertisementJoe Maddon, the Cubs’ manager, managed Zobrist for years with Tampa Bay, where he started his career in 2006. And Zobrist, his wife and his newborn daughter currently live in the Nashville area, meaning the commute to Chicago would be easier than to New York.AdvertisementBut Zobrist’s thought process will not be much consolation for the Mets, who had not developed a clear-cut backup plan while they had been waiting for Zobrist. They plan to reach out to Daniel Murphy, their own free-agent second baseman, but the market for Murphy is expected to be competitive after his stellar performance in October.“We’ll continue to stay in contact,” Ricco said. “We’ll see where that goes.” The Mets could turn to Dilson Herrera, a 21-year-old prospect who, they believe, has proved all he can at Class AAA. In two stints in the majors over the last two years, Herrera batted .215 and compiled 11 extra-base hits in 49 games.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Mets could sign a veteran middle infielder to take pressure off Herrera until he grows into the position. Kelly Johnson, whom the Mets acquired in July, and Asdrubal Cabrera, who played for the Rays this past season, have been linked to the Mets.The Mets could also trade for a middle infielder and have said they are open to moving Jon Niese, a veteran left-hander. But they have insisted that they do not want to deal any of their five young, talented starters, including Zack Wheeler, whom the Mets had included in a proposed trade for Carlos Gomez that fell apart.Not long before the news of Zobrist’s deal broke, Collins had spent about 20 minutes answering questions. Many of the questions pertained to the state of his infield, which now seems all the more precarious. Third baseman David Wright is still learning how to manage his spinal stenosis. And two Mets shortstops are injured, with Ruben Tejada having broken his leg during the playoff run and Wilmer Flores having recently broken his ankle while taking a pitch in winter ball. (Ricco said Flores would be ready for spring training.)Signing Zobrist would have given the Mets more flexibility to give Wright time off. Toward the end of last season, Collins had suggested Wright would need days off in order to stay fresh and keep his back healthy, and during the World Series, Wright’s throws appeared weaker. But the Mets have strongly denied since then that they have any carry-over concerns about Wright’s health.“I have, in the back of my mind, a plan,” Collins said, “but I haven’t sat with David and talked about it. So until we see how he is in spring training — then we’ll get together.”AdvertisementCollins said he planned to have Flores, Tejada and the rookie Matt Reynolds compete at shortstop in spring training. But each has his flaws: Flores is not an adept defender, Tejada has not played well consistently, and Reynolds is inexperienced.Zobrist would have eased those concerns. His versatility had about 10 teams interested in him at one point this off-season. The Mets were considered strong candidates to acquire him until he reached out to Ricco as Ricco was at dinner Tuesday. Zobrist thanked Ricco but told him that he had decided against signing with the Mets.After the dinner ended and news of Zobrist’s signing had broken, Ricco emerged from a ballroom and was surrounded by a horde of New York reporters. Ricco put on a brave face, saying that the Mets would now allocate resources elsewhere — perhaps to sign another infielder, a center fielder, a reliever. He promised that the Mets would move on, undeterred.But, Ricco was pressed again, how did it feel missing out on the team’s top target?“It’s disappointing,” he said. “I’m going to be honest.”Tyler Kepner contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on December 9, 2015, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: This Time, Cubs Beat Mets by Signing Zobrist, a Top Free Agent.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.