By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSDEC. 8, 2015
Johnny Manziel will play Sunday against the San Francisco 49ers, returning as the starting quarterback after being benched for two games by Coach Mike Pettine for defiantly partying during the team’s bye week.Pettine is giving Manziel another chance after he broke a promise that he wouldn’t become a distraction when the team was off last month. Manziel, a first-round pick in the 2014 draft, had been named the starter for Cleveland’s final six games on Nov. 17.He was demoted to third string, but moved up one spot last week when Josh McCown sustained a season-ending collarbone break.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Pettine said that Manziel had paid his dues. Manziel will replace Austin Davis, who started Sunday’s 37-3 loss to Cincinnati.AdvertisementGIANTS PUT 2 ON INJURED LIST The Giants placed long snapper Zak DeOssie and tight end Larry Donnell on injured reserve. The Giants also signed long snapper Danny Aiken and cornerback Tramain Jacobs to fill the open roster spots. DeOssie, who has a wrist injury, had played in 140 consecutive games.JETS PLACE END ON INJURED LIST The Jets have placed defensive end Mike Catapano on season-ending injured reserve with a foot injury.AdvertisementCatapano was signed to the active roster from the practice squad last month. He had a sack in the second quarter of the Jets’ 23-20 overtime win over the Giants last Sunday, but was carted from the sideline shortly after the play. The Jets promoted safety Ronald Martin to the active roster to replace him.A version of this article appears in print on December 9, 2015, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: Manziel Back as Starter for Browns.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.