By CHRISTOPHER CLAREYDEC. 8, 2015
Roger Federer plays on at age 34, and he will play on in 2016 without Stefan Edberg, his boyhood idol and assistant coach.Federer announced on Tuesday that Edberg was leaving his staff after two years and would be replaced by Ivan Ljubicic, Federer’s good friend and former tour rival.“It was a dream come true,” Federer said in a statement of working with Edberg, a former world No. 1 from Sweden. “Although it was supposed to only be for 2014, Stefan was great and agreed to extend the partnership through this year, which I really appreciated. He taught me so much, and his influence on my game will remain. He will always be a part of my team.”Federer, ranked No. 3, said Severin Luthi, the Swiss Davis Cup captain, who has been working with him since 2008, would remain his head coach.Advertisement“It probably should be an easy transition,” Paul Annacone, Federer’s former coach, said Tuesday. “Severin is kind of the glue, and if Severin is there and the other particles come around and they stick to the glue, they’ll be fine.Advertisement“Ivan knows what’s going on, but the thing that makes it always tricky is not even really the tennis knowledge. It’s the dynamics of the environment. And Roger’s environment is very complicated. It’s great, but it’s complicated.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Federer travels with his wife, Mirka, and his four children and, as men’s tennis’s unofficial ambassador, has a particularly busy agenda.In a statement, Edberg confirmed that he had coached in 2015 with the “clear understanding that it would be my last year given the time commitment.”He said that he believed Federer still had the ability to win the big events.But Federer did not win the biggest ones during his two years with Edberg, failing to win an 18th Grand Slam singles title and losing to Novak Djokovic in the 2014 and 2015 Wimbledon finals and the 2015 United States Open final.Under Edberg, one of the great attacking players and volleyers of the modern era, Federer sharpened his offensive skills and recovered from a difficult 2013 with a 73-12 record in 2014 and a 63-11 record in 2015.Ljubicic, a thoughtful Croatian who recently left the coaching staff of the Canadian star Milos Raonic, will have a tough act to follow. Federer had a 13-3 career edge over the big-serving Ljubicic, but they were frequent practice partners.“What Ljubi is going to bring is familiarity, experience and maybe a little bit of new perspective, which is good sometimes,” Annacone said, using Ljubicic’s nickname. “It will be something new to think about, and at this stage of his career and as open-minded as Roger is, that can be a good thing.“But Ljubi should talk to Severin a lot. Ljubi and Roger know each other well, but it’s one thing to know a lot about tennis, and it’s another to know how to deliver that knowledge the way the player needs to hear it."A version of this article appears in print on December 9, 2015, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Sports Briefing | Tennis; Edberg Leaving Federer’s Staff.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.