AdvertisementSupported byBy Dave CaldwellGREENBURGH, N.Y. — After a practice in which he was one of the last players off the ice, Rangers defenseman Ryan McDonagh sat at his locker. This year, McDonagh, the second-year captain, has moved into Martin St. Louis’s old locker, next to goaltender Henrik Lundqvist’s.Not much else has changed with the Rangers, who open the regular season Wednesday in Chicago against the Blackhawks, the defending Stanley Cup champions. Seventeen of the 20 players expected to dress for the Rangers were regulars last season, when the team had the N.H.L.’s best record and reached the Eastern Conference finals for the third time in four years.Once again, McDonagh, 26, is expected to take on a heavy workload with Dan Girardi. The Rangers, who lost in the 2014 Stanley Cup finals, are widely regarded as a Cup contender again.But McDonagh is not quite the same player and person he was a year ago. Though he had help from St. Louis and Rick Nash, former N.H.L. captains, McDonagh acknowledged that it took a couple of months to adapt to the captaincy last season. He is more comfortable and confident with the role now.“When we picked him, we were sure we had the right guy,” said Alain Vigneault, who enters his third season as the Rangers’ coach. “I’m sure more than ever.”McDonagh sustained a broken foot in Game 4 of the Eastern Conference finals against the Tampa Bay Lightning and played the last three games of the series with the injury.“It wasn’t very enjoyable,” he said with stony seriousness.Recovering from the broken foot forced him to alter how he prepared for what will be his fifth full N.H.L. season. He was in a walking boot for six weeks, the first two on crutches.Before the injury, McDonagh preferred to resume training for a coming season in July. He postponed his return this year until August. He said that his foot felt fine during training camp and that he felt fresh.“It forced me to rest my body a chunk of weeks,” said McDonagh, who has led the Rangers in ice time the past two seasons. “Sometimes, it was frustrating. You want to get going. After a couple of weeks, you want to get back in the weight room and on the ice and get going again. It forced me to kind of rest my body a little bit. Maybe that will be a good thing.”McDonagh conceded that the Lightning were a talented opponent, but he said the loss actually hurt more than the five-game loss to the Los Angeles Kings in the 2014 Cup finals. The Rangers rolled into that series.They limped through the series against Tampa Bay. Three other defensemen, including Girardi, played hurt. Hit inadvertently by a McDonagh slap shot, Mats Zuccarello, the Rangers’ effervescent wing, was out with a brain contusion and hairline skull fracture.McDonagh missed the first 13 minutes of Game 7 at the Garden because a freezing agent applied to his right foot took a while to take effect. He gallantly soldiered through the game, but he played conservatively, giving the Tampa Bay forwards more room.“He’s a really tough guy,” Lundqvist said. “He’s not a guy to complain when things hurt a little bit. A broken foot is a pretty good example of that.”McDonagh, who missed four weeks early last season with a separated left shoulder, ended up playing more than 17 minutes in Game 7 on May 29, a crushing 2-0 loss in which the Lightning scored both goals in the third period.Given the injuries, the Rangers appeared as if they had gone as far as they could. McDonagh still took it hard.“You look at the teams that win, and they make a couple more plays — bear down on their chances more than the opponent,” he said this week. “It’s a fine line. It might seem like a general statement, but it’s true. Four or five good looks for each team a game, and you have to capitalize on those chances. We didn’t find a way to score some goals there.”Not that he really needed to be coaxed, McDonagh resolved to work harder when he was allowed to return. He had always impressed his teammates and opponents with his approach, but McDonagh had also become a capable captain.“You definitely wouldn’t have thought it was his first year as a captain of an Original Six team, one of the most famous franchises in all of sports,” said Keith Yandle, the defenseman whom the Rangers acquired from Arizona in March. “It’s a tough job. The way he handles it — the way he handles a room and the media, communicates with coaches, especially helps the young players out — he ranks up there.”Lundqvist, 33 but still in his prime, and the Rangers’ six regular defensemen are back. Besides St. Louis, who retired, the Rangers lost the speedy forward Carl Hagelin, who was traded to Anaheim, in part because he was about to become a restricted free agent. The backup goalie Cam Talbot, so reliable when Lundqvist missed two months last season with a neck injury, was dealt to Edmonton, where he is expected to start. The current core of Rangers has a window of two or three years to win the franchise’s first Cup since 1994. Tampa Bay looms as a formidable Eastern Conference opponent. The rival Islanders, now in Brooklyn, are expected to make a strong push. The division foes Pittsburgh and Washington made significant off-season moves.But the Rangers have their captain back, motivated by a playoff ouster that hurt in more ways than one.“Mac, to me, has come to camp feeling really comfortable about himself as the captain of this team,” Vigneault said. “I’ve seen the same player I’ve always seen on the ice. He’s one of the hardest-working guys I’ve ever coached. He’s a great role model, and I think he’s going to have a real good year.”Asked what he learned about himself last season, McDonagh thought for a moment, then said: “What approach to bring, what the right attitude is every day. Focusing on the strength of my game, and trying to improve things I can improve. Not trying to put too much pressure on any game, taking it day by day. Enjoying being around the guys, trying to bring a great attitude, a workmanlike attitude. Just approach the game with a fun attitude, I guess.”McDonagh was not smiling when he said that, but it is the thought that counts.Advertisement