AdvertisementSupported byBy Rebecca R. RuizOne of the two soccer officials arrested in Zurich last week in the FIFA corruption case spent only five nights in jail before agreeing to extradition to the United States.Juan Ángel Napout, the president of Conmebol, the South American soccer confederation, is among 16 new defendants in the United States’ world soccer corruption case, according to charges unsealed last week. He is expected to be collected by an American police escort and brought to the United States within 10 days, Swiss authorities announced on Tuesday. Once he arrives, he will be arraigned in United States District Court for the Eastern District of New York.Accused of accepting millions of dollars in bribes from businessmen in exchange for steering lucrative soccer marketing contracts their way, Mr. Napout was apprehended in a predawn raid of a luxury hotel overlooking the Alps on Thursday. He was staying in Zurich — home to FIFA, the governing body of world soccer — for a meeting of the organization’s ruling executive committee.Mr. Napout, a citizen of Paraguay, initially opposed extradition to the United States, the Swiss Federal Office of Justice said Thursday, the day of his arrest. He was held in one of several jails in Zurich, along with eight other defendants in the United States’ case.Five officials have been in those jails since May, when the first round of charges was announced and a similar raid of the same hotel was conducted; they have fought subsequent efforts to bring them to federal court in Brooklyn. Two others consented to extradition after weeks or months, including Jeffrey Webb, who recently pleaded guilty, American authorities announced last week.But Mr. Napout, 57, reversed course most quickly. Days after he was apprehended at his hotel, he agreed to be extradited in a hearing on Tuesday, Swiss authorities said.In response to last week’s arrests, FIFA barred Mr. Napout and the other official arrested in Zurich — Alfredo Hawit, the president of Concacaf, the confederation overseeing North and Central American and the Caribbean — from soccer for 90 days.But Conmebol, the FIFA confederation led by Mr. Napout, still listed him as its president on its website Tuesday. In fact, in a sign of how pervasive the corruption charges have been to South American soccer, 11 of the 13 officials listed  as “directors” on the Conmebol website either have been indicted by the United States or have pleaded guilty in the continuing case.Including the business executives accused of paying bribes and the sports marketing companies also charged, the United States’ case has at least 40 defendants. Authorities have suggested that as the investigation — a coordinated effort by the United States attorney’s office for the Eastern District of New York, the New York field office of the F.B.I. and the I.R.S.’s criminal investigation unit — continues, more defendants may be named.Switzerland, too, is pursuing its own inquiry into possible corruption within FIFA. It is focused on the successful bids by Russia and Qatar to host the 2018 and 2022 World Cup tournaments. The country also opened a criminal inquiry into FIFA’s suspended president, Sepp Blatter, it announced in September, related to a suspicious payment Mr. Blatter made to a fellow official in 2011. Swiss authorities have provided United States prosecutors with key support in their independent investigation while remaining wary of being outshined.On Thursday in Washington, Attorney General Loretta E. Lynch delivered a new warning. “To every culpable individual who remains in the shadows, hoping to evade our investigation, you will not wait us out,” she said. “You will not escape our focus.”Advertisement