AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressThe family of the late Chicago Blackhawks defenseman Steve Montador sued the N.H.L. on Tuesday, accusing the league of failing to keep him reasonably safe and of not providing him with crucial medical information on the permanent ramifications of brain trauma.Montador, who played for six N.H.L. teams, died in February at 35 of an undisclosed cause at his home in Mississauga, Ontario. His brain was donated to the Canadian Sports Concussion Project, and an autopsy found chronic traumatic encephalopathy, or C.T.E., a degenerative brain disease. C.T.E. has been found in the brains of dozens of former N.F.L. and N.H.L. players. Linked to repeated brain trauma, it is associated with memory loss, impaired judgment, depression and progressive dementia.The lawsuit said the N.H.L. gratuitously conducted scientific research and engaged in the discussion about head injuries to give players “the false impression that it was working on their behalf to keep them informed and up-to-date on all medical and scientific advancements related to repetitive head trauma.” Instead, the suit said, the N.H.L. failed to inform players about the long-term dangers of repeated brain trauma, and demonstrated a conscious disregard of players’ long-term health.The lawsuit seeks unspecified damages for Montador’s son, parents and brother and sister. Commissioner Gary Bettman, at the Board of Governors meeting in Pebble Beach, Calif., declined to comment. He previously has said that a link between concussions and C.T.E. has not been established, a position ridiculed by some doctors and brain trauma experts. In a federal class-action lawsuit, former players seek unspecified damages from the N.H.L. over concussion-related injuries. The plaintiffs say the league promoted violent play that led to their injuries. The suit, a combination of several lawsuits by more than 200 former N.H.L. players, was filed in Minnesota in October 2014.Montador played in 641 games with Calgary, Florida, Anaheim, Boston, Buffalo and Chicago, and was involved in 69 fights.He sustained at least three concussions in six months in 2003, at least four in nine months in 2010 and at least four in a three-month span in 2012, according to the suit. It said Montador experienced significant memory issues, sleep disturbances, chronic pain, a substance abuse problem, photosensitivity, mood and behavioral changes, anxiety and depression.Advertisement