AdvertisementSupported byBy Naila-Jean MeyersEvery Tuesday, The New York Times will look at the week ahead in the N.H.L., highlighting hot — or not so hot — teams and players. Los Angeles Kings at Blue Jackets, Tuesday, 7 p.m.It’s probably too early to declare the Kings favorites to add a 2016 Stanley Cup to their 2012 and 2014 championships, but they are surging as they head into a six-game trip against Eastern Conference teams. Los Angeles (17-8-1) has won four in a row and seven of 10 to pull out to a 7-point lead in the Pacific Division. The Kings have been led by the line of Jeff Carter, Milan Lucic and Tyler Toffoli. Lucic, who arrived in an off-season trade from the Boston Bruins, has seven goals in his last 11 games.Devils at Toronto Maple Leafs, Tuesday, 7:30 p.m.The Devils continue to exceed expectations, and can show off their beards and mustaches — and improved play — to their old boss. Their longtime general manager, Lou Lamoriello, left the Devils after 28 years to join the Maple Leafs’ front office in the off-season. The Devils (14-10-3) enter the game with the standings on their side. Toronto is tied for last in the Eastern Conference with 23 points. The Devils’ leading scorer, Mike Cammalleri, has four goals and three assists in his last three games.Patrick Kane vs. the record bookKane’s scoring streak continued for another week — barely. He assisted on Artemi Panarin’s empty-net goal with 1 minute 46 seconds left against Winnipeg on Sunday. With that assist, Kane broke the Blackhawks’ franchise record set by Bobby Hull in 1972-73. Only three players since the 2004-5 lockout have had single-season scoring streaks of 22 games or longer: Kane, Dany Heatley (22 games, 2005) and Sidney Crosby (25 games, 2010). According to NHL.com, Kane has accounted for 56.2 percent of Chicago’s goals during the streak. The Blackhawks have a home-and-home series against Nashville on Tuesday and Thursday, then host Winnipeg on Friday.Rangers at Edmonton Oilers, Friday, 9 p.m.There is also a reunion of sorts in Edmonton this week. The Rangers’ president, Glen Sather, will be honored by the Oilers, the team he helped lead to five Stanley Cups as a coach and executive. The game will also reunite Cam Talbot and the Rangers, for whom he was a stalwart backup goaltender. He is also a backup in Edmonton, but that was not the plan. When he was traded to Edmonton in the off-season, his hope was to be the Oilers’ starter. But Anders Nilsson has overtaken him for the role in recent weeks. So fans may not see Talbot versus Henrik Lundqvist after all.On Nov. 28, former N.H.L., A.H.L. and college players took part in a picturesque pond hockey game on Pitt Lake in British Columbia. The game fulfilled the three-year mission of Bradley Friesen, a helicopter pilot and photographer, to create a hockey heaven in the mountains.“There were no fans, no paycheck, no Cup to be won,” said Manny Malhotra, a former N.H.L. player who participated in the game. “It was just about getting to play the game you love in its most natural setting. It was pure hockey.”Pictures and videos of the game can be found on Friesen’s Instagram page.John Gibson and Connor HellebuyckIt has been a very good few weeks for young American goaltenders. Gibson, a 22-year-old from Pittsburgh, was named the N.H.L.’s first star for last week, when he was 3-1 with a 0.76 goals-against average, a .968 save percentage and two shutouts to help the struggling Anaheim Ducks creep up in the standings.Gibson was the 39th pick in the 2011 draft, and much has been expected of him since he had a shutout in his N.H.L. debut in 2014. Injuries derailed his progress, and he had been unable to wrest the starting job from Frederik Andersen. He began the season in the minor leagues, but has taken advantage of Andersen’s recent illness to make his mark.Hellebuyck, a 22-year-old from Michigan, is getting a shot with the Winnipeg Jets because of an injury to Ondrej Pavelec and the struggles of the second-year goalie Michael Hutchinson, who has lost six of his last seven starts.Hellebuyck, meanwhile, has yet to lose in the N.H.L. In his three starts, he has stoped 83 of the 86 shots he has faced, including 37 against the high-powered Washington Capitals. He has compiled a 0.97 goals-against average and a .965 save percentage.A fifth-round draft pick in 2012, Hellebuyck led UMass-Lowell to the Frozen Four as a freshman. He was also the starting goalie for the United States at this year’s world championships, with a 7-1-0 record and two shutouts for the bronze-medal-winning Americans.Advertisement