By DAVE CALDWELLDEC. 8, 2015
If Rangers goaltender Henrik Lundqvist stays in one piece, and Coach Alain Vigneault sticks with his plan, Antti Raanta will not play until Saturday.Raanta is likely to make his seventh start of the season, against the Flames in Calgary, one night after the Rangers play in Edmonton.This is the slot for which Raanta, a good-natured 26-year-old goaltender from Rauma, Finland, will be paid $800,000 this season: to give the Rangers a chance to win games in which Lundqvist, 33, the workhorse making $10 million, gets the night off.Raanta has won four of the six games he has started, including a lackluster 2-1 loss at home on Thursday to the Colorado Avalanche. He has a 1.48 goals-against average, No. 2 among N.H.L. goaltenders with at least seven games played, and a .945 save percentage, No. 1 among N.H.L. goaltenders with at least seven games played. Both numbers are even better than Lundqvist’s (1.99 and .938).AdvertisementAcquired from Chicago on June 27 in a deal that sent the minor league forward Ryan Haggerty to the Blackhawks, Raanta has proved to be as reliable as his predecessor, Cam Talbot, who was traded earlier that day to Edmonton for three draft picks. Talbot was 33-15-5 in two seasons behind Lundqvist, including a 16-4-3 mark while Lundqvist was injured last season.Advertisement“Of course, everybody wants to play always, but you have to start from somewhere,” Raanta said. “You have to prove yourself, and you have to show that you’re good enough to play in this league. I’ve had a great time here, and I had a great time in Chicago, and I think my game has gotten a little bit better since last year. I’m proving a little bit more — just trying to do my best every day. Hopefully, I’ll get a game here and there, and steal a couple of games. That would be nice.”Backup goalies know all about what Talbot did for the Rangers late last season. He kept the team afloat when Lundqvist missed nearly two months with a serious neck injury, and the Rangers finished with the league’s best record.Talbot became the team’s most tradable asset, and now he is splitting time with Anders Nilsson in Edmonton, posting a less-than-stellar 3-8-1 record, with a 3.17 goals-against average and .889 save percentage.Backups also know about a 25-year-old rookie named Mike Condon, who has been asked by the Eastern Conference-leading Montreal Canadiens to step in for another elite goaltender, Carey Price, after he was injured.“I’ve kind of gotten a taste of both scenarios, and what it takes to take care of your body and your mind during those stretches,” Condon said. “I feel like I’m kind of prepared for both roles. As a goalie, you’ve got to be ready for anything.”Price sustained a lower-body injury, believed to be to his right knee, in an Oct. 29 loss to Edmonton. Condon was 5-2-2 in the nine games Price missed. Price returned for three games but reinjured his knee in a 5-1 victory Nov. 25 over the Rangers.That morning, Condon stayed late on the ice at Madison Square Garden, working with the Canadiens who would be healthy scratches. Condon said he understood his role: The Canadiens are, as he said, “Pricey’s team.”“But crazy things happen,” Condon said.Price is now expected to be out until mid-January, and Condon has lost on two of his last three days.AdvertisementCondon said he knew all about Talbot’s success story, saying: “I feel like if you play well anywhere, you’re going to get an opportunity somewhere else. I don’t really focus too much on that far down the road, because I’m barely trying to keep it together day by day.”Backup goalies know their workloads can change in a flash: Raanta stepped in for Corey Crawford in Chicago when he was injured in each of the last two seasons, the second time when Crawford sustained a lower-body injury after missing a step at a concert.Al Montoya, 30, a former Rangers first-round draft choice who is backing up Roberto Luongo in Florida, said: “For me, it’s trying to do the right things, get better every year. When you do get the opportunity to play, you make the most of it. I never try to get ahead of myself. I plan to play the next one. The goalie coach is great. He communicates with me. I’m never surprised. It makes the game much easier, especially with the unpredictability that we play with.”To be a backup goaltender is tough enough as it is. Consider what Raanta faced Thursday. It was the Rangers’ third game in four nights, their ninth in 15 days. They lost to the Islanders a night earlier in a hard-hitting game, the first between the fierce rivals in Brooklyn.“He’s done what you expect from a goaltender, give your team a chance to win,” Vigneault said of Raanta before Thursday’s game. “It’s not an easy situation; a lot of times you’re coming in on back-to-back nights, with limited work and sometimes limited rest, so it’s a challenge. But he’s come in here and he’s played extremely well for us. I’m confident it’s going to continue.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.While the Rangers struggled getting the puck through the neutral zone to test goaltender Semyon Varlamov, Raanta gave up two goals in the span of 4 minutes 16 seconds, the first to Chris Wagner on a snap shot, the second to Matt Duchene on a two-on-one rush.In his previous start, a 3-0 loss Saturday to the Philadelphia Flyers at the Garden, Raanta gave up only two goals on 33 shots — on a breakaway and a rebound in which he got no help from his defensemen.AdvertisementAs Raanta was taking on the Avalanche, the Devils played at Carolina and called on Keith Kinkaid to step in for goaltender Cory Schneider, whom the Devils are paying $6 million a year to lean on heavily.It was only the fifth start of the season and the first in 13 days for Kinkaid, 26, who signed as an undrafted free agent in 2011. Kinkaid said his first four starts were “hit or miss,” but he made 30 saves Thursday, and the Devils won, 5-1.“You’ve just got to be a good team player — always practice hard, always do the extra stuff,” Kinkaid said. “When you get the call, you’ve got to perform. It’s not the easiest thing. You don’t get to make up for your mistakes the next game. You’ve got to wait a little bit. It’s definitely an adjustment, but I’m happy to be here.”Lundqvist should play the first two games of a Rangers trip that includes stops Wednesday in Vancouver and Friday in Edmonton, possibly with Talbot in the opposite net. Among N.H.L. goaltenders, Lundqvist was seventh in minutes played entering Tuesday.Raanta was 49th. He probably will get his next minutes on Saturday. Until then, he will brush up for his next test, rare as those tests may be.“Even though I’m not playing, I try to get everything out of the system in practice — try to take it a little like a game,” Raanta said. “There are little things you want to do better and better, how you’re moving in the crease and things like that. So it’s just watching the tapes and games, and how the guys have beaten me in the past. Try to learn a little bit from that, and try to play better.”A version of this article appears in print on December 9, 2015, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: Thriving in the Moment in Backup Roles .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.