AdvertisementSupported byGlobal SoccerBy Rob HughesLONDON — When a new star is rising, there is always the temptation to push him too fast and too hard, neglecting the fact that he might need time to grow into his skin and his skills.Step forward, Bamidele Alli, better known as Dele Alli, the newest talent of Tottenham Hotspur and the English national team. Less than a year ago, he was playing to tiny audiences in the third tier of English soccer. Now, he is displaying exceptional skills week after week and either scoring or creating goals out of midfield.Alli scored from 30 yards out last month during his first start for England, a 2-0 win over France at Wembley Stadium. And he has either scored or set up his Spurs teammates in his last five games for Tottenham, which is in fifth place in the Premier League.Five games, of course, do not make a season, let alone a career. Tottenham knows it will have to be careful with a 19-year-old player who is still growing — mentally for sure and physically most likely. Standing 6-foot-2 and weighing about 160 pounds, Alli exudes the eagerness of youth and the sureness of a more seasoned veteran. “We need to stay calm,” the Spurs’ Argentine coach, Mauricio Pochettino, told reporters. “He is young; he has played 13 games. It’s not about age, it’s about desire and hunger.”And it’s about talent and precocity.Alli last weekend both made and scored Tottenham’s only goal at West Bromwich Albion in a 1-1 draw. He made it because of his run, a long, penetrating move he chose to take right through the heart of West Brom’s central defense.On television afterward, Alli said he ran there because he knew that the Spurs’ Toby Alderweireld was going to make the pass that Alli volleyed for the goal. Sure he did. He “knew” to expect a long, angled pass from a defender he has known all of a dozen games would land in the space where he was running. Some things in sports are intuitive and cannot be explained. It is as if some players have the instinct that makes carrier pigeons fly home.With perhaps similar insight, Alli scored his goal at Wembley on Nov. 17. He had the strength to muscle Morgan Schneiderlin off the ball in midfield and then, with barely a glance, had the audacity to strike a rising shot from 30 yards into the top far corner of the net.Why audacity? Because he scored against a goalkeeper who also happens to be Tottenham’s captain, the Frenchman Hugo Lloris.In that same match, Alli overpowered the impressively built Paul Pogba to begin the sequence that culminated with Wayne Rooney scoring England’s second goal.“It’s one of those crazy moments,” Alli said afterward. “I’m sure I’ll think about it, a lot. Right now, words can’t describe the feeling, but I’ve got to get my main focus back to Tottenham.”The French, to be fair, did not have their minds fully focused on Alli or England that night. It was an exhibition game that went ahead just four nights after the terrorist attacks in Paris.Since then, Alli has played in every Tottenham game but one. He has traveled with Spurs for a Europa League game in Baku, Azerbaijan, and has scored in front of packed houses at Tottenham’s White Hart Lane stadium and on the road against top Premier League teams.The game that he missed — the only one in which Spurs did not score against the opposition — ended up a 0-0 draw against Chelsea. Alli was absent as he served a one-game ban for accruing five yellow cards this season.His tackles are fair and forceful, and, for the most part, well-timed. Part of Coach Pochettino’s style is that he asks the midfield players to “press” for the ball, to make challenges and to be aggressive, within the limits of the law.Alli is, in that sense, a willing young soldier. He always has been, ever since he was a boy in Milton Keynes, north of London, where he grew up admiring Steven Gerrard of Liverpool and Frank Lampard of Chelsea.The night that Gerrard inspired Liverpool to an incredible comeback from three goals down to win the 2005 Champions League final against A.C. Milan made a huge impression on Alli, who was 9 years old at the time. He started out with the academy of the Milton Keynes Dons, but it was no secret that he hoped, one day, to follow Gerrard at Liverpool. That dream had every chance of happening.Milton Keynes’s manager, Karl Robinson, was once an academy coach at Liverpool, and he did what he could to apprise Liverpool of the boy’s wishes. Liverpool’s scouts monitored Alli, and the former Liverpool manager Brendan Rodgers received regular updates from Robinson.Yet when Milton Keynes decided to sell, the executives on Liverpool’s transfer committee felt that the price tag — 5 million pounds, or about $7.5 million — did not represent value for money. Tottenham paid that fee last February and let Alli play out the remainder of last season with the Dons.When the time was right, Pochettino took him. And you suspect that this Argentine, who has a feel for developing players, will also know when to take Alli out and rest him. You hope so, anyway, because the Premier League is demanding on the bodies of fully grown men, let alone a first-year player with outstanding potential.Advertisement