AdvertisementSupported byCanucks 2, Rangers 1By The Associated PressVANCOUVER, British Columbia — Daniel Sedin and Alexander Edler each had a goal and an assist to lift the Vancouver Canucks over the Rangers, 2-1, on Wednesday night.Henrik Sedin added two assists for Vancouver, and Ryan Miller made 32 saves. The Canucks won consecutive games for the first time since Oct. 30 and Nov. 2.The game was marred by a gruesome injury to Vancouver defenseman Dan Hamhuis late in the third period. He took a puck in the face from close range off the stick of the Rangers’ Dan Boyle and laid on the ice for a few seconds before leaving a trail of blood on his way to the locker room.“He took the shot in the mouth, just on the upper part of his mouth and lost some teeth,” Canucks Coach Willie Desjardins said. “I would assume it probably broke his jaw.“It’s scary. It’s a hard thing to take. He’ll suffer with that for a little while.”Boyle scored on a penalty shot for the Rangers, and Henrik Lundqvist had 23 saves.Daniel Sedin scored the winner on a slick deflection at 9 minutes 24 seconds of the third period off a slap pass from Edler. Sedin’s goal, his 13th of the season, came only 30 seconds after Boyle had tied the score at 1-1.The Rangers were awarded the penalty shot after a Vancouver player covered the puck in Miller’s crease, and Boyle made a nice move to score his first goal of the season.Boyle later hit the post during a Rangers power play.Edler opened the scoring on a five-on-three power play 3:19 into the third period after Rangers forward Jarret Stoll was penalized for delay of game when the Canucks already had a man advantage.Vancouver moved the puck around nicely to Edler at the point, and he ripped a shot off the post and in for his sixth goal.The Canucks had a quality chance to build on their lead after the Rangers were assessed a bench minor that was followed by a high-sticking penalty, but Vancouver was unable to capitalize.The Canucks, who were coming off a 5-2 victory over Buffalo on Monday night that ended a five-game losing streak, were slow at the start.Jesper Fast and Viktor Stalberg had good chances against Miller in the first five minutes as the Rangers seemed to be playing a game of keep-away in the Canucks’ zone.Vancouver finally got a decent opportunity at the other end with about six minutes left in the opening period, but Lundqvist stopped Derek Dorsett off a rush.Rangers defenseman Dan Girardi nearly opened the scoring less than four minutes into the second. With the teams playing four-on-four, Girardi’s deflection in front of Miller struck the crossbar and stayed out.The Rangers had another great chance, but Kevin Hayes’s shot nicked off the Canucks rookie Jared McCann in front of Vancouver’s goal and stayed out. The Rangers held a 23-14 edge in shots through 40 minutes.Advertisement