AdvertisementSupported byJazz 106, Knicks 85By Andrew KehSALT LAKE CITY — Carmelo Anthony reclined on a padded seat Wednesday morning, speaking of his shooting touch as an impermanent entity, a feeling that comes and goes without much warning.“Some days the rhythm is kind of there,” he said as the Knicks wound down their morning shootaround, “and some days the rhythm is not.”That night, the Knicks lost to the Utah Jazz, 106-85, and it was clear within moments of the opening tipoff that Anthony’s shooting rhythm had not made it to Salt Lake City.Anthony heaved up two shots within the first 65 seconds and missed them both. The Knicks had already fallen behind, 23-8, when Anthony launched his third attempt, from 21 feet, which clanged wide. With about four minutes left in the quarter, Anthony drew a shooting foul in the paint, but he made only one of his two free throws. It went like that all night. One minute later, Anthony brought the ball up the court and pulled up at the top of the 3-point arc for his fourth field-goal attempt, which missed well short. A minute after that, he took a seat on the bench and watched as the Knicks finished the quarter on the wrong end of a 29-11 score.The game was over, and there were still three full periods left to play. Anthony scored just 12 points while shooting 3 of 11 from the field and had four turnovers.“Personally, as a competitor, it kind of gets frustrating because I know I put so much work in on those parts of my game,” Anthony said Monday morning of his recent play. “When it doesn’t work out, I kind of beat myself up.”The frustration kept building as the Knicks, who were starting a three-game trip, lost for the seventh time in nine games.After the game, Coach Derek Fisher said the Knicks needed to disregard their early success this season and “make sure we’re approaching this as though we’re not that good yet.”In Anthony’s previous five games before Wednesday, he shot 36.6 percent from the field and 33.3 percent from 3-point range and averaged 17.2 points, 5.4 rebounds and 3.4 assists in 32.3 minutes per game. He missed one game in that span because of illness.Speaking before the game, Fisher played down the important of shooting percentages.“Quite frankly, at times we haven’t played well offensively, and that’s going to affect field-goal percentages,” Fisher said of Anthony. “He’s doing everything we’re asking him to do. And we just have to keep working at it.”To be sure, it was not just Anthony. The Knicks, as a whole, were atrocious. They shot 31 of 78 (39.7 percent) as a team. Kristaps Porzingis made 2 of 8 from the field and finished with 4 points and 3 rebounds in 13 minutes.The Jazz, on the other hand, got 24 points from Gordon Hayward and 20 from Derrick Favors and shot 39 of 80 (48.8 percent) as a team. “They played probably their best game so far this season, and we played our worst game,” Anthony said afterward. “Anytime you dig yourself a hole that early, it’s hard to fight that battle.”Anthony scored 5 points at the free-throw line, another area of irritation for him  Wednesday morning. Two days after receiving a technical foul after arguing with a referee over a perceived noncall, he expressed displeasure with what he described as a dearth of foul calls in his favor.“I always get fouled,” he said after the team’s morning workout.Before Wednesday’s game, Anthony was averaging 0.310 free-throw attempts per field-goal attempts this season, far below his career average of 0.383. The figure reflected a general downward trend in his 13 N.B.A. seasons. Before the game, he was averaging 5.7 free-throw attempts per game, which ranked 19th in the league.To Anthony, it has not been enough. As he sees it, his physical style and willingness to sacrifice his body in the paint have been drawing all sorts of contact that has gone unpenalized. “You play so hard, you work so hard, and then you don’t benefit from that,” he said. “Then you look at other guys that you touch, or you look at them wrong, and they get fouls. So it’s a frustrating thing for me as a guy who likes to go to the basket and likes to play in the paint and likes to be physical and play physical.”Anthony was asked if he had ever heard an explanation from officials. He said that he had heard on multiple occasions that he was one of the most difficult players in the league to referee, and that his aggressive moves often made it unclear which player was creating contact.It did not help, Anthony said, that his size and strength allowed him to stay in motion, while weaker, lighter players might stop upon feeling contact and earn a whistle. Anthony said flopping was common in the league, but he explained with a smile that he did not know how to do it.“I won’t even look right trying to do that,” he said of playacting. “I won’t even feel right trying to do that move.”But not much has felt right for Anthony lately.Advertisement