AdvertisementSupported byBy Ken BelsonNational Car Rental has agreed to pay $158 million for the naming rights on a football stadium that is being planned by civic leaders in Missouri who are trying to keep the St. Louis Rams from moving to Los Angeles.The deal, which will be announced Wednesday, is designed to show the 32 N.F.L. owners that the city and state can pay for the $1 billion stadium they hope to build if the Rams or another team agree to play there.Under the proposed deal, the Rams or another N.F.L. tenant would pay about one-quarter of the stadium’s construction costs, or about $250 million. The $158 million in naming rights revenue, which would be paid over 20 years, may go to the St. Louis Regional Sports Authority, which would own the stadium, or potentially the team with the understanding it was used for rent or upkeep on the facility.The new stadium would be called National Car Rental Field. National was bought in 2007 by Enterprise Holdings, one of the biggest corporations in St. Louis. “No matter how you look at this, it’s good for our city and our brand,” said Pat Farrell, the chief marketing and communications officer at Enterprise Holdings Inc., which spent about $12 million last year on television commercials advertising National Car Rental during N.F.L. games. “The demographics of our brand line up almost exactly with the N.F.L.”The N.F.L. owners are meeting this week in New York to discuss, among other things, whether to let the Rams, the Oakland Raiders or the San Diego Chargers move to Los Angeles. The Chargers and the Raiders have proposed building a stadium together in Carson, Calif., while E. Stanley Kroenke, the owner of the Rams, announced plans to build a stadium in Inglewood, Calif.To move, a team must win the support of at least three-quarters, or 24, of the owners. According to the league’s relocation guidelines, teams cannot ignore good-faith efforts by their host city. Leaders in Missouri, including Gov. Jay Nixon, hope that the owners consider their stadium plan a good-faith effort and that they vote against letting Kroenke move the team.The Chargers, the Raiders and the Rams are expected to file applications to move their teams toward the end of the season so they can play in Los Angeles in 2016. This year, Commissioner Roger Goodell asked six owners, including John Mara of the Giants and Art Rooney Jr. of the Pittsburgh Steelers, to form a committee to make a recommendation to the full ownership. While neither the Rams nor the Chargers-Raiders alliance appears to have an edge, it is clear that the committee does not want all three teams to move to Los Angeles.The commitment by leaders in St. Louis is ahead of efforts in Oakland and San Diego. The governor, the mayor of St. Louis and now one of the city’s biggest companies support the stadium plan, and two legal rulings have paved the way for the St. Louis Regional Sports Authority to issue bonds to pay for the building.“This is a very positive development in terms being comprehensive and bringing certainty,” said Dave Peacock, a co-chairman of the governor’s stadium task force.At $7.9 million a year, the naming rights deal in St. Louis is in line with a city of its size. The Dallas Cowboys, and the Giants and Jets, who share a stadium, have the most lucrative agreements, at $19 million. The deal in St. Louis would be less than naming rights agreements in Charlotte and Philadelphia and more than those in Denver and Indianapolis.Advertisement