AdvertisementSupported byBy ReutersPARIS — The decision to award the 2021 track and field world championships to Eugene, Ore., is being investigated by France’s national financial prosecutors as part of a wide-ranging inquiry into the sport’s governing body. A spokesman for the prosecutors said Wednesday that prosecutors decided to open the investigation on Dec. 1 after international news media reports questioned the decision by the governing body, the International Association of Athletics Federations.The hosting rights were awarded to Eugene in April without a bidding process, to the surprise of Gothenburg, Sweden, which was preparing to present its own case. Sebastian Coe, now the I.A.A.F.’s president, said recently that the decision was made after a presentation by his predecessor, Lamine Diack. Diack said certain financial and commercial opportunities had arisen that he felt meant Eugene should be awarded the rights without a bidding contest.The world championships, which began in 1983, have never been held in the United States.The I.A.A.F. Council voted, 23-1, in favor of awarding the event to Eugene, with one abstention, and those behind the Gothenburg bid were left frustrated and confused at the change of tack. Bjorn Eriksson, leader of the Gothenburg bid and a former head of Interpol, subsequently said the decision “smelled” and needed an investigation. Eugene is closely linked to Nike, and that connection also caused concern because Coe, an I.A.A.F. vice president at the time of the vote, was a longstanding paid ambassador for the company.Diack is a subject of an investigation in France and is accused of taking bribes to cover up positive doping tests. Other I.A.A.F. officials are being questioned by the French police and Interpol. Although Coe, a former Olympic champion, has denied any conflict of interest, he severed his link with Nike two weeks ago, saying that the “noise” around the situation had become a distraction as he sought to deal with the doping and corruption crisis that has left the sport reeling.Organizers of the Eugene event remained confident in their bid.“We are very proud of and we stand by our bid,” Vin Lananna, the president of TrackTown USA, which organizes track events in Eugene, told reporters in Oregon. “We stand by the integrity of the bid. We are 100 percent confident there has been nothing outside of what are the norms for the presentation of an I.A.A.F. bid.”I.A.A.F. officials were unavailable for comment on Wednesday, but when previously asked about the decision, they said: “There is nothing to revisit. This was a democratic decision of the I.A.A.F. Council.”Advertisement