AdvertisementSupported byRoundupBy The Associated PressArsenal saved its best performance for the last game of the Champions League group stage, advancing to the round of 16 with a remarkable 3-0 victory at Olympiakos on Wednesday. Chelsea also advanced on a good night for English soccer with a 2-0 win at home over Porto.“I told you before that it would be the greatest escape,” Arsenal Coach Arsène Wenger said.Both Arsenal and Chelsea were trying to avoid following in the footsteps of Manchester United, which was eliminated on Tuesday.Roma’s 0-0 draw against visiting BATE Borisov was just enough to allow Roma to edge Bayer Leverkusen for second place in its group. Leverkusen could not manage more than a 1-1 draw at home against Barcelona as Lionel Messi scored his 80th goal in the tournament.The Belgian club Gent advanced in its first Champions League campaign after winning at home against Zenit St. Petersburg, 2-1, a result that eliminated Valencia, which lost at home to Lyon, 2-0.Bayern Munich, which had already qualified for the round of 16, earned a 2-0 win at Dinamo Zagreb with a pair of goals by striker Robert Lewandowski.Dynamo Kiev advanced thanks to a 1-0 win in Ukraine over Maccabi Tel Aviv. The game was played in an empty stadium in Kiev, the Ukrainian capital, as part of Dynamo’s punishment for racist attacks by its fans in October.M.L.S. INCREASES SALARIES M.L.S. will allow teams to spend $37 million more on player salaries in the next two seasons in an effort to improve talent.M.L.S. said each team would be able to spend an additional $800,000 in so-called targeted allocation money in both the 2016 and 2017 seasons. The money can be used to sign or re-sign players who earn more than the maximum salary budget charge but are not high-priced designated players.The league will also allow teams to spend $125,000 each year on homegrown players.The money must be spent within four transfer windows.SWANSEA FIRES MANAGER Swansea fired its manager, Garry Monk, amid a slump in the Premier League, ending his two-year stint in charge, during which he guided the club to its highest finish in the league, England’s top division.Unbeaten in the first four games of the season, Swansea has won just one of its last 11 games, its most recent a 3-0 loss at home against Leicester on Saturday.Monk had been with Swansea for more than 11 years, first as a defender and then as manager since February 2014, when he replaced Michael Laudrup. Huw Jenkins, the club’s chairman, said he made the decision with a “heavy heart.”2 AFRICAN TEAMS QUALIFY Algeria and Nigeria secured spots in the soccer tournament at the Rio Olympics, leaving South Africa and Senegal to fight for the third and final qualifying place this weekend.Algeria earned a convincing 2-1 victory over South Africa, and Nigeria defeated Senegal, 1-0, in the eight-nation African qualifying competition in Dakar, Senegal.Senegal, which beat South Africa in the opening match of the tournament, must do so again Saturday in the third-place game to secure a second straight appearance at the Olympics. (AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE)Advertisement