AdvertisementSupported byBy Billy WitzIf the Yankees defeated the Houston Astros in the American League wild-card game on Tuesday night, nobody was to expect the type of celebration, replete with champagne and beer showers, that the team launched last week when it clinched a playoff berth.This would be a more modest and restrained celebration: everyone raising a glass to the manager’s toast of the achievement. It was unclear if the toast would be with an alcoholic beverage.The plan, according to a team supervisor who was not authorized to speak publicly, was in place before C. C. Sabathia’s decision to enter an alcohol rehabilitation program, which the team announced Monday. Instead, according to two team sources also not authorized to speak publicly on the matter, Manager Joe Girardi did not want the usual type of celebration because, if the Yankees won, they would be boarding a plane afterward and flying to Kansas City, Mo., where the winner of Tuesday’s game will open an American League division series on Thursday. The Yankees would arrive at their hotel at 4 a.m. and would be scheduled to work out later Wednesday.Girardi declined to reveal his plans before the game.“We’ll celebrate accordingly,” he said.Champagne and beer celebrations have been a long tradition, but Sabathia’s admittance into a diversion program has shined a light on the sometimes uncomfortable link between alcohol and baseball. As General Manager Brian Cashman and Girardi spoke Monday to discuss Sabathia’s departure, the backdrop contained a beer company logo. In 2010, the Texas Rangers celebrated their trip to the World Series with ginger ale in deference to their star Josh Hamilton, whose career was nearly derailed by substance abuse. While other major sports leagues have banned alcohol from clubhouses and locker rooms, baseball has not. Though the Yankees do not typically allow alcohol in the clubhouse at Yankee Stadium, they do on the road, since players leave the stadium on a bus. If the Astros won, they planned a straightforward celebration — just as they did Sunday, when they clinched a playoff berth in Arizona on the final day of the season, their first since 2005.“Just to get that feeling of knowing you had a winning season and got back in the playoffs with a lot of homegrown talent and some new additions, it just felt great,” said Reid Ryan, the Astros’ president. “If we were fortunate enough to get a win, I’m sure we’d have the same type of celebration.”ELLSBURY SITS The Yankees started the one-game playoff with their $153 million outfielder, Jacoby Ellsbury, sitting on the bench in order to get Chris Young, a right-handed hitter, into the lineup against Dallas Keuchel, the Astros’ dominant left-hander.Young had a .972 on-base plus slugging percentage against left-handers and was one of the few Yankees who had performed well against Keuchel, with six hits in 20 at-bats. Young may be the only Yankee who would not have minded playing the game in Houston, his hometown. In 27 games there, he has hit 10 home runs and driven in 35 runs.Ellsbury, who was paid $21 million in the second year of a seven-year contract, struggled to stay healthy and posted a .663 O.P.S., his worst performance for a full season. Girardi could have benched Brett Gardner, who, like Ellsbury, has had a severe drop-off in the second half.“In the end, it was Gardy’s numbers against left-handers compared to Jacoby’s,” Girardi said. “It was a tough decision. I mulled it over for two days, and I made the decision about 3 o’clock today.”Girardi told Ellsbury he would come off the bench at some point.Ellsbury said: “I told him I want to play. But then I let him know I’ll be ready to go at some point in the game.” BENJAMIN HOFFMANGOMEZ RETURNS TO LINEUP Though still recovering from a rib-cage injury, Astros outfielder Carlos Gomez returned to the lineup against the Yankees, batting sixth and playing center field as one of only nine Houston players with postseason experience.Gomez’s ability as an offensive catalyst also comes with a combustible personality, and some history with the Yankees. In late August, benches cleared after Gomez engaged in a yelling match with Girardi after a flyout to center. Girardi took issue with how Gomez flipped his bat in a 9-0 game. The incident was hardly the first time Gomez has irked opponents with his antics. He had a particularly memorable run-in with Yankees catcher Brian McCann, when McCann was with the Atlanta Braves and Gomez played for Milwaukee in 2013. That argument, which ensued after Gomez had homered, started a brawl in which three players were ejected.Gomez’s impact as a hitter (12 home runs, 56 R.B.I. this season), fielder and base runner, however, are viewed as a boost.“There’s no doubt he can be an electrifying force in our lineup and in the field,” Astros Manager A. J. Hinch said.Gomez, who began his career with the Mets, nearly returned to New York as the centerpiece of a July trade between the Mets and the Brewers for shortstop Wilmer Flores and pitcher Zack Wheeler. After details of the deal leaked onto social media, and Flores was reduced to tears on the field, the trade fell through when Mets executives grew concerned about Gomez’s hip.The Mets wound up trading for Yoenis Cespedes instead, and Gomez was dealt to Houston. At least for now, history shines positively on the Mets’ move: Cespedes batted .287, with 17 home runs, in 57 games for the Mets, while Gomez hit .242, with 13 R.B.I., in 41 games for the Astros. But Gomez still stood to contribute in the wild-card game. Though he strained his left intercostal muscle early in September and wound up missing 17 of the past 20 games of the season, Hinch said he could not keep Gomez out of this game.“He’s bouncing around the clubhouse ready to play,” Hinch said. “Obviously, I had concerns. He’s not 100 percent. But for this moment, with this type of player, the importance of this game, this is the time.”  ZACH SCHONBRUNAdvertisement