By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSDEC. 9, 2015
Speaking to reporters for the first time since being demoted last month for off-the-field behavior, Browns quarterback Johnny Manziel did not apologize for his actions, offered no promises and said he felt fortunate to be back in the starting lineup for this weekend’s game against San Francisco.“I was forced to learn a hard lesson,” he said. “I had to learn the hard way, and I’m lucky to be back in the position that I’m in and being the starter again, so I’m definitely not taking that lightly. That’s for sure.”Browns Coach Mike Pettine punished Manziel after a video surfaced of Manziel holding a champagne bottle and rapping profane lyrics at a club in Austin, Tex.Manziel’s start on Sunday will be his first since he passed for a career-high 372 yards against Pittsburgh on Nov. 15.AdvertisementREVIS ATTENDS PRACTICE Cornerback Darrelle Revis rejoined his Jets teammates, attending practice for the first time since sustaining a concussion Nov. 22.Advertisement“He ran a little bit on the side,” Coach Todd Bowles said, “so that was encouraging.”Revis has missed two games while going through the N.F.L.’s concussion protocol, and it was uncertain if he would be cleared in time to play against Tennessee on Sunday.KELLY REBUTS RUMORS Eagles Coach Chip Kelly said running back DeMarco Murray was unhappy that he had only eight carries in a win over the New England Patriots on Sunday, but Kelly denied rumors that Murray had undercut coaches by speaking with the team’s owner, Jeffrey Lurie.Kelly rebutted the notion that Murray had sought out Lurie, saying that Murray, the N.F.L’s rushing leader last season, simply sat next to Lurie on the plane ride home from Massachusetts.Murray played only 14 snaps in the game.“He only got 14 snaps, but the offense as a whole only got 50 snaps,” Kelly said. “The offense was just not on the field a lot.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.BRONCOS’ MANNING THROWS Peyton Manning threw indoors on his own for the first time in three and a half weeks.Manning has been sidelined since Nov. 15 with a torn plantar fascia in his left foot, sore ribs and a sore throwing shoulder.Brock Osweiler, who is 3-0 in Manning’s place, will make his fourth start when the Broncos host the Raiders on Sunday.INGRAM’S SEASON OVER The Saints placed running back Mark Ingram on injured reserve, ending his season. Ingram is the team’s leader in yards from scrimmage with 1,174 this season, including 769 yards rushing. He also rushed for six touchdowns.AdvertisementRAMS LOSE TWO DEFENDERS The Rams lost two defensive stalwarts for the rest of the season, with end Robert Quinn set to have back surgery and safety T. J. McDonald headed for a shoulder procedure.INJURED JAGUAR MAY PLAY Jaguars linebacker Paul Posluszny had surgery to repair a broken right hand but was not ruled out against Indianapolis.A TITAN RETURNS Tennessee running back Dexter McCluster returned to practice after missing two games with an injured right knee.A version of this article appears in print on December 10, 2015, on Page B15 of the New York edition with the headline: Manziel Calls His Benching ‘a Hard Lesson’.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.