AdvertisementSupported byBy Jason Sablich and Justin SablichFantasy football analysis for Thursday night’s game between the Minnesota Vikings and the Arizona Cardinals. Check back Friday for analysis on Sunday’s games and Monday’s matchup between the Giants and the Miami Dolphins. You can also follow the Sablich brothers on Twitter at @5thDownFantasy.8:30 p.m. Eastern. Line: Cardinals by 6.5.Quarterback Carson Palmer (ARI) — Three of his last four opponents, the Seahawks, the Bengals and the Rams, currently rank in the bottom 10 of fantasy points allowed per game, yet he had at least 22 fantasy points against each of those teams. The Vikings also rank in the bottom 10 at 16.1 F.P.P.G., but just yielded four total touchdowns to Russell Wilson, and Palmer’s consistency should keep him in lineups Thursday night.These player rankings from the Sablich brothers are for standard and PPR scoring formats and will be updated throughout the season.Teddy Bridgewater (MIN) — With a total of 7.6 fantasy points in his last two games, and a matchup against the sixth toughest opponent for fantasy quarterbacks (15.0 F.P.P.G.), you can safely ignore Bridgewater this week.Running Back David Johnson (ARI) — On paper, the Vikings are the ninth toughest matchup for fantasy backs, but they have yielded at least 100 rushing yards to an opposing runner in each of the last three games. Johnson looked stellar as the Cardinals’ new lead back last weekend, with 120 total yards and a receiving touchdown. He’ll lead the way once again with Andre Ellington missingAdrian Peterson (MIN) — The Cardinals rank fourth in the N.F.L. against the run (89.0 Y.P.G.) and have allowed the seventh fewest F.P.P.G. at 15.6.Wide Receiver Larry Fitzgerald/Michael Floyd/John Brown (ARI) — All three are seeing enough targets from Palmer to be effective in fantasy, but it’s tough to predict which player will stand out from week to week. Fitzgerald’s numbers in particular have suffered of late, as he has only one touchdown in his last seven games.The Sablich Brothers have provided award-winning fantasy football advice for The Times since 2010. For additional fantasy analysis, visit 5thdownfantasy.com and follow them on Twitter @5thdownfantasy.Advertisement