By SCOTT CACCIOLAOCT. 6, 2015
Robert Day thought his basketball career was finished.Ten years ago, after an unsettling stint with a professional team in Mexico, Day headed home to Oregon to take a job selling windows for his father-in-law. Day had a young family to support, and he found the work fulfilling. He soon graduated to providing window estimates on expensive homes.“It was going pretty well, and my mind really wasn’t in basketball,” he said. “I would play with my friends here and there, but it wasn’t one of those things where I felt that I had to have it. I was just happy to provide for my wife and daughter.”Day never could have suspected that in the months ahead, the housing market would crash, costing him his job. Or that he would resuscitate his playing career back in Mexico, his only option at the time. Or that he would eventually land in Brazil, where he would become a three-time all-star in Novo Basquete Brasil, the country’s top league.On Wednesday night, having traveled a path that he neither planned nor predicted, Day, 33, will find himself on his most unexpected stage to date: defending Carmelo Anthony for stretches in the Knicks’ preseason opener at Madison Square Garden.Advertisement“It’s something you always dream about as a basketball player,” said Day, a 6-foot-6 shooting guard and long-range specialist for Bauru Basket, a Brazilian team that will get the first crack at the new-look Knicks.AdvertisementDay has spent the past six seasons in Brazil, the first four playing for a club in Uberlândia, where he never averaged fewer than 17.2 points a game and once set the league abuzz by scoring 50 points in an all-star game. His teammates knew about his fondness for the 3-point line, so they kept feeding him the ball.“That was a special moment,” he said. “Just crazy.”Day has since settled into a more supporting role with Bauru, a regional power. Last season, he averaged 10.7 points a game while shooting 54.4 percent from the field as Bauru won the FIBA Americas League championship. Day’s duties are wide-ranging, though.About six hours after arriving in New York on Sunday morning aboard a commercial flight from São Paulo, Day and nine of his teammates folded themselves into a rented Chevrolet Suburban and headed north on Interstate 87. Their destination? Woodbury Common Premium Outlets, a shopping center in Central Valley, N.Y.Day, who speaks fluent Portuguese, operated as interpreter and tour guide, a de facto job that he earned as the team’s lone American. None of the players, he said, seemed to be craving sleep — not with so much shopping to do, and not with a game at the Garden in the near future.“I think there’s some adrenaline at work,” he said.The Garden is a long way from Bauru, a modest city about 470 miles west of Rio de Janeiro. And the Knicks were never on the schedule at Western Oregon, a Division II program where Day remains the career scoring leader.“Talk about a dream guy to coach,” said Tim Hills, his former coach at Western Oregon.Day’s only previous brush with the N.B.A. came in the summer of 2008, when he was home in Oregon after another season in Mexico. David Lucas, a friend who had played at Oregon State, recruited Day to work out with several members of the Portland Trail Blazers during their off-season. For three weeks, Day scrimmaged against the likes of Steve Blake, Rudy Fernandez and LaMarcus Aldridge.“At first, everyone was like: ‘Who is this dude? Man, he can shoot the ball,’ ” said Lucas, whose father was the N.B.A. player Maurice Lucas. “I remember how the two point guards would pick the two sides, and after a while, they were picking Rob before some of the other guys who were actually on the team.”AdvertisementDay knew that his best shot at winning a job in the N.B.A. would be to latch on with a team in the Development League and hope for the best. But he and his wife, Reena, already had a daughter (and a son on the way), and Day doubted that he could support his family on a D-League salary. So he returned to Mexico, where he was fairly certain, he said, that one of his teams was backed by an organized crime syndicate. He was coming to a slow realization about life on the N.B.A. margins.“There are so many guys on the cusp,” he said. “There are a lot of players on these rosters who fill roles, and there are a lot of guys out here who could easily take their spots. There’s not a huge difference in the level of talent.”Lucas, who spent several seasons playing overseas, said politics often played a part in determining which players received N.B.A. opportunities. Despite posting huge numbers in college, Day was not the product of an elite program.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“That probably hurt him,” Lucas said. “Getting seen is so hard. It takes a certain type of coach to take a shot.”By 2010, Day was looking for more secure employment. In a haphazard route typical of international basketball, one of his coaches from Mexico recommended that he play for a team in Argentina that was heading to China for a tournament. The trip was a success, Day said, and he thought he might take a job in Argentina. But the team that was interested in him signed a power forward who consumed much of the payroll.Instead, after Day’s agent worked the phones, Brazil called, and Day jumped at the opportunity. In a soccer-crazed country, he soon emerged as one of the league’s top players, showcasing a brand of shot-making expertise that left fans enthralled. His elevation on jumpers was performance art.“He’s one of the best shooters I’ve ever seen,” Lucas said.Day has made a decent living in Brazil, he said, where salaries range upward of $20,000 a month. His family lives with him in Bauru — he and his wife were high school sweethearts — and the couple’s two children attend an English-language immersion school, which should help ease their transition back to Oregon whenever Day decides to retire.“Robert will keep himself in shape,” said Hills, his former college coach. “He works his fanny off every day.”AdvertisementLucas said he advised Day to savor every possession against the Knicks. Day’s wife will be at the Garden to watch, having lured her father to Brazil to look after the kids. (Bauru will visit the Washington Wizards on Sunday before returning to Brazil for the start of the team’s season in November.)Hills said he only wished that Day had the opportunity to face an N.B.A. team two or three years ago, when he was truly in his prime.“Back when he maybe had a little bit more life left in his legs,” Hills said.Day said he agreed with that assessment. Perhaps he could have opened some eyes, he said, and maybe a team or two would have given him a longer look. But now, he knows, his career is winding down.So Wednesday will be bittersweet for Day, who said he was grateful that the game — his first whiff of the N.B.A. — would be happening at all.A version of this article appears in print on October 7, 2015, on Page B18 of the New York edition with the headline: Relishing an N.B.A. Encounter .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.