

 Michael Powell
 

SPORTS OF THE TIMES
DEC. 9, 2015
Ben Zobrist, the apple of the Mets’ eye this off-season, decided to spurn the family Wilpon and sign with the Chicago Cubs.Chicago’s proximity to Zobrist’s family home in Nashville was said to play a role. That would have made sense when paddle-wheel riverboats were the preferred means of transport, but less so since Orville Wright and the advent of winged flying devices. (Chicago is 1 hour 20 minutes by plane from Nashville; New York City is 2:20.)More likely, the fact that Cubs Manager Joe Maddon and Zobrist enjoyed many years together with Tampa Bay was the deciding factor. And Theo Epstein, the Cubs’ president, has displayed a willingness to spend and spend again.The Wilpons have displayed no willingness to do any such thing.Still, this is a good test for the Mets. Zobrist, who will be 35 in May, was the wrong player at the wrong time for the Mets, who offer a peculiar mix of fuzzy-cheeked youth and the creaky-boned aged.AdvertisementBy the spring, this team will have a 37-year-old left fielder, a 35-year-old right fielder and a sore-backed 33-year-old third baseman. It did not need to pay a new second baseman until the cusp of his fifth decade.Instead, the Mets, blessed with an abundance of strong pitching arms, need to pursue a genuine power hitter, like that fellow Yoenis Cespedes, who patrolled the outfield and led the team during its stirring pennant run last season. If not Cespedes for the rest of us — the Mets pretend to have all but lost his telephone number — then two other top free-agent outfielders loom: Justin Upton, 28, and Jason Heyward, 26.AdvertisementTo type this is to risk marking yourself as an unserious man as so many fall over themselves to explain that the Mets cannot possibly afford to compete with the likes of Chicago, Boston, the Dodgers, the Angels and, perhaps, even Kansas City.On Wednesday, the Mets traded for a second baseman, picking up Neil Walker from the Pittsburgh Pirates for an expendable starting pitcher, Jon Niese. It was a nice trade and perfectly small-bore Mets. It was a cash wash. Later that night, they continued to reshape their infield, adding Asdrubal Cabrera, a former All-Star who ranks among the poorest defensive shortstops in baseball, on a two-year deal believed to be worth a modest $18 million.Still, however much Sandy Alderson, an astute baseball man, enjoyed Oakland and San Diego, and however much the Wilpons might enjoy visiting Milwaukee, the Mets fit no definition of a midmarket team. Flushing, Queens — for better and worse — is not Cleveland.The Mets’ claim of sackcloth poverty seems worth interrogating. The Wilpons trusted their grifter friend Bernard L. Madoff, and so fell on hard times. And the debt service on their new stadium is pretty high. But as Howard Megdal of Capital New York has noted, somewhere between $45 million and $60 million rained down upon the Wilpons in this autumn’s baseball festivities.Ratings and ad rates are up significantly on SNY, in which the Mets own a majority share. And as my colleague Richard Sandomir has noted, ticket sales are up.
                If so, we’d like to talk to you. We want to hear from you about what your experience was in watching Game 5, and specifically, the slide by the Royals’ Eric Hosmer that tied the game against the Mets in the ninth inning.            Then there’s the fact that Alderson and Mets management insisted for years that if only fans came out in greater numbers, the team would spend more. Typically in American capitalism, you produce a better product, and sales rise. Whatever; it worked.AdvertisementBaseball’s commissioner, Rob Manfred, seems intent on responding as Bud Selig did to his old friends the Wilpons: Manfred is playing the avuncular enabler. “I think clubs should and do spend commensurate with the revenues that are available to them,” Manfred said recently.This is silliness. New York City’s veins are clotted with young masters and mistresses of the universe who would love to own the bauble known as a major league franchise. The Wilpons could put the team on the market Monday and count their billion-plus dollars by Friday.As for free agency, the Wilpons would do well to start with what they had: Cespedes. The Mets lack many coaches who can speak Spanish, but in a city nearly half black and Latino, you might expect a black Cuban to present the team with intriguing marketing possibilities.As to his play, Cespedes is not Willie Mays. He is like a hound after a hare to high fastballs. He swings at a few too many curves off the low outside corner. (These are not disabilities unique to him; Fangraphs has documented that Mike Trout has the same weakness for high, hard stuff.) Nor was Cespedes spectacular in the postseason, although he did hit two home runs and knock in seven runs in nine playoff games before the World Series. Like most of the Mets, he had a bad five-game stretch in the Series.His fielding in center field in the postseason bore a resemblance to soccer. That said, he is a natural left fielder, and for his work there with the Detroit Tigers in the first half of 2015, he just won a Gold Glove. His arm is like a javelin in the hands of Achilles: deadly.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.As Fangraphs wrote, if he stayed put in left field, he would rate “among the best full-time players.”Mets management tells reporters — sotto voce — that were it to give Cespedes his desired long-term contract, he would be 36 at the end of it. This is a curious plaint, as the team offered a four-year contract to an infielder who would have been 38 when the deal ended.The Mets have reached an inflection point. They have a phalanx of terrific young starting pitchers who can toss nasty curves and dial fastballs at close to 100 miles per hour. The actuarial odds are that one of them might tear an elbow tendon, and the economic odds are that one or more might leave for free agency.AdvertisementAs the Mets learned in the soporific days of June and July, baseball teams cannot live on pitching alone. Someone has to hit. Catcher Travis d’Arnaud might stay healthy all year, although he has not managed that feat yet.And Michael Conforto, in his second season, might blast more home runs. But after 174 regular-season at-bats in the major leagues, Conforto will confront pitchers who have studied his weaknesses. Let’s say he hits .260 with 24 home runs. That is a nice sophomore year, and no shame there. He might not be ready to carry the team.The Angels are circling Upton. God only knows how many general managers are whispering sweet things into Heyward’s ears.One World Series is no guarantee of another. You wonder if the Wilpons realize they are not running Tampa Bay.Email: powellm@nytimes.com A version of this article appears in print on December 10, 2015, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Good News: Mets Lose Out on Their Top Free-Agent Target.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »