By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSOCT. 6, 2015
If linebacker K. J. Wright had simply fallen on the loose ball as it bounced Monday night, there would be no controversy hanging over the Seattle Seahawks.Instead, Wright did as he had been instructed, to make sure the ball did not end up back in the hands of the Detroit Lions. It was calculated and intentional.Yes, the Seahawks received a break when a flag was not thrown against Wright for illegal batting after he guided Calvin Johnson’s fumble out of the back of the end zone for a touchback late in the fourth quarter, giving Seattle possession.
            Scores, highlights and analysis from this week’s games.        
The Seahawks are freely admitting as much after their 13-10 win, with Coach Pete Carroll saying on his radio show on KIRO-AM in Seattle on Tuesday that based on what he understood about the rule before Monday’s missed call, he would have “done the exact same thing” as Wright.Advertisement“I didn’t know the rule either,” he said. “I’ve never seen it come up, and I’ve been coaching for — I don’t even know how many years it is and how many games it possibly could be. I don’t see how anybody would have known that one.”AdvertisementHad Wright been flagged, the Lions would have gotten possession back at the Seattle 1-yard line.Instead, things went the Seahawks’ way, but the noncall overshadowed the performance of the Seattle defense.For the second straight week, Seattle did not allow an offensive touchdown. The Lions were held to 256 total yards, with 90 of those on Detroit’s final possession.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.BEARS LOSE CENTER Chicago Bears center Will Montgomery will miss the remainder of the season because of a broken left fibula.The team placed Montgomery on injured reserve Tuesday. He broke his leg early in Sunday’s 22-20 win over the Oakland Raiders, forcing the Bears to juggle an already short-handed line.LUCK’S AVAILABILITY IN QUESTION Colts Coach Chuck Pagano said that quarterback Andrew Luck threw some passes at practice and that he “looked good,” but it remained uncertain if he would play Thursday at Houston.Luck is recovering from an injured right shoulder that forced him to miss an N.F.L. game for the first time Sunday.A version of this article appears in print on October 7, 2015, on Page B16 of the New York edition with the headline: Missed Call Brings Shrug.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.