AdvertisementSupported bySports of The TimesBy William C. RhodenIn a perfect world, the Liberty would have returned home to a rocking Madison Square Garden after a dismal loss to the Indiana Fever in Game 2 and won.They would have fed off the energy of an electric crowd Tuesday night, defeated the Fever and continued a phenomenal playoff run to the W.N.B.A. finals.In this perfect Liberty world, there would have been no Tamika Catchings.She ripped apart the Liberty’s dreamland script, scoring 14 points, as Indiana shocked the top-seeded Liberty, 66-51, in the Eastern Conference finals.As Liberty stars passed up big shots and faded in big moments, Catchings took control of the game. She provided the Fever with what the Liberty lacked at the moments of truth: leadership.For most of Game 3, Indiana was clicking. Center Erlana Larkins beat the Liberty inside, and guards Briann January and Shenise Johnson sliced through the Liberty or scored from the perimeter.But when Catchings saw her team’s 18-point second-half lead shrink to 4, she took over.After Candice Wiggins scored 5 consecutive points to cut the Indiana lead to 49-45 with little more than eight minutes to play, Catchings stepped in.She did not hit a tough basket under pressure or convert a 3-point play. She simply drove to the basket and drew a foul from Tina Charles.Catchings made both free throws, triggering a 10-0 run that put the game away and lifted Indiana into the finals. The Fever will face the Minnesota Lynx, beginning Sunday afternoon.“It’s not always in the numbers; it’s not always what you see on a stat sheet,” Catchings, 36, said. “It’s all the other stuff that makes more of a difference sometimes than what shows on the stat sheet.”I wondered when Catchings developed this take-charge mentality. Had she had it all along?“Honestly, this year,” she said.That is a surprising answer for such an accomplished player, someone who has won three Olympic gold medals, a W.N.B.A. title and a league Most Valuable Player Award.Catchings described how her father, Harvey, who played several seasons in the N.B.A., exhorted her to be more aggressive and assume greater responsibility for leading her team over troubled waters.“He’s always been the one saying, ‘You’re capable of so much more for your team, they’re waiting for you to step up,’ ” she said.The Liberty stars did not step up. Charles had 13 points and shot 6 of 16 from the field, and Epiphanny Prince had only 6 points.Catchings ruined the script, which would have had the Liberty, with the best regular-season record, playing for the W.N.B.A. championship in New York for the first time since 2002.“The script wasn’t written for the Indiana Fever to get past the first round,” Catchings said. “And the script wasn’t written for the Indiana Fever to get past the second round. And the script definitely is not written for the Indiana Fever to get past the finals.”The Liberty’s fantastic playoff run succeeded in drowning out much of the noise created at the beginning of the season when James L. Dolan hired Isiah Thomas as team president. After the game, Dolan addressed a somber Liberty locker room and praised the team, telling the players they made him proud to be the team’s owner.In the interview room, Catchings was telling members of the news media how she had been propelled and inspired by her team’s underdog status.“I felt like my whole career, being in Indiana, we’ve always been underestimated, always been the team that had Tamika Catchings and little else,” she said. “I might get respect as a player, but it’s never as a team, and what we’re capable of doing.”Catchings, who has played all of her 14 W.N.B.A. seasons with the Fever, has said she will retire next year. Asked to list her greatest accomplishment, she said leaving a footprint.“I feel that I’ve made more of a difference on the lives of my teammates, that when I’m done and when I do retire, they’ll be able to still operate on a championship level because they had somebody they could watch,” she said.The young Liberty need such a force, and eventually will have one, either through maturity or a trade.On Tuesday, Madison Square Garden was rocking, music was blaring and the home crowd was desperate for a Hollywood ending.Professor Tamika Catchings, on a grand stage in a great moment, carried her team to the W.N.B.A. finals. In the process, she taught the young Liberty a heartbreaking, season-ending lesson in leadership.Email: wcr@nytimes.comAdvertisement