By ANDREW KEHDEC. 11, 2015
SACRAMENTO —  With four and a half seconds left in the fourth quarter on Thursday night, Carmelo Anthony caught an inbounds pass near midcourt, rumbled like a N.F.L. running back to the 3-point line, and heaved a potential game-winning shot that clanged off the rim.The Knicks, who had trailed by 19 points in the third quarter, could have secured a spirit-lifting win over the Sacramento Kings in the midst of a tough road trip. Instead, they fell to a 99-97 defeat, their fourth consecutive loss and their eighth in 10 games.“You take the best shot available,” Knicks Coach Derek Fisher said. “The ball was in our best player’s hands with 4.5 seconds in the game. He got to a spot on the floor where he felt like he could get a shot up. We’ll take that every time.”The shot might not have been the best one available; Kristaps Porzingis appeared to be wide open under the basket. Yet Fisher seemed happy enough with the attempt as well as his team’s effort to come back after three languid quarters.AdvertisementAfter the final play, replays showed that Rajon Rondo had held Anthony’s arms momentarily as Anthony tried to wriggle free for a shot. But no foul was called, perhaps giving some credence to Anthony’s claim this week that he was not treated fairly by officials.Advertisement“I got the ball up there,” Anthony said. “Anything other than that, I’d rather not speak on.”Asked if the play supported his complaints from this week, Anthony did not answer directly but made reference to “reoccurring events.”It was, in a way, a final dagger from Rondo, who tormented the Knicks on Thursday, finishing with 16 points, 12 assists, 9 rebounds and 2 steals.“He’s playing good,” Knicks point guard Jose Calderon said of Rondo. “I think he’s back to his days a few years ago when he was doing a lot of things.”Rondo gamboled around the court for three quarters, expressing his devastating creativity almost at will as the Kings (9-15) made light work of the bumbling Knicks (10-14). He slung sophisticated passes with playground flair. He performed sleight-of-hand dribbles, embarrassing Knicks defenders as they stepped into his path. He skipped on his toes, in and out of rhythm, up and down the court, like a child playing hopscotch.The Knicks were down by 11 points after the third quarter. They had 16 turnovers at that point, compared with four by the Kings.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But the Knicks charged back in the fourth, and Rondo ramped up his own intensity.With about three minutes remaining, Porzingis made a shot off the glass while absorbing a foul, and he completed the 3-point play to cut the Knicks’ deficit to 91-88. But on the other end, seconds later, Rondo scurried around a screen, found a seam along the baseline and sailed past Anthony for a thunderous one-handed dunk. The players on the Kings’ bench hopped to their feet, mouths agape.“There’s no question that that was a golden moment for him, kind of an announcement that he is healthy and that he is back,” Kings Coach George Karl said of Rondo. “He was good.”AdvertisementWith just under 30 seconds to go, Arron Afflalo missed a potential go-ahead 3-point shot, and Rondo, one of the smaller players on the court, rose above a crowd to bring down the rebound.Then came his hands-on defense against Anthony on the game’s final play.DeMarcus Cousins bullied the Knicks, too, adding 27 points and 11 rebounds for the Kings. Halfway through the second quarter, he hopped into the paint and soared over Robin Lopez for a punishing one-handed slam. Midway through the fourth, he felled Porzingis with a spin move and contorted his body in midair to finish a powerful dunk.Anthony finished with 23 points, shooting 8 for 21 from the field, and 14 rebounds to lead the Knicks, who will finish their trip Saturday against the Portland Trail Blazers.During the Knicks’ recent slump, Fisher has suggested that his players might have become unjustifiably confident after a surprisingly positive start to the season.After a blowout loss to Utah on Wednesday, Fisher explained that the players might have felt, incorrectly, that they had things figured out. Fisher said he wanted them to “make sure we’re approaching this as though we’re not that good yet.”In case the players needed further convincing of that, a bounty of evidence was there in the first three quarters on Thursday.In the fourth, though, they might have caught a glimpse of a path forward.“I think that’s the type of effort and intensity and desire that we have to play with right from the start every single night just to have a chance to win,” Fisher said. “Sometimes maybe that’s good enough, but what’s not good enough is to not put that type of effort on the floor.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.