AdvertisementSupported byBy Zach SchonbrunSt. John’s added a second Hall of Famer to its coaching staff Tuesday, hiring Mitch Richmond as a special assistant to his former N.B.A. teammate, Coach Chris Mullin.From 1989 to 1991, Mullin and Richmond represented two-thirds of the dynamic, run-and-gun Golden State Warriors group that became known as Run TMC. The nickname — incorporating the first initials of Mullin, Richmond, and point guard Tim Hardaway — was generated by fans and endured as one of the N.B.A.’s most popular marketing monikers of the decade.Richmond was enshrined in the Hall of Fame in 2014, three years after Mullin. He had been working alongside Mullin in an advisory capacity for the Sacramento Kings for the past two seasons.“Mully and I were always coaches on the floor,” Richmond said in a statement. “So I am thrilled to join him for this new venture.”For the Red Storm, Richmond will assist the staff with team activities, plan practice and analyze film. He will travel with the team.“Mitch is committed to helping us build this program and develop an environment for sustained success at St. John’s,” Mullin said in a statement. “He has tremendous basketball insight, a vision for the game and a passion to share his knowledge. Obviously, his experience in different roles throughout his career as a player, scout and mentor will have an impact in many areas.” Since being hired to restore the relevance of his alma mater in March, Mullin has orchestrated an impressive off-season despite losing a substantial chunk of his roster to graduation and the early departures of two prominent players, Rysheed Jordan and Chris Obekpa. Mullin’s first recruiting class is considered strong, and he has lured an experienced and versatile mix of assistants to join him on the bench.Along with Richmond, Mullin added the New York natives Matt Abdelmassih from Iowa State and Barry Rohrssen from Kentucky to the staff. And on Tuesday, St. John’s announced the team’s third assistant coach: Greg St. Jean, an assistant development coach for the Kings in 2014-15.Advertisement