By ZACH SCHONBRUNDEC. 10, 2015
FLORHAM PARK, N.J. —  Jets cornerback Darrelle Revis said Thursday that he expected to return Sunday against the Tennessee Titans after missing the last two games with a concussion.Revis, a four-time All-Pro, limited his workout mostly to stretching and taking part in special teams drills.“I practiced, so I’ll be ready to go,” he said.Revis will need to pass a concussion protocol test Friday before he is allowed to participate fully in practice, but he said that he had had no setbacks and that he did not think the test would be a problem.Coach Todd Bowles expressed more caution.“I was happy with the progress today,” Bowles said. “I’ll need to see a little more tomorrow, and then we’ll have to talk about it.”AdvertisementRevis, 30, had missed time with a head injury only once before, in 2012, and at that time he returned after only a week. He declined to be more specific in Thursday, but he indicated that this head injury — sustained in the third quarter against the Houston Texans on Nov. 22 — was the most significant of his career.“This has been the one that’s kept me out the most,” Revis said. “But you can’t play around with these things. These are serious. You can’t play around with hits to the head.”Bowles raised the possibility that because Revis had missed so much time without experiencing contact in practice, he might not play even if he cleared the protocol.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“He’s just running around; he still hasn’t hit anybody,” Bowles said. “You have to trust the player, and you have to see what kind of work he’s doing out on the field.”In a conference call Wednesday, Tennessee Coach Mike Mularkey said the Titans were preparing as if Revis was going to play.Advertisement“The plan is he’s playing, and we’re prepping for that,” Mularkey said. “We understand his ability and what he brings to that defense. He brings a lot more than just his talent outside there.”Revis would probably help the Jets handle the Titans’ shifty rookie quarterback Marcus Mariota, who has averaged 9.8 yards per carry in the past three weeks, with two rushing touchdowns. The Jets defensive coordinator Kacy Rodgers has been stressing containment with his players this week.“You’re still talking about one of the best corners in the game,” Rodgers said. “Any time you can have him with you, you feel a lot better.” A version of this article appears in print on December 11, 2015, on Page B15 of the New York edition with the headline: Revis Expects to Face Titans.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.