AdvertisementSupported byBy John BranchLAS VEGAS — As the 10-night National Finals Rodeo concludes here on Saturday, when world champions are crowned in events like saddle-bronc riding, calf roping and steer wrestling, professional rodeo will straddle a telling and potentially historic moment. The next big competition is scheduled for a Texas courtroom.Looking for more money and a less harrowing schedule, dozens of the sport’s biggest stars plan to start their own tour in 2016, most of them while still dabbling on the traditional circuit.Calling themselves Elite Rodeo Athletes, or E.R.A., they have a regular-season schedule (announced on Wednesday), a five-day championship planned for November in Dallas, a television contract with Fox Sports and the commitment of roughly 80 of the top athletes, each given an ownership share of the new enterprise.What they lack, in any way, is the support of the Pro Rodeo Cowboys Association, the de facto governing body of the sport.This past fall, the rodeo cowboys’ association reacted to E.R.A.’s plans by changing its bylaws for 2016. Now, anyone with a financial interest in a competing rodeo association cannot buy an annual P.R.C.A. membership card, which is required to compete in any of the association’s 624 sanctioned rodeos in North America. That includes the season-ending National Finals Rodeo, which has a $10 million purse.E.R.A., in turn, filed an antitrust class-action lawsuit against the association last month in United States District Court in Dallas. A hearing is scheduled for Dec. 29, and a decision is expected — and needed, both sides say — soon after.At stake are some sport-altering questions: Would E.R.A. athletes really give up the chance to compete at some of their favorite rodeo stops, including next year’s national finals? And would the P.R.C.A. really shut out dozens of its biggest stars and many of its world champions from all of its events?“It’s disappointing that they would rather just alienate some of the top athletes from the sport rather than come together and work out something that’s better for everybody,” said Bobby Mote, who has won four bareback world titles and is one of three named plaintiffs in the lawsuit, with the 13-time all-around champion Trevor Brazile and the roper Ryan Motes. “But that’s the position they’ve taken. For me, it’s a risk that I’m well willing to take.”The court fight and possible split have created an awkward subtext to the National Finals Rodeo, the sport’s premier event. The 17,000-seat Thomas & Mack Center is sold out for 10 consecutive prime-time rodeos and broadcast nationally, with all watching the top 15 season-long qualifiers compete in seven events: bareback riding, saddle-bronc riding, bull riding, steer wrestling, tie-down roping, team roping and, for women, barrel racing.But among the competitors are nearly 50 who have committed to E.R.A. in 2016. For now, they will not be allowed to compete in any P.R.C.A. rodeos as of Jan. 1, including some big indoor ones this winter, the hundreds of small ones that dot the summer calendar and next December’s national finals.The uncertainty is, as P.R.C.A. Commissioner Karl Stressman said, “the elephant in the room” at this year’s event. It has athletes, fans, stock contractors and sponsors waiting for a resolution while picking sides in a debate over what is best for a niche sport with a tight, frenzied following.Wrangler, for example, is the title sponsor for the National Finals Rodeo but has contracts with many top cowboys requiring them to compete at a minimum number of events. Many fans who have stopped at E.R.A. booths at a pair of corresponding trade shows at Las Vegas casinos this week are longtime supporters of the P.R.C.A., but they said that they liked the idea of a compact, easy-to-track tour of the best athletes.E.R.A. plans to grow to roughly 28 events within five years and sees itself as a league of the sport’s top athletes, with more than 100 combined world titles.They are proven champions, most tired of the grind of crisscrossing the country at all hours and in all seasons, some putting 100,000 miles on their trucks each year to reach 100 rodeos, many of them with winning payouts of $1,000 or less, without any guarantee of prize money at all.“The ideal world would be the E.R.A. rodeos mixed in with a few of the traditional rodeos I’ve been to forever,” said Motes, one of the top ropers in the sport and a fan favorite known for his bushy goatee.The P.R.C.A. has no interest in mingling with E.R.A. It has tried over the years to elevate its top athletes above the fray of its roughly 5,000 contestants, creating higher-level circuits and increasing payouts at the National Finals Rodeo.“This is a traveling sport,” Stressman said. “And to get here, for $1 million a round, you wear a truck out, wear a trailer out.”He added: “Everybody wants to work less and make more money. I do, too. Unfortunately for this sport, it doesn’t work very well.”The P.R.C.A. believes that E.R.A. is unfairly piggybacking on its promotional heft and vast infrastructure while it builds a competitive circuit.E.R.A. promotes its athletes by listing their P.R.C.A. credentials, for example, and plans to use results from P.R.C.A. rodeos to help determine who qualifies for its circuit.E.R.A. argues that the P.R.C.A. is acting as an illegal monopoly, and it believes that its success will elevate the broader sport by attracting more fans, sponsors and money to rodeo.“The P.R.C.A.’s a membership-driven association, where you pay a fee to participate and all skill levels are involved,” said Tony Garritano, E.R.A.’s president and chief executive officer. “Anyone from Trevor Brazile down to me can compete. And we don’t think that’s the wrong model. We just think there’s a better way to showcase the best guys in the world.”Last year’s world champions won between about $200,000 and $500,000 in prize money through the P.R.C.A. The top 15 or so make a decent living, but it is one with plenty of costs, from equipment to time to physical pain. Few are able to rodeo as a full-time job. Growing families and responsibilities force some to step away from the grueling circuit while still in their prime.“I want to prolong my rodeo career as long as I can,” said the bareback bronc rider Kaycee Feild, who is closing in on his fifth consecutive world title. “The way the P.R.C.A. is structured, I have to go to 60 to 70 rodeos to make a living — and not a great living. With E.R.A., I can cut that in half.”Top competitors see the millions being made by athletes in other sports, but also in the rodeo event of bull riding. The Professional Bull Riders was started about 20 years ago by cowboys who felt the P.R.C.A. limited their earning potential. In 2015, its top rider, J.B . Mauney, had official earnings of $1.54 million.The top bull rider in the P.R.C.A. last year, Sage Kimzey, made $318,631 in official earnings.E.R.A., using the Professional Bull Riders as a loose model, said it will pay a total of $4.6 million in winnings next year — $200,000 at each of its eight stops (most with two nights of rodeo) and $3 million at its five-day championship at American Airlines Center in Dallas in November.“Rodeo is not going anywhere,” Mote said. “And we are making no effort to tear rodeo apart, or to change what is going on at the 600 rodeos every year. We’re talking about creating an opportunity for the top guys to go to additional places that are ultimately better for them and better for the sport.”Not all top cowboys support E.R.A. The veteran steer wrestler K. C. Jones offered his support for the P.R.C.A. in a declaration filed with the court.“They are not seeking to improve the lives of cowboys competing on the circuit,” he wrote of those starting E.R.A. “They are attempting to take money away from them by creating a competing organization that will drive the money in the industry to certain anointed ‘stars’ (i.e., themselves), while reserving the right to participate in the P.R.C.A events with the biggest purses. They — and only they — would avoid the cost, time and physical toil associated with traveling around the country and competing on the rodeo circuit.”The issue has even divided families. Jesse and Spencer Wright, two former world champions in saddle-bronc riding, signed on to E.R.A. Their brothers Jake and Cody, a two-time champion, did not.If nothing else, the prospect of E.R.A. — whether considered a competitor or a co-conspirator in rodeo — has shaken a sport steeped in tradition like few others.This week, Feild had public appearances and signed autographs for streams of fans, as most of the top cowboys do each day during the National Finals Rodeo, before sitting down for a cup of coffee. In deciding to join E.R.A., even at the risk of being an outcast in the rodeos where he has made much of his living, he said, he leaned on the advice of those like Mote and his own father, Lewis, a world champion bareback rider in the 1980s.Hours later, in front of 17,000 fans, Feild won the bareback round and the $26,230.77 prize money for first place. He did the same thing the next night, and the next. As with a lot of the top cowboys, he was on his way toward earning more in 10 days in Las Vegas than he had at 54 rodeos (a schedule interrupted by hip surgery) and countless miles and hours pursuing them.“I don’t want the P.R.C.A. to go away,” Feild said. “But there is so much more potential.”Advertisement