By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSDEC. 10, 2015
The Cardinals’ Dwight Freeney stripped the ball from Teddy Bridgewater with five seconds to play to deprive the Vikings of a chance at a tying field goal, and Arizona clinched a playoff berth with a 23-20 home victory over Minnesota on Thursday night.Chandler Catanzaro kicked a 47-yard field goal with 1 minute 23 seconds to play for what turned out to be the winning points.Bridgewater then moved the Vikings to the Cardinals’ 31-yard line, well within the range of kicker Blair Walsh. But Freeney hit Bridgewater’s arm as he tried to pass on a third-and-10 play that began with 13 seconds remaining. The ball came loose, and Calais Campbell recovered for Arizona.Bridgewater passed for 335 yards and a touchdown for the Vikings (8-5). Playing without four defensive starters, Minnesota fell behind Green Bay (8-4) in the N.F.C. North.Carson Palmer threw for 310 yards and two touchdowns for the N.F.C. West-leading Cardinals (11-2).WATT PLANS TO PLAY Houston Texans defensive end J. J. Watt said that he was not worried about people trying to come after him Sunday to take advantage of his broken left hand.“Let them try,” said Watt, last season’s defensive player of the year and the N.F.L.’s sacks leader this season, with 13 ½.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.He added: “The opposing players come after me every week with every type of thing in the book you can think of. So feel free; go ahead come at me. I’ll take advantage of whatever you try to do. It’s my job to get to the quarterback. That’s what I do. You can try and take advantage of whatever you want to take advantage of.”Watt broke his left hand Wednesday in practice but said he would play Sunday night, when the Texans (6-6) host New England (10-2).He had a black cast covering his left hand and wrist Thursday, but he and Coach Bill O’Brien said they did not expect the injury to hamper him.“I’ve played with worse than this before, even this season,” Watt said. (AP)AROUND THE LEAGUE  New England tight end Rob Gronkowski was back on the practice field 11 days after sustaining a knee injury in a loss to Denver, but he was wearing a brace. There was no indication if he would play Sunday at Houston. ... Oakland wide receiver Michael Crabtree got a four-year contract extension that keeps him with the team through 2019. ... Cleveland tight end Gary Barnidge, having an unexpected breakout season as a pass catcher and playmaker, signed a three-year extension. (AP)A version of this article appears in print on December 11, 2015, on Page B15 of the New York edition with the headline: Cardinals Beat Vikings to Clinch Playoff Berth.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.