AdvertisementSupported byOn BaseballBy Tyler KepnerNASHVILLE — When teams make major moves, they usually feel some pain. They include an extra prospect in a trade, add another year to a contract, extend themselves for a player with untapped potential. High-impact deals inspire both elation and dread.The Mets and the Yankees each left the winter meetings Thursday with a few new players and the hope that their roster is a little bit better. To have felt more encouraged would have required greater risk. Neither team was really up for it.The Mets traded an expendable veteran starter, Jon Niese, to Pittsburgh for Neil Walker, a reliable second baseman entering his final season before free agency. They also reached a two-year, $18 million contract agreement with the versatile infielder Asdrubal Cabrera.The Yankees traded a spot starter and reliever, Adam Warren, to the Chicago Cubs for Starlin Castro, a second baseman whose reputation (three All-Star selections) outshines his recent production (a sub-.300 on-base percentage in two of his last three seasons). They also traded Justin Wilson, a dependable left-handed reliever, to Detroit for two starting pitchers for their Class AAA team.“I think Alan Cockrell is loving me, and I think Larry Rothschild is not liking me,” Yankees General Manager Brian Cashman said, referring to his hitting and pitching coaches. “Alan’s got a nice Christmas card coming, and I’m getting coal from Larry right now. I’ve got some things to continue to work through.”Three years from now, perhaps, the Yankees will be leaving the winter meetings in Las Vegas after signing Bryce Harper — and maybe Matt Harvey — as free agents. For now, they seem serious about reining in their payroll. Shedding Wilson and Brendan Ryan (as the player to be named in the Cubs deal) will help offset Castro’s $7 million base salary for 2016.The risk for the Yankees is that Castro, still only 25 years old, will regress and underperform his salaries through 2019. There is also the fear that Wilson, who had 74 appearances last season, will be missed.Sacrificing an asset like Wilson highlights the Yankees’ emphasis on controlling their runaway budget. But Cashman emphasized a different economic point, citing the exploding salaries of free-agent starters from Rich Hill (who parlayed four starts for Boston into a $6 million deal from Oakland) to Arizona’s Zack Greinke, baseball’s first $34-million-a-year man.“You see how valuable starting pitchers can be,” Cashman said. “If I can collect guys that are right on the verge of knocking on the door and playing a role as starting alternatives as early as 2016, I just felt it was something we needed to do, and it cost us something that’s valuable.”The Mets have been content to lose Yoenis Cespedes, their slugging free-agent center fielder who lifted them down the stretch, without a fight. Same for second baseman Daniel Murphy, whose October home runs helped propel them to the World Series.Walker and Cabrera stabilize the infield, but the power boost may have to wait. Rather than risk a costly, long-term mistake in the afterglow of their pennant, the Mets believe it is wiser to seek another rental this summer, if needed.“We showed that this year,” said John Ricco, the assistant general manager. “It certainly is an avenue that teams have used over the years. You get a better sense in midseason as to what your team’s about, where you really need to plug holes and maybe who’s injured, who’s not, versus, if you do it all now, you spend all of your capital, and you don’t have that ability. Then you have holes, and you’re kind of stuck with what you have.”Ricco also mentioned the Mets’ natural tendency to avoid the kind of contracts that had burdened them before their recent renaissance. The old way did not work; the Mets’ subsequent patience did. But this does not mean they should avoid taking chances altogether.The Mets need to sign their prized young starters to long-term contracts. That should be their immediate focus and their best bet to extend their chances of winning a championship with this rotation.Consider the contracts for two other young aces: the San Francisco Giants’ Madison Bumgarner and the Chicago White Sox’ Chris Sale. Both are on five-year deals with club options for 2018 and 2019, Bumgarner for $32.05 million, Sale for $35 million. Their teams struck quickly, signing both early in their second full seasons as starters.The contracts bind the pitchers to their teams for their prime seasons, at rates that give flexibility to spend elsewhere. The Mets recognize the value in potential deals like that with their starters — Harvey, Jacob deGrom, Noah Syndergaard, Steven Matz and Zack Wheeler — but have not actively begun the process of making them.“One thing you’ve got to do is make sure you’re picking the right guys, and we think we have that group,” Ricco said. “The other thing is you’re forecasting out quite a bit, health-wise. If you do that, you’re going to have to do it pretty early in their careers. And the other thing is each of these guys have different long-term goals. Some of them would be open to something like that. A lot of them feel like the way to go is to go year to year and then hit that jackpot at the back end.”Another issue, Ricco said, is that the Mets’ starters are all at roughly the same stage of their careers. Potential jealousy would not preclude the Mets from pursuing a deal, Ricco said, but it cannot be ignored.“Are you going to have that conversation with them: ‘This is why we didn’t do it?’ ” Ricco said. “You’re going to have to tell them something.”This is what the Mets are telling their fans now: Things are fine, the team is solid, and the starters are not going anywhere. It is a safe, sensible message, like the Yankees’ austerity pitch, but at least the Mets can warm themselves with memories of a World Series run. The familiar rush of anticipation and queasiness from bold, risky moves is not happening.Advertisement