By BILL PENNINGTONOCT. 6, 2015
The staph infection that ended the season for Giants tight end Daniel Fells is methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus, or MRSA, a dangerous bacterial skin infection. Monday night, the Giants scrubbed their locker room, meeting areas and training rooms in response. The team is consulting with infectious disease experts.“We have defined protocols that we are following in consultation with the Duke Infection Control Outreach Network and local infectious disease specialists,” the Giants spokesman Pat Hanlon said in a statement Tuesday. “Those protocols are being followed carefully.”A handful of N.F.L. teams have dealt with MRSA outbreaks in the past, most notably the Tampa Bay Buccaneers in 2013.“It was very unfortunate with Daniel,” Giants Coach Tom Coughlin said Monday. “It went from early in the week being a junky ankle to a serious situation. He’s just looking forward to getting things under control so he can get out of the hospital.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Also on Tuesday, The Buffalo News quoted various Buffalo Bills players who were critical of how the star wide receiver Odell Beckham Jr. conducted himself Sunday in the Giants’ 24-10 victory against the Bills. Bills players said Beckham threw punches and behaved like a “prima donna.”Advertisement“That’s what he does; he’ll get away it,” Bills linebacker Preston Brown told the newspaper. “He’s the golden boy of the league. He’s on the cover of Madden. Sometimes, you get away with stuff like that.”AdvertisementVideo of play late in Sunday’s game, after Beckham was knocked to the ground on an interception return, appeared to show Beckham retaliating in some manner with his right arm or hand.Stephon Gilmore, a Bills cornerback who played opposite Beckham on Sunday, said: “He’s different. It’s kind of like you’re playing your little brother and he gets mad at you for being too physical with him — throwing a tantrum.“He feels like he’s on top of the world and nobody’s supposed to do anything to him.”A version of this article appears in print on October 7, 2015, on Page B16 of the New York edition with the headline: Giants Scrub Facilities to Combat Infection.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.