By TOM PEDULLADEC. 10, 2015
PHILADELPHIA —  Keenan Reynolds never campaigned for the Heisman Trophy. He never struck a Heisman pose after scoring one of his many touchdowns. He never boasted of his achievements. And Reynolds will not win the trophy on Saturday night, having been left off the list of finalists despite an online campaign on his behalf.But that all seems to be fine with Reynolds, who has expertly commanded Navy’s intricate triple-option offense the last four years but is suddenly entering a jolting new phase of his life, one over which he has no control.“I’m trying,” he said recently, “to stay focused on what is in front of me.”This week, that is Saturday’s regular-season finale against Army (2-9) at Lincoln Financial Field. Reynolds’s focus on that game narrowed even tighter this week when he learned that he would not be invited to the Heisman ceremony in New York, forcing Navy (9-2) to scrap plans to use two helicopters to ferry a nine-person contingent, including Reynolds, from Philadelphia, where kickoff is set for 3 p.m., to New York for the 8 p.m. ceremony.Instead, Reynolds will be able to focus on one more milestone in his record-setting career: becoming the first starting quarterback to sweep four games in the series. After that, he will look ahead to Navy’s Military Bowl matchup against Pittsburgh on Dec. 28 in Annapolis, Md.Advertisement“I don’t know what the future holds after graduation,” he said, but he surely has thought about that as well.Any opportunity to play in the N.F.L. will depend not only on whether he can overcome doubts about his size (5 feet 11 inches, 205 pounds) and throwing ability, but also on whether the secretary of the Navy is willing to allow him to simultaneously meet his obligations to a team while he fulfills the mandatory five-year military commitment. Though Reynolds might be disappointed if he does not receive an accommodation, he said that he had gotten his first choice for his service assignment — information warfare — and that he was enthusiastic about it.AdvertisementThe toughest part of the football season is behind him. Reynolds said he found the Heisman talk so distracting that he dropped off Facebook and Twitter, leaving fans and news media members to debate whether voters were keeping to their mission of recognizing the player “whose performance best exhibits the pursuit of excellence with integrity.”The debate intensified last week when ESPN dropped Reynolds as one of five listed candidates from an online vote after Navy lost to Houston on Nov. 27, even though he was leading fan voting by a substantial margin. Navy voiced its objection through the athletic department’s Twitter account, and Senator John McCain, a Naval Academy graduate, was among those who rallied to the cause. He wrote on Twitter that dropping Reynolds was “outrageous” and urged fans to go through the more laborious process of a write-in campaign. ESPN later restored Reynolds to the list of candidates, though voting ended last Saturday.Reynolds’s parents left the impression that they were bitterly disappointed that Keenan was not invited to New York. His mother, Jackie, said, “He epitomizes what the award stands for.” His father, Donnie, said: “He should be there. Just look at his résumé.”It is quite a résumé. Reynolds became the career leader in the Football Bowl Subdivision this season, with 83 rushing touchdowns, and he ranks fifth among quarterbacks in N.C.A.A. history with 4,279 rushing yards. He holds Navy records for points (674) and wins by a quarterback (30), and with 36 passing yards against Army, he will become the first Midshipman with two seasons of 1,000 yards rushing and passing.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But the Heisman is not based on a career, only the current season, and Reynolds’s rushing statistics (1,093 yards, 19 touchdowns) hardly leap off the page when compared to the named finalists. Yet Reynolds also completed 46 of 84 passes for 964 yards and six touchdowns, and did it while taking courses that included National Security Decision Making in the Cyber Age and Politics of Irregular Warfare.Bernard Sarra, a Navy nose guard, said of Reynolds, “Keenan definitely sets the tone for the kind of Midshipman you want to be, the kind of man off the field that you want to be.”AdvertisementAlthough Reynolds fell short of the Heisman, N.F.L. scouts will make the evaluation that matters most to him, and he can only hope the Navy will accommodate him if the opportunity arises for a professional career. Navy Coach Ken Niumatalolo said he believes Reynolds possesses some of the intangibles that allowed Russell Wilson, the Seattle Seahawks’ dynamic 5-foot-11 quarterback, to succeed.“You look at the things they’ve done with Russell Wilson, and it seems he’s a very similar type of quarterback,” Niumatalolo said.Reynolds hopes a recent precedent may favor him if there is N.F.L. interest. His former teammate Joe Cardona, a long snapper, is playing his rookie season with the New England Patriots while fulfilling his five-year military commitment in Rhode Island.Donnie Reynolds said of his son’s aspirations, “He looks at it that it would be nice to let kids know you can come to Navy and serve your country and still play football.”A version of this article appears in print on December 11, 2015, on Page B15 of the New York edition with the headline: Navy Quarterback Sets His Sights on the Pros .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.