AdvertisementSupported byBy Christopher ClareyThe International Olympic Committee’s executive board recommended Thursday that a restructured antidoping system with independent oversight be created in time for the Winter Olympics in 2018.Such a system would take the responsibility for testing and results management out of the hands of sports organizations, including international federations, and place it firmly under the leadership of the World Anti-Doping Agency, the I.O.C. said.In a statement released after meetings in Lausanne, Switzerland, the I.O.C.’s executive board called on sports organizations to transfer their doping control operations to the new umbrella organization and to give it financing that, at least initially, would equal what they were spending on existing antidoping efforts.Olympic leaders recommended an independent drug-testing entity at a meeting in October. WADA is forming a working group to examine the proposal and is to report to the WADA board in May.“There’s a whole series of practical issues that I think need to be addressed before you march on to deal with the principle,” David Howman, WADA’s director general, said in an interview last week.But Thursday’s I.O.C. recommendations, which were directed at the WADA working group, provided more detail and an ambitious timetable. They were announced only a month after a WADA report accused Russia of running a sophisticated doping system that involved sports officials using bribes, intimidation and false samples to evade international doping rules.Stuart Miller, the International Tennis Federation executive who heads his sport’s antidoping program, has estimated that it would take “three to five years” for a new agency to be in a position to take over antidoping efforts from the international federations. The 2018 Winter Olympics in Pyeongchang, South Korea, will begin in little more than two years.The I.O.C. also announced Thursday that it would institute independent auditing of the major funding it gives to sports organizations, including Olympic organizing committees, international federations and national Olympic committees. The bulk of such I.O.C. financing comes from television and sponsorship revenue.The move, which will require the auditing of hundreds of millions of dollars in distributions, comes in the wake of corruption scandals in federations like FIFA and the International Association of Athletics Federations that have shaken public confidence in sports administrators this year.One of the concerns about the new antidoping plan remains cost.“Governments, which are 50 percent partners of WADA, should support this reform alongside the sports movement, both logistically and financially,” the I.O.C. statement said.But Howman said it would take far more money than countries currently contribute to create an independent, global program. “You are not talking about 30 or 40 million,” Howman said of the annual budget, in dollars. He said the figure would be much more than that.Asked if $100 million would be a fairer estimate, Howman replied, “Without too much difficulty.” But he declined to offer a precise figure.The 2014 operational budget for WADA, which is currently in an oversight role but not a testing role, was about $30 million. Sebastian Coe, president of the embattled I.A.A.F., track and field’s governing body, reiterated on Thursday in an interview with the BBC that he intended to double the I.A.A.F.’s annual antidoping budget, to $8 million. Tennis’s antidoping budget, which is not public, is believed to be about $4 million.But Howman suggested that it would not be as straightforward as adding up the existing expenditures to arrive at a budget for the new antidoping entity.“You’d be talking about a centralized organization that requires housing and talking about making contracts with those who would work within it and contracts with those who will be around the world collecting the samples,” Howman said. “There is quite a lot that needs to be discussed, and I think it would be premature to put a number on it.”Howman said one of the issues was that the federations have not traditionally paid for antidoping costs at major global events.“Those who host international events like the world athletics championships or the Olympic Games, as part of their hosting contract, have to undertake the doping program,” Howman said. “So it’s never been a figure that has been put to the federations. It’s always been covered by the hosting. So those sorts of fundings would have to be taken into account as well.”OpinionRoss Tucker and Jonathan DugasAdvertisement