AdvertisementSupported byAn AppraisalBy Benjamin HoffmanWhen Kristaps Porzingis, a mammoth young forward for the Knicks, sets up outside for a deep shot instead of pounding the ball inside, people have a tendency to compare him to Dirk Nowitzki, another player who mastered a position called the “stretch four.” But Porzingis, Nowitzki and all the other big men who aspire to be outside gunners owe a tremendous debt of gratitude to the man who perfected the position long ago: Dolph Schayes.Perhaps the first New York City playground legend, Schayes was also one of the first superstars of the N.B.A., and with his death on Thursday at age 87, basketball lost not only one of its greatest players but also one of its best storytellers.To hear Schayes discuss the game, both of his era and of the modern one, was to experience equal parts humility and hubris and come away with an appreciation for the game and its many permutations.Schayes had a tendency to credit his limitations for what became his strengths as a player, but there is no understating his dominance. In a 15-season career, played almost entirely for the Syracuse Nationals — after the franchise relocated to Philadelphia, he served as its player-coach in 1963-64 — Schayes was one of the game’s best players, with career averages of 18.5 points and 12.1 rebounds a game.He was selected for the first 12 N.B.A. All-Star games — scoring the first 2 points in All-Star Game history, off a pass from Bob Cousy in 1951 — and in all but three of his seasons, he was named first-team or second-team all-N.B.A. He was named to the N.B.A.’s 25th and 50th anniversary teams and in 1973 was elected to the Basketball Hall of Fame.A master of the two-handed set shot, Schayes said his unusual approach developed in the schoolyards and church basements of New York City, mostly in the Bronx, which he said was a hotbed of basketball at the time.“Even though I was really tall, I never played inside because in the three-on-three game, it was frowned upon,” Schayes said. “We just played the pure game of pass, cut, pick-and-roll, spread the floor. It was a game of motion. It was a game of movement. So we moved, and I moved and learned the playground game.”Schayes was drafted by his hometown Knicks of the Basketball Association of America, but he chose to sign with the Nationals of the rival National Basketball League because they had offered more money. When asked to look back on the decision, he said it had been vital to his development as a player.“In Syracuse, we had a very aggressive coach by the name of Al Cervi, and a lot of his strengths rubbed off on the team,” Schayes said. “I wasn’t an aggressive college player, but when I got to Syracuse, playing under that coach and with the type of team that we had, his aggressiveness rubbed off on us. It turned out to be the best move of my life to play basketball in Syracuse.”He and Cervi were the key cogs in a Nationals team that was the class of the Eastern Division until Bill Russell arrived in Boston. With Schayes manning the power forward position, Syracuse never failed to make the playoffs, earning a trip to the N.B.A. finals three times and winning it all in 1954-55.While he had plenty of pride for his own era, Schayes was quick to point out that people watching old game film would see something quite different from what they were used to.“People would fall down laughing looking at the way the game was played, without the jump shooting that we have today,” Schayes said. “The players we have today are just amazing with their skills. We had a few, but it was just a very different game.”Despite that, he was not necessarily a fan of the way the sport had evolved, even if his own nontraditional approach helped inspire a rethinking of the way the game was played.“I think the players feel that the fans will just want to see dunks and behind-the-back passes,” Schayes said. “I would rather see better basketball rather than just showmanship basketball.”That criticism did not extend to his two favorite modern players: Tim Duncan and Nowitzki.“I played outside more like Dirk, but my hero is Tim Duncan,” Schayes said. “He’s just got a great all-around game. I’m just amazed at his age that he still had a great incentive to go out there and do a good job. He’s really one for the ages.”But ever the competitor, Schayes, interviewed at 86 years old, was unafraid to compare himself to Duncan, a five-time champion whom many consider the game’s greatest power forward, while also pointing out that the game did not take care of him nearly as well.“A lot of our statistics are the same,” Schayes said. “Our statistics after 15 years were like 20 points a game, average, and 13 rebounds a game, average. One of the great differences is that I earned, over 15 years, $250,000 total, and that’s his pay for one game. So there is quite a difference in the economics of the game.”Advertisement