By VICTOR MATHERDEC. 10, 2015
Striker Karim Benzema has been suspended from the French national soccer team until an investigation into possible blackmail involving a teammate’s sex tape is concluded.Benzema is accused of trying to blackmail another France player, Mathieu Valbuena, over the tape. A French judge is investigating the case, and Benzema has not been charged.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I have decided that he is not available for selection,” the president of France’s soccer federation, Noël Le Graët, said Thursday. He called dropping Benzema a “heartbreaking” decision.Benzema cannot play for France, Le Graët said, until the case is resolved. France will host the European soccer championship in June, the biggest tournament held there since the 1998 World Cup.A tape obtained by Europe 1 Radio of a conversation between Benzema and a friend included several apparently damning comments, the BBC reported, including Benzema’s saying that he said to Valbuena, “If you want the video to be destroyed, my friend comes up to see you in Lyon and you sort it out face to face with him.”Benzema has said that he was merely giving Valbuena some friendly advice.After hearing the recording, Valbuena told Le Monde: “Of course, you’re disappointed, more than disappointed. It shows a lack of respect. I respect everybody, but now I have the impression that I’m being taken for a fool.”Benzema, 27, has been a key part of the French team, leading the side with three goals in the 2014 World Cup. He is also in fine form for his club team, Real Madrid; he had a hat trick in an 8-0 thumping of Malmo on Tuesday in the UEFA Champions League.A version of this article appears in print on December 11, 2015, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: France Suspends Striker From the National Team.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.