By ROB HUGHESDEC. 10, 2015
LONDON — While entering the field at Olympiakos, Arsenal’s players could hardly avoid the banner that was draped across the tunnel. “We Rule This Land” was its message.Some two hours later, at close to midnight in Piraeus, Greece, Arsenal had turned impending elimination from the Champions League into one of the most memorable comebacks in the tournament’s history. The London team needed to win by at least two goals to qualify for the next round. It scored three and conceded none.Olivier Giroud, the Gunners’ center forward who has been doubted by many, fell during the first half and twisted an ankle. Moments later, he scored the first goal, then the second, then the third. Giroud ended up taking home the game ball as a souvenir.Mesut Ozil, a playmaker so subtle that it has taken two years for Arsenal supporters to appreciate his beauty, opened up Olympiakos with meticulous passes.AdvertisementJoel Campbell, who has barely been featured at Arsenal since he starred for Costa Rica at the 2014 World Cup, was swift and courageous and skillful on the wings. And when he was substituted in the final minutes, the 31,388 people in the stands applauded.AdvertisementThis was the real triumph. Olympiakos is renowned for the hostility of its fans, yet here they were on their feet acclaiming an opponent. In Campbell’s case, it was genuine affection because he had been loaned last season to the Greek club and had given his all for their team.But in general, those supporters showed their most sporting side. They had arrived at the stadium hoping — expecting even — their team would qualify instead of Arsenal. Olympiakos had shocked everyone by winning, 3-2, when the two teams met in London earlier.And Arsenal was a weakened animal. It has lost three key players — Francis Coquelin, Santi Cazorla and Alexis Sánchez — to injuries over the past three weeks. It has others who were barely fit to play.“I told you this would be our greatest escape,” Arsenal Manager Arsène Wenger said on television immediately after the contest. “I must say, I am very proud tonight because we needed to be right on the mental side and on the tactical side as well. We needed something special to come back, and we did it.”He keeps on doing it. Arsenal has reached the final 16 of this tournament for 16 straight years under Wenger. It has pulled out victories against the odds in some notedly difficult places to do so, but this was truly exceptional.In every department — defense, midfield, offense — Arsenal outgunned Olympiakos. The Greek club had only lost to one team, Bayern Munich, in all competitions this season, and it went boldly for another win from the start.Arsenal’s defense, held steady by the experienced goalkeeper Petr Cech and the calm presence of central back Laurent Koscielny, refused to give an inch.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The veteran Mathieu Flamini was back in midfield because so many alternatives were injured, but the group was composed, alert and primed to shape attacks.AdvertisementOzil, as he does almost on a weekly basis now, created the opening goal with a sublime turn and a pass that once again seemed to be in his brain before any opponent could anticipate or react to it. Campbell was running here, there and everywhere, full of verve and energy, and he, too, created a goal with a disguised pass.Giroud was what Giroud at his best is: a striker prepared to put himself into scoring positions again and again until his perseverance pays off. His first goal was a header at the near post, and his second was a cushioned left-footed shot after he had asked (demanded almost) for the ball to be played. His third was a penalty kick correctly awarded for a hand ball by the excellent Italian referee, Nicola Rizzoli.It takes a man of nerve to show Olympiakos’s Kostas Fortounis the yellow card and not be fooled by his theatrical fall in the penalty box in an atmosphere as febrile as it was Wednesday. The crowd knew what was going on, and at times the stadium seemed as quiet as a library as Arsenal, little by little, imposed its rhythm and style.As the pendulum swung so completely Arsenal’s way, one thought back to what Wenger had said on the eve of the match. “We want to give absolutely everything to qualify,” he told reporters.“If you want to jump over a hurdle, you don’t think what happens if you miss. If you fall, then you have to respond. You have to get over it.”There are countless critics who want Wenger, 66, to be sent off into retirement and replaced by someone younger. His team is second in the Premier League, despite having key players, like Jack Wilshere and Theo Walcott, who have barely contributed because of injuries.The critics say that Wenger has always been too stingy with Arsenal’s money, that he has failed to sign a striker, a solid central defender or an athletic midfield anchor.His answer is that he trusts the team he has. He will buy only if he sees players of demonstrably greater potential than what he already has.“We are very close in the dressing room,” Wenger concluded on Wednesday. “You could see that tonight. This result makes us stronger — and strengthens our belief.”AdvertisementHe then said something that few outsiders believe, that this could be Arsenal’s year in the Champions League. It was, to be fair, very late in the evening for so old a coach.A version of this article appears in print on December 11, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.