AdvertisementSupported byBy Marc TracyThe race for the Heisman Trophy is one of college football’s most engaging contests. Take a large pool of contestants, throw them into the rollicking up-and-down of the three-month regular season and then hang the finalists out to dry, sitting uncomfortably in suits in an oak-panel room in New York, until one of them lifts the hefty bronze statue.It is football’s answer to the Oscars, but with only one category.This year, the finalists are Alabama running back Derrick Henry, Stanford running back Christian McCaffrey and Clemson quarterback Deshaun Watson. And for the first time, some fans may have more than bragging rights or school pride riding on the outcome.The 81st Heisman contest is the first for which Las Vegas bookmakers have taken wagers on who will win.The Nevada Gaming Control Board approved the bets in September, after the season had begun. On Oct. 5, Station Casinos, which operates sports books at nine places in Las Vegas, opened with 31 listed candidates. The favorite, at 8-5, was Louisiana State running back Leonard Fournette. Henry, who is widely expected to win Saturday night, was 16-1.Many of the odds listings now read like the ghosts of overhyped or injured players: Texas A&M quarterback Kyle Allen (20-1), California quarterback Jared Goff (40-1), Texas Christian wide receiver Josh Doctson (65-1). A bet on the field — all players not explicitly listed — was initially listed at 28-1 and included McCaffrey, making early faith in him a relative bargain.But under Nevada rules, sports books had to stop taking wagers on Nov. 15 — after Fournette’s star had begun to fade but before McCaffrey broke Barry Sanders’s single-season record for all-purpose yards. (Many offshore books accept Heisman wagers, but American citizens may not legally bet there.)Several bookmakers suggested that the gambling board had endorsed Heisman wagers only because of the threat posed by offshore bookmakers to legal wagering in Nevada.“Some felt we were at a competitive disadvantage because others can do it — like sports books offshore,” said John Avello, the executive director of race and sports operations at Wynn Las Vegas. “That doesn’t always mean we’re going to get to do it, but it means they’re going to take a closer look.”In Las Vegas, where about $4 billion is bet annually on sports, gambling on the Heisman not only is novel but also carries the seeds of a broader precedent: wagering on sports (and nonsports) events that rely, as the Heisman does, on voting rather than on competition on the field.The restriction on such bets stems partly from fears that a bad actor could influence the outcome or be tipped off to the result before it is announced publicly. That is why, at least for now, sports books may not take action on contests like the N.B.A. Rookie of the Year Award or the Academy Award for best picture, even as anyone can walk up tomorrow and wager on the winner of next year’s World Series.Nick Bogdanovich, director of trading at William Hill, said that his book wrote about 200 tickets for the Heisman race this year but that the number was limited because the wagering was not approved until after the season had begun. Next year, he said he expected to be able to offer the wager several months earlier.“I think it’ll do pretty well,” said Avello, of Wynn Las Vegas, which did not offer the Heisman wager this year because of the late start. “We’ve been asked about it before. I feel like it will attract good action.”A look at the top players in contention for college football’s highest honor.For Bovada, an offshore book, Heisman wagering is the most popular betting of its kind, bringing in about two to three times as much action as the race for the N.F.L. most valuable player.Bovada is not restricted by the Nov. 15 rule, though. As a result, this week will account for the most money taken in on Heisman wagers “by far” this season, Bovada’s sports book manager, Kevin Bradley, said Wednesday in an email. (Alabama’s Henry is a steep favorite, at 1-6; Stanford’s McCaffrey is 4-1; and Clemson’s Watson is 16-1.)Still, the Heisman betting in Las Vegas is groundbreaking. A longstanding Nevada Gaming Control Board regulation states that wagers cannot be taken on any event “other than a horse race, greyhound race, or an athletic sports event.” There was a time when the regulation was interpreted more loosely — Art Manteris, a veteran bookmaker at Station Casinos, said he could recall bets on Major League Baseball’s M.V.P. Award decades ago — but such bets have been banned for about 20 years.In 2011, the gambling board adopted a process by which a sports book could petition for an exemption if it could assure the board that the event “could be effectively supervised” and that the outcome would be “verifiable” and “generated by a reliable and independent process.” Several other requirements were also involved.A. G. Burnett, the chairman of the gambling board, said it had made that determination in the case of the Heisman.“After we looked at it, we found that we can rely on the process and that it’s got the integrity and standards that we can allow our books to rely on as well,” Burnett said. “After doing the due diligence into the Heisman and how they do things, we got that level of comfort.”The Heisman Trust, which oversees the awarding of the trophy, declined to comment. It states on its website that the winner is decided by 929 eligible electors: 870 media voters deliberately spread throughout the country; 58 former Heisman winners; and a fan vote determined by a public process. Voting opened Nov. 23 — more than a week after the Las Vegas betting window had closed — and ended Monday. The voting is overseen and tabulated by Deloitte.Manteris praised the board’s decision as “a precedent-setting move,” and Bogdanovich suggested that books might next petition for approval of bets on the Super Bowl M.V.P. Award.Although a separate regulation bans bookmaking on “the outcome of any election for any public office both within and without” Nevada, Bogdanovich said that “our ultimate goal would be the presidential election.”He added: “That would be the biggest bet in the state of Nevada. Collecting money for four years. Hillary versus someone. That would be a monster.”Advertisement