By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSDEC. 12, 2015
EDMONTON, Alberta —  Lauri Korpikoski scored three goals for his first career hat trick, Taylor Hall added two goals and two assists, and the Edmonton Oilers beat the Rangers, 7-5, on Friday night for their fifth straight win.Teddy Purcell and Darnell Nurse also scored for the Oilers, who have a six-game home winning streak dating to Nov. 20.Rangers goaltender Henrik Lundqvist allowed five goals on 33 shots and was replaced in the third period by Antti Raanta.Derick Brassard scored twice for the Rangers, and Mats Zuccarello, Rick Nash and Chris Kreider also had goals. The Rangers (18-9-3) have lost two in a row and four of their last five.AdvertisementNash tied the score, 5-5, on a power-play goal with 1 minute 46 seconds left in the third, but Hall put the Oilers (13-15-2) ahead for good 12 seconds later with his second of the night. Korpikoski completed his hat trick by scoring into an empty net with 38 seconds to go.AdvertisementEdmonton took a 4-3 lead just 18 seconds into the third period on a backhand shot from Hall. Less than three minutes later, Nurse gave the Oilers their second two-goal lead of the game, sending Lundqvist to the bench.The Rangers responded, cutting their deficit to 5-4 less than four minutes later as Brassard knocked in the rebound of a Nash shot that went off the post.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In the first period, Edmonton opened the scoring on a power-play goal by Korpikoski at 6:35 as he made a strong second effort to poke a rebound under Lundqvist.The Rangers tied it with 7:44 left in the period. Edmonton could not clear the puck, allowing Kreider to make a long pass to Zuccarello, who sent the puck past Oilers goalie Anders Nilsson from the front of the net. The goal was Zuccarello’s 12th of the season.The Oilers went ahead with goals 1:10 apart later in the period. Korpikoski scored from close range off a rebound, and Hall dropped a pass in the slot to Purcell, who hit the top left corner of the net to make it 3-1 with just over three minutes remaining in the first.The Rangers answered 53 seconds into the second period as Kreider split the defense and slid the puck between Nilsson’s legs.The Rangers tied it at 8:44 on a long shot from Brassard.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.