By JAY SCHREIBERDEC. 11, 2015
Michael Cuddyer, a respected veteran in the Mets’ clubhouse during the 2015 season but a disappointment on the field, has decided to retire with one year left on his contract. His decision, which was confirmed Friday by a person in baseball with knowledge of the situation, could allow the Mets some additional financial flexibility as they continue to put together their 2016 team.The 36-year-old Cuddyer stood to make $12.5 million next season in the second half of a two-year, $21 million deal. Depending on how much of a buyout the Mets and Cuddyer agree on, the Mets could realize significant savings that may influence what other players they try to acquire.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In 379 at-bats in 117 games, Cuddyer hit .259 with 10 home runs and 41 R.B.I. The Mets surrendered a first-round pick when they signed him as a free agent from the Colorado Rockies in November 2014. He was prone to injury in his one season in Flushing, and last month the Mets announced that he had undergone surgery for a core muscle injury.If Cuddyer had returned for the 2016 season, he would presumably have been a backup in left field and at first base, and he would have served as a right-handed pinch-hitter.Cuddyer, a longtime friend of the Mets’ captain, David Wright, was selected in the first round of the 1997 draft by the Minnesota Twins and went on to have a solid 15-year major league career. He finishes with a .277 career average, 197 home runs and two All-Star selections.Although he reached the postseason numerous times with the Twins, he got to the World Series only once, with the Mets last season. He appeared in only one game in the Series, the first one, and struck out in all three of his at-bats.A version of this article appears in print on December 12, 2015, on Page D4 of the New York edition with the headline: Michael Cuddyer Calls It a Career, and the Mets Gain Some Flexibility.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.