By DANIEL VICTORDEC. 11, 2015
Tommy Hanson, a former major league pitcher, died from delayed complications of cocaine and alcohol toxicity, according to autopsy results released Friday.Hanson, 29, was found unresponsive at a friend’s home in Newnan, Ga., on Nov. 8. “He looks blue, and there’s like a liquid coming out of his nose,” a woman said in a 911 call.He died at Piedmont Newnan Hospital the next night. The death was ruled accidental, said Richard Hawk, the Coweta County coroner.Baseball America once named Hanson baseball’s fourth-best prospect, and his early performance for the Atlanta Braves suggested he could become a top starting pitcher. He finished third in voting for the National League Rookie of the Year Award in 2009, when he had a 2.89 E.R.A. and 116 strikeouts over 1272/3 innings.AdvertisementBut injuries derailed his career. He missed two months because of shoulder soreness in 2011, and his velocity was down when he returned. He was in a car accident that resulted in a concussion in 2012.AdvertisementThe Braves traded him to the Los Angeles Angels in 2012, and he continued to struggle, posting a 5.42 E.R.A. with 56 strikeouts in 73 innings. He took a three-week leave from the team after his stepbrother died.“I was having mental issues with the death of my younger brother,” he said at the time. “I was just trying to get through it. I didn’t know how to handle it.”He spent 2014 with a Chicago White Sox minor league team after an unsuccessful bid for a spot in the Texas Rangers’ starting rotation, and he played in San Francisco’s minor league system in 2015.NATIONALS SIGN TWO RELIEVERS The Washington Nationals, in an effort to rebuild their middle relief corps, agreed with the right-hander Shawn Kelley on a three-year, $15 million contract and with the left-hander Oliver Perez on a two-year, $7 million deal, the team announced. Kelley, 31, was 2-2 with a 2.45 E.R.A. in 53 appearances for the San Diego Padres last season.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Perez, 34, was a combined 2-4 with a 4.17 E.R.A. in 70 games with the Arizona Diamondbacks and the Houston Astros in 2015. On Thursday, Washington acquired the right-handed reliever Trevor Gott in a deal that sent infielder Yunel Escobar to the Angels.The Nationals ran into problems with their inexperienced middle relief corps last season, one reason that the club, despite World Series aspirations, failed to make the playoffs. (AP)INFIELDER HEADED TO BLUE JAYS Infielder Darwin Barney agreed to a one-year, $1.05 million contract with the Toronto Blue Jays. Barney, 30, hit .304 with two homers in 15 games for Toronto after being acquired from the Dodgers on Sept. 13. Barney is a .246 hitter with 21 homers and 157 R.B.I. in six major league seasons. He won a National League Gold Glove at second base in 2012 with the Chicago Cubs. (AP)METS COMPLETE DEAL The free-agent shortstop Asdrubal Cabrera and the Mets completed a two-year, $18.5 million contract.AdvertisementCabrera, 30, was the second middle infielder added by the Mets at the winter meetings. They also acquired second baseman Neil Walker from the Pittsburgh Pirates for the left-hander Jon Niese.Cabrera’s deal, which includes a 2018 club option, was agreed to Wednesday and announced Friday after Cabrera passed a physical.Cabrera batted .265 with 15 homers and 58 R.B.I. for the Tampa Bay Rays last season. (AP)A version of this article appears in print on December 12, 2015, on Page D4 of the New York edition with the headline: Ex-Pitcher’s Death Tied to Drugs.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.