By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSDEC. 11, 2015
Kyle Palmieri scored in overtime to give the Devils a 3-2 victory at home over the Detroit Red Wings on Friday night.Palmieri took a lead pass from Lee Stempniak and streaked into the Detroit zone ahead of defenseman Tomas Tatar. He then skated in on the goal and put a backhander past a sprawled-out Jimmy Howard with 39.3 seconds remaining. It extended Palmeiri’s goal-scoring streak to four games.Damon Severson and Sergey Kalinin also scored for the Devils, who rallied after trailing by 2-0 in the third period. Cory Schneider finished with 27 saves.Tatar and Gustav Nyquist scored power-play goals in the second period for Detroit, and Howard made 35 saves.AdvertisementThe Red Wings extended their streak of games with a point to 13 (8-0-5). Their last loss in regulation was on Nov. 14.AdvertisementNyquist put the Red Wings on the scoreboard at 8 minutes 51 seconds of the second period on a redirection of a shot by Henrik Zetterberg. The tip by Nyquist glanced off the right post before landing in the net only 11 seconds after Brian O’Neill was penalized for slashing.A penalty on Patrik Elias for interference with 5:41 left in the period set the stage for a roller-coaster power play.Detroit first came close to cashing in when Dylan Larkin sent a shot off the post from the left circle.Then it was the Devils’ turn, as Mike Cammalleri was stopped by Howard on a backhand try that left Cammalleri shaking his head.Back the other way, Tatar ripped a shot from the top of the left circle past Schneider with 3:52 to go to make the score 2-0.The Devils rallied in the third, with Palmieri playing a key role on the tying goal.Severson broke through at 2:40 with a drive from the right point past Howard, who was screened.The Devils evened the score with 5:20 left as Kalinin deflected Palmieri’s shot with a stick dangerously close to the cross bar. A video review confirmed the goal.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Red Wings Coach Jeff Blashill then used his challenge, saying Kalinin had interfered with Howard, but the goal withstood the second video review, giving Kalinin his first score in 12 games.AdvertisementEach team had 10 shots in the scoreless opening period, with each also having a great opportunity on the power play.John Moore picked up the puck in his own end and wove through the Detroit defenders to break in on Howard, who got a piece of the shot as it deflected off the post.The Red Wings came close on their man advantage when Schneider made a sprawling stop on Mike Green.BLACKHAWKS 2, JETS 0 Patrick Kane extended his franchise-record points streak to 25 games with a power-play goal, Corey Crawford stopped 25 shots for his third shutout of the season, and Chicago beat visiting Winnipeg.Jonathan Toews also scored on a power play, ending a goal-scoring drought of seven games, as the Blackhawks won for the third time in four games and defeated the Jets in Chicago for the second time this week.Kane, who entered the game as the N.H.L.’s leading scorer, recorded his 19th goal of the season midway through the second period to match Sidney Crosby’s 25-game streak, in 2010-11, for the longest in the league since 1992-93. Kane has 16 goals and 23 assists during his run.The rookie Connor Hellebuyck made his fifth N.H.L. start, filling in for Winnipeg’s starting goaltender, Ondrej Pavelec, who has a knee sprain. Hellebuyck had 29 saves.KINGS 3, PENGUINS 2 A shootout goal by Marian Gaborik lifted Los Angeles to a win at Pittsburgh, giving the Kings their sixth consecutive victory.The Penguins’ David Perron and the Kings’ Anze Kopitar also scored in the shootout.Jake Muzzin and Tanner Pearson had Los Angeles’s goals in regulation, and Jonathan Quick stopped 40 shots through overtime. The Kings have earned at least a point in eight straight games (6-0-2).Eric Fehr and Evgeni Malkin scored for the Penguins, who were 5-2-1 in their last eight home games. Marc-Andre Fleury had 38 saves.AdvertisementMalkin forced overtime when he scored with Fleury pulled for an extra attacker. From the top of the crease, he got a couple of whacks at the puck before it slid under Quick with 1:10 left.A version of this article appears in print on December 12, 2015, on Page D6 of the New York edition with the headline: Devils Trail by 2 in Third but Win in Overtime.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.