AdvertisementSupported byN.F.L. RoundupBy Bill PenningtonEAST RUTHERFORD, N.J. — Giants defensive end Damontre Moore, who was drafted two years ago to rejuvenate the team’s flagging pass rush but whose inconsistent play and erratic practice habits frustrated Giants coaches, was unexpectedly waived by the team.There was no single incident that led to Moore’s release. Instead, it was a culmination of factors, which included Moore being fined repeatedly for violating team rules, according to people with information about the Giants’ deliberations who were not authorized to talk about Moore’s release.In the last three seasons, Giants coaches have talked about Moore’s potential and praised his enthusiasm, but they would always caution that he was unreliable when it came to staying within the team-wide defensive schemes.This season Moore was whistled for three costly roughing-the-passer penalties and also got into the occasional practice scuffle with teammates, including one this week.“We made the move today in the interest of both parties,” General Manager Jerry Reese said Friday in a statement from the team.The timing of the release was surprising. Moore had played extensively last weekend in the Giants’ loss to the Jets and had one of his better games, with five tackles.Moore, who is 6-foot-5 and 250 pounds, played in 11 games this season and had 17 tackles. He was not available to reporters when the Giants made the announcement.REVIS NEARING RETURN Jets cornerback Darrelle Revis fully participated in practice for the first time since sustaining a concussion three weeks ago. He is listed as probable for the Jets’ game against the Tennessee Titans on Sunday.“He still has to be cleared by one more doctor,” Coach Todd Bowles said. “Pending that clearance, he’ll be good to go.”Revis has been in the N.F.L.’s concussion protocol since sustaining the injury on Nov. 22 at Houston.“If he passes the test, I’ll be encouraged,” Bowles said.Marcus Williams, Revis’s backup, is questionable with a sprained knee that kept him out against the Giants last Sunday. (AP)KEY ADDITIONS FOR PATRIOTS Two key offensive weapons for the New England Patriots, Rob Gronkowski and Julian Edelman, were both back on the practice field on Friday, and Gronkowski has a chance to play Sunday night at Houston.Gronkowski, who has missed one game since hurting his right knee in a loss to the Denver Broncos on Nov. 29, had his second day of limited practice and was listed as questionable when the team released its injury report.“I’m doing everything I can to get better every single day and it feels good to be back just with my teammates,” Gronkowski said during a 20-second encounter with reporters after practice. “Just mentally, it feels good to be back with them out on the practice field.”Earlier in the day, when asked about how Gronkowski looked, Coach Bill Belichick said, “We’ll list on the injury report whatever his situation is.”The Patriots have lost two games in a row for the first time since 2012. They have not dropped three straight since 2002.Edelman, who has missed the last three games after breaking his left foot, appeared for the first time at practice, but is officially out for Sunday. (AP)SEAHAWKS’ LYNCH RECOVERING Running back Marshawn Lynch has rejoined Seattle as he continues to recover from abdominal surgery last month.Lynch was at the team’s facility earlier this week and Coach Pete Carroll said that it would be “week to week” regarding when Lynch might rejoin practice.“We’ll see what happens next week,” Carroll said.Lynch underwent surgery on Nov. 25 for an injury related to a sports hernia.Between the operation and a hamstring injury earlier in the season, Lynch has missed five and a half games. The rookie Thomas Rawls has filled in for Lynch and is on pace for a 1,000-yard season, averaging 5.6 yards per carry. (AP)Advertisement