
On Baseball By                     
 TYLER KEPNER
 
DEC. 11, 2015
Jason Heyward hit a home run on his very first swing in the major leagues, in 2010, when he was 20 years old. Since that moment, it has been easy to project dreams onto him. Heyward can do it all — hit, run, field — yet he has somehow not made an All-Star team since his rookie season and has never come close to winning a Most Valuable Player Award.No matter. For Heyward, potential is no longer the question. He has proved that his well-rounded skills help teams win. Now he is heading to a new team, the Chicago Cubs, as a free agent. If Heyward helps the Cubs win a championship, the baseball world will never be the same.Heyward is bound for Chicago after five years with the Atlanta Braves and the last one with the St. Louis Cardinals. He helped the Braves to three playoff appearances and the Cardinals to a 100-win season and the National League Central title.But so much has changed since John Lackey and the Cardinals beat the Cubs in their division series opener in October. The Cubs dispatched them by winning the last three games of that series and signed Lackey for two years and $32 million. Then they signed second baseman Ben Zobrist, who helped Kansas City win the World Series and was heavily pursued by the Mets, for four years and $56 million.AdvertisementThe Mets, of course, swept the Cubs in the N.L. Championship Series, and now Heyward has spurned other Cubs rivals in reaching an agreement with Chicago. The deal was confirmed by a baseball official who was granted anonymity because the Cubs had not announced it.AdvertisementThe Cardinals and the Washington Nationals also tried to sign Heyward, who was said to receive an eight-year, $184 million contract with two opt-out clauses, according to Peter Gammons of MLB Network. Heyward is only 26, so this may not be the last time he cashes in.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.For now, though, Heyward’s arrival could signal a shift in the balance of power in the National League, and possibly in the majors. Each of the N.L. division winners has lost, or seems certain to lose, a major piece — the Los Angeles Dodgers lost the ace right-hander Zack Greinke to Arizona, the Cardinals have lost Heyward, and the Mets do not expect to keep center fielder Yoenis Cespedes.It stands to reason that the Cardinals will move aggressively on other fronts, after making strong bids for Heyward and the free-agent left-hander David Price, who signed with the Boston Red Sox. Among the remaining top-tier free agents are starter Johnny Cueto; first baseman Chris Davis; and outfielders Alex Gordon, Justin Upton and Cespedes.Last off-season, the Cardinals acquired Heyward from Atlanta in a trade for starter Shelby Miller, whom the Braves flipped to the Diamondbacks this week for an overwhelming package of young players, including shortstop Dansby Swanson, the No. 1 overall pick of the 2015 draft. For losing Heyward, the Cardinals will receive a compensatory pick after the first round of next year’s draft.Heyward used his year in St. Louis as a steppingstone to riches, posting a typical season of decent traditional statistics but outstanding advanced metrics. Heyward batted .293 with 13 homers, 60 R.B.I. and 23 stolen bases. For the second year in a row, he ranked fifth among N.L. position players in Baseball-Reference.com’s wins above replacement, largely because of his defense.Heyward has won three Gold Gloves for his excellence in right field, but the Cubs — for now — have a hole in center, not right. Jorge Soler is their right fielder, and he had a breakthrough performance in the playoffs, batting .474 with three homers in seven games.The Cubs could trade Soler for pitching, put Heyward in right and pursue another free agent — perhaps Denard Span or their own Dexter Fowler — for center field. Or they could keep Soler and use Heyward in center, where he has made 30 starts in the majors.In any case, the Cubs have options, all of them appealing. They have the reigning winners of the N.L. Cy Young Award (Jake Arrieta), Rookie of the Year Award (Kris Bryant) and Manager of the Year Award (Joe Maddon). They won 97 games in the regular season and four more in the playoffs. After this bold off-season, they are strongly positioned to contend for their first World Series championship since 1908.A version of this article appears in print on December 12, 2015, on Page D1 of the New York edition with the headline: Cubs Add Heyward, and Optimism Is Multiplying.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »