By ANDREW KEHDEC. 11, 2015
SACRAMENTO —  Minutes before the Knicks and the Kings tipped off Thursday night, Vlade Divac, joking with reporters, said that he had some advice for Kristaps Porzingis, the Knicks’ rookie big man from Latvia.If Porzingis should ever feel so frustrated that he wanted to lash out at a referee, Divac said, he should do it in his native tongue.“You say something in your own language, you can say whatever you want and your frustrations will go away,” he said. “But they’re not going to fine you.”It was timely counsel from Divac, 47, the general manager and vice president for basketball operations for the Kings, who was born in Prijepolje, Serbia, and played in the N.B.A. for 16 seasons.The Knicks, who surprised even themselves with their 8-6 start to the season, appear to be gravitating toward something closer to reality. Their loss to the Kings on Thursday was their eighth defeat in 10 games, and they are now 10-14.AdvertisementMore frustrations, then, appear to be on the horizon.Porzingis has had some of his own — centered on his lack of consistency — even as he has charmed fans and fellow players with his strong play.AdvertisementAgainst the Dallas Mavericks on Monday, he scored 28 points. Against the Utah Jazz on Wednesday, he had 4 points and 3 rebounds in 13 minutes.On Thursday, Porzingis tussled and exchanged words with the Kings’ Kosta Koufos and did not have much luck guarding DeMarcus Cousins, whom he called “a really, really, really, good center.” Porzingis finished the game strongly, with 13 points, 7 rebounds and 3 blocks.The Knicks finish their trip on Saturday night with a game against the Portland Trail Blazers.“I can always do better,” Porzingis, 20, said. “I’ve been having great games, bad games. I’m up and down. I want to be consistent. That’s the main goal for me during my rookie season.”Before the game, Divac joined the chorus of people in basketball surprised by Porzingis’s smooth transition to the N.B.A. The rookie has singled out his teammate Sasha Vujacic as a mentor who has been instrumental in helping him overcome the differences in the European game and the American one. Vujacic, 31, was born in Maribor, Slovenia, and has played in Europe as well as the N.B.A.Divac smiled on Thursday when Vujacic’s name was mentioned. The two were teammates on the Lakers in the 2004-5 season — Vujacic’s first in the league and Divac’s last.“He was my fourth kid,” Divac said of Vujacic. “I had three at home. He was my fourth one.”Divac said the transition to the United States from Europe was harder when he entered the league in 1989. There were far fewer players from overseas, so there was much more to prove.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Divac recalled receiving mentoring from Magic Johnson, who would yell at him to dunk the ball instead of laying it in. So Divac smiled when it was suggested to him that all of that collected wisdom, in some indirect way, was being passed on to Porzingis.Advertisement“Magic took me under his wings,” he said. “My job was to do the same thing with our rookies. So I’m glad that Sasha used some of those things to help him out.”The Kings were high on Porzingis as last summer’s draft was approaching, but with the sixth pick, they assumed correctly that they would not have a chance to select him. (The Knicks selected him with the fourth pick.)Divac has instead been admiring Porzingis from afar, though he playfully bristled at the notion that Porzingis has more range than he did when he played.“Look at my stats,” said Divac, who made 100 of his 426 career 3-point attempts, or 23.5 percent. “I mean, he’s better. But, you know, I could hit a 3.”A version of this article appears in print on December 12, 2015, on Page D2 of the New York edition with the headline: Porzingis Adds Dazzle, but Knicks Still Revert to Form .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.