AdvertisementSupported byBy Victor MatherWhen the unbeatable Ronda Rousey was beaten by Holly Holm last month, the Ultimate Fighting Championship found itself in need of a new breakout star. Luckily, it had one on its roster: the flamboyant, extremely talented Irish featherweight Conor McGregor, who faces what may be the fight of the year on Saturday in Las Vegas.McGregor attracts attention, whether through full-throated self-promotion, pro wrestling-style taunting or stunts like a sparring session against Hafthor Bjornsson, the enormous actor who plays the Mountain on “Game of Thrones.”His personality and skill have made him one of the most appealing fighters in the world, and Irish and Irish-Americans in particular have embraced him. Three of his six fights in the U.F.C. have been scheduled in Boston or Dublin.McGregor, 27, has backed up the talk with results in the Octagon. Using some of the most powerful punches in the sport, he has won all six fights, winning performance of the night four times. When he was given a shot at the elite featherweight Chad Mendes in July, there were those who thought he was being promoted above his ability. But he battered Mendes, finishing him off with two left hands and a kick as time expired in the second round.McGregor’s most memorable moment came in January after a victory over Dennis Siver. McGregor scaled the cage, leapt into the audience and screamed invective at the champion, José Aldo of Brazil, who was watching at ringside. The mild-mannered Aldo just laughed.Now McGregor gets his shot at Aldo and the featherweight championship in what is one of the most anticipated fights of the year.Aldo, 29, has been a featherweight champion since 2009 and has crushed all comers. The U.F.C. currently ranks him as the No. 1 fighter of any weight class.Aldo’s style and skills have dazzled fight fans for years, notably his powerful leg kicks. Though he is not judged to be as good fighting on the ground, he is very quick to escape from tricky situations.Several of his opponents, speaking to mmafighting.com, described fighting Aldo as a uniquely painful experience. “It was unbearable pain,” said Jonathan Brookins, who was knocked out by Aldo in 2008. “That dude will, like, cut your muscle. He’ll cut it to where you’ll bleed inside of your leg internally — to where, to this day, man, my knee will still swell up and have fluid in it. It still has cartilage all out of place because José ripped so many of the muscles in my leg.”Urijah Faber, who lasted five rounds with Aldo in 2010 but lost by a decision, said: “He hit a jump knee that hit me right in the sternum. It knocked me down for a second, then I stood right back up like nothing happened. But after my leg stopped hurting about four weeks after, then my sternum hurt for, like, almost two years. I’m not even sure what happened.”The deep respect so many fighters have for Aldo means that many say he will beat the upstart McGregor. Mendes, who lost to both men, said, “I think Aldo’s going to tear him up.”But bookmakers see it differently, rating McGregor a slight favorite. One reason may be that Aldo has been out of the Octagon for more than a year. A rib injury caused him to miss the original date for this fight, in July. In the meantime, McGregor became the interim champion.McGregor has turned his colorful invective against Aldo in recent months, even baiting him in Portuguese. He also accused Aldo of ducking their fight in July because of fear. Many of the rest of his insults are unprintable.There is another championship bout on the card: Chris Weidman of Long Island will defend his middleweight belt against Luke Rockhold, the No. 1 contender. But all eyes are likely to be on the main event.Advertisement