By JOE DRAPEDEC. 11, 2015
Hours after a New York judge on Friday granted the state attorney general’s injunction barring the two largest daily fantasy sports sites, FanDuel and DraftKings, from operating in the state, an appeals court judge allowed the companies to keep operating until the legality of their games can be further considered.The decision by the appellate judge, Associate Justice Paul G. Feinman of the Appellate Division of the State Supreme Court, came in an emergency hearing in which lawyers for DraftKings argued that if the company were forced to shut down even temporarily, it would be irreparable harmed. The stay by Justice Feinman allowed the companies to do business in New York until at least Jan. 4.Earlier Friday, Justice Manuel J. Mendez of State Supreme Court had granted the request by the attorney general, Eric T. Schneiderman, for a temporary injunction. Justice Mendez did not rule on the merits of the case and asked both sides to submit more evidence, but he said he thought the attorney general’s office would win on the merits of the case. A panel of judges will decide in January whether Justice Mendez’s injunction will stay in place.“The balancing of the equities are in favor of the N.Y.A.G. and the State of New York due to their interest in protecting the public, particularly those with gambling addictions,” Justice Mendez wrote.AdvertisementThe back and forth in New York’s courtrooms illuminated the larger national debate over whether competing in daily fantasy sports is betting. Under New York law, part of the definition of gambling is risking something of value. Justice Mendez wrote that “the payment of an ‘entry fee’ as high as $10,600 on one or more contests daily could certainly be deemed risking ‘something of value.’ ”AdvertisementLawyers for DraftKings filed a notice of appeal after Friday’s ruling, writing that Justice Mendez had “misapplied the law in granting” the preliminary injunction. The company, which is based in Boston, has continued to operate in New York.“Daily fantasy sports contests have been played legally by New Yorkers for the past seven years, and we believe this status quo should be maintained while the litigation plays out,” David Boies, a lawyer for DraftKings, said.A spokeswoman for FanDuel, which is based in New York, said that it was lifting its ban on paid contests as it continued to participate in the discovery process and make its case before the appellate division.“This is only the beginning of the legal process,” a FanDuel statement said. “The court specifically noted that this was not a final determination of the issue and that discovery would be needed to fully resolve the legal question, which we think should be decided in our favor when all of the evidence is in.”If the ruling by Justice Mendez is upheld, it will be a major setback to the daily fantasy sports industry. New York, with more than 1.2 million customers, is the largest market, and the companies will lose a combined $35 million to $40 million in revenue, according to Eilers Research.“We are pleased with the decision, consistent with our view that DraftKings and FanDuel are operating illegal gambling operations in clear violation of New York law,” Mr. Schneiderman said. “I have said from the beginning that my job is to enforce the law, and that is what happened today.”Sign up to receive an email from The New York Times as soon as important news breaks around the world.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Damien LaVera, a spokesman for the attorney general, said the office was confident it would demonstrate to the appellate division why it should uphold the earlier decision and “grant a preliminary injunction barring DraftKings and FanDuel from continuing their illegal gambling operations in New York.”AdvertisementPlayers who bet on fantasy sports assemble their own teams of professional athletes who compete based on their statistical performances in games. By concluding that daily fantasy games constitute gambling, Mr. Schneiderman has also directed an uncomfortable spotlight on some professional sports leagues that oppose gambling while maintaining financial partnerships with daily fantasy sports sites.A key issue is whether the competitions are games of chance or skill.Kathleen McGee, a lawyer for the state, argued that daily fantasy sports contests were clearly gambling because they depended on the outcome of events out of bettors’ control: a fumble, a batting slump, a dropped ball, an injury or rain.“I place my bet, pick my team and watch television,” she said. “Chance pervades daily fantasy sports.”Rather than betting on games directly, players pay an entry fee and select a team of players. Ms. McGee said this was really just another form of betting.“If someone set up a website that allowed people to make millions of bets on the outcome of spelling bees, that would be gambling,” she said.John Kiernan, representing FanDuel, argued that daily fantasy sports was not gambling at all.“What is skill?” he said. “It’s when, through effort and aptitude, you increase your probabilities of success.”Mr. Boies, representing DraftKings, pointed to a statistical analysis that showed a handful of players won most of the money.“If most people lose money and the same people continue to win repeatedly, that is absolute proof that this is a game of skill and not of chance,” he said.AdvertisementFantasy sports companies have also contended that their games are legally sanctioned by a 2006 federal law that exempted fantasy sports from a prohibition against processing online financial wagering.FanDuel has an average of 52.1 million monthly visits and DraftKings 30.3 million, according to Joel Zand of the Internet analysis site SimilarWeb.Mr. Schneiderman has expanded his investigation to include Yahoo, which is a relatively small player in the market.Major North American sports leagues have embraced daily fantasy games, partnering with the companies and accepting their advertising. Ads for the companies are ubiquitous on TV broadcasts of sports events.A version of this article appears in print on December 12, 2015, on Page D1 of the New York edition with the headline: Fantasy Sites Allowed to Operate in New York, for Now.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »