AdvertisementSupported bySpecial Report: Hong Kong RacingBy Ryan GoldbergA month after Mongolian Saturday won the $1 million Breeders’ Cup Turf Sprint in October, his trainer, Ganbat Enebish, reflected on a conversation he had had five years earlier, before leaving Mongolia for the United States in 2010.Enebish recalled that in that talk, with someone who knew everything about horse racing in the West, he had been told that he was foolish to think he could win races there.How could Enebish, who had trained horses to race 20 miles across the Mongolian steppes, understand how to condition a faster, more athletic horse to spin around an oval racetrack? he was asked. “Mongolian racing is 100 years behind,” the man said. “How will you catch up?” Enebish’s response was simple: “A horse is a horse.” The Breeders’ Cup had never seen anything quite like Mongolian Saturday and his entourage. The 5-year-old gelding’s owner, Ganbaatar Dagvadorj, and his older brother Tserenjigmed, two of the wealthiest businessmen in Mongolia, arrived at Lexington’s Keeneland Racecourse with their family and friends wearing colorful, traditional dress. They offered a striking scene, and then Mongolian Saturday held on by a nose to win the Turf Sprint. Now, Enebish and his boss are not curbing their ambitions. They are bringing Mongolian Saturday closer to home on Sunday, for the nearly $2.4 million Hong Kong Sprint, one of the Hong Kong Jockey Club’s four invitation-only international races. “We came to win big races here — Breeders’ Cup, Kentucky Derby, Triple Crown,” Enebish said. “We started with Breeders’ Cup. Now we need to win Kentucky Derby.” Enebish met Dagvadorj in 1999. Both owned and trained horses and they began hunting together near Ulan Bator, the Mongolian capital. By then, Enebish had been training Mongolian ponies for four years and his grandfather had been a trainer. Enebish also kept dogs and a golden eagle for hunting foxes and wolves. In Mongolia, race jockeys are children, from 6 to 9 years old. Given the endurance required for the long distance, horses rarely run more than three times a year, Enebish said. The season reaches its high point in July, with the Naadam, a centuries-old festival featuring three competitions: archery, horse racing, and Mongolian wrestling. Horse owners compete for prestige and pride, but little else. Enebish said he once won a race commemorating the 80th anniversary of Mongolia’s founding. His horse beat 720 rivals, and Enebish won a Russian-made car.  Dagvadorj and his brother founded the Max Group conglomerate, which owns hotels, supermarket chains and furniture stores, as well as mining, oil and construction interests. They began to build their fortune by trading skins and furs in the 1980s.Since then, nearly half of Mongolia’s population of 2.8 million has converged on Ulan Bator, where money-making opportunities in this mineral-rich country are concentrated. A few years ago, the brothers and various entities controlled more than 650,000 square feet of commercial space in Ulan Bator, employed more than 2,000 people and had $42 million in sales, according to Forbes. It was Enebish who persuaded his friend to race outside Mongolia. The trainer’s fact-finding mission took him to Australia, England, France, Ireland and Japan. Dagvadorj bought two horses in France and sent them to the French trainer Freddy Head, but they were unsuccessful. Enebish then visited the United States and decided that it was the best place for their stable. Unlike in Australia or Europe, he had no problem securing a work visa. “In America, everything is easy,” he said cheerfully. They began their Mongolian Stable with four horses and have now expanded to 10. Since 2010, Dagvadorj has purchased 11 yearlings, all colts except for one, for a total of $575,000 at Keeneland’s annual two-week September sale. He paid $60,000 for Mongolian Saturday in 2011. But his efforts in the auction ring have already slowed down: Mongolian Stable is now breeding its own racehorses, with eight mares boarded in Lexington, Kentucky. Mongolian Saturday, a son of Any Given Saturday, is far and away the stable star. He has contributed $960,926 to Mongolian Stable’s earnings of $1,349,278 from 226 starts. He has raced from coast-to-coast in the United States, at 13 racetracks in eight states, and in Canada, at varying distances and on turf and dirt. Enebish expects the same hardiness of him as he does of his Mongolian ponies. He still keeps 200 horses in his homeland. In the beginning, though, Mongolian Saturday was too wild to handle, so Enebish decided to geld him.Mongolian Saturday only began racing halfway through his 3-year-old season, at Arlington Park outside Chicago, where Enebish decided to take a chance. He entered him in a claiming race, where any owner could buy Mongolian Saturday on that afternoon for $25,000. He was not worried he would lose him, however. He shrewdly capitalized on his stable’s obscurity. “Everybody thinks these were some stupid people who came to race in America,” he said with a big laugh. “Nobody paid attention to us.” Advertisement