By RYAN GOLDBERGDEC. 11, 2015
When Glyn Schofield rode at Sha Tin Racecourse in Hong Kong a decade ago, his son Chad was too young to get into the track, so he and other boys climbed trees behind the grandstand to watch the action. Those whose fathers were jockeys made a racket whenever they buzzed past.“It was always nice to come past your family, screaming and shouting,” recalled Glyn Schofield, 48, who bagged more than 150 victories in Hong Kong from 2002 to 2006.But on Sunday at Sha Tin, the positions will be flipped. The father, who nows rides in Australia, will be watching — from a seat in the stands — as his son, now 21 and a rising star in racing, buzzes past.After quick-fire triumphs in Australia, including the famous Cox Plate in 2013, Chad received an invitation from the Hong Kong Jockey Club to join its big-money circuit. He is now seventh in the local standings with 11 victories.AdvertisementSunday is the showpiece day of racing there, with four multimillion-dollar invitational races, including the prestigious Hong Kong Cup. And even though he secured mounts in six races on the night, Chad Schofield won’t be riding in the international races.AdvertisementThe younger Schofield didn’t start riding until he was almost 16. He thinks his father initially kept him away from horses because he feared that a bad experience might dissuade him. So his early years were spent riding the arm of the sofa at home, with his father’s crop and helmet, mimicking what he saw on television.“I don’t think he quite embraced the idea of me being a jockey,” Chad said of his father. “But he wanted the decision to be all mine.”Family history suggested what that decision might be. His mother, Tiffany, is from a family of celebrated jockeys in South Africa. Her grandfather, Charlie Barends, won several championships and her father, Aubrey Roberts, won the Durban July, South Africa’s biggest race, before becoming a trainer. Roberts hired Glyn Schofield, who was born in England, as an apprentice after he had graduated from Durban’s riding academy. Roberts soon also had a son-in-law.After his Glyn Schofield’s success in Hong Kong, the family moved to Australia at the end of 2007.As soon as Chad started riding and was allowed to join a stable, he did, though still a small, quiet teenager. His father brought him to the trainer David Payne, a former jockey for whom Glyn had ridden Group 1 winners in South Africa.After a week of easing him in, Payne said of the younger Schofield, “He looks like a natural to me.”His father, then recuperating from a broken leg, drove him to Payne’s barn at Rosehill Gardens Racecourse in Sydney every morning. He watched him learn, offering tips and encouragement, and within six months Chad was race-riding.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Once Glyn returned to the saddle, he refused mounts on days when Chad rode. Chad had been riding competitively for only a few months when he broke his arm in a fall. His father was there, watching.“I jumped the fence and was running up the straight, and he was so small that the grass was longer than he was wide,” he recalled. “You couldn’t see him in the grass.”AdvertisementApprentice jockeys in Australia begin their careers in barrier trials, practice races for both horses and riders. Chad’s first trial came on a gelding named Sir Gwynn, a horse his father had also ridden. The hard-trying horse became his first ride in a race, and later gave Chad his maiden success, at Newcastle Racecourse, after almost 30 attempts. His father had a winner earlier on the card.Chad never looked back. He became the champion apprentice in Sydney for the 2011-12 season, and then achieved the same thing in Melbourne as the go-to rider for the leading trainer David Hayes. No other apprentice had ever realized that double. At only 19, he then became the youngest jockey of the modern era to win Melbourne’s Cox Plate, aboard Shamus Award.But the two years since the Cox Plate were challenging. In various spills, Chad broke his neck, back, both elbows and left wrist. On each occasion he convalesced in Sydney with his family.“It goes from the highest of highs to the lowest of lows,” Glyn said of the racing life. “I know from experience that those are the terrible things you have to deal with. But Chad has had some fantastic highs. We try to focus on the positives, and I think Chad has done that.”When he returned to racing, Chad’s eagerness to make up for lost time often got him in trouble with the Melbourne stewards. Various infractions put him on the bench for four months, a forgettable and unprecedented run in Australian racing’s recent past.Tragedy, too, struck the family. Last year, Nathan Berry, a high-flying 23-year-old Australian jockey, and Chad’s older sister, Whitney, had been married less than two months when Berry collapsed while at a track in Singapore. He was diagnosed with an acute form of epilepsy and died in Sydney a few weeks later.In Hong Kong, meanwhile, Chad has drawn comparisons from trainers to the jockey Douglas Whyte, also a Durban native, whose streak of 13 consecutive local titles ended in 2014. But Chad said he has another model in mind: his father, whom he says he calls at least twice a day.“I’m very lucky to have someone with so much experience, a champion rider like that, as my father,” he said. “He’s always there for me to offer advice.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.