By SAM BORDENDEC. 11, 2015
Michel Platini, the president of soccer’s governing body in Europe, lost his appeal to have his provisional suspension lifted, the Court of Arbitration for Sport announced Friday morning.The judiciary body ordered, however, that FIFA not extend the ban beyond its initial 90 days.The ruling from the court, based in Lausanne, Switzerland, was not surprising given that Mr. Platini and Sepp Blatter, the FIFA president, who is also serving a provisional suspension, are scheduled to have full hearings next week before the ethics committee of soccer’s global governing body to address corruption charges.The charges stem from a $2 million payment to Mr. Platini, approved by Mr. Blatter in 2011, for work that both men say Mr. Platini had done nine years earlier.The Court of Arbitration for Sport confirmed that it had refused to grant Michel Platini’s appeal against his 90-day suspension, dealing a blow to his hopes of competing for the FIFA presidency.Mr. Platini was suspended as UEFA president in October, and he will not be allowed to host a ceremony in Paris on Saturday for the draw for next summer’s European championships, which will be played in his home country, France.AdvertisementPerhaps more important, he cannot officially be considered a candidate for the special election in February to replace Mr. Blatter as FIFA president until the matter is resolved. Mr. Platini has filed the paperwork necessary to run in the election, but FIFA’s electoral committee cannot approve his candidacy unless the ban is lifted.AdvertisementIn its ruling, the three-person committee of arbitrators said that the suspension “does not cause irreparable harm to Michel Platini at this point in time,” an apparent nod to plans by the FIFA ethics committee to rule on Mr. Platini’s case in the next two weeks.The ethics committee normally has the authority to extend a provisional ban by 45 days, and that could have kept Mr. Platini from participating in the FIFA election despite not having received a definitive ruling on the corruption charges.In Mr. Platini’s case, however, the court said that FIFA must not extend the provisional ban beyond its initial end date of Jan. 5.Mr. Blatter’s hearing before the chairman of FIFA’s ethics committee, Hans-Joachim Eckert, is scheduled for Thursday, and Mr. Platini’s is set for the next day.The two men face various charges of violating the ethics code of soccer’s global governing body, with the $2 million payment believed to be at the heart of the case against them.The timing of the payment to Mr. Platini, who became the president of UEFA in 2007, is part of what raised suspicion. Mr. Platini worked as a consultant to FIFA and to Mr. Blatter from 1998 to 2002, but he was not paid for that work until 2011, a few months before Mr. Blatter won re-election as FIFA’s president.Both men could face a lifetime ban from soccer, although they will have the right to appeal any decision to the Court of Arbitration for Sport.A version of this article appears in print on December 12, 2015, on Page D3 of the New York edition with the headline: Court Upholds Suspension of European Soccer’s Leader.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.