AdvertisementSupported byRugbyBy Huw RichardsLONDON — European competition is getting a lot tougher for the Irish rugby teams that used to seem unstoppable.Two years ago, Ulster, Munster and Leinster were a combined 16-2 in the pool stages of the Heineken European Cup. This weekend they enter the third round of the European Rugby Champions Cup — the successor to the Heineken Cup — with a combined record of 1-3. Both Munster (1-0) and Ulster (0-1) have a game to make up after matches against French teams were postponed on the weekend following the Paris terrorist attacks. But the three-time champion Leinster (0-2) is already battling for survival as it goes into back-to-back home and away clashes with Toulon, winner for the past three seasons.“If you lose your opening home match, as we did against Wasps, it is uphill all the way from there,” Guy Easterby, Leinster’s head of rugby operations, said about a 33-6 loss to the English club on the opening weekend. “But it used to be the rule that if you lost your first two games you had no chance of progressing. Then last season Wasps and Bath both did it.”Each of the Irish provincial franchises is facing a formidable opponent in home and away matches these next two weeks. Ulster, which lost its first home match 27-9 to Saracens, takes on the four-time champion Toulouse, while Munster plays the consistently tough English team Leicester.But there is little doubt Leinster has the toughest task, and not just because of the 0-2 start. On Sunday it visits the Stade Mayol, where Toulon has yet to lose a Champions Cup match.“I know they get called galácticos and people say that they should be winning with the resources at their disposal,” Easterby said about Toulon, invoking the name given to the high-priced soccer stars assembled by Real Madrid. “But you’ve still got to spend that money sensibly, to get the right sort of people in and create an atmosphere in which they want to play together — and they’ve clearly done that.”Toulon’s wealth means that it has a team capable of chasing two big titles — the Champions Cup and the French league title.Leinster, too, has a domestic agenda — and a stellar record to defend. It was winner of the Pro 12, which brings together the top teams from Ireland, Scotland, Wales and Italy, in 2013 and 2014 after losing in the finals all three years before that.One possible reason for the Irish struggles in the Champions Cup is that the Pro 12 has become tougher and more competitive. Until 2014, at least 10 of its 12 teams were guaranteed qualification for the Heineken. The introduction of the Champions Cup, which has 24 teams rather than 20, reduced the number of spots to six.All four Irish teams, led by Connacht, usually the weakest of the quartet, are currently in the top six. But Easterby has little doubt the Pro 12 has become tougher.“When almost everyone was guaranteed a place, some games were less intense, particularly in the second half of the season,” he said. “But now it is a meritocracy; every game is a dogfight. I think it has raised standards and made it a better competition.”English clubs in particular complained that the old structure gave the Irish an unfair advantage reflected in five Heineken Cup victories, including three by Leinster, in seven seasons from 2006 to 2012. They may feel vindicated by the 10-11 pool-stage record of the Irish trio so far in two Champions Cups seasons, compared to 57-14 in the final four years of the Heineken.But the restructuring may also have removed a check on the unbridled influence of wealth, giving teams from the larger, richer English and French markets their own built-in advantage. Toulon has won the last three tournaments, while English clubs are 10-1 so far this season.“Rules are rules, and that’s how it is,” said Easterby, declining to complain about the new order. “The richest clubs will target the best players, and they can afford to pay for them.”Both the French and English leagues have television contracts bringing in revenue beyond the dreams of their Pro 12 counterparts, while English purchasing power has been enhanced by the rise of the pound against the euro.“I have the exchange rate permanently on my computer. And when the pound is worth around 1.40 euros rather than the 1.20 or so it was for a long time, that makes a big difference,” said Easterby.“The English Premiership is a very tough, attritional competition. But that extra purchasing power means they can increasingly do what the French have been able to do, and build squads capable of competing on two fronts.”The record of the Irish trio is a warning against writing them off on the basis of a poor couple of rounds, or even a below-par season. Their successes always had a strong element of triumphing over the odds. But the odds are clearly getting longer. Advertisement