By KELLEY McMILLANDEC. 11, 2015
BOSTON — At an age when most skiers are eyeing retirement, 31-year-old Aleksandr Khoroshilov’s career is just getting started.Last season, after 10 years competing on the World Cup circuit with nary a top three result, Khoroshilov nabbed his first victory. In doing so, he became the first Russian man to win a World Cup race in more than 30 years. By season’s end, he had notched three podium finishes, was ranked third in the slalom standings and was coming off the most successful winter of his career.Khoroshilov heads into the opening men’s slalom race of the World Cup season on Sunday in Val d’Isère, France, as a favorite. He hopes to continue his success and will likely battle Marcel Hirscher of Austria and Felix Neureuther of Germany for the discipline’s end-of-season trophy, Khoroshilov’s main goal for the winter.“I’ve been trying to improve so I can take the slalom globe. That’s why we’re skiing, to reach our goals,” Khoroshilov said in a telephone interview from his home in Moscow.AdvertisementKhoroshilov’s rise to the top of ski racing has been a long time in the making. Born and raised on the Kamchatka Peninsula, the Russian region closest to Alaska, Khoroshilov first started skiing at age 5. In the early years, he honed his skills by watching videos of the world’s best racers — Michael von Grünigen, the Swiss giant slalom specialist, and the German all-rounder Markus Wasmeier — and by skiing year-round on the region’s snow-capped volcanoes. At 18, he moved to Moscow to train at an elite ski academy, and two years later, he made his World Cup debut.AdvertisementSuccess, however, did not come easily to Khoroshilov. He competed in all five disciplines but failed to master any of them and often finished close to last. Before last season, Khoroshilov’s best result was an 8th place in 2006, and his highest ranking in the World Cup overall standings was 57th.It’s no surprise then that Khoroshilov contemplated retiring.“I never dreamed where I would be today. I was dreaming to be one of the best skiers in the world, but I was getting older, 26, 27, and I started to think more about reality,” Khoroshilov said. “Before last season, I was thinking if it’s not a good season, then maybe I will start to think about retiring.”His turnaround began in 2010, when the Russian Alpine Ski and Snowboard Federation hired Jani Hladnik of Slovenia as the coach of the men’s technical team. Hladnik introduced a rigorous gym routine and ramped up on-mountain training.“In 2010, we started to ski 400 to 700 gates a day, and by the end of the season, we skied more than 30,000 gates in a season. Other athletes might do 10,000 to 20,000 a season,” Hladnik said. “There’s not many people who could do what Aleksandr did.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Year after year, Khoroshilov’s skiing improved, and he started to steadily climb the World Cup slalom standings, rising from 60th in 2010 to 54th the next year. By 2014, he was ranked 19th and placed 14th in slalom and 30th in the combined at the 2014 Olympics in Sochi, Russia.Going into the 2014-15 season, Hladnik and Khoroshilov made a critical change to their strategy. In previous years, Khoroshilov competed in several disciplines; last year, he only raced slalom.The new approach worked almost instantly: At the second slalom race of last season in Are, Sweden, Khoroshilov placed third, his first top-three result. In January, he won the night slalom in Schladming, Austria, one of ski racing’s most prestigious events. The feat earned him the praise of Russia’s president, Vladmir V. Putin, who called the Russian Alpine Ski and Snowboard Federation after the race to congratulate Khoroshilov.By season’s end, Khoroshilov had finished in the top 10 in every World Cup slalom. He had achieved his childhood dream of becoming one of the best skiers in the world.Advertisement“Everything came together — good skis, good materials, good training, and also family, his wife had their daughter, and everything together just made him ski faster,” said Hladnik. “When we started working together he was 100 in the world, then he came to top 30, then top 15th, and then boom, now he’s exactly where we wanted.”As for the future, Khoroshilov has his eyes on the 2018 Winter Games in Pyeonchang, South Korea, though he won’t speculate on much after that.“I’ll ski as long as I can. I don’t want to think about retiring now. I had my best season, so now I have more positive thoughts in my head,” he said. “I just want to ski fast.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.