AdvertisementSupported byFlames 5, Rangers 4, OvertimeBy The Associated PressCALGARY, Alberta — T. J. Brodie scored 2 minutes 9 seconds into overtime, Johnny Gaudreau had two goals in regulation, and the Calgary Flames recovered after giving up a three-goal lead in the third period to beat the Rangers, 5-4, on Saturday night for their ninth straight home victory.Tanner Glass, Dan Boyle and Mats Zuccarello scored for the Rangers in the final 15 minutes of regulation to tie the score at 4-4.However, in the extra period, Brodie, a defenseman, held the puck on a two-on-one rush and put a perfect shot inside the far goal post. The goal extended Brodie’s career-best point streak to six games (one goal, six assists).Joe Colborne and Mason Raymond also scored for Calgary (13-14-2), which opens a four-game trip on Tuesday at Nashville.The Flames finished off a homestand 5-0, just as Edmonton did the night before against the Rangers. In fact, the two teams swept the same five opponents — Dallas, Boston, San Jose, Buffalo and the Rangers.J. T. Miller scored 10:56 into the first period for the Rangers, who fell to 2-6-2 in their last 10 and finished a 0-2-1 trip to western Canada.Glass started the Rangers’ comeback with his first goal of the season 5:13 into the third period — just 16 seconds after Colborne had made the score 4-1.Boyle curled out of the corner and put a backhand past Jonas Hiller with just under five minutes to go to cut the Rangers’ deficit to one. With the goaltender pulled, Zuccarello tied the score on a power play with 1:12 remaining.Gaudreau and Raymond had scored 17 seconds apart late in the second period to put the Flames up, 2-1. Gaudreau tied the score at 1-1 after intercepting a Keith Yandle pass up the middle and ripping a wrist shot past Antti Raanta high on his glove side. Then Michael Frolik and Raymond broke in on a two-on-one, with Raymond neatly one-timing a pass from Frolik for his first goal in 15 games and just his second goal in the last 42 games, going back to last season (including the playoffs).After Gaudreau scored his second goal, 2:32 into the third period on a breakaway, Colborne scored at 4:57, chipping a puck over the shoulder of Raanta.Hiller finished with 25 stops to improve to 4-4-0. Raanta had 22 saves and fell to 4-3-1.Advertisement