AdvertisementSupported byKnicks 112, Trail Blazers 110By The Associated PressPORTLAND, Ore. — Carmelo Anthony had the hot hand and plenty of help when he needed it.Anthony tied a season high with 37 points and the Knicks’ reserves sparked a rally from a 10-point, fourth-quarter deficit to beat the Portland Trail Blazers, 112-110, on Saturday night.Anthony, who scored 20 points in the first half, shot 13 of 21 from the field as New York ended a four-game losing streak. He didn’t score in the fourth quarter until making six free throws during the final 30 seconds as reserves such as Lance Thomas and Kyle O’Quinn helped fuel the rally.Thomas scored 7 of his 13 points and O’Quinn 6 of his 14 points during the fourth quarter.“Their bench was obviously the difference,” Portland coach Terry Stotts said. “They had 46 off the bench. All their bench players contributed.”No one was more impressed with the reserves than Anthony.“Tonight our bench was phenomenal,” he said. “When we were down 10, it was them that stepped up big time.”The former Blazers Robin Lopez and Arron Afflalo, returning to Portland for the first time since leaving the team in free agency over the summer, were among six Knicks to score at least 10 points. Afflalo had 15, and Lopez had 14 to go with seven rebounds.The Knicks outscored the Blazers, 36-24, in the fourth quarter to pull out the finale of a three-game road trip.“Third game in four nights, things have not been going well,” Knicks Coach Derek Fisher said. “It would have been easy to say, ‘We’ll get them next time’ and feel sorry for yourself. They decided they wanted to win.”Damian Lillard led Portland with 29 points but missed a 3-point attempt at the buzzer, which would have won the game. He had chased down the rebound of his intentionally missed free throw.“From where I was standing, I thought it was going in,” Lillard said.The Knicks were able to end a six-game losing streak to Portland despite a terrible night by the rookie Kristaps Porzingis, who missed six shots and went scoreless in 19 minutes. Porzingis was averaging 14.1 points. The Knicks’ last win over the Blazers came on March 12, 2012.New York started the fourth quarter on a 12-2 run to erase Portland’s lead. Then, trailing 92-91, the Knicks regained the lead on back-to-back baskets by O’Quinn.The Knicks built the lead to 6 points on several occasions, but needed Anthony’s free throws to hold on.C.J. McCollum scored 22 points and Allen Crabbe 15 for the Blazers.Advertisement