AdvertisementSupported byN.H.L. RoundupBy The Associated PressKyle Okposo got his second goal of the game on a drop pass from Josh Bailey 2 minutes 16 seconds into overtime to lift the visiting Islanders to a 3-2 victory over the Columbus Blue Jackets on Saturday night.“Just happy to see that one go in,” Bailey said of Okposo’s goal. “I didn’t want to just take an end-to-end breakaway knowing Okie was there.”Apparently Bailey was too busy to hear Okposo’s instructions.“I was yelling at him to just take it, but I was prepared for it,” Okposo said. “In that situation sometimes you drop it, but it worked out. I just tried to make the goalie bite.”Frans Nielsen also scored, and Jaroslav Halak had 28 saves as the Islanders improved to 7-0-2 in their last nine games.Even with the Islanders’ strong record of late, Coach Jack Capuano was not pleased after the game, saying his team provided Columbus with energy.“If you look at the chances we gave them, it came from mismanaging the puck,” Capuano said. “I’m disappointed; our decision making has to be better.“I understand we have some skill guys, but sometimes they want to make the sexy play, and that’s not the right play to make. You’ve got to take what’s available to you.”Brandon Saad and Cam Atkinson scored for Columbus, which has one win in its last seven games (1-3-3). The Blue Jackets also had a potential winning goal in the final minute of regulation overturned by a video review.Curtis McElhinney finished with 16 saves while making a second consecutive start since Sergei Bobrovksy strained a groin muscle on Tuesday against the Kings. Bobrovksy is expected to be sidelined for three weeks.Atkinson tied the score at 2-2 8:20 into the third period on a long slap shot. The Blue Jackets then thought they had scored a winner with 48 seconds remaining, but the goal was overturned in the league’s video review room. It was ruled that Boone Jenner had used a “distinct kicking motion” to convert a centering pass by a rushing Saad.“It went off my stick, and I just kind of lost it with the goalie and everything,” Jenner said. “Replay showed, I guess, there was a kicking motion. I can’t do anything about it now.”In a blurry sequence in the crease, it appeared the pass hit Jenner’s stick and then maybe hit his skate or even trickled in off the stick of defenseman Travis Hamonic.Columbus Coach John Tortorella said that he was happy his team earned a point but that “we’ve got try and figure out getting that extra point in these types of games if we’re going to get from underneath the water.”Okposo gave the Islanders a 1-0 lead with 4:39 remaining in the first period, stealing a bad breakout pass toward the middle of the ice by Gregory Campbell and quickly snapping a shot over McElhinney’s glove.Saad tied the score 5:08 into the second period when a centering pass from Jenner deflected off his skate past Halak. The goal was Saad’s 10th, ending an 11-game drought, which was one short of tying his career long skid.The Islanders responded just 57 seconds later on a power play, with Nielsen scoring his 12th goal. He controlled a bouncing puck at the top of the crease and sent a weak, low shot by McElhinney’s outstretched arm and David Savard on his knees at the goal line.“I think that we’ve done a pretty good job of getting a couple points when we haven’t been at our best,” Okposo said. “We’ve just got to find a way to get back to that level because we know we can’t sustain this.”BRUINS 3, PANTHERS 1 Ryan Spooner scored twice, and Tuukka Rask stopped 26 shots to lift host Boston to a win over Florida.Backed by a strong stretch from Rask, the Bruins posted their eighth win in 11 games (8-1-2). Rask is 6-0-2 in his past eight starts.SABRES 2, KINGS 1 A sliding overtime goal by Ryan O’Reilly helped Buffalo end a three-game losing streak and defeat visiting Los Angeles.O’Reilly was tripped as he cut to the slot, but his an off-balance shot fooled Kings goaltender Jhonas Enroth 3:19 into overtime. It was O’Reilly’s 100th N.H.L. goal.CAPITALS 2, LIGHTNING 1 Braden Holtby made 35 saves to win for the 10th time in his last 11 starts, and Washington beat host Tampa Bay.Holtby stopped a Valtteri Filppula shot from just outside the crease and a scoring chance from the slot by Nikita Kucherov during a 15-second stretch five minutes into the game.Washington got goals from Jay Beagle and Evgeny Kuznetsov.CANADIENS 3, SENATORS 1 Brian Flynn and Max Pacioretty scored in the first period, and host Montreal stopped a four-game losing streak with a victory over Ottawa.Jeff Petry also scored for Montreal, which scored more than two goals in a game for the first time in six contests.Jean-Gabriel Pageau scored for Ottawa, which went 1-3-0 on a four-game trip.BLUES 3, DALLAS 0 David Backes had a goal and an assist, Jake Allen stopped 26 shots, and St. Louis beat visiting Dallas.Vladimir Tarasenko and Ryan Reaves scored in the third period to help the Blues beat the Stars for the third consecutive time. AVALANCHE 3, PREDATORS 2 Andreas Martinsen broke a tie midway through the third period, Semyon Varlamov made 34 saves, and Colorado beat host Nashville.Colorado seized a 2-0 lead in the first period, but Nashville rallied to tie the score at 2-2 on a Craig Smith one-timer from the left point 58 seconds into the third. HURRICANES 5, COYOTES 4 A left-handed wrist shot by Victor Rask 53 seconds into overtime gave Carolina a win at Arizona.Rask’s goal came after the Coyotes’ Connor Murphy scored with 15.7 seconds left in regulation to tie it at 4-4.Advertisement