By SETH BERKMANDEC. 12, 2015
For three and a half quarters, the Los Angeles Clippers traversed the air above the court at Barclays Center to create a crowd-pleasing abundance of above-the-rim plays.To thwart the aerial assault, the Nets enacted a “hack-a-Shaq” strategy — in this case hacking DeAndre Jordan — and almost crawled back from an 18-point fourth-quarter hole before falling to the Clippers, 105-100, on Saturday night.All five Nets starters finished in double figures, led by Thaddeus Young with 18 points and Jarrett Jack with 16 points and 11 assists. Chris Paul, the pilot of the Clippers’ air show, scored 15 points and had 14 assists.“It was a strange game,” Nets center Brook Lopez said. “We were kind of mixing and matching, trying to figure it out. I guess the energy wasn’t really there, up to a point. We made the run too late.”AdvertisementEntering the game, the Nets looked to shed the final remnants of a slovenly beginning to their season, having won six of their past seven home games — their only loss coming against the Golden State Warriors, who are beating everybody. A win would have put the Nets at 8-8 since their 0-7 start.AdvertisementAfter Andrea Bargnani made two free throws with 5 minutes 22 seconds remaining, reducing the Clippers’ lead to 91-80, the Nets targeted Jordan, who entered the night shooting 41 percent for his career from the line.Jordan and Blake Griffin combined to make 2 of 6 free throws during the next minute and a half, and the Clippers were otherwise held scoreless as the Nets trimmed the deficit to 2 points. They would not get closer.Such vitality from the Nets was missing for most of the game, while the Clippers played with abundant style and substance.The Clippers’ pregame layup line turned into an impromptu dunk exhibition. Paul waited to practice jumpers while watching Jordan attempt — three times — a self-assisted dunk by tossing the ball off the backboard. Griffin windmilled with ease. Even Cole Aldrich, a seldom-used 6-foot-11 center, executed a nearly 360-degree spin move.Soon after the opening tip, the Clippers continued to flash their panache as the Nets struggled to avoid the most elementary of turnovers.The first of the Clippers’ several dunks in the first quarter set the blueprint for numerous baskets throughout the game. With the Nets leading, 8-4, Paul drove along the baseline, drawing in the Nets’ defense, before he found Jordan, who finished with 12 points and 12 rebounds, cutting to the basket for a thunderous slam.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Paul followed by scoring on a fast-break layup. He then stole the ball from Lopez, who had 14 points and 12 rebounds, and threw an outlet pass to J. J. Redick, who found Griffin flying to the basket for an alley-oop dunk.AdvertisementThe Nets tried to take a page from the Clippers’ playbook and threw an alley-oop to Lopez on the next possession, but he missed the dunk, almost looking unsure what to do with the ball after he caught it in the air.As the game went on, the Clippers’ dunk attempts were performed with more flair. Late in the first quarter, Paul drove past Lopez in the lane, and as Lopez tried to catch up, Paul lifted an arcing lob to Jordan for a dunk.Soon after, Paul again stole the ball from Lopez and threw an outlet pass to Redick, who missed a 3-pointer. But Jack and Young, forgetting to block out Jordan, allowed him to get an uncontested offensive rebound and a putback dunk for a 22-15 lead.While the Clippers created highlights, the Nets added plenty of self-inflicted wounds through much of the first half.During one possession, Bargnani passed up an open jump shot in the corner, but the ball eventually found its way back to him. This time, he looked to shoot as a defender closed, paused in midair, and then threw the ball out of bounds before he could be called for traveling.Even when the Clippers had rare lapses, they finished well.Early in the second quarter, Jamal Crawford threw an off-target lob, but two Nets fumbled the ball in the air as they tried to corral it. The ball deflected to Jordan, who finished with an open slam.As the first half drew to an end, Young showed frustration, shoving Redick to the floor as he tried to work through a screen, resulting in a tiff between Young and Jordan. Young was called for a flagrant foul, and Jordan was assessed a technical foul.The former Net Paul Pierce added 8 points in the second quarter as the Clippers carried a 57-44 lead into halftime.AdvertisementAfter the break, mental mistakes continued to plague the Nets, as they forgot to box out and allowed the Clippers to crash the offensive boards. The Nets were even called for a lane violation on a technical foul shot.Finally switching to the strategy of fouling Jordan, the Nets scored 37 points in the final quarter, cutting the Clippers’ advantage to 2 points on three occasions, but they were never able to follow with a defensive stop and never attempted a game-tying or go-ahead shot during the rally.“It was appropriate at the time we did it, and it brought us back,” Hollins said of the Nets’ fouling, adding, “We wound up coming all the way back and had our chances.”A version of this article appears in print on December 13, 2015, on Page SP5 of the New York edition with the headline: Nets’ Rally Falls Short in Loss to Clippers.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.