AdvertisementSupported byNavy 21, Army 17By The Associated PressPHILADELPHIA — With perfection at stake, Keenan Reynolds ended his Navy career with a clean sweep against Army.Navy Coach Ken Niumatalolo just might leave the academy the same way.Reynolds rushed for two touchdowns and threw for another score to lead the No. 21 Midshipmen to their 14th straight win over the Black Knights, a 21-17 victory Saturday at Lincoln Financial Field in Philadelphia.“That was the No. 1 goal,” Reynolds said. “To be able to be here four years and never lose against Army, that’s huge.”Reynolds raised his career rushing touchdown total to 85, the most for any N.C.A.A. Division I player. He is also the first quarterback in the 116-game series between Navy and Army to go 4-0. Niumatalolo improved to 8-0 against Army just two days before he was set to visit Brigham Young University to talk about the program’s coaching vacancy.A look at the top players in contention for college football’s highest honor.Niumatalolo, who has the most victories as coach in Navy history, celebrated and choked back tears Saturday while discussing his faith-based decision to visit B.Y.U. Niumatalolo is a Mormon who went on a two-year mission after his freshman year at the University of Hawaii.“It’s been my life,” he said of coaching at Navy. “My kids have grown up here.”Niumatalolo tied the former Army coach Earl Blaik (8-8-2) for the most wins in the series.On Saturday, Army Coach Jeff Monken showed that his program might be closing the gap on Navy — but the Black Knights blew any chance of an upset in the fourth quarter.Army’s Daniel Grochowski missed a 29-yard field-goal attempt early in the quarter. Quarterback Chris Carter lost a fumble at the Navy 34, and the ball was recovered by linebacker Ted Colburn. Navy (10-2) grabbed two interceptions — one off a trick play — on two straight drives to preserve the lead. A Hail Mary pass by Army on the final play of the game fell short.Navy, a three-touchdown favorite, had a tougher time than it has recently in the rivalry, still one of the most storied matchups in college sports. But the Midshipmen still won the Commander-in-Chief’s Trophy, awarded to the team with the best record in games among the three service academies. Navy beat Air Force, 33-11, this season.Army (2-10) got a field goal on the game’s opening drive, and Tyler Campbell scored on a 29-yard run to make it 10-7 in the first quarter. Carter then hit Edgar Poe for a 39-yard touchdown pass with 2 minutes 8 seconds left in the half to give Army its first halftime lead in the rivalry since 2009, at 17-14.Army had a lead. It just did not have Reynolds, who scored on runs of 58 yards and 1 yard to keep Navy in the game and then used his arm to find Jamir Tillman in the third quarter for the lead.Advertisement