AdvertisementSupported byInboxPraise For Leader At PurdueTo the Sports Editor:Re “Outspoken and, Now, Out of Work,” Dec. 5: As reported, Morgan Burke, athletic director at Purdue, was a vice president at the Inland Steel Company. He reported directly to me.This was during a period when the North American steel industry was beleaguered and our survival was very much at risk. We had to execute an aggressive turnaround effort, and even though we were able to increase sales, layoffs were inevitable.At Morgan’s urging, he and I met with small groups of affected employees, explaining our situation and laying out the prospects as to when they might be recalled to work, if at all. I well remember how deeply he was touched after each of these tough, emotional meetings.I have rarely seen such a combination of empathy, skill and leadership in an individual. I seriously doubt that within the Purdue athletic department itself, much less the entire university campus, speaking one’s mind freely and openly is discouraged.MAURICE S. NELSON Jr., Los AngelesA Narrow Idea of PoetryTo the Sports Editor:Re “Poets Cheer Bryant’s Crossover Move,” Dec. 3: Andrew Keh notes that Kobe Bryant’s poetic announcement of retirement “was an exciting, rare moment in which a poem entered mainstream culture.” The article also quotes David Gordon, who imagines “a world in which stadiums are filled with people screaming for poetry, along with basketball.” Keh reminds us of Bryant’s earlier efforts in rap, and writes that after the retirement announcement, “slam poetry suddenly had new meaning.”Indeed, it is easy to imagine connections among rap, slam poetry, and Bryant’s poem, and to remember then that rap artists do fill stadiums with audiences eager to listen to poetic verses. Even if meant to be lighthearted, in its casual acceptance of a narrow definition of poetry this article about a poetic newcomer only preserves such narrowness. It is also worth noting that for a piece about an African-American athlete who drew on traditions of hip-hop and slam poetry, none of the poets interviewed is African-American or a slam poet.BEN DAVIDSON, BrooklynMissing Rutgers WinsTo the Sports Editor:Re “Few Wins but Much Chaos at Rutgers After Move to the Big Ten,” Dec. 9: I found this to be an incredibly disconcerting piece due to its dwelling so much on Rutgers’s past, despite the positive changes as of late.The article made it sound as if Rutgers, a great academic university, has poured all of its money into athletics. As a senior student, I have seen new academic buildings, new dorms, new faculty, exciting events and positive adjustments around campus.Rutgers absolutely could not refuse the invitation into the Big Ten; it was a life raft. Additionally, Rutgers just reached a $1 billion endowment. With all of this, people should look to New Jersey’s state university’s future. A lot of house cleaning has been done in our athletics department, and Rutgers will, undoubtedly, become a school with greater academics and great athletics soon.KIERSTEN FORMOSO, New Brunswick, N.J.Advertisement