AdvertisementSupported byBy Bill PenningtonThe desperate last-minute comeback in an N.F.L. game, a harried march downfield with one eye on the countdown of an unrelenting scoreboard clock, has always produced some of the sport’s most memorable moments.The attraction was built on the understanding that a game-winning late rally faced long odds and was rarely successful, especially against defensive schemes designed for the circumstances.This season, however, in the final quarter, final minute or final second — or even with no time on the clock — it often appears that no lead is safe from a stirring comeback drive.In the final 90 seconds of Monday night’s game between Washington and Dallas, the lead toggled from sideline to sideline as the teams combined for 17 points. The previous day, Carolina threw for the winning touchdown with 65 seconds left, and Tampa Bay scored the decisive points with 99 seconds remaining in the fourth quarter. For the Jets, there were just 27 seconds left when they tied their game with the Giants, which they won in overtime.Three days earlier, Green Bay’s Aaron Rodgers completed a 61-yard touchdown pass with the scoreboard clock reading 00:00. It was the second-longest pass to win an N.F.L. game with time expired.Over all, there were eight fourth-quarter comebacks from Thursday to Monday, the third-highest total of final-quarter comebacks during one “week” of games in the history of the league.Through 13 weeks of play this year, teams trailing in the fourth quarter have rallied to win 58 times, the third-highest total for this juncture of an N.F.L. season, and just two off the record pace set in 1989, a season that ended with 70 fourth-quarter comebacks producing victories.“This year, it’s almost as if the offenses are playing downhill and the defenses are playing uphill,” said Boomer Esiason, a four-time Pro Bowl quarterback with Cincinnati and now a CBS “NFL Today” studio analyst. The increase in late N.F.L. comebacks — including the rarest situation, which is a rally in the final 60 seconds — is far from a one-year trend. The league is on a pace to almost double the number of last-ditch comebacks of a decade ago.Since 2010, there have been 36 successful game-winning or game-tying drives in the final minute of regulation or overtime. That is the same number of last-minute comebacks as from 2000 to 2009, according to research provided by Scott Kacsmar of Football Outsiders, who has spent a decade tracking comebacks and game-winning drives. From 1990 to 1999, there were only 26 last-minute comebacks.How can my team make the N.F.L. playoffs? It’s a simple question, but answering it can be devilishly complicated. This interactive simulator walks you through the scenarios.“Today, you better be ready to play every second of that 60-minute game,” said Giants Coach Tom Coughlin, whose team has lost five games this season that it led in the final two minutes.The question is: What has happened to make a late comeback so much easier to accomplish?There is an abundance of theories, with most focusing on the growth of quick-strike offenses, the effect of altered practice-time policies and the increased penalties for rough defensive play.First, a relevant statistic. There have been 100 games this season decided by 7 points or fewer, which is the most ever through 13 weeks of play.“Somewhere, Pete Rozelle, who wanted parity in the league, is smiling,” said John Lynch, a standout safety for 15 N.F.L. seasons who now works for as a color commentator for Fox Sports. “When the teams are more evenly matched and playing closer games, there will be a higher probability of comebacks happening.”But Lynch reluctantly added: “What also comes to mind is a lot of bad football that allows for it. We all see sloppy fundamentals.”Cutbacks recently negotiated in collective bargaining between the players and ownership have limited the number of full-scale workouts allowed during preseason training camps and altered practice schedules between games. The diminished time on the field has been blamed for poor tackling and other slipshod play.“Decreased practice time over the years has a cumulative effect on the game,” said Charley Casserly, a longtime general manager in the league who now serves as an NFL Network analyst. “It hurts individual player development and probably affects things like preparing for certain situations defensively. There’s only so much time to get to everything.”Dan Campbell, the Miami Dolphins’ interim head coach and a former player, dedicates time to drill his team in the game management tactics of closing out a tight game, but the instruction comes on a Friday at the end of a busy workweek. The lessons may not be absorbed.“It seems like a no-brainer, and you would think little kids can do some of those things,” Campbell said last week. “But you reiterate them because the little details are what save the game for you. If it’s a fourth-quarter, four-minute drill and you’re trying to close the game out, don’t run out of bounds.“You coach what’s smart and what’s not smart.”It is also clear that modern football is an offense-minded game and has been tilting that way for decades. N.F.L. teams this season have scored the second-most points ever through 13 weeks of play. Moreover, it is now common for teams to operate no-huddle or hurry-up offenses throughout a game — not just when they are in a comeback mode.“Forty years ago, a coach said to me: ‘Why don’t we start the game with the hurry-up offense? It seems to work well,’ ” Casserly said. “And we said, ‘You can’t do that.’ Well, guess what? You can do it. That’s been proven.”The increased tempo hardly confuses many of today’s N.F.L. quarterbacks, who have been in fast-paced offensive systems that use four- and five-receiver spread formations since they were in high school.If the quarterbacks and wide receivers are more versed in quick-strike offensive play, the game’s place-kickers and long snappers for field goals are also more accurate and have greater range than their predecessors. The number of field goals kicked beyond 50 yards and the conversion rate of field goal attempts have never been as high as in this decade. And most successful N.F.L. comebacks end in field goals.But perhaps the reason mentioned most for the surge in late-game comebacks has to do with the rule changes that make it more likely a defender will be called for illegal contact or pass interference while covering a receiver. Far more roughing-the-passer penalties are also being called.“These are significant penalties that give offenses a tremendous number of extra opportunities to score,” Esiason said. “They are severe penalties that act like turnovers or drive restarters. The defensive players and defensive coordinators are afraid of these penalties and tend to back off or play softer.“The defensive players are basically playing with one arm tied behind their backs.”Comebacks in the N.F.L. are nothing new. Some of the game’s most celebrated players, from Roger Staubach to Joe Montana and Dan Marino, helped build their legacies on late-game heroics. As the N.F.L. continues to evolve and leave behind its days as a run-first league, it is likely that the percentage of games decided in the closing minutes will increase, perhaps exponentially. That may even be an intentional result.As Casserly said, “I’m sure all those comebacks keep the fans watching games until the very end.”Advertisement