By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSDEC. 12, 2015
Sundays are not just for touchdowns and tailgates anymore.While N.F.L. football rules the day in the United States, in Europe, fans are tuning in to the N.B.A. in big numbers for a rare chance to catch live action and still get a good night of sleep.The league expanded its schedule of Sunday afternoon starts this season, with 20 of the 23 games tipping off at 3:30 p.m. Eastern. That’s 9:30 p.m. in Spain, home of the European champions and a devoted fan base.Matt Brabants, the N.B.A. senior vice president for global media distribution and business operations, said the games had become “appointment viewing” for fans in the 114 countries and territories in Europe, Africa and the Middle East who will see Minnesota play at Phoenix on Sunday.And it barely requires any scheduling difficulty for the N.B.A., since, with about 100 international players in the league, nearly every team has somebody the overseas audience wants to watch.Advertisement“Finding a team that’s compelling isn’t very hard,” Brabants said, “because you’ve got a team like, for example, the Timberwolves with a number of international players, including Ricky Rubio, for example, who’s obviously Spanish and a big hit in Spain.”It means some dreaded matinee starts for players, who often practice in the early afternoon but are not nearly as interested in playing games then.Advertisement“I know I couldn’t stand them as a player,” said Clippers Coach Doc Rivers, whose team is scheduled eight times at home this season for 12:30 p.m. local starts.He added: “I think every coach loves them because at 5:30 in the evening, you’re done with your work for the next day — I mean, selfishly. I just felt like, as a player, and it doesn’t matter home or road, that you can’t catch up sometimes. Like if you start off bad, it feels like by the time you wake up, the game’s over.”At least the players are only tired at game time occasionally. For many international fans, it is a season-long issue.A regular 7 p.m. or 7:30 p.m. local start in the United States means European fans may have to hang in until 3 a.m. or later to watch the end of a live game.The Spanish national team veteran and Knicks guard José Calderón said his country’s fans were so passionate about the N.B.A. that they do it. But he knows from talking to them that they would benefit from fewer all-nighters.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“When they see you after the season, the only thing they say is like: ‘Man, it’s tough. We can’t sleep,’ ” Calderón said. “Because at the end of the day, you got to wake up, or stay up. It’s like 2 in the morning or 3 in the morning.”AdvertisementThe Sunday schedule the N.B.A. introduced last season addresses that. Fans are treated to a number of strong games, particularly in January, when the matchups scheduled are the ones being shown on ABC’s national television coverage.Brabants said teams are supportive of the matinees, even knowing they compete with the N.F.L. They have been a hit overseas, where viewership for Sunday games increased 32 percent last season over 2013-14, when the games were not being shown at a consistent time.But Brabants said the benefits went beyond ratings. Social media interactions — the league has more than 920 million likes and followers across all platforms — increase during the games, since more people are awake, and TV partners are putting more resources into pregame and postgame studio shows to serve their larger audiences.“Because they know they’re going to have many more people tuning in than they would for a game at, say, 2:30 in the morning,” Brabants said.Latvia, home of the Knicks rookie Kristaps Porzingis, was recently added as the 114th country or territory being reached. And the league has already started looking beyond Sundays, with 11 Saturday games scheduled for 5 or 6 p.m. Eastern.That is too late for prime time, but still makes an easier bedtime.“The earlier the better, but 5 o’clock on a Saturday in particular, a later afternoon start, is still a very good thing for our business, and we’ve seen more engagement on those Saturday games as well,” Brabants said.A version of this article appears in print on December 13, 2015, on Page SP5 of the New York edition with the headline: N.B.A.’s Matinee Games Raise Profile in Europe.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.