AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressRENO, Nev. — Antonio Vargas never had a cut in his boxing life until blood trickled down his forehead Wednesday during his most important bout.An acclaimed flyweight, Vargas fought through the surprise and pain, but his Olympic dreams were imperiled when he lost a split decision at the United States team trials.“It happened so fast,” Vargas said. “It was just a clash of heads. I had that fight, man.”Vargas didn’t blame the blood for his loss, but facial cuts are a growing problem for Olympic-style boxers fighting for places in Rio de Janeiro at the first Olympics since the International Boxing Association, known as AIBA, decided that male boxers would no longer wear protective headgear.Seven fighters developed significant cuts during the first three days of the United States Olympic trials here last week, including the heavyweight favorite Cam F. Awesome and Vargas, the Pan Am Games champion who may be the Americans’ best chance to end their 12-year gold medal drought. They both fought on, but three other boxers were cut badly enough to force them out of the tournament.Mark Dawson was done after he needed 18 stitches on his forehead to seal a grotesque cut, also the first of his career. Even Chris Ousley’s Olympic dream died because his opponent, Carlos Monroe, was cut down to the skull and couldn’t continue yet still won their bout on the scorecards.The problems are not confined to the United States, with serious cuts reported from tournaments around the world since the 2013 rule change. AIBA reportedly reassessed its headgear decision during the 2014 Commonwealth Games in Glasgow when the Australian boxer Daniel Lewis was cut too badly to continue, but quickly confirmed that the plan would move forward to Rio.Even AIBA’s detractors realize the absence of headgear has made Olympic boxing more television-friendly. Although the association acknowledges the danger of cuts, it contends that the change was made because concussions will decrease without the heavy protective padding. But many American coaches and fighters chuckle at the science used to justify the decision.“You’re subjecting a kid to trauma for nothing,” said Virgil Hunter, the veteran trainer behind the career of the Olympic gold medalist Andre Ward. “It’s one thing to get cut, and you get a million-dollar check when you get out of there. It’s another thing to get cut, and you get a trophy or a handshake.”Boxers have worn headgear in every Olympics since the 1984 Los Angeles Games, and women still wear it. The proliferation of cuts is fueling complaints throughout the sport from athletes and trainers who believe head guards are the only practical way to compete in an Olympic-style multifight tournament.Cuts usually result from heads banging together. That’s a frequent occurrence in professional boxing, but Olympic-style fighters must usually fight the next day or be disqualified.AIBA has encouraged fighters to wear cut-reducing creams, and it has started an initiative called HeadsUp! to encourage fighters to compete with fewer inadvertent head butts.USA Boxing officials hold a precarious position between their amateur fighters and AIBA, which has eliminated the word “amateur” from its name while creating several professional ventures for its fighters. USA Boxing does not want fighters sabotaged by cuts but also wants to support the international governing body.Headgear decisions in domestic tournaments could be taken out of the hands of USA Boxing soon. Various state athletic commissions have expressed concern about headgear-free boxing by amateurs, with some refusing to allow it.Advertisement