By READERS OF THE NEW YORK TIMESDEC. 11, 2015
Are you tired of holiday gift guides yet? No? Well, we are. So we turned the concept around on readers and invited them to share their sports-related dream gifts. Our editing elves pored over the hundreds and hundreds of submissions and selected the best ones. Turns out, a lot of our readers really, really want to play golf at a certain course in Georgia.If you can’t make it come true, then you might as well dream big and out of the box: a time machine to experience a historic sports moment live. Imagine sneaking into the Yankees’ dugout just as Lou Gehrig began to deliver his retirement speech or witnessing the “Miracle on Ice” as it unfolded. The time machine would self-destruct if I profited from betting on would-be winners (as Biff did in “Back to the Future”) or if I tampered with the outcome of the event (reinflating the deflated footballs, etc.). I am strictly an observer — a traveler of time and space to the best seats to the best sports moments. — Heidi■ ■ ■I think I may have already received my dream sports gift. Last summer, a serendipitous aligning of travel schedules landed a few distant family members in Baltimore on the same weekend. My cousin and I took the train down from New York City and joined her sister, her parents and almost a dozen relatives (all native Baltimoreans) for a Sunday Orioles game. Nothing beats summer baseball, hardly anything beats Camden Yards, and there’s nothing quite like drinking a few cold brews and eating some peanuts while catching up with 13 of your most treasured family members. — Sander■ ■ ■In one calendar year, to attend Sunday of the Masters; the Indy 500; the finals of tennis’s United States Open; the Super Bowl; and the final games of the World Series, the Stanley Cup finals and the N.B.A. finals. — Sig SemonAdvertisement■ ■ ■Learning the skills of riding, dressage and jumping at an equestrian center governed by the Fédération Équestre Internationale, and then obtaining a job as a trainer or even competing. — LilouAdvertisement■ ■ ■As a Drake University graduate, I would take courtside seats to see the Bulldogs beat Duke and win the N.C.A.A. basketball championship. I don’t ask for much. — Roger Scott■ ■ ■I almost don’t know where to begin. It’s easy to say tickets to the Super Bowl with all that comes with it or a chance to see two of the fiercest boxers duke it out in Las Vegas. I, however, dream of witnessing in person an Olympic hockey game between the United States and Russia. Both have been a part of numerous historic Olympic contests, most notably the Miracle on Ice in Lake Placid in 1980 and most recently the Americans’ victory in Sochi highlighted by T. J. Oshie’s spectacular shootout performance. In an event like this, one can take in firsthand the sheer talent of some of the finest hockey players in the world, like Alex Ovechkin and Pavel Datsyuk of Russia and the Americans Zach Parise, Ryan McDonagh and Patrick Kane. Beyond what is happening on the ice is the ambience of a packed arena filled with the most avid of fans branching across many international backgrounds. You can’t help but feel an immense amount of intensity in the air as your country is neck and neck with an opposing world power in the sport you love so much. With all things considered, a highly anticipated hockey match between the United States and Russia at the Olympics would absolutely be a dream of mine to experience. Who knows? Maybe it can happen someday. — George Prezioso■ ■ ■To be standing at the finish line for all three races of the Triple Crown (I might even collect a bit of dirt from each track). — Kenny Solomon■ ■ ■Two World Series bleacher-seat tickets at Wrigley Field to watch the Cubs beat the Yankees in Game 7. — Craig Lobdell■ ■ ■A magical reappearance of my lefty Rawlings baseball glove, circa 1965. I just can’t think of a sweeter reminder of my youth. — John Tiebout■ ■ ■In the 1970s, the Yankees would stop checking tickets at the gates after the seventh inning, and you could walk in free and watch the end of the game. The ushers wouldn’t even mind if you went down to fill in the empty seats by the dugouts, especially if you slipped them a few bucks. Dad was a handball player at Orchard Beach in the Bronx. He liked baseball, but I wouldn’t call him a fan. In the summer, it felt as if all I did was go to Orchard Beach and watch him play handball. When I was 10, I started to play baseball, and I picked the Yanks as my team. A few times after handball that summer, we went to the stadium, walked through the turnstiles and sat right by the Yankee dugout. It was only two or three innings, but the seats were awesome, and I was with Dad instead of watching him all day from the sidelines. Whether it was Ed Figueroa’s 20th win or a Yankee loss, my dad and I were together. Not for him, but for me. It lasted only a season or two, but it made for some of the happiest times with my dad that I can remember. We haven’t spoken in almost 10 years; not sure if we ever will again. But a chance to go back and relive those few innings, watching a game with Dad, before life and poor choices would pull us apart, would be priceless. — David Rodriguez■ ■ ■A copy of Action Comics No. 1 signed by Darryl Strawberry. — Eric G.■ ■ ■The Cubs winning the World Series. I hope it happens in my lifetime. I am still waiting and wishing. — LauraAdvertisement■ ■ ■A Honus Wagner T206 baseball card or, if Santa wants to keep his, a 1933 Goudey Napoleon Lajoie. — Tim LexvoldA No. 400 1957 Topps baseball card with the Brooklyn Dodgers sluggers Carl Furillo, Gil Hodges, Roy Campanella and Duke Snider kneeling with their bats at Ebbets Field. I like to remember times when the chief concern of the day was your favorite baseball team’s progress. — Daniel BegleyA mint-condition 1956 white-back Topps Mickey Mantle card. A great picture of the Mick in his best season, when he won the triple crown. — Jimmy Mack■ ■ ■Playing for my two favorite teams in a surrealistic manner. First, I dream, conservatively, to be the St. Louis Rams’ punter, of all things, and to be able to back up the opponents to their 1-yard line no matter where I kick from. These would be rainmaking kicks, especially in outdoor stadiums — gravity-defying spectacles that all fans would wait to see instead of boring touchdowns. Second, the Angels would get my services to watch me bring back the bloop pitch. Similar to the punts, these pitches would arc relatively high (25 feet) and be literally unhittable. I would travel by train between games in both sports to build good will for my franchises and to bring a P. T. Barnum atmosphere to the marketing of my favorite teams! — Charles W. Frick ■ ■ ■To attend the Sri Lanka Cricket Tour of England next May and June. I love cricket, and I love Sri Lanka cricket. I attended my first match in London at Lord’s on May 31, 2014, and loved watching cricket in England. This is going to be an awesome tour — England is hot right now, but Sri Lanka has a young team that is coming together. Of course, I would also love to meet the team, since I didn’t have the chance at Lord’s. — K. Amarasinghe■ ■ ■To referee a three-on-three charity basketball game in Rucker Park featuring Steph Curry, Michael Jordan and Kevin Durant versus LeBron James, Kobe Bryant and Carmelo Anthony. — Evan Vladem■ ■ ■I actually have a pretty simple wish. I would love to run out onto the field with the Mets’ defensive starters at the beginning of the game. It’s always an adrenaline rush to see the Mets take the field for the first time. “And here they are, as they take the field, your National League champion NEW YORK METS!” the P.A. announcer blares out. Nothing in sports like it! — Anthony Furia■ ■ ■Airfare to Hawaii for the World Cup of Surfing on Oahu’s North Shore for myself and a friend or two. I can sleep on the beach, so a hotel room is optional, and it doesn’t have to be round-trip airfare. — Heber LinaresAdvertisement■ ■ ■Truly a dream sports gift for my beautiful daughter Yvette: Super Bowl 50. If only she could witness her all-time favorite athlete, Peyton Manning, raising the Lombardi Trophy once again. She is only 19, but this avid N.F.L. fan has attended all three Super Bowls her sports idol has played in. I’ll never forget her tears of joy at the tender age of 11 when Manning and the Colts won Super Bowl XLI in South Florida. Unfortunately, I recall tears and disbelief at MetLife Stadium just two years ago when Seattle dismantled the Broncos. Just one more opportunity for a truly great athlete, N.F.L. ambassador and role model for women, men, boys and girls. — Tony Signore ■ ■ ■A ’60s vintage Formula One racecar with a spares package. Preferably Lotus or Ferrari, but I’m not that picky. I’ll cover the shipping. Thank you for thinking of me! — Tom Berlin To join thousands of other Mini car owners in the sport of driving the two-week, cross-country Mini Takes the States rally this summer, starting at Road Atlanta and ending at Thermal Club in Palm Springs.  — Carrie McPhee■ ■ ■My dream sports gift would be tickets for the Masters. In a perfect ending, the tournament would come down to a putt at the 18th where I was sitting. Then I would be invited to Butler Cabin to take part in the green jacket ceremony. That’s a dream gift. — Mike KoczanskiPlaying Augusta National in the spring when the azaleas are in bloom. — Bill BinettiA round of golf at Augusta National with my dad. — Ted FurnissTickets to the Masters. I apply but don’t succeed in getting them. The pro who taught me when I was 14 sets the pins there. I am 83. On my bucket list. — Katy KaneA foursome at Augusta National. That’s it. — Robert GalvanMy dream gift would be a round of golf at Augusta National. It would be a foursome made up of my dad, brother and nephew. A gift that would last a lifetime. — Jim Rutkowski Jr.For any golf fan, it has to be tickets to the Masters — all four days and all the practice rounds. Nothing better than seeing the best in the world at Augusta National. — Jeff Skinner AdvertisementTo play 18 holes at Augusta National with Jordan Spieth and Rory McIlroy. — Ernie DiMarzioA round of golf at Augusta National with my best friends before pancreatic cancer ends my life. — Tom McGuffeyI’d like a membership at Augusta National, please, Santa. — Rick ThompsonMy dream sports gift would be to play a round of golf at Augusta National the day after the Masters. — Phil MarbachOk, I’ll bite. Take my son, my grandson and Rory McIlroy to Augusta National on a beautiful day in May. Play 18 holes, have a quick lunch and go back out for a second 18 (now that I know the course!). Make it happen, please! — Mike M.■ ■ ■Courtside seats at the Dean Dome to watch Heels beat the Blue Devils. — Frank Sandler■ ■ ■Hitting with Juan Martín del Potro or Roger Federer for a half-hour. Ideally it would be on Centre Court at Wimbledon, but that archaic institution the All England Club would frown upon that! But this is a dream, right? — MaureliusTo play tennis with Roger Federer. I am an 18-year-old tennis player, and Roger has been my idol since I started playing at age 6. He’s a champion and a gentleman, and someone I would love to meet and talk with. — Scott BattagliaAs a senior citizen, rallying with Roger Federer on a practice court at the U.S. Open tennis facility. — Alfred Kaplan■ ■ ■I am dreaming of receiving the gift of American football made obsolete instantly, to be replaced by world football, also called soccer. American football is not just an aggressive sport dangerous to its players, with its over-the-top rules, regulations and customs (breaks every few seconds to extend the game and offer more opportunities for commercials, to mention just one) — it is also a mind-damaging danger to its supporters. In soccer, the players work for two 45-minute halves without relief and practically without interference from coaches; there is just one of them standing outside the lines, who doesn’t need a headset and is smart enough to leave the initiative and decisions to the players themselves. These players are competent athletes with the agility of dancers; their elegantly coordinated ballet and masterly foot and ball control are a heavenly sight compared with the ramming roughness dominating the American game, which, if continued, should be renamed “American head and shoulders,” a.k.a. “dandruff.” — Ton HaakAdvertisement■ ■ ■I would hope to see Olympic dreams restored to millions of young girls by bringing softball back to the 2020 Olympic Games in Tokyo. — Don Porter■ ■ ■Spend a week with an N.F.L. coach, to look over his shoulder to see firsthand how to manage and prepare a team to execute a strategy. I would then apply this knowledge to a work venture. — John Shupe■ ■ ■I would love to spend May in Indianapolis. Next year will be the 100th anniversary of the Indianapolis 500. Attendance at that race would be memorable. — S. Beasley■ ■ ■An all-access day in the life of Henrik Lundqvist as he prepares for a game. Get to tag along from start to finish, from the morning skate to the postgame locker room interviews. I mean, who doesn’t want to find out what it’s like to be Henrik Lundqvist, even if just for a day? — Stacy S.■ ■ ■The Mets winning the World Series in the next 100 years, and the Cubs never winning the World Series. — tmarkbreiter■ ■ ■A ticket to the Argentine Open Polo Championship. I grew up in Hurlingham, and we attended every polo match played at the Hurlingham Club polo grounds. We were even allowed to ride the “lesser” horses during the week. It would be marvelous to sit through even one chukker again. — Bren■ ■ ■As a lifelong New York sports fan, I dreamed of seeing the Yankees and the Mets in the World Series, and that was realized in 2000. Since then, my dream has been to see the Giants and the Jets in the Super Bowl. — Michael Marks■ ■ ■Attending a World Cup and seeing eight to 10 matches. Basically being George Vecsey. — Jon S.I want to see Liverpool play at Anfield one day. I’ve tried more than a few times to get tickets, to no avail. I think I have a better chance of being appointed manager than finding tickets as a spectator. — David DyteAdvertisementMidfield ticket in Dortmund, Germany, for a game against Bayern Munich. — Jack Kirks■ ■ ■In one season, to have tickets to center court for the men’s and women’s finals at the Australian Open, the French Open, Wimbledon and the U.S. Open. — G.G. Luke■ ■ ■To have the football that Morten Andersen kicked to send the Falcons to the Super Bowl. — Zach Blend■ ■ ■I would absolutely love one of the Tour de France-winning bikes that adorn the halls of some of the big bike manufacturers like Specialized or Trek. — Collin■ ■ ■Growing up a Cleveland sports fan can be painful, exhausting and, sad to say, depressing at times. Let’s turn to the Browns, or Brownies, as we affectionately call them back home. For over 40 years, I have been ridiculed, although other fans will sometimes give me a slight nod of compassion for my lasting and unwavering loyalty to a team that has failed to bring home a championship. As the holidays approach, once again Cleveland fans around the world are lovingly packing away their cherished orange and brown clothing, vowing that next year will be our year. You will never, ever find a more devoted fan than a Cleveland fan. So, what would my dream sports gift be? I’m not going to ask that the Browns become Super Bowl champions; I’m just not that greedy anymore. But if they could make it to the A.F.C. championship game, Browns fans around the world would rejoice. Our people could stand a bit taller, and our voices would be heard. — Cathy■ ■ ■Playing in a four-man scramble at Royal County Down with Rory McIlroy, Jordan Spieth and Jason Day, followed by a few pints of Guinness at the local pub frequented by the caddies (not the club). — Jim Crane■ ■ ■Lunch with the surviving members of the 1961 Yankees. — Steven Tragash■ ■ ■My dream is for Peyton Manning to teach me how to throw a football, and for Adam Vinatieri to teach me how to kick a field goal. — Jane■ ■ ■To see my daughter pitch at Fenway. — Paul Gray■ ■ ■Having lunch with Frank Robinson. He was my hero since I was 5, and he led the Orioles to a victory the 1966 World Series. This was a very special moment for Baltimore, which does not have a lot of special moments. Frank is 80 now, and it would be wonderful to meet him before time runs out.Advertisement■ ■ ■I would like to spend two or three weeks watching the Tour de France from various points along the course. I would love to be there at an exciting mountain summit finish. — Andrew BuilderRiding along the Tour de France route during the race with my husband and daughter!— Kathy Gunter■ ■ ■A V.I.P. experience for two in Cooperstown when Derek Jeter is inducted into the Baseball Hall of Fame in August 2019. My daughter, a softball player and Yankee fan, began asking me if the Captain was Hall-worthy over 10 years ago. I would tell her, “Only time will tell,” but I also continued to point out how he played the game with grace and passion. I always said it was the intangibles that made him great. We made a pact back then that we’d be in Cooperstown if he were ever elected. Now that it’s a lock, I have four more years to figure out how to make that happen. — Mark Spina■ ■ ■One ticket (including airfare and hotel) to the Olympics of my choice, where I would be able to attend any/every event I wished. — Brad Rothbart■ ■ ■Stanley Cup finals tickets at Madison Square Garden. I used to have season tickets in Wayne Gretzky’s twilight years. I’m a father now and have other priorities. Yet my 9-year old daughter wants to see the Rangers in person. I would be thrilled to take her. — Richard Sendrovitz■ ■ ■Nothing would be better than being able to attend my 13th Michael Jordan Senior Flight School in Las Vegas. It was a basketball fantasy camp held from the mid-1990s until about 2009. The camp was for fantasy basketball players over 35, and each team had two famous basketball coaches. Coach K was my coach twice! Michael Jordan was really into this event, very friendly, open, trash-talking, and he really enjoyed the camp until he became obsessed with golf. — Garry Munson■ ■ ■Successfully shooting a world’s top-10-size whitetail buck deer in Kansas. — Robert■ ■ ■To quietly sit at a dinner table among Willie Mays, Willie McCovey, Gaylord Perry, Felipe Alou and Juan Marichal and listen to their recollections of the San Francisco Giants, and playing together on those teams in the 1960s. — Charles ThoemingAdvertisement■ ■ ■An hour for my 11-year-old daughter, a goaltender, to work with the Rangers’ goalie coach, Benoit Allaire. I think she would have a great time working with Henrik Lundqvist’s coach, and she knows to pay close attention when the experts are talking to her about ice hockey.■ ■ ■My dream is to have an all-session pass for swimming at the 2016 Olympic Games in Rio. — Alexis Long■ ■ ■I would love to have a gold medal from the Olympics! Or tickets to the U.S. women’s national team game in the Olympics. — Amanda Coffey■ ■ ■■ ■ ■To buy a Chicago Cubs World Series pennant in my lifetime. I’m 33. Your move, Cubs. — Luke Schnoebelen■ ■ ■I want all the amazingly talented Atlanta Braves whom the front office foolishly traded this year to come back so we can win in 2016. I also want the team to stay at Turner Field and not move to the new stadium in Cobb County. — Lisa Tsiopras■ ■ ■Watching my 6-year-old daughter walk out onto the pitch as a pregame mascot for Tottenham Hotspur. Bonus points if the match is a North London Derby played at White Hart Lane, and she is paired with Tottenham’s in-form striker Harry Kane. — Brian H.■ ■ ■I’m a New York City fly fisherman, and my dream sports gift would be a day on the water with a top guide chasing steelhead on the Salmon River in Pulaski, N.Y. Yes, Pulaski, N.Y. — not Rio, South Bend or Barcelona — is my dream sports destination. Funny what fly fishing does to your sensibilities. — Chaz Orvis bamboo trout rod, 4-weight mid-flex. — Robert Dana■ ■ ■Going up the Canyon of Heroes on a float with the Mets, 2016 World Series champions. #mets #lgm #ibelieve — Susan HeitI’d like to spend a Mets game in the broadcast booth with Ron Darling and Keith Hernandez. They are by far the most insightful and enjoyable baseball broadcast team, and who knows? Maybe I could chime in with some brilliant observation myself, and a new career is born! — TovaAdvertisement■ ■ ■Throw out the first pitch at a Mets game. — Oren Abramowitz■ ■ ■Entry into the Kona Ironman. It’s extremely hard to earn a spot, and now perhaps impossible to lottery into. Still a lifetime bucket list event. — Cory S.■ ■ ■My dream gift is a monthlong sports binge. I would start June 27 at Wimbledon and spend a fortnight watching the best tennis players in the world. Then, on July 14, I would go to Ayershire, Scotland, and watch the world’s best golfers at Royal Troon compete for the Open Championship. Then off to Paris the next weekend for the finish of the Tour de France with the world’s best cyclists. — Robert■ ■ ■Pay-per-view for N.F.L. games, so I can get rid of cable. Watching the N.F.L. games is the only reason I keep my cable contract. — Lorna Gleason■ ■ ■A stick-handling tutorial with John Tavares, shooting drills with Alex Ovechkin and off-ice training with Martin St. Louis. For my kids. I’m tired just thinking about it. — Rishi Vohora■ ■ ■A new, nonracist team name for my beloved Washington N.F.L. franchise. It is way past time. Come on, Dan Snyder, make it happen! — Elizabeth J.It is a Washington Redskins jersey. My thinking is that if and when the team has to change its name, it shall become a collectors’ item. — Buntoon Raksapao■ ■ ■A trip in a time machine to watch Babe Ruth and Lou Gehrig play for the Yankees, with my grandfather in the stands. And for a quarter, no less! Take that, current Yankees ticket prices! — Jon StahlAdvertisement■ ■ ■To play a game of pickup basketball on the court at Madison Square Garden with my best friends. — Brian Descovich■ ■ ■A driver that I can hit 275 yards down the center of the fairway. — Tom Hannock■ ■ ■For Major League Baseball to take several steps so that typical games finish in under three hours. My gift would include: First, batters stay in the box; second, pitchers must deliver the ball within 15 to 18 seconds, with a clock displaying the time on scoreboards and home TV screens; third, breaks between half-innings are reduced to 60 seconds (big-screen viewers will see logo ads on all four edges of the screen, the way ESPN did it for 1994 World Cup); fourth, relief pitchers are required to finish a half-inning or face a minimum of two batters. — Wayne Baker■ ■ ■Getting tickets for Super Bowl 50 right at midfield, and a pair of gloves signed by the teams (one of each, of course). — Santiago Sangeado■ ■ ■To sit in the Committee Box when Ireland next plays New Zealand in rugby. — Conor Hayden■ ■ ■The right to have first refusal for two tickets to any/every sporting event anywhere at face value. Forever. — Gerald■ ■ ■I want to know what it feels like to have the Oregon Ducks win the college football national championship. — Nickolaus Sugai■ ■ ■A five-a-side pickup soccer game: me, Lionel Messi, Neymar, Luis Suárez and Gerard Pique (I’ll go in goal) versus Cristiano Ronaldo, Paul Pogba, Giorgio Chiellini, Andrea Pirlo and Gianluigi Buffon. — Gary PetersAdvertisement■ ■ ■A season ticket to the New England Patriots for my single-mom daughter who has worked daily to send her own daughter to college to get her nursing degree. — SBH■ ■ ■Two tickets on the 50-yard line at Lambeau Field so my son and I can watch Notre Dame play Michigan in the Shamrock Series. — Dave from Baltimore■ ■ ■Enjoy the Monaco Grand Prix on a yacht in the Harbor. But first have a “drive around” with Ayrton Senna. — Josh■ ■ ■To have my husband, a Vietnam veteran, honored during the seventh-inning stretch with Mariano Rivera there. — Anne■ ■ ■The ultimate gift for me, a die-hard 46-year-old Jets fan, would be to see my team in the Super Bowl. Yes, we’ve come close in my life (thanks, Vinny T, and yes, even you, Mark Sanchez), but we’ve never been able to seal the deal. I am now the father of three boys and don’t want them to have to suffer for as long as I have — and no, there is no chance they are allowed to root for another team! The Jets in the Super Bowl might be a Christmas miracle, but hey, it can’t hurt to ask. — Scott AckermanSeeing a player dressed in green and white hoisting the Vince Lombardi over his head in victory. Casting aside images of the big-game failures of Richard Todd, Marc Gastineau and Vinny Testaverde. No more images of Joe Walton (with his hat on backward) or Rich Kotite. Relief from first-round draft busts like Johnnie “Lam” Jones and Blair Thomas. Give us a worthy quarterback who will let us savor the sweet taste of the ultimate sports victory. Please — 1969 seems like a faded dream. — Steven J. Miller■ ■ ■To be an N.H.L. linesman in Game 7 of the Stanley Cup finals with my Los Angeles Kings participating. — Lovie Cashew■ ■ ■Ten box-seat tickets to the opening game of the next World Series that includes the Chicago Cubs. Why 10? So I can take my entire family — kids and grandkids. O.K., I’ll settle for two. — Michael MalecAdvertisement■ ■ ■For someone who works in stadium design and construction, there is nothing more wishful than the idea of kicking off a football (soccer) match, just one more time, at the most historic venue in the world — the Colosseum in Rome. Forza! — Joshua A. Boren■ ■ ■A solid throw to home plate from Lucas Duda. — S.T.■ ■ ■I want to see the Knicks trade Carmelo Anthony and build the team around Kristaps Porzingis. The kid has surpassed all expectations (except Phil Jackson’s). — Potterwon■ ■ ■I have been a baseball fan since I was 8. Or should I say, a Yankee fan since then? Anyway, I have always wanted to go to a World Series game. The Yankees wouldn’t have to be in it, although that would make it sweeter. Just the pageantry and the pressure of the game would make it worthwhile to attend. — Steve Stavrou■ ■ ■A boxing ring. Me. Chase Utley. That is all. After what he did to shortstop Ruben Tejada, he is going to be hurt by someone (probably not me) soon. If it’s a Noah Syndergaard heater aimed at him, it would be a nice present. — Eli■ ■ ■Playing doubles tennis with Stan Wawrinka against Nick Kyrgios and Thanasi Kokkinakis. Trash talking permitted. — D Mcgrory■ ■ ■■ ■ ■A writer’s workshop with Roger Angell. — Len Sandler■ ■ ■To sit down at a great Boston restaurant for an extended repast with several of my sports heroes and listen to them talk about sports and their place in the American (Boston) sports world. We would dine on great steaks, drink great bourbon and then smoke great Cuban cigars. Who would be at this table on this night? Yaz, Bobby, Bird, Bruschi, Belichick, Hannah and Pedro! — Alex Jevgrafovs■ ■ ■Watch a courtside Knicks game with Eli Manning, Odell Beckham Jr., Noah Syndergaard and Jacob degrom! — Mohammad Yusuf■ ■ ■Travel and entry to the following: the Two Oceans Marathon (South Africa), the Rio Marathon (Brazil) and the Australian Outback Marathon. I’ve completed marathons in North America, Asia, Europe and Antarctica already. — Barbara BondA version of this article appears in print on , on Page SP6 of the New York edition with the headline: A Time Machine, and Gifts That Are Less Realistic.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.