Reported by THE NEW YORK TIMESDEC. 14, 2015
Facing the Rams’ banged-up secondary, Lions receiver Calvin Johnson looked primed for a big game. But he was limited to a late reception for 16 yards as Trumaine Johnson shut him down, mostly in solo coverage. Johnson, back after missing two games with a thigh injury, also had a 58-yard interception return, which ended St. Louis’s seven-quarter touchdown drought.The Seahawks’ Russell Wilson matched a career high set last month by throwing five touchdown passes, giving him 16 in his last four games. With Seattle thin at running back, Wilson threw for 292 yards and finished with a passer rating of 139.6, his fourth straight game with a rating of at least 138.5. According to Stats L.L.C., no passer has had a rating that high in four straight games in records going back to 1960.With the Jaguars facing a late fourth down at the 1, fans chanted, “We want 50!” Coach Gus Bradley obliged them, allowing Blake Bortles to run for a score and put a finishing touch on a rout of the Colts. Bortles also threw for three scores as Jacksonville ended Indianapolis’s 16-game winning streak in the A.F.C. South, the longest division streak in N.F.L. history. The Colts’ last division loss had been at Houston on Dec. 16, 2012.Khalil Mack had five sacks of Brock Osweiler, one for a safety, as the Raiders beat the Broncos for the first time since 2011. Injury ReportThe Bengals lost quarterback Andy Dalton, who broke his right thumb, and tight end Tyler Eifert, who was evaluated for a concussion. ... Seahawks running back Thomas Rawls broke his ankle, and safety Kam Chancellor hurt his tailbone. ... Packers cornerback Sam Shields sustained a concussion. ... Buccaneers receiver Vincent Jackson injured his knee. ... Panthers cornerback Bene Benwikere broke his leg and is probably out for the season. ... Lions tight end Brandon Pettigrew left with a knee injury. ... Colts quarterback Matt Hasselbeck left with a rib injury.Information from The Associated Press A version of this article appears in print on December 14, 2015, on Page D6 of the New York edition with the headline: The Day’s Best.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.