AdvertisementSupported byRoundupBy The Associated PressHenrik Kristoffersen of Norway easily protected his lead from the first run to win the opening World Cup slalom race of the season, beating Marcel Hirscher of Austria by 1.09 seconds on Sunday in Val d’Isère, France. Hirscher, 26, seeking his fifth straight overall World Cup title, already holds a commanding lead in the overall standings, but Kristoffersen seems poised to challenge his bid for a fourth straight slalom title. Kristoffersen, 21, won his fifth career race and his fourth in slalom. Felix Neureuther of Germany took third ahead of the American David Chodounsky, whose fourth-place finish was the best of his career. Ted Ligety finished tied for 20th.SLOVAK WINS SLALOM The former junior world champion Petra Vlhova of Slovakia took advantage of Mikaela Shiffrin’s absence to win the first World Cup race of her career, prevailing in a slalom event in Are, Sweden.Vlhova, 20, added to her surprising first-run lead to win by 0.59 of a second over Frida Hansdotter of Sweden. Nina Loeseth of Norway was third, 0.65 behind. Shiffrin, the Olympic and two-time world champion, flew home for tests on her right knee after crashing while warming up for Saturday’s giant slalom race.TITLES FOR U.S. SPEEDSKATERS The American speedskater Heather Richardson-Bergsma edged her teammate Brittany Bowe to win a 1,500-meter race in Heerenveen, the Netherlands. Another American, Joey Mantia, won the men’s 1,500 to take the overall World Cup lead.GERMANS FINISH 1-2 IN BOBSLED Nico Walther defeated a fellow German, the world champion Maximilian Arndt, to claim his first four-man bobsled World Cup title of the season.Walther, pushed by Gregor Bermbach, Marko Hübenbecker and Eric Franke, was the fastest in both runs in Königssee, Germany, clocking a combined time of 1 minute 37.57 seconds to beat Arndt by 0.18 of a second.JAPANESE SKI JUMPER WINS Sara Takanashi of Japan extended her lead atop the World Cup ski jump standings, winning in Nizhny Tagil, Russia, for her 32nd career victory. In the men’s event, Peter Prevc of Slovenia earned his first win of the season to take the overall World Cup lead from Severin Freund of Germany. (AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE)Advertisement