By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSDEC. 13, 2015
 Tom Brady threw for 226 yards and two touchdowns, and the New England Patriots ended a two-game skid and clinched a playoff spot with a 27-6 win over the Texans in Houston on Sunday night.Brady threw scoring passes to Keshawn Martin and Rob Gronkowski in the first half to help New England build a 17-6 lead.The Patriots did not move the ball as well in the second half, but the defense harassed Texans quarterback Brian Hoyer into multiple mistakes. Jabaal Sheard had strip sacks on Hoyer twice after halftime. The Patriots recovered the second one early in the fourth, and James White made it 27-6 with a 2-yard run three plays later.Hoyer was sacked five times and left the game to be evaluated for a concussion with about nine minutes remaining. Hoyer already missed a game this season after sustaining a concussion on Nov. 16.AdvertisementREDSKINS 24, BEARS 21 Kirk Cousins threw for 300 yards and a touchdown, and Washington hung on for a victory at Chicago as Bears kicker Robbie Gould missed a 50-yard field-goal attempt.AdvertisementThe Redskins, who broke a nine-game road losing streak dating to last season, remained tied with Philadelphia for the N.F.C. East lead at 6-7 and moved a half-game ahead of the Giants, who are set to play at Miami on Monday.Washington took a 3-point lead early in the fourth quarter on a 47-yard field goal by Dustin Hopkins.Late in the game, though, the Bears appeared to be ready to score, with Jay Cutler connecting with Alshon Jeffery on a 50-yard pass that left Chicago on the Washington 35.Gould, who had missed a potential winner at the end of regulation in an overtime loss to San Francisco last week, got a chance to redeem himself. But his attempt sailed wide right with 1 minute 40 seconds left.PACKERS 28, COWBOYS 7 Eddie Lacy ran for 124 yards and a touchdown, and a fellow running back, James Starks, added two scores as Green Bay won at home, moving to 9-4 and taking a one-game lead over Minnesota in the N.F.C. North.With 435 yards and 29 first downs, the Packers got better production out of their inconsistent offense with Coach Mike McCarthy assuming play-calling duties again.Darren McFadden had 111 yards on nine carries for Dallas, but the Cowboys (4-9) lost more ground in the N.F.C. East.AdvertisementThe Cowboys’ Dez Bryant had a long reception overturned on replay — the same thing that happened to him in a loss to the Packers in a playoff game in January.SAINTS 24, BUCCANEERS 17 Drew Brees connected with Marques Colston on two touchdown passes to help visiting New Orleans halt a four-game losing streak.Tampa Bay (6-7), which could have climbed over .500 for the first time in three years, lost for the second time in three weeks, damaging its hopes of securing an N.F.C. wild-card spot after a slow start.Jameis Winston threw a fourth-quarter touchdown pass to cut into the Saints’ 14-point lead, and the Buccaneers got the ball back with just over five minutes remaining. But they punted four plays later.RAMS 21, LIONS 14 Leading a revived offense under the new coordinator Rob Boras, Todd Gurley ran for 140 yards on only 16 carries and scored two second-half touchdowns as St. Louis won at home.Aaron Donald had three sacks of Detroit’s Matthew Stafford to give a boost to the Rams’ defense, which had sagged in recent weeks.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.EAGLES 23, BILLS 20 Caleb Sturgis kicked a 30-yard field goal with 3:26 left, and Ed Reynolds intercepted a Tyrod Taylor pass with 1:16 left to secure a victory for Philadelphia.LeSean McCoy, whom the Eagles traded to Buffalo in the off-season, had 74 yards rushing and 35 receiving in his return to Philadelphia. McCoy, the Eagles’ career leading rusher, kissed the Eagles’ logo at midfield before the coin toss and hugged the owner Jeffrey Lurie but never approached Philadelphia Coach Chip Kelly after saying last week that he did not want to shake Kelly’s hand or talk to him.Sam Bradford threw for 247 yards for the Eagles, who improved to 6-2 in the past eight games that Bradford has started and finished.AdvertisementSEAHAWKS 35, RAVENS 6 Doug Baldwin had three touchdown receptions, and visiting Seattle won its fourth straight, keeping Baltimore out of the end zone, forcing two turnovers and allowing only 28 rushing yards.The Ravens’ offense sputtered under the direction of Jimmy Clausen, playing in place of the injured Joe Flacco and Matt Schaub. Clausen, waived by Chicago last month, became the sixth N.F.L. quarterback since 1950 to start against the same team for different clubs in the same season.The loss ensured Baltimore will finish with a losing record for the first time since Coach John Harbaugh took over in 2008.BROWNS 24, 49ERS 10 Upset after throwing an interception late in the first half, Johnny Manziel bashed a tablet on his head, but he recovered to throw a touchdown pass in the second half and help host Cleveland end a seven-game losing streak.Manziel, who had been benched two games, passed for 270 yards, throwing a 2-yard scoring pass to Gary Barnidge in the third quarter.Isaiah Crowell rushed for 145 yards and two touchdowns for the Browns.RAIDERS 15, BRONCOS 12 Derek Carr bounced back from an awful half to lead Oakland past host Denver, which led by 12-0 at the break.The Broncos failed to hang onto several passes from Brock Osweiler, including two big drops by Demaryius Thomas, one on a pass that would have resulted in a touchdown and one on a pass that would have provided a late first down. A wide-open Vernon Davis also dropped a pass on a fourth-and-5 with 3:45 left.The Raiders were held to minus-12 yards in the first half — the worst performance by a team heading into halftime since at least Nov. 1, 1992.AdvertisementCHIEFS 10, CHARGERS 3 Kansas City shut down visiting San Diego for most of the game, forcing Philip Rivers into two incomplete passes near the goal line in the final seconds to preserve the Chiefs’ seventh straight victory.The Chargers got the ball at their own 11 with five minutes left and quickly moved into Kansas City territory, converting on fourth down three times. But after Rivers was called for a delay of game at the Chiefs’ 1 with five seconds left, he threw the ball high and out of the end zone.Two seconds remained, and another incomplete pass that would have ended the game was blown dead for a false start. So with the ball pushed back to the 11, Rivers, who had the flu, scrambled and again threw to the end zone, where his pass skipped incomplete.JAGUARS 51, COLTS 16 Host Jacksonville outscored Indianapolis by 42-3 in the second half and finished with its highest regular-season point total, scoring on offense, defense and special teams in the same game for the first time since 2011. Seven Jaguars players scored.The Colts lost a second straight game by 35 points.A version of this article appears in print on December 14, 2015, on Page D6 of the New York edition with the headline: Patriots Claim a Playoff Spot by Battering the Texans.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.