By BENJAMIN HOFFMANDEC. 13, 2015
A week after running for just 4 yards in his team’s come-from-behind win, Eddie Lacy of the Green Bay Packers barreled his way to 124 yards on 24 carries in a 28-7 victory over the Dallas Cowboys.At one point demoted from his role as the team’s lead running back, Lacy now has passed the 100-yard mark in three of his last four games and his effort was a key part in his team’s offensive rejuvenation against a Cowboys team that came into the game having played well recently on defense.On top of Lacy’s big day, Green Bay also got 71 yards and a touchdown from James Stark, and Aaron Rodgers completed 22 of 35 passes for 218 yards and 2 touchdowns.
            Eddie. Lacy. pic.twitter.com/S08wSYddmA The offensive explosion coincided perfectly with Coach Mike McCarthy resuming his playcalling duties. The team ran more, used play-action passes more, and simply looked more comfortable than they had in weeks.AdvertisementMcCarthy has been under pressure to take control of the team’s struggling offense, which he had handed over to Tom Clements, his associate head coach, this offseason. The team, perennially one of the top offenses in football, came into the game ranked 22nd in total yards and 23rd in passing.Advertisement“I feel as the leader of this football team I’ve got to make sure I maximize all the opportunities and resources and give our team a chance to win,” McCarthy told reporters after the game. “Personally it didn’t feel very good. It didn’t feel good at all. That’s the challenge with these types of decisions.”Rodgers defended Clements, saying it was not necessarily the change in playcalling duties that led to the win.“I don’t think it’s been about play calling,” Rodgers said at his post-game news conference. “It’s been about execution.”While the 435 yards of offense would be welcome any week, Green Bay was likely even more excited about having controlled the ball for 37 minutes and 48 seconds, giving the Tony Romo-less Cowboys offense little time to get anything going.With the win, the Packers avoided losing three consecutive home games for the first time since 2006.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.