AdvertisementSupported byPanthers 38, Falcons 0By Jodie ValadeCHARLOTTE, N.C . — Seconds remained in the Carolina Panthers’ 38-0 pounding of the Atlanta Falcons on Sunday, and Cam Newton decided it was time to have some fun. Which is not to say he had not already had his share. Newton, the Panthers’ quarterback, had thrown three touchdown passes, celebrating a 46-yard beauty with his “dab” dance. The fans at Bank of America Stadium chanted “M.V.P.!” when he threaded the needle for his third score.But after Newton spent the fourth quarter watching reserves hold onto the commanding lead, he was eager to celebrate all that he and his team were on the verge of accomplishing: The Panthers are the final remaining undefeated N.F.L. team in Week 14 of the season, and Newton’s sparkling play has made him a favorite for the Most Valuable Player Award. So in the final seconds of Sunday’s game, Newton sprinted along the sideline from midfield to the 10-yard line at one end of the field, held his hand to his ear and encouraged cheers. He nodded emphatically when the roars came.Then Newton raced down the sideline in the opposite direction, laughing and grinning broadly, pausing only at the opposite 10-yard line to pantomime the same gestures. What was left of the crowd that had begun to thin in the blowout screamed its approval.The Panthers are 13-0. With their dominating victory over the Falcons — they had a 28-0 lead at halftime and a whopping 260 yards of offense in the first quarter — they secured a first-round bye in the playoffs.And Newton is enjoying the ride. At 26, he is the Panthers’ star, the one who preens in the spotlight with outlandish postgame outfits — after Sunday’s victory, he wore red-velvet shoes and a 12-inch furry pelt clipped to his jeans — and who rallies his teammates and fans with his effervescent leadership.“Right now, it’s our moment, as Panthers,” Newton said. “We try to seize it as much as possible.” It is a balance the Panthers are working on: embracing their undefeated march through the season while trying to stay focused on the task at hand.Last week, they nearly stumbled before pulling out a 41-38 victory in the final minutes over the New Orleans Saints.It was the jolt Carolina Coach Ron Rivera said he believed was necessary.“I’m glad they were paying attention, and just focusing in on what we need to do,” Rivera said.Against Atlanta, there were no lapses in concentration as the Panthers scored on their first three possessions. Carolina running back Jonathan Stewart had a 44-yard gain on the third play of the game, and he scored on a 1-yard leap into the end zone seven plays later.Even more impressive were Newton’s two touchdown passes in quick succession to wide receiver Ted Ginn Jr.: a 74-yard score with 6 minutes 48 seconds left in the first quarter, followed by a 46-yard touchdown. “I give all my success to Cam Newton,” said Ginn, who has eight touchdown receptions this season. “Without him, there is no Ted Ginn. I can’t say the same vice versa, but we really, really have a nice thing going right now.”Newton has had a knack for making everyone around him better all season, to the point where he is expected to dominate. Against the Falcons, Newton completed 15 of 21 attempts for 265 yards. His quarterback efficiency rating was 153.3, just shy of a perfect rating, 158.3.In the first half, he led Carolina to scores on drives of 80, 93, 80 and 81 yards with calm efficiency. “His first half was as good of quarterbacking as you can play,” tight end Greg Olsen said.Newton was quick to credit his performance to the growing confidence throughout the team.“When you have a team like that that is peaking, you don’t really look for anybody to make plays. You start making plays,” Newton said.It helped that the Panthers were facing a Falcons team that has lost six games in a row and dropped to 6-7. The Panthers outgained the Falcons, 424 to 230, in total net yards and forced four turnovers.“Carolina is one of the best the league has to offer right now, but our performance was totally unacceptable,” Atlanta Coach Dan Quinn said. The only negatives for the Panthers were a handful of injuries. Olsen missed the second half with a knee injury. Stewart missed the second half with a foot injury. And Carolina’s already thin defensive backfield took a hit when cornerback Bené Benwikere sustained a broken leg, Rivera said.Still, the Panthers are the only team with a chance at a perfect season. The last time a team went undefeated was in 2007, when the New England Patriots finished the regular season 16-0. That Patriots team lost Super Bowl XLII to the Giants, whom the Panthers will play next week at MetLife Stadium.“It’s good, but we’re not going to grow complacent,” safety Kurt Coleman said. “This is not a place for us to take the foot off the gas. We’ve got to get better. And that’s the exciting part. This team is hungry.” He added: “I think that’s the great part about this team. Nobody is satisfied with where we’re at. Thirteen-and-0 was never the goal. You can go 13-0 and still lose in the Super Bowl, or lose in the first round. And then it’s all for nothing.”Advertisement