AdvertisementSupported byBy Christopher ClareyAmericans and Internationals mixing it up in the Presidents Cup has been a bad recipe for suspense.The Americans have lost only once in the 10 editions of golf’s other biennial team event. The major tension in team play has usually been reserved for the Ryder Cup, which pits Americans against Europeans.But this edition of the Presidents Cup, which begins Thursday in Incheon, South Korea, could provide at least one matchup full of sizzle and uncertainty: a duel between the top players of the moment, No. 1 Jordan Spieth of the United States and No. 2 Jason Day of Australia.“We could probably make it happen; we’ll just have to see,” said Jay Haas, the United States Presidents Cup captain. “But yes, I think it would be cool.”Spieth, 22, has won five tournaments this year, including the Masters and the United States Open. Day, 27, has also won five tournaments, including his first major, the P.G.A. Championship, where he got the better of Spieth in the final pairing in the last round.They were also paired frequently down the final stretch of the PGA Tour season that just concluded, with Spieth winning the FedEx Cup.But a Presidents Cup mano a mano would add another dimension to this fast-emerging rivalry and give the 2015 edition what it lacked in 2013, when the captains did not match Tiger Woods, then No. 1, and Adam Scott, then No. 2, in singles.“You look at the past greats of the game, Arnie and Jack, they were the first two who really kind of battled it out throughout the course of time,” Haas said. “It’s always nice to see the best players go at each other.”The Arnie and Jack in question — Arnold Palmer and Jack Nicklaus — were American teammates when it came to international play, however. Neither played in the Presidents Cup, which was not created until 1994.But Nicklaus has played a major role as a four-time captain and as the leader of the company that designed the two most recent courses used for the event: Muirfield Village in Dublin, Ohio, in 2013 and the Jack Nicklaus Golf Club in Incheon this year.Nicklaus, who will travel to South Korea for the event, likes the idea of Spieth versus Day in the singles. (They could also face off in the foursomes or fourball competitions, which will be contested in the first three days.)“I certainly have a history of doing that as a captain, going back to my first opportunity in 1998, when I paired Tiger against Greg Norman,” Nicklaus said in an interview last week. “When the Presidents Cup went to South Africa in 2003, I put Tiger against Ernie Els. In 2005 in Washington, we had Fred Couples against Vijay Singh and Phil Mickelson against Ángel Cabrera. Then, in my last opportunity, in 2007, when we went to Canada, I was able to pair Tiger and the host country’s hero, Mike Weir.”He added: “When I was captain, I asked the guys who they would like to play, and if I could get the matchup for them, I did. I think that adds to the Presidents Cup. It’s something they don’t have in the Ryder Cup. I think it makes for something unique, something exciting and something appealing to the fans.”Spieth and Day have also expressed enthusiasm about facing off in match play.“I think a lot of people around the world are interested to see if that will happen,” Day told reporters in Incheon on Tuesday. “It would be a lot of fun playing against Jordan, but then again I’m not too sure what the strategy is with that.”The Presidents Cup is largely the brainchild of the PGA Tour commissioner, Tim Finchem. It was designed to provide a forum for the growing number of stars not from the United States or Europe and thus not eligible to compete in the Ryder Cup.In competitive terms, the Presidents Cup has been a flop. The Americans have now won five in a row, all by 3 points or more. Their depth has been superior, and so has their sense of team identity, despite earnest efforts by the Internationals to bond a group of 12 players who come not only from different countries but different continents.Consider this year’s team, which has representatives from Australia, Japan, New Zealand, South Africa, South Korea and, for the first time in a Presidents Cup, Thailand and India.“I think if you look at us, we’re not used to having South Korea or Japan or China pushed together with Australia or South Africa,” said Frank Nobilo, a former assistant captain and a member of the only International team to win the Cup, in 1998. “We’re natural rivals, too. Look at rugby with New Zealand and Australia or New Zealand and South Africa.“So the biggest problem for us is trying to get that team chemistry. The players want to do it. It’s just getting them to be comfortable in an environment they are not normally used to. It’s just the geographical issue we have. It’s not the players’ fault, just the way it is.”The commercial upside is that the Presidents Cup — now in Asia for the first time — continues to showcase the game in areas that are never going to host a Ryder Cup or a major.“The game in the Asian region has grown leaps and bounds over the last 20 years or so,” Nicklaus said. “We certainly have seen it just in our design company. We have more than 90 courses opened in the Asia-Pacific region, and that is spread over 15 countries. We have some 26 courses open in Japan and the same number in China. We just opened our first course in Vietnam, with several more under construction.”The Americans’ success in the competition continues to provide a stark contrast with their struggles in the Ryder Cup, even though the cast of players has often been the same.“It’s a lot of little things, but no one glaring thing to me,” Haas said of the disparity between the results in the two competitions. “I think the more time goes on, the more the American players maybe press to win the Ryder Cup and to quiet the critics.”Format changes to the Presidents Cup this year have made the two events more similar, though. After a long lobbying effort, Nick Price and the International team succeeded in persuading Finchem to reduce the number of matches to increase the Internationals’ chances. There will be 30 points at stake this time instead of 34.Previously, every member of a Presidents Cup team was guaranteed to play on each of the four days, which removed some of the angst and intrasquad competition. Now, all 12 players on each team will still play in the Sunday singles, but as in the Ryder Cup, the captains will have to choose who will sit on the opening days of team play.“One of the great things about the Presidents Cup, I thought, was more guys getting to play and showcasing their talents,” Haas said. “But it was something that the International team was very adamant about, and Tim listened to them and made the change.”A Spieth-Day duel would presumably require Price’s approval. Price is captain of the International team again after serving in that role in 2013, when Woods-versus-Scott failed to materialize.“I did my pairings this morning to try to win the Cup, not to put 1 and 2 together,” Price said after the Americans had wrapped up an 18½-15½ victory in 2013 at Muirfield Village.He later added: “You can’t go to your opposing captain and say, ‘Let’s put Adam and Tiger together.’ Maybe the commissioner could do that, but I’m not going to do it.”But with a more open draw and a less cutthroat vibe than at the Ryder Cup, the possibility is certainly there for the captains to make such a joint call.“We’d have to have some kind of agreement or some kind of wink-wink to make this happen,” Haas said. “But I think the world — the golf world — would want to see it, and they’ve been kind of back and forth all year, so you never know.”He added: “I have not spoken to Nick about it. I know the players would love it. Neither one of them is scared of the other one, and I don’t think either one of them would say, ‘Aw, why did you do that?’ ”Advertisement