By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSDEC. 13, 2015
Marek Zidlicky scored twice and Thomas Greiss made 27 saves for his first shutout of the season to lead the Islanders to a 4-0 victory over the visiting Devils on Sunday, extending to 10 games the Islanders’ streak without a regulation loss.John Tavares and Matt Martin also scored for the Islanders, who are on an 8-0-2 stretch and moved into second place in the Metropolitan Division, 1 point ahead of the crosstown-rival Rangers.The Islanders also improved to 11-4-2 at home in their first season at Barclays Center in Brooklyn.“I’m just happy we are winning,” said Greiss, who improved to 9-3-2 in his first season with the Islanders. “The team is playing great in front of me. This was one of our best games all year.”Cory Schneider gave up three goals on 18 shots before he was replaced by Keith Kincaid after Martin’s goal seven and a half minutes into the second period. Kincaid finished with 11 saves.AdvertisementThe Devils were again without Travis Zajac (upper-body injury) and Adam Henrique (lower-body injury).AdvertisementZidlicky, who played parts of four seasons with the Devils, opened the scoring with a slap shot from the point at 7 minutes 43 seconds of the first period.Zidlicky, who joined the Islanders as a free agent during the summer, had not scored since opening night against Chicago on Oct. 9.Tavares made it 2-0 at 11:53 of the first, tipping Kyle Okposo’s pass behind Schneider for his team-leading 13th goal of the season.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Martin’s third goal of the season made it 3-0 at 7:28 of the second, chasing Schneider.Zidlicky’s second goal of the game and third of the season capped the scoring with 43 seconds left in the second.Greiss made nine saves in the opening period, seven in the second and 11 in the third.BLACKHAWKS 4, CANUCKS 0  Patrick Kane extended his point streak to 26 games, Corey Crawford made 30 saves for his second straight shutout, and host Chicago beat Vancouver.Kane, with 46 points the N.H.L.’s leading scorer, had the second assist on Duncan Keith’s power-play goal midway through the first.AVALANCHE 3, BLUES 1  Jack Skille and John Mitchell scored in the first period and Semyon Varlamov made a season-high 42 saves to lead visiting Colorado to a win over St. Louis.Carl Soderberg added an empty-net goal with 22 seconds remaining to seal Colorado’s fifth win in seven games.Varlamov stopped the first 36 shots until Vladimir Tarasenko spoiled his shutout bid with a power-play goal with 7:05 remaining. It was Tarasenko’s team-high 18th of the season.A version of this article appears in print on December 14, 2015, on Page D9 of the New York edition with the headline: Islanders Top Devils to Move Into Second.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.