By JONAH BROMWICHDEC. 13, 2015
Every week, The New York Times will choose one essential game to watch, highlighting hot teams, winning and losing streaks and statistical intrigue in the N.B.A.Cleveland at Boston, Tuesday, 7:30 p.m. Eastern, NBA TVHalfway through last December, the Eastern Conference was in terrible shape. Nine of the East’s 15 teams had records under .500, and seven of them were below .400.It is remarkable how many teams have improved this season. Among that group of low achievers, the Boston Celtics, the Charlotte Hornets, the Detroit Pistons, the Indiana Pacers, the Miami Heat and the Orlando Magic have winning records. Only two teams in the conference have winning percentages below .400: the Nets and the Philadelphia 76ers.Another sign of the turnaround is how competitive the East has become. Through Saturday’s games, the Cleveland Cavaliers were on top at 15-7. But the Atlanta Hawks, a full eight spots away in the standings, were only two and a half games behind.AdvertisementSome of the best teams from last season — the Chicago Bulls, the Washington Wizards — appear to have taken a step back. But over all, the conference’s teams are playing at a higher level.AdvertisementBy taking the Warriors to two overtimes Friday night in Golden State’s toughest test to that point, the Celtics showed they were to be taken seriously. Boston’s tenacity exhausted Golden State, which might have been a factor as the Warriors dropped their first game of the season on Saturday night against a mediocre Milwaukee Bucks squad. Fatigue did not seem to bother the Celtics, who beat the Hornets and jumped two spots in the standings, up to sixth. Boston, which has played back-to-back games five times this season, has won on the second night of those doubles four times.In the last two years, the Celtics have done an admirable job of rebuilding, refusing to cling to the personnel who led them to a championship in 2008. After Doc Rivers left the team in a 2013 trade to coach the Los Angeles Clippers, the Celtics’ general manager, Danny Ainge, was willing to send Kevin Garnett and Paul Pierce, the two remaining members of the team’s Big 3, to the Nets. The Celtics’ most important acquisition in the deal was a handful of first-round draft picks.That same summer, the Celtics drafted center Kelly Olynyk, an early piece in what is now their core. Olynyk, perhaps Boston’s hardest-working defender, was also its fiercest weapon against the Warriors, scoring 28 points, including all 7 of the Celtics’ points in the first overtime. After averaging only 6.8 points a game through November, he is off to a better start this month, at 16.5.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Olynyk is not the only defensive stalwart on the squad. Isaiah Thomas, Jae Crowder and Avery Bradley are all smart, sneaky defensive players, each of them averaging at least 1.5 steals a game. Their pickpocket prowess helped Boston post the fourth-best defensive rating in the league (97 points allowed per 100 possessions) entering Sunday. The Celtics are particularly good at defending the 3-point line, one reason the Warriors had so much trouble taking them down.The Celtics appeared to be ahead of their reconstruction schedule last season when, at 40-42, they crept into the playoffs as the seventh seed. Facing the Cavaliers in the first round, they were swept, but not before Olynyk dislocated Kevin Love’s shoulder, effectively ending Love’s season and depleting the roster of the Cavaliers, who fell to the Warriors in the N.B.A. finals.You might expect Love to hold a grudge against Olynyk and the Celtics, the Cavaliers’ opponent on Tuesday night in Boston. But soon after the incident, Love said he and Olynyk were on good terms, and from the way Love is playing this year, it is clear that the shoulder is no longer bothering him. Although his numbers have not made a major leap, he is scoring far more comfortably within the Cavaliers’ offense, particularly in the post, a spot that rewards his superlative passing ability and punishing right hook.Love has been one of the few bright spots recently for a Cleveland team that has not quite looked like itself, losing three of its last five games, with two of the losses to lesser teams, the Wizards and the New Orleans Pelicans.Still, the return of Kyrie Irving, the Cavaliers’ second-best player, appears imminent. Having sat all season with knee troubles, he is listed as day to day and might even return on Tuesday. (Another top Cleveland player, Iman Shumpert, returned to action on Friday and scored 14 points while shooting 5 of 7 from the field.)When the Cavaliers are finally able to field their full roster, they may well put some distance between themselves and the rest of the East. But right now, they are barely clinging to the top spot — and the Celtics are one of several teams that seem primed to push them off.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.