AdvertisementSupported byJets 30, Titans 8By Zach SchonbrunEAST RUTHERFORD, N.J. — After his team celebrated its overtime victory against the Giants last week, after the owner Woody Johnson danced in the locker room and the Empire State Building started to twinkle in green and white, Jets Coach Todd Bowles found a text message waiting on his phone.“Everybody’s talking playoffs,” Bowles said the message read. “Just coach your team and worry about the next game.”The sender was Bill Parcells, the former Jets coach who has mentored Bowles since hiring him as a defensive backs coach in 2000. Challenges like the one the Jets faced Sunday against the Tennessee Titans were anathema to Parcells. As the Dallas Cowboys’ coach, he hung mousetraps from shoelaces in the locker room before a game to remind his players not to fall into the trap of overlooking their next opponent after an emotional victory.After the Jets dismantled Tennessee, 30-8, at MetLife Stadium on Sunday, there was no “I told you so” message waiting on Bowles’s phone. He never needed to warn his players to keep their focus from straying. They assured him they were not going to be trapped.“We didn’t hear that word all week,” receiver Brandon Marshall said.Against a clearly outmatched opponent, the Jets displayed some ruthless efficiency early in Sunday’s game. Their opening drive included a 19-yard scramble by quarterback Ryan Fitzpatrick, a 12-yard pickup by Marshall that featured a ferocious stiff arm and a 16-yard touchdown catch by Eric Decker.There was more explosiveness out of the backfield from Bilal Powell, who caught five passes in the game, one of them for a touchdown, and more thundering runs from Chris Ivory, who finished with 101 rushing yards. Muhammad Wilkerson had three sacks and forced a fumble, and Buster Skrine snagged his first interception of the year.And then there was a play that defied explanation. With less than two minutes left in the first half, the Titans failed to realize until far too late that Marshall (all 6 feet 4 inches of him) was left to roam unguarded at the line of scrimmage. Marshall waved his arm, and Fitzpatrick quickly checked out of a shotgun formation and rushed to take the snap under center Nick Mangold. He then fired the ball to Marshall, who ran down the sideline for a 69-yard touchdown, the Jets’ longest scoring play of the season, making it 27-0 after the extra point.“Fitz and Brandon have been around awhile, so they saw something,” Bowles said. “Luckily, Brandon didn’t get caught by a defensive tackle.”Marshall said, “I’ll take it.”He had another monster game. Decker did, too. Together they are establishing one of the league’s most dangerous tandems, and it seems that their interchangeability is rubbing off on Ivory and Powell, who are having a similar effect in the running game.Together, the four of them generated 388 of the team’s 439 total yards Sunday, with three scores. There may have been other skill players on the field for the Jets, but it was hard to notice them. Fitzpatrick, who finished 21 for 36 for 263 yards and three touchdowns, could sprinkle the ball to any of the four and still leave the defense fearing where it was going next. “You want guys cheering for each other and pushing each other,” Marshall said. “That’s what we have here.”Fitzpatrick credited the team’s chemistry with recognizing and exploiting the Titans’ mistake on the Marshall touchdown, which he said was not a situation the team regularly practiced (or, for that matter, expected to see in a game).“It’s just three guys — me, Nick and Brandon — being on the same page,” Fitzpatrick said. Whatever the Jets were doing offensively, the Titans (3-10) did the opposite. Their chemistry was not going to impress at a fourth-grade science fair. The rookie quarterback Marcus Mariota, coming off a record-setting performance against Jacksonville in which he became the first player in N.F.L. history to throw for at least 250 yards and three touchdowns and rush for at least 100 yards, struggled to find any rhythm. The Jets spent the week focusing on his explosive scrambling ability, and they blitzed the pocket from all directions.“He’s really a pocket passer who’s able to run,” linebacker David Harris said of Mariota. “One of our goals was to keep him in the pocket, because everybody knows how dangerous he is when he gets to the perimeter.”The Jets held Mariota to three rushing attempts for 3 yards, with no touchdowns and one interception. “I can do a better job moving our protections or getting us out of things to help those guys up front,” Mariota said. “I’ve just got to do a better job of getting us in better plays.”Mariota did show just how versatile his athleticism could look with a 41-yard reception on a pass from running back Antonio Andrews late in the third quarter. But for the most part, his activity was limited to fleeing pressure from a defense that sacked him five times and hit him seven times.“We know he’s an elusive guy,” Wilkerson said. “But our job as pass rushers is to have precise rushing lanes, and I think we did that pretty well today.”The Jets (8-5) have kept pace with the Pittsburgh Steelers and the Kansas City Chiefs, both winners Sunday, in a battle for the two wild-card spots in the A.F.C. The Jets had the same record at this stage in 2011, and they wound up missing the postseason. It was a similar story in 2008, 2000, 1997 and 1993.So there was a cautious optimism after Sunday’s victory — a convincing blowout, but one that leaves the Jets still reaching for the postseason from the same distance as before.“We understand what’s on the line,” Marshall said. “All these games down the stretch are big.” EXTRA POINTSThe rookie Jets receiver DEVIN SMITH was carted off the field in the third quarter with an injury to his right knee, and the punt returner JEREMY KERLEY left the game with a calf injury.Advertisement