AdvertisementSupported byGlobal SoccerBy Rob HughesLONDON — When A.F.C. Bournemouth was promoted to the Premier League for the first time in its history this summer, the dream was to share the field with the likes of Chelsea and Manchester United. In just one week, Bournemouth has beaten them both, and deservedly so.A 1-0 victory at Chelsea on Dec. 6 set the team’s confidence alight, and a 2-1 win at home on Saturday over Manchester United had it soaring off the scale. This is no fairy tale of luck — there was too much effort being shown by too many players in Bournemouth’s red and black jerseys for that to be the case.But there is a surreal element to a club with a stadium that barely holds 11,500 fans putting the sword to two of the world’s most lauded clubs. The wind blew and the rain came down on Saturday on England’s south coast, yet many Bournemouth fans arrived at their recently renamed Vitality Stadium in a mood of excitement.United is to them the iconic team. Once upon a time, in 1984, Bournemouth beat Manchester United, but that was in the F.A. Cup, where giant killing takes on an ephemeral magic of its own. Between then and now, Bournemouth had been to the bottom of the four leagues of English professional soccer and faced liquidation.Its rapid rise has been well documented. Much of it is because of one man — Eddie Howe — a player who became player-coach and then team manager. His sense of how the game should be played — with the ball on the grass, and not hoisted high and far in the air as clubs in England long have done — was daring to say the least, with the club’s hand-to-mouth budget.Along the way, the club attracted what every team craves: a rich benefactor. It came in the form of a Russian, Maxim Demin, who is not in the same league of Chelsea’s billionaire owner Roman Abramovich, but someone who nevertheless agreed to cover the bills so long as Howe kept the team rising.The win at Chelsea was a snatch-and-grab. Bournemouth was hanging on through a resolute defense when it broke away to score late in the game.Saturday wasn’t like that. Bournemouth was attacking and counterattacking the whole day, taking the game to United, and the victory had little to do with luck.Some may attribute Manchester’s loss to the fact it was without nine senior players because of injury or suspension, or that it came after a chastening loss at Wolfsburg last Tuesday that knocked United out of the Champions League.After that loss, United Coach Louis van Gaal said to the Manchester fans that it is time they accepted his defensive style of play and stop dreaming of the past, when United teams were cavaliers of a fast and entertaining style.The finances of the game, van Gaal pointed out, have changed. United no longer has the privilege of being a special case. “People don’t wish to hear me,” he said. “They say a club like Manchester United has to win. That is in the past.”Maybe it is. Maybe the payout from the Premier League’s new $7.8 billion television deal gives a leg up to small, well-run and aspiring clubs like Bournemouth.It takes more than money. Howe has instilled an esprit de corps at Bournemouth that relies on fitness and desire from its players. The fitness can be coached, but the desire has to be in their hearts.United had some big players missing? So did Bournemouth. It lost the team’s top scorer, Callum Wilson, to a knee injury in September, by which time Bournemouth’s new striker Max Gradel had already suffered a similar long-term injury.Coach Howe had six first-teamers out and unable to play against United. A seventh, Harry Arter, asked to play on Saturday even though he was still grieving the death last week of his newborn daughter.Arter ran himself into the ground Saturday. At one point, he snapped at the referee and was booked. Howe restrained his player, spoke to Arter and then substituted him.This team is family, and when a member is hurting, the rest gather around.Bournemouth scored first when a corner kick from Junior Stanislas caught the wind and tricked United goalkeeper David De Gea, who got a hand to the ball but let it through his fingers and into his net. United drew even when Michael Carrick’s long pass from the center circle was taken down off the chest of Memphis Depay.Bournemouth keeper Artur Boruc rushed to block Depay’s shot, but Marouane Fellaini bustled onto the rebound and, despite stumbling onto his knees, somehow managed to get a foot on the ball and prod it over the goal line.“Now go win it all over again” was the gist of Bournemouth’s conversation at halftime. Win it they did, with a rehearsed corner-kick routine, where the ball was played low into the goalmouth and two Bournemouth players made decoy runs, allowing Joshua King to spin and side-foot the ball into the net.King, born in Oslo to a Gambian father and a Norwegian mother, accomplished a dream when he joined United at 16. But after five years of limited opportunities in Manchester and loans to several other clubs, he left, joining the Blackburn Rovers before signing with Bournemouth.“Scoring against United meant a lot,” King said. “I practice that move a lot. This is the first time it has gone in.”Van Gaal’s take on the Bournemouth goals was interesting. “You have to sniff that kind of movement at set pieces,” he said. “We have not sniffed the danger until it was too late.”Advertisement