By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSDEC. 14, 2015
MIAMI GARDENS, Fla. —  With the score tied in the fourth quarter, Odell Beckham Jr. somehow slipped 5 yards behind the secondary.That turned out to be the winning margin for the Giants.Beckham’s 84-yard touchdown reception put the Giants ahead to stay with 11 minutes to go, and they forged a three-way tie atop the N.F.C. East by beating the Miami Dolphins, 31-24, on Monday night.Giants quarterback Eli Manning completed 27 of 31 passes for 337 yards and four scores. His passer rating, 151.5, was his highest since 2009.The Giants (6-7), who broke a three-game losing streak, are tied with the Redskins and the Eagles for the lead in their woeful division.Advertisement“It’s a must-win, a playoff game for us,” Beckham said. “They’re all playoff games.”The Dolphins (5-8) were eliminated from the playoff race, extending their postseason drought to seven years, a franchise record.Advertisement“Obviously this is not where we want to be,” quarterback Ryan Tannehill said, “but here we are.”Beckham had seven catches for 166 yards, including a 5-yard reception for a first down with two minutes to play that sealed the outcome. The 100-yard game was Beckham’s sixth in a row, a Giants record.“They got it to a star player, and he made plays for them,” Dolphins defensive tackle Ndamukong Suh said.Manning also had touchdown passes to Rueben Randle and Will Tye.Beckham outplayed his close friend and former Louisiana State teammate Jarvis Landry, who had 11 catches for 99 yards but committed a costly personal foul with the Dolphins trailing late.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Beckham made a 45-yard reception to set up a touchdown and had a 6-yard scoring catch. The touchdown was initially ruled incomplete because Beckham was thought to be out of bounds, but the decision was overturned by a replay review that made the score 24-24.Beckham then took advantage of broken coverage to score the go-ahead touchdown. Jamar Taylor and the seldom-used safety Shamiel Gary were the closest defenders as Manning hit Beckham in stride at midfield, and he sprinted to the end zone for his 12th touchdown of the season.The Giants had plotted the play at their hotel before the game.“We got the coverage we wanted,” Manning said. “We thought it would be a big play, but I didn’t think he would be that open.”Beckham’s final catch, a diving grab on third down at midfield with two minutes to play, sealed the victory.AdvertisementThe Giants’ victory means they will play on Sunday night in two weeks. The N.F.L. announced earlier Monday that its Dec. 27 prime-time matchup would hinge on the result of the Giants-Dolphins game.The Giants’ visit to Minnesota in Week 16 will now be featured on “Sunday Night Football” on NBC under the league’s flexible scheduling policy.Tannehill threw for 236 yards and burned a blitz by throwing deep to Kenny Stills for a 47-yard score that put Miami ahead by 24-17. But Tannehill overthrew an open Landry behind the Giants’ secondary with his team trailing and less than five minutes to go.“Those are the ones you’ve got to make,” Tannehill said.A version of this article appears in print on December 15, 2015, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Beckham and Giants Pull Away From Dolphins and Into a First-Place Tie.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.