By ALLAN KREDADEC. 14, 2015
SYOSSET, N.Y. —  The Islanders are winning in every possible manner of late, with points in 10 straight games, including eight victories: four in regulation, three in shootouts and one in a three-on-three overtime. Goaltenders Jaroslav Halak and Thomas Greiss have helped drive the team’s climb up the standings.Halak and Greiss each have nine victories and a goals-against-average of just over two per game this season. They also have a bond that appears to steady their play and the collective efforts of their teammates in front of them.“It’s healthy competition; they push each other,” said Islanders Coach Jack Capuano, who has been searching for such a twosome in his five years behind the team’s bench. “I like how hard they compete and how hard they work — plus the friendship they have off the ice.”Halak was the team’s stalwart last season, winning a career-high and franchise-record 38 games as the Islanders finished with 101 points. They had three backups at different junctures — Chad Johnson, Michal Neuvirth and Kevin Poulin — but none played with the consistency and poise Greiss has shown this year.AdvertisementA 29-year-old German, Greiss signed as a free agent after 20 games as Pittsburgh’s backup last season. He played three of the Islanders’ first four games while Halak nursed an injury and has kept up his steady play since.Greiss has played 14 games to Halak’s 17 and had perhaps his best performance with 27-save shutout against the Devils on Sunday at Barclays Center to improve to 9-3-2.“It’s a team effort; it helps when everyone is playing well in front of me,” said Greiss, who was drafted in the third round by the San Jose Sharks in 2004. “I’m just happy the team is winning. That is what’s most important.”The Islanders (18-8-5) have been winning at a pace similar to last season, and they are 11-4-2 at home in their first season in Brooklyn, entering Tuesday’s game against the Florida Panthers.With their recent surge, the Islanders have passed the Rangers, who are 2-6-2 in their last 10, for second place in the Metropolitan Division. The Islanders sit 3 points behind the first-place Washington Capitals.AdvertisementThe veteran center Frans Nielsen said the reliable goaltending had increased the team’s confidence.“It doesn’t matter who we have in there; they are giving us a chance to win,” Nielsen said. “It’s all you can ask from your goalies. They are giving us great efforts every night, and it’s fun to watch.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Halak, who has two shutouts and a 9-4-3 record, credited Greiss with helping his game.Having more than one sturdy goaltender is not new to the Islanders. During their run of four straight Stanley Cups from 1980 to 1983, the playoff starter Billy Smith shared regular-season duties with Glenn Resch and Roland Melanson.“It’s always good when you have two goalies who can play and win games,” said Halak, who got the nod over a young Carey Price for Montreal in the 2010 playoffs when the Canadiens reached the conference finals. “It’s a long season. It’s good that we can have two goalies ready all the time.”Halak was traded to St. Louis after that playoff run and played the next three-plus seasons with the Blues. He joined the Islanders after they parted ways with the previous starter Evgeni Nabokov after the 2013-14 season. Now entrenched as the Islanders’ starter, the soft-spoken Slovakian goaltender inspires chants of “Jaro, Jaro” from the home fans.“We know Jaro is our guy,” Capuano said. “But Thomas is playing extremely well. It’s good that we play with structure in front of them both to limit the opposition’s chances. What you ask of your goaltenders is when there is a breakdown they will make a save.”Halak said he had been enjoying the transition to Barclays Center, where support has grown as the wins continue to pile up for the Islanders, who have reached the postseason two of the past three springs but have not won a playoff series since 1993.“The crowds have been louder and louder as the season moves on, especially that game against the Rangers,” Halak said, referring to a 2-1 shootout win over their rivals on Dec. 2. “We have to just keep getting better and playing well. That’s the key.”Greiss, who is a win away from tying his career high of 10 victories for the Coyotes two seasons ago, said his shutout over the Devils was a chance to savor the moment.“The building was pumping, and everything was clicking,” he said. “It’s definitely fun to play here.”AdvertisementNielsen added that it was particularly gratifying to see the Islanders succeed using balanced scoring and steady defense. “A big strength of our team is our depth,” he said.Because of an editing error, an article about Islanders goalies Jaroslav Halak and Thomas Greiss misstated, in some editions, the recent record of the Rangers, whom the Islanders had passed in the standings. They had won two of their last 10 games, not lost two of 10.A version of this article appears in print on December 15, 2015, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: Dependable Goalie Tandem Lifts the Islanders .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.