By MIKE McPHATEDEC. 14, 2015
An N.B.A. referee disclosed in a statement to Yahoo Sports that he is gay after Rajon Rondo, a Sacramento Kings guard, directed what the league called a “derogatory and offensive term” at him during a game this month.Bill Kennedy, who is working his 18th season as an N.B.A. referee, told Yahoo Sports, “I am proud to be an N.B.A. referee and I am proud to be a gay man.”He added: “I am following in the footsteps of others who have self-identified in the hopes that will send a message to young men and women in sports that you must allow no one to make you feel ashamed of who you are.”Rondo, a four-time All-Star, was ejected after receiving consecutive technical fouls during a losing effort against the Boston Celtics in Mexico City on Dec. 3. Rondo delivered an increasingly animated tirade toward Kennedy before his teammates had to physically pull him away.AdvertisementIn a game officials’ report described by Yahoo Sports, Kennedy and a fellow referee, Ben Taylor, said Rondo’s outburst included an anti-gay slur.AdvertisementThe league later suspended Rondo for one game, citing his language and failure to leave quickly enough upon ejection.On Twitter on Monday, Rondo suggested that anti-gay animus played no role in his choice of language, saying the comments were “out of frustration and emotion, period!”He continued in a second message: “They absolutely do not reflect my feelings toward the L.G.B.T. community. I did not mean to offend or disrespect anyone.”Kennedy’s statement elicited an outpouring of support online Monday, with some commentators criticizing the league’s one-game suspension of Rondo as too lenient.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Commissioner Adam Silver said in a statement that he supported “Bill’s decision to live his life proudly and openly.” He acknowledged that “while our league has made great progress, our work continues to ensure that everyone is treated with respect and dignity.”The Sacramento Kings owner Vivek Ranadive apologized to Kennedy on behalf of the team and added that Rondo’s comments were “not reflective of the culture of the Sacramento Kings organization or the world we want to live in.”Few players in the four major American sports leagues have publicly come out as gay. In 2013, Jason Collins, the retired N.B.A. center, became the first openly gay male athlete who was still active in a major American team sport.In a posting on Twitter on Monday night, Collins commended Kennedy for “sharing his story and demonstrating true professionalism.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.