By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSDEC. 14, 2015
T. J. Oshie scored twice and added an assist as the Washington Capitals spoiled Mike Sullivan’s head coaching debut with the Penguins in a 4-1 win on Monday night in Pittsburgh.Nicklas Backstrom had a goal and two assists for Washington. John Carlson added his fifth goal of the season for the Capitals, the Metropolitan Division leaders. Braden Holtby stopped 44 of Pittsburgh’s season-high 45 shots.Evgeni Malkin scored his team-leading 14th goal for the Penguins, but Pittsburgh failed to keep pace with Washington in Sullivan’s first game since he took over when Mike Johnston was fired. Marc-Andre Fleury made 30 saves, but the captain Sidney Crosby was held without a point, and Pittsburgh’s power play went 0 for 2.Washington needed just over seven minutes to build a two-goal lead. Backstrom took a backhand feed from Oshie and cruised down the slot before beating Fleury over his glove. Carlson scored his fifth of the season 7 minutes 4 seconds into the first by flipping his own rebound past Fleury as Pittsburgh’s defense scrambled to protect the front of the net.AdvertisementOILERS 3, BRUINS 2  Andrej Sekera scored 41 seconds into overtime to lift visiting Edmonton over Boston for the Oilers’ sixth straight win.AdvertisementCam Talbot made 47 saves, and Jordon Eberle and Ryan Nugent-Hopkins scored first-period goals for Edmonton. The victory halted an eight-game losing streak in Boston for the Oilers, fresh off a 5-0 homestand — their best since 1987.The Bruins had tied it on Brad Marchand’s goal with 4:38 to play in regulation.LIGHTNING 2, BLUE JACKETS 1  Brian Boyle scored a short-handed goal in the third period, and Ben Bishop made several big stops down the stretch, finishing with 25 saves, as Tampa Bay beat host Columbus.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Brandon Dubinsky scored for Columbus, which has dropped four in a row. Joonas Korpisalo, a 21-year-old rookie, was impressive in stopping 27 shots in his first N.H.L. start.SABRES 2, RED WINGS 1  Ryan O’Reilly and Johan Larsson scored 61 seconds apart late in the third period, rallying visiting Buffalo over Detroit.O’Reilly tied it, 1-1, at 15:46 when his deflected shot beat goalie Petr Mrazek between the legs. Larsson scored the go-ahead goal with 3:13 remaining.SENATORS 5, KINGS 3  Mike Hoffman had two goals and an assist to lead host Ottawa to a win over Los Angeles. Craig Anderson made 33 saves in his 15th straight start.RANGERS WAIVE STOLL  The Rangers placed the slumping veteran forward Jarret Stoll on waivers. Stoll had one goal and two assists in 29 games.A version of this article appears in print on December 15, 2015, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: Capitals Ruin Debut of Penguins’ Coach; Oilers Win 6th Straight.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.