By TYLER KEPNERDEC. 14, 2015
While the San Francisco Giants took their annual odd-year break from the World Series, Johnny Cueto showed up there with the Kansas City Royals. Cueto, a former All-Star right-hander, twirled a two-hit complete-game victory over the Mets in Game 2.It was the highlight of a brief but eventful tenure with the Royals, who won the championship before Cueto could pitch again in the World Series. Now he will try to return there with the Giants, who signed him to a six-year contract on Monday, pending the results of a physical exam.The deal was widely reported to be worth $130 million and to include an opt-out clause after the 2017 season. That arrangement would allow Cueto, who turns 30 in February, to hit the market again soon if he re-establishes himself as an ace. He did not pitch that way consistently for the Royals.Cueto spent almost eight seasons with the Cincinnati Reds, and he was among the top five finishers in the National League Cy Young Award balloting in 2012 and 2014. He had a 2.62 earned run average in 19 starts for the Reds last year, but the figure swelled to 4.76 in 13 regular-season starts for the Royals.AdvertisementHe was erratic in October. After carrying the Royals into the American League Championship Series with eight strong innings in a division series clincher, Cueto allowed eight runs in two innings of his only A.L.C.S. start, in Toronto. The Royals decided that Cueto — who was also rattled on the road in the 2013 N.L. wild-card game at Pittsburgh — would pitch only at home in the World Series.The Giants, who won the title in 2010, 2012 and 2014, clearly plan to return. After failing to sign starter Zack Greinke, who bolted from the Los Angeles Dodgers to the Arizona Diamondbacks, the Giants have now signed Jeff Samardzija and Cueto to follow Madison Bumgarner in their rotation.AdvertisementSamardzija signed for five years and $90 million despite going 11-13 with a 4.96 E.R.A. for the Chicago White Sox. But he, like Cueto, is a former All-Star who could benefit from working in spacious AT&T Park and with the Giants’ renowned pitching instructors.A version of this article appears in print on December 15, 2015, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: Giants, Rearming for Title Run, Sign Cueto.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.