By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSDEC. 14, 2015
Cincinnati Bengals quarterback Andy Dalton will not need surgery on his broken thumb and could play again this season.Dalton broke the thumb on his passing hand during a 33-20 loss to the Steelers on Sunday that left the A.F.C. North up for grabs. He had an appointment with a specialist on Monday who recommended that the fracture could heal without surgery.It is unclear how many games Dalton will miss. His hand will remain in a cast for now.“He won’t play this week,” Coach Marvin Lewis said. “As we move forward, we’ll see how he is each week, and it’ll be up to Andy and the doctors.”A. J. McCarron will make his first N.F.L. start Sunday at San Francisco. Against Pittsburgh, he went 22 of 32 for 280 yards with two touchdowns, three sacks and two interceptions.AdvertisementUNCERTAINTY AROUND MANNING Brock Osweiler remains the Denver Broncos’ starting quarterback, but Peyton Manning may practice this week for the first time since mid-November. Then again, maybe he is not ready.AdvertisementCoach Gary Kubiak did not have many answers regarding his quarterback situation when he met with the news media a day after Denver lost to Oakland, 15-12.Kubiak said he had been too busy watching film of the game and meeting with the team to get together with Manning or the medical staff and determine this week’s quarterback plan.Manning has been sidelined for a month with a left foot injury.LUCK TRAINING HARDER Indianapolis Colts quarterback Andrew Luck intensified his workout and said he hoped to return to practice on Wednesday.Luck has missed four straight games with a lacerated kidney and torn abdominal muscle. He was unable to say whether he could play in this weekend’s game against the Texans, who are tied with Indianapolis for first place in the A.F.C. South.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Colts backup Matt Hasselbeck, 4-2 as a starter this season, did not take questions after reinjuring his ribs Sunday.CONCUSSION FOR HOYER Houston quarterback Brian Hoyer is doubtful for Sunday’s game against Indianapolis after sustaining his second concussion in less than a month.Coach Bill O’Brien said Hoyer was following the league’s concussion protocol and was also dealing with a strained neck and a wrist problem after being sacked five times Sunday night in a 27-6 loss to New England.If Hoyer cannot play against the Colts, the Texans will look to T. J. Yates.JETS LOSE ROOKIE RECEIVER A challenging rookie season for Jets receiver Devin Smith reached its nadir Sunday when he tore the anterior cruciate ligament in his right knee in their 30-8 victory against Tennessee. Smith was carted off the field after being injured on punt coverage in the third quarter.Advertisement“It’s unfortunate that this happened,” Coach Todd Bowles said in a teleconference, “because he was really coming around.”Smith, a second-round draft pick, caught nine passes this season for 115 yards and a touchdown, modest production for a player the Jets expected to emerge as a downfield complement to Eric Decker and Brandon Marshall.He missed most of training camp and the first two games after breaking ribs and sustaining a punctured lung, and later sat out another game with a sprained ankle. Smith also fumbled a kickoff that led to a Bills touchdown in a loss to Buffalo on Nov. 12 and had two critical drops in the Jets’ next game, a Nov. 22 loss in Houston.  BEN SHPIGELA version of this article appears in print on December 15, 2015, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Bengals’ Dalton May Return Before the End of the Season .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.