AdvertisementSupported byBy Dave CaldwellKANSAS CITY, Mo. — Alex Smith strode through the Kansas City Chiefs’ locker room Sunday afternoon wearing white game pants soaked through with rainwater, splotched with mud and tinted green from the paint used to make a football field look nice in December.After starting the season by dropping five of six games, including three losses decided by a touchdown or less, the Chiefs (8-5) have won seven in a row, holding off San Diego, 10-3, on Sunday largely on a goal-line stand by a Kansas City defense tattered by injuries.But Smith helped the Chiefs win the unglamorous game with his legs, his spirit and his poise, as he has throughout the winning streak that put Kansas City in an A.F.C. wild-card spot.Smith, 31, the former No. 1 overall draft choice who was traded to Kansas City in 2013 after seven generally disappointing seasons in San Francisco, completed 15 of 23 passes for only 191 yards Sunday. He threw his first interception after 312 passes, the second-longest streak in N.F.L. history.“Obviously, the streak is over, so I don’t have to answer those questions anymore,” he said, smiling.But his pants were a mess because he picked up 40 yards rushing on five carries — including an 18-yard scramble, ending with a gutsy dart up the middle — that enabled the Chiefs to kick a field goal at the end of the first half.“I’m dropping back to throw the football, and sometimes those things just happen,” Smith said.Through 13 games, Smith is second on the Chiefs in rushing with 366 yards. He has been an enormous asset for a team that was largely thought to be all but done when Jamaal Charles sustained a season-ending knee injury in a glum 18-17 loss at home to the Chicago Bears in Week 5.“That’s Alex — still a scooter,” Kansas City tight end Travis Kelce said. “He ran that spread offense in college and hasn’t lost a step yet.”Smith, who rushed for 1,416 yards in nine previous N.F.L. seasons, has run for 247 yards and two touchdowns in the winning streak. He picked up 12 yards on one run Sunday, enhanced by a 15-yard penalty when Chargers safety Jahleel Addae drilled him after he went out of bounds.After he slid across the slippery tarp in front of the Chargers’ bench, Smith got up and screamed at Addae, who was fined after a helmet-to-helmet hit on Jeremy Maclin in the Chiefs’ 33-3 victory Nov. 22 in San Diego.Smith said after the game that the Chargers were “trying to headhunt,” but he later backed away, saying it was a division game and Addae was a physical player.“It’s meant to be heated,” Smith said. “It’s what football is about.”He said he was simply trying to get his teammates fired up — “and get me going,” he added, smiling — after the penalty on Addae. But Smith apparently had already inspired his team.“You can obviously rely on Alex; he’s a great weapon,” Kansas City right tackle Jah Reid said. “He gives us another leg up. He just has incredible poise in the pocket and makes excellent reads. He knows just when to pull down the ball and run with it.”With 3,034 yards passing this season, only four interceptions and a 95.8 quarterback rating, Smith knows by now when to throw the ball, too. The second-year receiver Albert Wilson said he liked to “pick his head” with questions about coverages.“He takes care of the ball, for one,” Wilson said. “He can speed a game up and slow a game down.”On the drive before his 18-yard scramble, Smith threw a 44-yard touchdown pass to Wilson on a second-down play. Smith sensed that the Chargers would bring a heavy pass rush — and they did just that.So Smith threw a pass across the middle to Wilson, who broke a tackle by San Diego safety Eric Weddle and scored what would be the game’s only touchdown.“Good check by Alex,” Weddle said. “We should have checked out of it, but, shoot, they made the play.”Kansas City Coach Andy Reid pointed out that Smith “showed a lot of fire” on the touchdown pass to Wilson.“Then he came back with the run,” Reid said. “His legs have helped us. I know he’s getting up there a little bit, but he knows how to protect himself when he goes down, which is important. And he can still run.”The Chiefs made enough plays Sunday to win again.“Good thing it’s not a beauty pageant,” safety Eric Berry said after the game.Reid said: “If you’re going to be a good football team, you’ve got to win games like this. We’ve found ways to lose games just like this.”Advertisement