

 Marc Tracy
 

ON COLLEGE FOOTBALL
DEC. 14, 2015
Several years ago, David Williams, the athletic director at Vanderbilt, was approached by Kansas State’s offensive coordinator at a gathering for young minority assistant football coaches.“He came up to me,” Williams recalled, “and said, ‘Hi, my name is James Franklin, I’m an assistant coach, and I just wanted to meet you because I wanted you to know who I am and for me to know you, because one day I’m going to be a head coach.’ ”A few years later, Williams hired Franklin to be Vanderbilt’s head football coach. After a three-year run, during which Franklin’s Commodores went 24-15, he was named the coach at Penn State.But this feel-good story stands out mainly for its rarity. As another season’s round of hirings comes to a close, it is apparent that minority coaches, particularly African-Americans, remain underrepresented in head coaching positions in the top tier of college football.Though some vacancies remain, there are only 13 minority head coaches — 11 of them black — among the 128 teams in the Football Bowl Subdivision, according to calculations by Richard Lapchick, who leads the sports business management program at the University of Central Florida. As recently as 2011, there were 17 black coaches, and 19 minorities over all.AdvertisementDespite good intentions and even proactive steps — like the annual gathering where Williams met Franklin, an event that is now run by the N.C.A.A. and known as the Champion Forum — the dearth of black head coaches in 2015 in a sport in which the majority of players are black has left many observers angry and exasperated.Advertisement“We tend to talk about that, but the needle doesn’t seem to move,” said Kevin White, the athletic director at Duke.The percentage of black head coaches in college football (less than 9 percent) is even lower than the N.F.L.’s rate of 16 percent (five of 32). Among the 65 programs in the so-called Big 5 conferences, seven employ black head coaches.“I would say to you the numbers are staggering,” Williams said.They got worse during the past few weeks. Mike London (Virginia) resigned; Curtis Johnson (Tulane) and Ruffin McNeill (East Carolina) were fired; and Mike Locksley, Maryland’s interim coach, was effectively demoted with the hiring of the Michigan defensive coordinator D. J. Durkin. Three black coaches were hired: Dino Babers at Syracuse; Mike Jinks, to replace Babers, at Bowling Green; and Scottie Montgomery, to replace McNeill, at East Carolina. Norm Chow, who is of Chinese and Hawaiian descent, was let go as Hawaii’s coach.Writing for The Washington Post’s PostEverything blog last week, the agent Donald H. Yee, who represents players and coaches, criticized the college sports establishment for a situation that he said gave young black coaches little chance of landing (or keeping) top jobs.Observers say this is about more than optics, and even about more than the 53.4 percent of F.B.S. players who, according to Lapchick, are black.Mike Slive, who as commissioner presided over the Southeastern Conference’s rise to one of the most successful and richest leagues in the country, has said that his proudest moment was Mississippi State’s hiring of Sylvester Croom as the SEC’s first black head football coach, in December 2003.“It was clear it was not only an athletic decision,” said Slive, who credited the former athletic director Larry Templeton for hiring Croom. “It impacted the state, the region, and it really helped vault the SEC from a regional to a national conference.”AdvertisementBut after five years in which Croom was 21-38 with just one winning season, he and the university parted ways. He is now the Tennessee Titans’ running backs coach.The problem is that fewer coaches are receiving similar opportunities, according to other black coaches and people who support their cause.“Are there black or minority coaches in college or professional football capable of running their own programs?” said Karl Dorrell, the Jets’ wide receivers coach and a onetime head coach at U.C.L.A. “Yes, I think there are.”Williams added: “One reason that you heard for a long time is, ‘Well, it’s a pipeline problem.’ Well, I can tell you there’s a lot in the pipeline.”But before this season, said Yee, who represents Dorrell, there was only one instance in which a black head coach was replaced by another: nearly two years ago at Vanderbilt, where Williams hired Derek Mason to replace the departed Franklin.Bill Carr, a former Florida athletic director who now consults on coaching hires, said that there remained a certain closed-mindedness among many athletic directors who looked to hire only candidates with experience as a head coach or as an offensive or defensive coordinator — a bias that births a vicious cycle in which the pool is largely restricted to white candidates.“Two groups of people who need to be more considered is people who have been associate head coaches and special-teams coordinators,” Carr said.But the biggest hurdle might be that, as in many industries, those making hires in college football often draw from their existing peer groups, which tend to be relatively homogeneous.Advertisement“There is networking involved in this profession,” Dorrell said, “and being involved or part of a network with some very influential people or coaches that know some other influential people or coaches that can make those leadership or management decisions, that’s tremendously helpful.”In this light, it is difficult not to notice that — as outlined in Lapchick’s report — 86.7 percent of athletic directors and 89.8 percent of presidents at F.B.S. institutions are white, as are nearly 90 percent of faculty athletics representatives. (Most of the athletic directors, and a distinct majority of the presidents, are also men.)As Williams, who is one of eight black athletic directors in the Big 5 conferences, put it: “Is it a function of who sits in the A.D. chair? Because that’s small. Is it the president’s? That’s even smaller.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Bernard Franklin, the N.C.A.A.’s chief inclusion officer and executive vice president for membership and student-athlete affairs, acknowledged that this tendency was a chief motivation for the Champion Forum, in which minority assistant coaches engage in mock interviews of the type they would have with university presidents, athletic directors and search firms.“We know a tremendous part of the hiring process is predicated on relationships,” Franklin said, adding, “Certainly we can’t make or force anyone, but we can increase awareness.”In the N.F.L., however, they do force people: The Rooney Rule mandates that teams interview minority candidates for open positions.Lapchick has pushed for a college version, which he calls the Eddie Robinson Rule, after the former Grambling coach. Williams said he would “hate to get to that.” Still, he argued, something should change. He recalled Vanderbilt’s first game against Kentucky with James Franklin as coach, when the Wildcats’ coach was Joker Phillips, who is also black.“There was a story about the two SEC teams playing each other and having African-American coaches,” he said. “On the one hand, you read it and say, ‘That’s a beautiful story.’ On the other hand, you say, ‘It’s 2011 — why is that still a story?’ ”A version of this article appears in print on December 15, 2015, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: Failing Rate: 9% of Coaches Are Black.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »