By KEN BELSONDEC. 14, 2015
The San Diego Chargers and the Oakland Raiders remain committed to building a stadium together in Carson, Calif., if owners of the other N.F.L. franchises approve the teams’ applications to move to the Los Angeles area.In a letter sent last week to the owners’ committee overseeing the league’s return to the Los Angeles area, the country’s second-largest market, the Chargers’ chairman, Dean Spanos, dismissed an overture by the St. Louis Rams’ owner, E. Stanley Kroenke, who said he was willing to let a second team invest in a rival stadium that he hoped to build in Inglewood, Calif.“Nothing in Stan’s letter gives me any reason to reconsider my partnership with Mark Davis and our chosen stadium site,” Mr. Spanos wrote, referring to the owner of the Raiders. “I firmly believe that the proposal we have jointly made is in the best interests of the entire league and is in complete compliance with the league’s relocation policies.”Mr. Davis sent a similar letter to the Los Angeles committee.For months, owners have been weighing the merits of the two projects. Mr. Kroenke said he would like to build a domed stadium that would be a part of a larger entertainment district in Inglewood, while Mr. Spanos and Mr. Davis would construct an outdoor stadium in Carson.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In late November, Mr. Kroenke wrote to the owners on the Los Angeles committee to say that he would allow a second team to help pay for the costs of building his stadium in return for half the football-related revenue. But the second team would have no say in the design of the stadium and would not share in any profits from other elements of the project.AdvertisementThe letter was viewed by some league executives as an effort to fracture the partnership between Mr. Spanos and Mr. Davis. The two owners, though, recruited Robert A. Iger, the chairman of the Walt Disney Company, to help build their stadium, should it win approval.AdvertisementRelocation applications are expected to be filed next month. The owners could vote on them as early as Jan. 12, when they meet again in Houston. At the meeting, the owners will also consider efforts by the cities of Oakland, San Diego and St. Louis to keep their teams from moving.According to the league’s relocation guidelines, a team cannot leave its home market if there is a credible effort by its host city to keep the team there. Of the three cities, St. Louis has the most developed plan, which includes a $1 billion stadium on the banks of the Mississippi River.An application to relocate requires approval by the owners of at least 24 teams. While a few owners have expressed a preference for one of the two proposals, most owners remain uncommitted.A version of this article appears in print on December 15, 2015, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Chargers and Raiders Reaffirm Plan for a Shared Stadium .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.