By VICTOR MATHERDEC. 14, 2015
Arsenal, which has advanced out of the Champions League’s opening round for 16 straight years but has made only one final and has never won, faces a difficult road again after drawing Barcelona in the round of 16 on Monday.Arsenal needed a 3-0 victory at Olympiakos last week to keep its streak alive and now must play the defending champion and a tournament favorite. Arsenal has lost in the round of 16 for five straight years.Manchester City got an easier draw against Dynamo Kiev: No Eastern European team has made a Champions League final since 1991. The first leg will be played in Kiev in an empty stadium because of racist incidents by fans there.Manchester City, which was eliminated by Barcelona in last season’s round of 16, seemed to express relief that an English rival would face that team this year.AdvertisementThe third English team still alive in the competition, Chelsea, will face the runaway French leader, Paris St.-Germain, in the knockout phase for a third straight year.Barcelona’s archrival, Real Madrid, which is surprisingly 5 points behind in the Spanish League, in third place, will play Roma. Atlético Madrid, in second place in Spain, will play P.S.V.AdvertisementBayern Munich, the winner in 2013, will play Juventus, last season’s runner-up, in a marquee matchup.In other games, Zenit St. Petersburg plays Benfica, and Gent plays Wolfsburg. Gent, the Belgian champion, is making its Champions League debut and is rated the longest shot to win the tournament, at 500-1.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The first legs will be played on Feb. 16, 17, 23 and 24 and the second legs on March 8, 9, 15 and 16.Among the notable matchups in the round of 32 in the Europa League, also drawn Monday, are Sevilla, the two-time defending champion, versus Molde of Norway; Borussia Dortmund, a favorite, versus Porto; Fiorentina versus Spurs; and Augsburg versus Liverpool.Midtjylland, last season’s unlikely Danish champion, will face Manchester United, which fell into the Europa League after a third-place finish in its Champions League group.A version of this article appears in print on December 15, 2015, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: Tough Draw for Arsenal.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.