AdvertisementSupported byGlobal SoccerBy Rob HughesLONDON — The firing of Liverpool Manager Brendan Rodgers came via a trans-Atlantic call from the team’s owners in Boston, and the potential hiring of the German Jürgen Klopp as his replacement was to be negotiated via similar communication.With two stellar managers — Klopp and Italy’s Carlo Ancelotti — unemployed and available, certain things happened last week that prompted Fenway Sports Group, the owner of Liverpool, to rush its decision to dismiss Rodgers.One was the “Back me or sack me” outburst by Chelsea Manager José Mourinho on Saturday. Another was Arsenal’s loss at home to Olympiakos in the Champions League earlier in the week and the subsequent speculation about Arsenal’s longtime manager, Arsène Wenger.And after Arsenal rebounded to thrash Manchester United over the weekend in the Premier League, questions re-emerged about the job security of United’s manager, Louis van Gaal.Add these stories to the rumors that Manchester City is waiting for Manager Pep Guardiola to leave Bayern Munich after this season and that Diego Simeone might be tempted away from coaching Atlético Madrid.By Monday, the Chelsea storm had blown itself out, with the owner, Roman Abramovich, appearing to decide that it was not the time to remove Mourinho — yet.That still leaves Klopp and Ancelotti on the market, along with hundreds of others who normally have to wait until Christmas for owners to run out of patience and for coaching jobs to open up.Fenway Sports Group had already shown its impatience with Manager Rodgers after it ordered him over the summer to get rid of his coaching staff and take on new assistants and a new approach. Rodgers was pleading for time and preaching that Liverpool was in its third transitional period since he took over in 2012.What he didn’t say, in public, was that which players were bought and sold each summer was not entirely up to him. Liverpool lost Luis Suárez, the catalyst behind the team that just barely missed out on the Premier League title in 2013-14, after Barcelona triggered a buyout clause in his contract after that magical season and paid $115 million to buy him.Similarly, this summer, Liverpool’s bright young winger, Raheem Sterling, forced the club to sell him to Manchester City.Fenway Sports Group is a sports investment company, with an emphasis on the investment part. But these sales of Liverpool’s biggest stars in back-to-back summers were brought on by the players themselves.Liverpool recycled the money it made from those deals, then added more when it spent $440 million for 23 players over the past few transfer windows. Of the players in those nearly two dozen deals, only one, the Brazilian Philippe Coutinho, has been an outstanding success — and Coutinho is hearing now that Barcelona might like to sign him in January.So how does a coach control the flow in and out of players? He is stuck between the board, the players and the transfer committee that the Fenway group relies upon. Fenway, remember, is an investor that wants Liverpool to develop talent through its academy while at the same time buying young(ish) talents whenever it can.One sticking point, which certainly Klopp has heard about, is that Rodgers tried, twice, to persuade the committee to recruit Ashley Williams from Swansea City. Williams is everything Liverpool lacks: a big, strong, trustworthy player who might hold the central defense together. But Fenway was not prepared to spend big money on a 31-year-old with no resale value.This is characterized in the British media merely as the American money-driven approach to sports. In fact, it is the way that Liverpool worked in its heyday 30 years ago, when its chairman, chief executive and manager decided which players to buy to strengthen the roster.And it is a way that Klopp understands. He took a club that flirted with bankruptcy just a few years before he took over and built it up so well that it took on — and beat — mighty Bayern Munich for the Bundesliga title.Only part of that success came down to his skills as manager and coach.Yes, Klopp’s huge personality, his aggressive style in getting the best out of players, and his hunger for the success that he never achieved as a player were fundamental in all that. But the directors who rescued the club from financial collapse and who directed the youth development and shrewd transfers played a big role, too, and they remain, though Klopp has left after deciding that he had burned himself (and some of his players) out.Now rested, Klopp is entitled to ask Liverpool for a major say in player recruitment. But Liverpool will barter that against the opportunity it can offer him: to test his considerable gift for molding another team in the exuberant and demanding style that worked for Dortmund.The other candidate, Ancelotti, has made players perform at Juventus and Milan, at Chelsea and Real Madrid. Ancelotti’s quiet temperament is the opposite of the fiery, wisecracking Klopp.Both would work, and both, it must be said, might be an upgrade on Rodgers.Can Fenway see all of this from Boston? Why not? It has run the Red Sox since 2002 through cycles of success and failure. On Sunday, the day that the owners made the call on Rodgers, they also announced that John Farrell was coming back as manager in 2016.After missing August and September while undergoing treatment for lymphoma, Farrell will return to the dugout.Something that Farrell said back in August should resonate all the way from Boston to Liverpool: “You live vicariously through the players’ careers,” he told reporters. “Yours is over.”He was not talking about coaching or living, just playing, but it is advice that applies on both sides of the Atlantic. So might fundamentals of winning come down to getting good players to perform — no matter which sport, or where it is played.Advertisement