AdvertisementSupported byBy Marc TracyAt his postgame news conference on Tuesday night after Wisconsin’s 64-49 win over Texas A&M-Corpus Christi, Coach Bo Ryan checked the night’s stat sheet. He spoke for a minute about the game. Then Ryan, who has the most coaching wins in Wisconsin basketball history, announced his immediate retirement.Ryan’s own stat sheet contains mainly highlights. He won more than 75 percent of his games, recording 747 victories over more than three decades while coaching at Division III Wisconsin-Platteville, then at Milwaukee and finally at Wisconsin. In 14 full seasons at Wisconsin, his teams made the N.C.A.A. tournament 14 times. The program had made the tournament only seven times previously, yet he got the Badgers to the tournament’s second weekend seven times.Ryan’s best record was last season’s 36-4, culminating in a hard-fought loss to Duke in the national championship game. But perhaps more impressive is that his worst record, in his first season, was 19-13. He also has the highest winning percentage in Big Ten play in conference history.But the most astounding statistic might be Ryan’s home record at Madison’s Kohl Center: 211-22, or .906. Good programs should win more than five in 10 games at home. Winning more than nine in 10 is all but unheard-of. Entering this season, Michigan State Coach Tom Izzo’s home record was .894. Duke Coach Mike Krzyzewski’s was .887.Explaining his decision to retire, Ryan, 67, cited “energy level,” saying, “I enjoy doing it, and the thing was, I felt it was time.”The Badgers have struggled this season after two straight seasons in which they made the Final Four. Having lost Frank Kaminsky , the player of the year last season, and Sam Dekker to the first round of the N.B.A. draft, the Badgers are 7-5, with recent home losses to Marquette and Milwaukee. Apart from a core of upperclassmen — Nigel Hayes, Bronson Koenig and Zak Showalter — the roster is largely made up of freshmen. That is a rarity for someone who, to an unusual extent among coaches at top programs, did not seek out highly rated players who were likely to depart as underclassmen.Athletic Director Barry Alvarez said in a statement Tuesday night that Ryan “led our program to the most successful era in school history.” Earlier this year, Ryan was named a Hall of Fame finalist.Ryan’s home record is a telling achievement. For four decades, he has essentially been Wisconsin basketball. Like Johnny Appleseed, Ryan was born in the East — in a blue-collar suburb of Philadelphia — and headed west, planting seeds as he went. He took over tiny Platteville in 1984 and won four national championships there. He helped rebuild Milwaukee. And he catapulted the Badgers from the ho-hum into the national elite.Many of the state’s junior high schools and high schools run Ryan’s trademark swing offense, as if grooming players for his program. Showalter is the son of a former successful high school coach in Germantown. Platteville’s coach, Jeff Gard, is a Ryan alumnus. Milwaukee’s coach, Rob Jeter, is a Ryan alumnus. And the interim coach at Wisconsin is Greg Gard, Jeff’s brother and a 23-year veteran of Ryan’s coaching staffs.Therein lies the stated reasoning behind the abruptness of Ryan’s departure. In the spring, after the Badgers lost to Duke, Ryan expressed a Hamlet-esque indecision about whether to hang up his whistle, and in the statement he finally released, in late June, he said that he planned to retire after this season. He was explicit that he wished for Gard, who he said devised the game plan that toppled previously undefeated Kentucky in the national semifinals, to be Wisconsin’s next coach.“It’s no secret, and every head coach would like their top assistant to be the coach,” Ryan said Tuesday.Ryan said he had considered retiring in April, but was persuaded to do otherwise by Alvarez. Part of what swayed him, he said, was that throughout the off-season Gard was preoccupied by caring for his own father, who had been stricken with cancer; he died last month.“Barry and I had been talking: What’s a good time?” Ryan said Tuesday. “What we came down to was: semester. This is semester. We start finals. And I wanted to give Coach Gard plenty of time to get the guys ready and to get them into the position where as a head coach he has a chance.”Keeping Gard, who has been associate head coach since before the 2008-9 season, would make sense from an “if it’s not broke, don’t fix it” standpoint. But it would not be out of character for Wisconsin to look elsewhere. It took two job openings for the former athletic director Pat Richter to hire Ryan in 2001, in a coaching search that included a courtship of Rick Majerus.Alvarez, who has the most wins in the history of the Wisconsin football program, has hired three football coaches in his 10 years as athletic director (though one was his former assistant Bret Bielema). A top candidate for Ryan’s successor outside Gard might be Tony Bennett, the coach at Virginia and the son of the retired coach Dick Bennett, who began the Badgers’ resurgence in 1995 and a few years later led them to their first Final Four since 1941. Tony Bennett, 2007’s national coach of the year, has rejuvenated the Cavaliers, who are currently ranked eighth.“Greg is the interim coach,” Alvarez said Tuesday. “We’ll make a decision at the end of the year what we want to do as we move forward.”In the meantime, there is an eight-day break, a game against Green Bay — Tony Bennett’s alma mater, it so happens — and then, just before the new year, the beginning of Big Ten play, in which Ryan had a .717 winning percentage while coaching the Badgers.The team has a potential all-American in the charismatic Hayes, who increased his national profile in March for coming up with hard-to-spell words for N.C.A.A. tournament stenographers. Hayes wished Ryan well Tuesday “with his retirement and all the things old people do.” The young people, meanwhile, will try to salvage a season, and one wonders if Ryan wondered whether they would have a better shot at doing so with a younger coach.Still, expect Gard to insist on the almost hokey fundamentals valued by Ryan, who keeps a fruit basket in his office, as if to remind visitors that the game is even older than he is. Ryan’s teams have won seven Big Ten titles, but he appears as proud that they have led the Big Ten in fewest points allowed per game; most turnovers forced per game; assist/turnover ratio; and free-throw percentage.True to form, Ryan began his farewell news conference not by diving into his announcement but by noting that games around finals can always be difficult and then praising his team, saying: “Our guys found themselves, ended up doing some things. Protected the lead, got to the free-throw line.”What, after all, could be more important than attempting 31 free throws?“I was extremely proud of them,” Ryan said.Advertisement