By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSDEC. 15, 2015
Reilly Smith, Aleksander Barkov and Aaron Ekblad all scored in the second period Tuesday night to lead the Florida Panthers to a 5-1 victory over the Islanders in Brooklyn.Vincent Trocheck and Jonathan Huberdeau added goals in the third period, and Roberto Luongo finished with 33 saves for the Panthers. Florida defeated the Islanders for the second time this season after a shootout win at home on Nov. 23.Brock Nelson had his 10th goal of the season for the Islanders, who had a five-game home winning streak end, as well as a 10-game stretch over all without a loss in regulation (8-0-2). Jaroslav Halak had 12 saves.After the Islanders outshot the Panthers, 19-2, in a scoreless first, Smith opened the scoring at 1 minute 51 seconds of the second with a slap shot from the right circle for his ninth goal of the season.AdvertisementBarkov made it 2-0 for the Panthers with his seventh goal of the season, unassisted, at 7:25 of the second.AdvertisementNelson pulled the Islanders to 2-1 with 7:23 remaining in the period when his shot dribbled past Luongo.However, Ekblad scored 20 seconds later to restore the two-goal lead. The goal was Ekblad’s seventh.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Trocheck extended the lead to 4-1 at 1:23 of the third period with his ninth goal of the season.Huberdeau was awarded an empty-net short-handed goal with 3:43 left when he was pulled down as he tried to score; it was his fourth goal of the season.Luongo improved to 11-11-3 this season. A former Islander who leads active goaltenders with 412 wins and 888 games played, Luongo, 36, was not especially tested except for glove saves on Kyle Okposo in the first and John Tavares in the second.Playing without their leading scorer — Jaromir Jagr, who was out with the flu — the Panthers kept steady pressure on the Islanders, even though they were outshot by a wide margin.Florida recalled Rocco Grimaldi from the American Hockey League’s Portland franchise for the game. The Panthers also dressed the rarely used right wing Logan Shaw and center Corban Knight, who made his Panthers debut.Halak had been 4-0-2 in his past six games. He lost for the first time since Nov. 12 at Los Angeles, when the Kings won, 2-1.AdvertisementThe Islanders smothered three Panthers power plays, extending their streak to 24 straight penalty kills.The Panthers have won the past four meetings against the Islanders — including twice in shootouts — but the Islanders are 6-4-2 in their past 12 games against Florida.Islanders forward Ryan Strome returned after missing Sunday’s win over the Devils with an upper-body injury.A version of this article appears in print on December 16, 2015, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: Panthers Overwhelm the Islanders in Brooklyn.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.