By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSDEC. 15, 2015
LeBron James scored 24 points to lead the Cleveland Cavaliers to an 89-77 victory over the host Boston Celtics on Tuesday night in an uneventful rematch of their bruising first-round playoff series last season.Kevin Love scored 20 with 8 rebounds in his first game back in Boston since Kelly Olynyk yanked his shoulder out of its socket in the playoffs. Jae Crowder, who took a punch in the jaw from J. R. Smith in the series, scored 14 for the Celtics.Timofey Mozgov had 9 points and a season-high 10 rebounds, scoring 7 points and grabbing 5 rebounds in the third quarter, when Cleveland turned a 5-point deficit into a 10-point lead.The Cavaliers have won three in a row since losing three straight to start the month.Avery Bradley scored 17 points for Boston, which was at home for the first time since taking the then-unbeaten Golden State Warriors to double overtime.AdvertisementWhile that Friday night crowd had a playoff atmosphere — it was the N.B.A. champion Warriors’ only trip to Boston of the season — the visit by James and the Cavaliers was more subdued.Celtics fans booed James all night and got behind their team when Isaiah Thomas drove for a layup that gave Boston a 50-45 lead with nine minutes left in the third. But Love hit a 3-pointer to start Cleveland on a 12-0 run; James scored 6 points, including a reverse dunk to finish it off.In all, the Cavaliers scored 17 of 19 points to take a 62-52 lead.The game was a rematch of the four-game Cleveland playoff sweep, a chippy series that will perhaps best be remembered for the play in which Olynyk yanked Love’s shoulder. Love missed the remainder of the Cavaliers’ playoff run, which took them to the N.B.A. finals before they lost to the Warriors in six games.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.NUGGETS 112, T’WOLVES 100 Randy Foye scored 19 points, and Denver picked up its sixth win in seven games with a victory at Minnesota.Kenneth Faried added 19 points and 10 rebounds, Will Barton had 14 points, 7 rebounds and 5 assists, and the Nuggets (11-14) shot 56 percent against the Timberwolves’ porous defense.AdvertisementFoye broke out of a season-long slump to hit 5 of 6 3-point attempts, and the Nuggets hit 10 of 18 from deep as a team.Zach LaVine had 20 points and 5 assists, and Andrew Wiggins scored 23 points for the Timberwolves, who have lost seven of their last eight games. They are 3-10 at home this season.RONDO APOLOGIZES AGAIN Sacramento guard Rajon Rondo offered a stronger apology for directing a gay slur at the veteran N.B.A. referee Bill Kennedy.In a statement issued Tuesday, Rondo said:“I want to be clear, from the bottom of my heart that I am truly sorry for what I said to Bill. There is no place on or off the court for language that disrespects anyone’s sexual orientation. That is not who I am or what I believe and I will strive every day to be a better person.”Rondo is serving a one-game suspension.A version of this article appears in print on December 16, 2015, on Page B15 of the New York edition with the headline: No Fanfare This Time as Cavaliers Top Celtics.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.