By DAVE CALDWELLDEC. 15, 2015
Just 23 seconds after serving a slashing penalty, Rangers defenseman Marc Staal skated right back to the box for clobbering Edmonton Oilers forward Leon Draisaitl in the face with his stick. The Rangers were squatting on a one-goal third-period lead, a rarity lately.Kevin Klein and Dan Girardi were out of the lineup with injuries, so the Rangers did not have many options other than to call on the rookies Dylan McIlrath and Brady Skjei to help kill both penalties.They pitched in to help the Rangers repel the Oilers, 4-2, on Tuesday at Madison Square Garden.“I think any team in today’s N.H.L. needs young players to step in and contribute — not just playing a few minutes, but playing important minutes at important times,” Coach Alain Vigneault said.Not only did the Rangers snap the Oilers’ six-game winning streak, but they regained a little starch after allowing 14 goals while losing all three games of a Western trip last week.Advertisement“This was just so needed, this win,” goaltender Henrik Lundqvist said after making 18 saves.A persistent Rick Nash scored on a power play in the final minute of the second period to give the Rangers (19-9-4) a lead that was preserved by Lundqvist, who made seven third-period saves as the Rangers won their third game in the last 11.AdvertisementMcIlrath, 23, played nearly 18 minutes, scoring his first N.H.L. goal to give the Rangers a 2-1 lead in the second period. It was the first goal by a rookie Rangers defenseman since Ryan McDonagh scored in the final game of the 2010-11 regular season.“It didn’t really register until I saw the reaction on some guys’ faces,” said McIlrath, who also killed penalties for nearly five minutes, including a high-sticking penalty on J. T. Miller in the third period.A turnover by Skjei, 22, resulted in the Oilers’ second goal, scored by Jordan Eberle on a breakaway, but Skjei played almost 15 minutes in his N.H.L. debut, including 2 minutes 15 seconds short-handed.“Playing against some of these top guys was pretty cool, and seeing guys I grew up watching — I mean, it was all I could ask for,” Skjei said.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.McIlrath and Skjei clearly gave the Rangers a boost. The Rangers had allowed 31 goals in their slide, with Lundqvist’s goals-against average swelling to 2.14 from 1.74 and his save percentage shrinking to .933. He was benched Friday in a 7-5 loss at Edmonton.Klein strained an oblique muscle Nov. 30 against Carolina and has yet to return. Girardi missed his first game of the season Tuesday with a knee injury, the team said.So the Rangers had to cobble together a defensive corps that included McIlrath, who did not play regularly until Klein was injured, and Skjei, their first-round draft choice in 2012. It was the first time since Nov. 21, 1998, that five first-round draft picks by the Rangers — Staal, Chris Kreider, McIlrath, Miller and Skjei — played together in a game. And it was the first since April 5, 1978, in which four consecutive first-round choices played for the Rangers: Kreider (2009), McIlrath (2010), Miller (2011) and Skjei.Advertisement“You can see what his strengths are,” McDonagh said of Skjei. “He is very poised with the puck and good at anticipating his next play.”McIlrath helped the Rangers kill an early hooking penalty on Oscar Lindberg; Skjei was called upon later to kill a high-sticking penalty on McIlrath. But the Rangers were much more attentive, limiting the Oilers to six first-period shots and 20 over all. Edmonton had 37 shots Friday.The Rangers scored less than a minute after Lindberg left the penalty box. Mats Zuccarello scored his team-leading 14th goal of the season, and third in three games, by drilling a shot from the left face-off circle over the glove of goaltender Anders Nilsson.The shot zipped into the top right-hand corner of the net at 5:04 and gave the Rangers the first goal for the 18th time in 32 games. The Rangers are 15-1-2 when they score first, but they responded quickly to both Edmonton goals.Less than three minutes after Taylor Hall scored his 15th goal at 5:12 of the second period on a power play, Keith Yandle slid a pass inside the Oilers’ blue line to McIlrath, whose 54-foot shot from the point sailed under Nilsson’s glove at 7:54.McIlrath whooped and raised his arms in triumph after scoring his first goal in 16 N.H.L. games. He wore a broad smile, his teeth covered by a mouth-guard, when he retreated to the bench.“It was definitely coming — he has a really hard shot, and I felt it a lot in practice,” Lundqvist said of McIlrath.Later, Lundqvist said, “Guys are out, we need guys to step up, and he’s definitely doing it.”A version of this article appears in print on December 16, 2015, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: Rookies Fill Void on Defense and Give Rangers a Boost Against the Streaking Oilers .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.