By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSDEC. 15, 2015
PITTSBURGH —  Mike Sullivan’s voice is unmistakable. Loud. Authoritative. Animated.And, the Pittsburgh Penguins hope, an alarm clock.One of the N.H.L.’s marquee teams is in the midst of an identity crisis more than a third of the way into a season that it began with typically high expectations, which at the moment appear impossibly out of reach. The Penguins are not scoring. They occasionally are not defending and — perhaps most troubling — the magic they once summoned so easily seems to have disappeared.“I think we’re bottom of the league in goals scored this year and I’m pretty sure we shouldn’t be, right?” forward Phil Kessel said.Pittsburgh’s 4-1 loss to Washington on Monday night in Sullivan’s debut dropped the Penguins to 15-11-3. They were tied for ninth in the Eastern Conference going into Tuesday night’s games and were 27th in goals per game despite ranking fifth in shots. Their power play, with a unit littered with All-Stars, is 28th, ahead of only Calgary and Arizona.AdvertisementEnter Sullivan, who spent a decade grinding out a career as a defensive-minded forward before getting into coaching. He now finds himself trying to get Pittsburgh’s highly capable, occasionally high-strung players working in unison.AdvertisementNowhere are Pittsburgh’s struggles more evident than in Sidney Crosby’s prolonged funk. Crosby, a two-time Hart Trophy winner, is on pace for career lows in goals and points, and his team appears destined for a four-month battle just to reach the postseason let alone make a serious run at Stanley Cup to bookend the one he and fellow superstar Evgeni Malkin won in 2009 back when a dynasty seemed almost inevitable.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.It never happened, thanks to a mix of injuries, bad luck and a handful of flameouts in the playoffs. The shine on one of hockey’s biggest success stories has dimmed.Dan Bylsma and Ray Shero, the coach and general manager who helped make the Penguins one of the league’s must-see attractions, are gone. Forward Pascal Dupuis, long the glue in a dressing room of diverse personalities, retired abruptly last week because of lingering health concerns. Defenseman Rob Scuderi, brought in more than two years ago to provide the blue line with some needed grit, became a pariah as his game deteriorated and was shipped off to Chicago on Monday night for Trevor Daley.The owners Mario Lemieux and Ron Burkle are shopping the club.Though General Manager Jim Rutherford stressed “I certainly don’t think we’ve got a huge issue to fix here” when he fired Mike Johnston as coach on Saturday after 18 largely ineffective months, he said that he was uncertain what kind of impact Sullivan will make.“We never know what a coaching change is going to do,” Rutherford said.Sullivan hit all the right notes during his first couple of days on the job.“We create an environment here that we inspire people to play,” he said.And if they don’t, Sullivan insists they will sit regardless of pedigree. “Those that play well will be rewarded with more play,” Sullivan said.Sullivan would prefer the Penguins get the puck to the net as often as possible. It’s a message Johnston repeated constantly, one his players appeared to tune out.The last time Pittsburgh switched coaches during a season, Bylsma helped hoist the Stanley Cup three months later. At this point, the Penguins will settle for a win at Boston on Wednesday.Advertisement“We’ll focus on the process,” Sullivan said. “We’ll pull ourselves out of this.”The alarm is buzzing. It’s up to the Penguins to answer it.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.