AdvertisementSupported byOn BaseballBy Tyler KepnerWith two outs and the bases empty in the bottom of the eighth inning on Aug. 17, 1986, Pete Rose inserted himself into the Cincinnati Reds’ game at Riverfront Stadium. Rose, who was the last active player to be his team’s manager, struck out against Goose Gossage of the San Diego Padres. He never played again.Rose whiffed again this year in his application for reinstatement to Major League Baseball. Commissioner Rob Manfred denied his request, revealing damning details in the process. There are no more turns at bat. This is the end of Rose’s story — and, almost certainly, that includes the Hall of Fame.Rose, who accepted a lifetime ban in 1989 for gambling on the Reds when he was their manager, never reconfigured his life the way Bart Giamatti, the commissioner at the time, instructed. He remains permanently ineligible to work in Major League Baseball, and thus remains ineligible to be elected to the Hall of Fame.In explaining his decision, Manfred clarified the distinction between the question before him and the Cooperstown issue. They are related, because as long as Rose is barred from baseball, he is also barred from the Hall. But that rule is not up to Manfred.The rule linking banishment from baseball with ineligibility for the Hall of Fame was established by the Hall of Fame’s board of directors in February 1991, the year Rose was scheduled to appear on writers’ ballots. It has never been changed — and why, exactly, would the board reverse it now?Manfred gave a devastating summary of his findings. While Rose was barred for his activities as a manager, it is now well established that he also bet while he was still an active player. Rose contradicted that, Manfred wrote, even when confronted with evidence.Somewhat incredibly, Rose also still bets on baseball. He does so legally, but what a brazen activity. You can almost imagine Rose making that admission, and Manfred then rising from his chair, packing his briefcase and saying, “Now you’re just wasting my time.”There were other startling findings, showing that 26 years of reflection were still not enough for Rose to grasp the severity of his actions. He has graduated from his total denials of the 1980s to the “I’m sorry, but ...” phase. He just never learned.So with all of that now in front of them, there is no logical motivation for the board of directors to change the 1991 rule that effectively bars Rose. The 15-person board, which includes Manfred, meets annually and has approved procedural changes in recent years. But it is counterintuitive to expect leniency for Rose after Manfred’s emphatic decision.Simply put, there are two paths for Rose to be considered for a plaque in Cooperstown: a reversal of his ban; or a reversal of the 1991 rule by the Hall of Fame board. If either happened, Rose would be eligible for consideration by the “expansion era” committee that meets every three years.The first path was blocked, permanently, by Manfred on Monday. The other path would open only if the board decided that members of the permanently ineligible list could be considered. A secret, surprise decision on that issue would be Rose’s only hope of getting on a ballot.“Nothing’s changed,” Jeff Idelson, the president of the Hall of Fame, said on Tuesday. He added, “For those fans who feel a kinship with Pete and feel that his career is important enough that it should be remembered in the annals of history, the answer is, it is.”Rose has donated at least 20 items to the Hall of Fame, including his jersey and pants from 1970, 1973, 1979 and 1981. The bats from his 3,000th and 4,000th hits are there. So are the spikes he wore the night he passed Ty Cobb as the game’s career hits leader.Last month, the Hall of Fame opened an exhibit chronicling baseball from the 1970s through today. Rose is there, his likeness on a beverage can for a chocolate drink he promoted in 1978.There are other items from players and stories not immortalized in bronze in the plaque gallery. There is Curt Flood’s letter to Commissioner Bowie Kuhn, asking for free agency in 1969; a book about drug addiction by pitcher Steve Howe, who was suspended seven times; a gavel used by the future Supreme Court Justice Sonia Sotomayor, whose decision ended the 1994-95 strike; the Mitchell report on steroids in 2007; and the ball Barry Bonds hit for his 756th career homer that season — with an asterisk carved into it by the fan who bought and donated it.In a news conference in Las Vegas on Tuesday, Rose said that he was disappointed but emphasized, as he often does, how vigorously he promotes the game.Later in Las Vegas on Tuesday, the Republican presidential candidates were scheduled for a debate. Rose has a supporter in Donald Trump, who tweeted this on Monday: “Can’t believe Major League Baseball just rejected @PeteRose_14 for the Hall of Fame. He’s paid the price. So ridiculous — let him in!”Trump, like so many others, missed the point: Major League Baseball did not ban Rose from the Hall of Fame this week. It upheld Rose’s banishment from the major leagues. The Hall of Fame bans Rose from its plaque gallery. That is a lot, but that is all. It is time for us all to move on.“I’m a baseball person,” Rose told reporters, “and that’s never going to change.”Advertisement