AdvertisementSupported byAnalysisBy Chase StuartThe Seattle Seahawks lost to the Arizona Cardinals on Nov. 15, and fell to 4-5. The offense was struggling, and the star running back Marshawn Lynch was dealing with an abdominal injury.Lynch has not played since, and Seattle also lost tight end Jimmy Graham for the season. Yet the Seattle offense looks better than ever, thanks to the outstanding play of Russell Wilson.The Seahawks have won four consecutive games, with the bulk of the credit going to Wilson. He has completed 89 of 118 passes (75 percent) for 1,171 yards (9.9 yards per attempt), with an incredible 16 touchdowns and zero interceptions. He has taken just five sacks in this time after struggling in that department for most of his career. He has averaged 11.93 adjusted net yards per attempt over his last four games, the best stretch of his career.The graphic at right displays Wilson’s ANY/A average in each of his 69 regular and postseason games. The dot represents each game, and the line shows a rolling four-game average.During Wilson’s first three seasons, Seattle won 42 games (including playoffs), the most in the N.F.L. Wilson’s strong play was a big reason for the team’s success, but so was his minuscule contract, as he cost Seattle’s salary cap, on average, less than $700,000 during those years. In July he signed a four-year contract extension worth $87.6 million, including a $31 million signing bonus. With that extension, the Seahawks were banking on Wilson playing like one of the best quarterbacks in the league; over the last month, perhaps no player has been better.He is succeeding alongside players who, like Wilson, do not have the typical size for their positions. Eight of his last 16 touchdown passes have gone to the 5-foot-10 Doug Baldwin, an undrafted free agent in 2010 who has become Seattle’s de facto No. 1 receiver. Four more have gone to the rookie Tyler Lockett, who fell to the third round of the 2015 draft because of his size (5-10, 182 pounds). The other four touchdowns have gone to players, like Baldwin, who were undrafted: Jermaine Kearse (2), Fred Jackson (1) and Thomas Rawls (1), now on the injured reserve list.At 4-5, the Seahawks looked as if they would probably miss this year’s playoffs. Fortunately for Seattle, the team’s franchise quarterback — both in ability and contract — has played the best football of his career.Advertisement