By NAILA-JEAN MEYERSDEC. 15, 2015
Every Tuesday, The New York Times will look at the week ahead in the N.H.L., highlighting hot — or not so hot — teams and players. The Rangers vs. ThemselvesThe Rangers return home from a disastrous trip to Western Canada with a game Tuesday night against Edmonton, which has won six in a row and beat the Rangers, 7-5, last week. The Rangers are 2-6-2 in their last 10, earning only 6 of a possible 20 points. With the Capitals and the Islanders surging, the Rangers find themselves in third place in the Metropolitan Division. They have not been the same team since Kevin Klein, a defenseman, and Derek Stepan, one of their best two-way forwards, went down with injuries. Recent losses have been marked by lapses in the defensive zone. Stepan and Klein have resumed skating, but their returns are uncertain. Dan Girardi will miss Tuesday’s game with a minor knee injury; the top prospect Brady Skjei is expected to make his N.H.L. debut in Girardi’s place. Jarret Stoll has been jettisoned, and Tanner Glass has earned back his spot on the team after spending most of the season in the minors. Tuesday’s home game is only a brief respite. The Rangers head to Minnesota and Winnipeg later this week before a crucial home game against Washington on Sunday.Montreal Canadiens vs. the Best of the WestThe Canadiens are 3-4-1, including a four-game losing streak, since goalie Carey Price was sidelined again with an injury. They have maintained their lead in the Atlantic Division, but slipped behind the Capitals in the Eastern Conference standings. Montreal faces two other division leaders this week, beginning Thursday at home against the Pacific-leading Los Angeles Kings, who are 7-1-2 in the last 10. On Saturday night, the Dallas Cowboys will be hosting the Jets in Arlington, but the best game in the area will be at the American Airlines Center. Entering Tuesday’s games, the West-leading Stars are the N.H.L.’s highest scoring team, with 102 goals, and the Canadiens are just behind, with 100.Chicago Blackhawks at Buffalo Sabres, Saturday, 1 p.m.Will Patrick Kane be carrying his points streak into his only game in his hometown this season? Entering Tuesday’s game against Colorado, Kane had a point in 26 games in a row, the longest streak since Mats Sundin’s 30-game one in 1992-93. The Blackhawks then host Edmonton on Thursday before going to Buffalo. But this homecoming may be more awkward than celebratory for Kane. This will be his first game at home since he was the subject of an off-season sexual assault investigation.AdvertisementThis week, the top young American prospects are gathered in Boston for a training camp ahead of the world junior championships, which begin Dec. 26 in Helsinki, Finland. Leading that team will be Auston Matthews, an 18-year-old from Arizona, who is expected by many to be the No. 1 pick in the 2016 N.H.L. draft. Matthews has spent this season playing professionally in Switzerland, where he was recently visited by Sam Borden of The New York Times.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Penguins Coach Mike SullivanOn Saturday, Mike Johnston became the second N.H.L. coach to be fired this season when he was let go by the underachieving Pittsburgh Penguins after only 18 months at the helm. He compiled a 58-37-15 record, but left with the Penguins 27th in the N.H.L. in scoring despite a lineup that includes Sidney Crosby, Evgeni Malkin and Phil Kessel.AdvertisementJohnston was replaced by Sullivan, 47, who is quite familiar with the Eastern Conference. He was coach of the Boston Bruins from 2003 to 2006. More recently, he was a longtime assistant with John Tortorella on the Lightning, the Rangers and the Canucks. (Tortorella, incidentally, filled the first opening of the season, in Columbus, also in the Metropolitan Division.)This season, Sullivan was 18-5-0-0 in his first season as coach of the Penguins’ American Hockey League affiliate in Wilkes-Barre/Scranton, where he replaced John Hynes, who left to coach the Devils (yet another Metropolitan Division connection).Upon his arrival, Sullivan said that he wanted more of a shooting mentality from the team, particularly on the 28th-ranked power play. He certainly got that in his debut against Washington on Monday night. But Capitals goalie Braden Holtby stopped 44 of them in Washington’s 4-1 victory.“I think we’ve got to think we’ve got to find a way to free ourselves up to be more instinctive and not press,” Sullivan said. “Sometimes when you try too hard, you’re out of that instinctive mind-set where you’re seeing the ice and you’re in that flow mind-set.”Pittsburgh is now 15-11-3, 11 points behind Washington in the Metropolitan Division and in ninth place in the Eastern Conference. The Penguins got more bad news Tuesday: goalie Marc-Andre Fleury will miss one to two weeks because a concussion, and forward Beau Bennett will be out four to six weeks.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.