AdvertisementSupported byOn Pro FootballBy Bill PenningtonChasing after a sideline pass in Monday night’s game with the Miami Dolphins, Giants cornerback Dominique Rodgers-Cromartie could not hold up as the play ended and his momentum carried him full speed into his team’s bench area. In an instant, the fully-padded Rodgers-Cromartie crashed into Tom Coughlin, propelling the 69-year-old Giants coach in a violent backward tumble.Coughlin’s headphones were knocked from his ears, ricocheting across the sideline as his head banged off the ground. He disappeared into a tangle of legs, and the players and coaches near him momentarily froze.The Giants came to Miami lugging dwindling playoff hopes. Losers of their last three games and with outside voices questioning the vibrancy of the team’s leadership, the Giants were down. And now so was their head coach.Rodgers-Cromartie, a bit shaken, sat out the next play.Coughlin got to his feet quickly, gathered his headphones to reposition them on his ears, and resumed his usual position at the edge of the field.It was the fourth quarter of a close game the Giants had to win.There were a series of gut checks by the Giants in the second half of their come-from-behind, 31-24 victory over Miami. One, perhaps more than symbolically, was Coughlin — flat on his back — rising to return to the pivotal battle playing out before him.To be sure, his players noticed. Several of them tweeted about it after the game.“Coach Coughlin took that hit like a boss,” offensive lineman Justin Pugh wrote. “Popped right back up and was good to go.”Several of the Giants had seen this act before. In a crucial victory late in 2011, Coughlin shredded his hamstring muscle in a scary sideline collision with running back Danny Ware but never went to the ground. That season was the last time the Giants qualified for the playoffs. They also won the Super Bowl.This year’s Giants (6-7) may or may not make a run to the postseason. The odds are against them, and the team’s many holes defensively were on display frequently against the undertalented Dolphins. But if the Coughlin era is going to sputter to an end in the next three weeks, Monday night proved that the quarterback who came to the franchise with him 11 years ago — and the other Giants stars who have known no other N.F.L. coach but Coughlin — are planning to get up off the turf and go down fighting.Eli Manning, who addressed his teammates with an emotional speech before the game and in the locker room at halftime, had a spectacularly efficient game. Manning, who was also knocked down repeatedly on Monday, completed 27 of 31 passes for 337 yards. Manning had the same number of touchdown passes — four — as he had incompletions.The irrepressible Odell Beckham Jr., who was sick for several days leading up to the game and needed intravenous fluids at halftime for cramping, had two touchdown receptions, including the game-winning score. That final touchdown, an 84-yard dash down the middle of the field, was vintage Beckham, if there can be such a thing for someone who has played only 25 N.F.L. games.Beckham made a shifty move to confuse one defender, then broke into his top gear to run away from a second defensive back. It was a Beckham specialty that he makes look easy — a long touchdown catch grab without ever being touched on the play.There were other stand-up performances. The Giants offense, sorely in need of the balance and consistency a proficient running game yields, got a breakout game from Rashad Jennings, who rushed for 81 tough yards on 22 carries. Defensive end Jason Pierre-Paul, valiant and improving, created just enough havoc to make Miami quarterback Ryan Tannehill uncomfortable in a tense final quarter.Reserve safety Cooper Taylor, cut from the team in October, resurfaced for a couple of decisive tackles. And Pugh, like so many players on the Giants’ banged-up and beleaguered offensive line, capably took over for his teammate Ereck Flowers when the balky ankle that has been plaguing Flowers finally gave out again.All around, the Giants were picking up one another, striving to keep the season alive. And at the very end of the game, with the Giants in the one position that has so vexed them — trying to protect a lead — every decision Coughlin made and almost every play the Giants attempted to execute worked out perfectly.Three times in their final possession with the game on the line, the Giants uncharacteristically threw the football with Manning coolly completing passes for significant gains.“We had to throw — let’s be aggressive,” said Manning, who like his coach often does his best work with his back to the wall. “It was a situation we’ve been in before but a situation we can’t be afraid of. We talked about that exact thing this week. Go get the first down and win the game.”But it’s also true that on a third-and-2 in that last drive of the game, Jennings was handed the football and ran for 3 yards. It is just these kinds of complex, changeable choices that have notably backfired on Coughlin this season. It is why he has spent so many of his postgame moments with reporters backpedaling as he defended his decisions.That was not the case late Monday night. Coughlin had a smile on his face, even when asked about being knocked to the ground.“Actually, it helped,” Coughlin said of his bruising spill. “It snapped my neck. It feels a whole hell of a lot better right now. Thanks for asking.”Advertisement