AdvertisementSupported byBy David WaldsteinAfter Yoenis Cespedes won the Home Run Derby at the 2013 All-Star Game, he was given the opportunity to direct a charitable donation to an organization of his choosing. Cespedes immediately thought of Cuba, the country he fled in 2011, but he was not sure how to proceed. So he asked Leonor Colon, an official with the players’ union, for guidance.At the time, it was unthinkable to consider a trip to Cuba involving Cuban players in Major League Baseball. But a two-year effort led by Colon culminated Tuesday with the start of a good-will tour of Cuba featuring a group of major league players, four of them Cubans. The players will conduct clinics and meet with representatives of the Cuban government and the Cuban baseball federation during the tour, the first organized trip to include Cuban defectors returning to the island.Although the landmark expedition is being jointly sponsored and planned by the league office and the players’ union, people in baseball agree that it was Cuban major leaguers and Colon who laid the groundwork. “Without Leonor’s diligence and vision, this never could have happened,” said Tony Clark, the executive director of the players’ union. “The biggest piece of the puzzle is that for the first time, the Cuban guys get the chance to go back home.”Taking part in the trip are Jose Abreu, the Chicago White Sox’ slugging first baseman, who defected in 2013; Yasiel Puig, a Los Angeles Dodgers outfielder, who left Cuba in 2012; Alexei Ramirez, a longtime White Sox shortstop and current free agent, who left Cuba in 2007; and the veteran catcher Brayan Pena, who has been playing professionally in the United States since 2001.Those four players were chosen based on a combination of their seniority and availability, but almost all of the roughly two dozen Cubans now in the major leagues showed an interest in going, Colon said. Cespedes decided to stay in the United States because he is a free agent seeking a huge multiyear deal and essentially has to attend to business. He may go on the next trip, assuming there is one, along with other Cuban players who want to reconnect with the island they left as defectors.“Out of respect, we didn’t want to overwhelm our hosts with 25 guys coming all at once,” said Colon, who was Omar Minaya’s assistant when he was the general manager of the Mets. “We are taking this one small step at a time.”Groups of ballplayers from the United States have been barnstorming Cuba for more than 100 years, and teams like the Detroit Tigers, with Ty Cobb, and the New York Giants, with Manager John McGraw, made notable visits many decades ago.In March 1959, just after the revolution led by Fidel Castro had overthrown the Cuban government, the Dodgers and the Cincinnati Reds played an exhibition game in Havana. After that, however, no major league team visited the baseball-adoring nation until 1999, when the Baltimore Orioles played an exhibition.The Tampa Bay Rays are scheduled to play an exhibition game against the Cuban national team during spring training next year.After Cespedes first approached Colon about making a contribution to Cuba — he wanted to do more than just donate money — she began researching her options. At the time, in 2013, there was not much hope that Cespedes or any of the other active players who had defected in recent years would be allowed to return anytime soon. But last December, after the United States and Cuba announced that they would move to restore full diplomatic ties after decades of hostility, Colon’s optimism grew.She sought the advice of Minaya, who has ties to Cuba from his involvement in international baseball and is now a senior adviser to the union. They wondered if a good-will tour including Cuban defectors would be feasible.“It was very delicate,” Colon said. “For a while, I didn’t tell the players what we were thinking.”In the spring, Colon’s hopes grew when she saw that the New York Cosmos soccer club had been able to travel to Cuba and that the N.B.A. had staged clinics there. In May, the Minnesota Orchestra played in Havana, too.They were notable events, but basketball and classical music do not hold sway in Cuba the way baseball does. “Our sport is different,” Colon said. “Baseball is so important in Cuba. That can be helpful, but maybe it could have made it trickier because there are so many emotions and so much symbolism involved.”It was around this time that Major League Baseball was trying to pave the way for the 2016 spring training game in Havana. It sought the consent of the union, which proposed the idea of a good-will trip that would come first. That led to the issue of whether Cuban players could participate.Defectors are a thorny issue in Cuba. While many, like Abreu, are beloved by Cuban baseball fans, the government can see them as traitors. Colon reached out to the State Department and to the N.B.A., which she said was particularly helpful. She then made contact with the Cuban baseball federation, relying on connections established through the World Baseball Classic, an international tournament last held in 2013.The key moment came in October, during the major league postseason. Colon went to Havana with Patrick Houlihan, an M.L.B. vice president, and other league employees who inspected the stadiums and worked on other aspects of the logistics of the trip.They met with Cuban officials, including the minister of sports and Antonio Castro, a son of Fidel Castro and a top baseball official.Colon and her colleagues emphasized that they needed Cuban major leaguers to be part of the trip, without restrictions. And, she said, “we explained how we would be bringing some high-profile non-Cuban players, too.” The non-Cuban contingent consists of Clayton Kershaw, Miguel Cabrera and Nelson Cruz, all of them marquee names, along with Jon Jay, who is of Cuban descent.At the October meeting, the Cuban officials were receptive to what Colon and Houlihan asked. The deal was all but completed pending visa applications, some of which were not finished until Monday.It was agreed that the Cuban major leaguers would be able to visit with family members at a hotel. The contingent of players will conduct two clinics, one at Estadio Latinoamericano in Havana and one at Estadio Victoria de Girón in Matanzas. The players will also meet with government officials and players from the Cuban professional leagues, and may attend games. There is also a plan to visit Caritas Cubana, a United States-based nongovernmental organization that provides humanitarian, social and emergency services in Cuba. The union and Major League Baseball plan to jointly donate $200,000 to the group.When Colon returned from Havana after the October meeting, she called the Cuban players and told them that their dream of going home was going to happen.“Alexei was in tears,” she said, referring to Ramirez. “It was very emotional. It’s too bad Cespedes and some of the other guys aren’t going this time. But maybe they will go on the next one. The goal is for all of them to go back at some point.”Advertisement