AdvertisementSupported byGlobal SoccerBy Rob HughesLONDON — Sooner or later, the past catches up with men like José Mourinho. Back in 2004, Mourinho took over a team that a previous manager, Claudio Ranieri, had built for Chelsea. On Monday night, the first time that their paths have crossed as coaches at English clubs, Ranieri’s Leicester City put Mourinho’s Chelsea to the sword. The margin of victory was narrow, at 2-1. The repercussions could be much bigger, because Chelsea’s owner Roman Abramovich is not a man who tolerates losing, let alone someone who enjoys seeing his hugely expensive team be overrun by opponents who cost a fraction of those in Chelsea blue. That, as they say, is sports. Any team can have its day.Except that this wasn’t just one day. Leicester is on top of the Premier League after 16 games, and Chelsea is staring down the barrel of relegation near the bottom of the standings. For Leicester, either Jamie Vardy or Riyad Mahrez scores every single week; for Chelsea, Diego Costa has scored just twice in its last 11 league games. The coaches can’t score goals. They live vicariously through their strikers. After Monday’s game, as the rain fell incessantly on Leicester’s King Power Stadium, Ranieri insisted no amount of money could buy his two strikers in the January transfer window.And Mourinho? “I feel my work is being betrayed,” he said. “Either last season I did phenomenal work and brought them to a level that was not their level — or this season they are so bad.”The winning coach praises players; the loser shifts the blame.Mourinho is a desperate rather than a stupid man. He acknowledged that Leicester was “better than us during a longer period of time when they were aggressive, had high intensity, high tempo, great mentality. In that time, we conceded two goals that are not acceptable to me.”It was very acceptable to Leicester’s Thai owners, who surprised the soccer world over the summer when they hired Ranieri. At that time, he was off the coaching radar, unemployed at age 64 after he was fired by the Greek national team in November 2014 following a humiliating loss to the Faroe Islands.Leicester had at least one insider who knew what Ranieri had built at Chelsea a long time ago. Steve Walsh, Leicester City’s head of recruitment, had scouted players for Chelsea for 16 years until he, too, was fired by Abramovich.Walsh had signed Vardy from the depths of non-league English soccer and Mahrez from the French club Le Havre. Walsh pretty much signed the whole Leicester lineup Monday. Last summer, when Ranieri arrived as manager, Walsh talked to him incessantly about N’Golo Kanté.Kanté, he said, was the closest thing he had seen to Claude Makelele, the ball-winning kingpin who was like a piranha as he snapped into tackles and fed the ball to the big-name players on the Chelsea team handed to Mourinho in 2004. Leicester paid about $8.5 million to get Kanté from the French club Caen. The team has lost only once, to Arsenal, since he arrived in early August. But there are so many shining for the Foxes, whose players all run as if their next meal depends upon it. “We want to see how far we can get,” said Wes Morgan, the team captain. Surely, his interviewers kept prompting him, Leicester City can start thinking of the Premier League title now?“We just want to see how far we can get,” Morgan repeated. He smiled, just as he had smiled at the antics of Diego Costa on Monday as he tried to instigate a fight, as he so often does on the field. Leicester kicked as hard as they were kicked. But Mahrez and Vardy did their thing. On the first goal, Mahrez, a winger for the Algerian national team, chipped a wonderful ball between Chelsea’s central defenders, knowing that Vardy was far too fast for the aging and fading Chelsea defender John Terry. Bang, Vardy scored.For the second goal, Mahrez twisted left and right and left again until, from just inside the right edge of the penalty area, he let fly a shot that curled beyond the reach of Chelsea’s 6-foot-6 goalkeeper, Thibaut Courtois.It was a perfect shot, struck without any back lift on the ball and aimed into the far top corner of the net.How does he do that? “When you keep scoring and make some assists,” Mahrez said, “it’s normal to have confidence. The most important thing is the team.”That old cliché — the team — is engrained in Leicester. It was there when Ranieri arrived. Ranieri, a Roman who has traveled the world in 16 coaching roles over three decades, is the antithesis to Mourinho.If the team is winning, it is because the players are doing their work. Way back when Ranieri was building Chelsea, he was known as “The Tinkerman” because of the way he constantly substituted for players. He “tinkered” again on Monday, taking out Mahrez and Vardy when he believed they were tiring, if not fully spent.While Mourinho was feeling betrayed by his players, Ranieri was doing what a coach does, making decisions for their long-term good. In the years since Mourinho took Ranieri’s job at Chelsea — after writing a famous dossier on himself for Abramovich — Mourinho has sneered at the Italian coach.He called Ranieri old. He said the Italian’s command of English was poor. He mocked his lack of titles.After Monday’s game, Mourinho offered a handshake and a warm hug. Ranieri accepted the handshake, and looked away during the embrace. “A part of me,” he told reporters in darn good English, “still loves the Chelsea. But now, I am Leicester.”Advertisement