By SCOTT CACCIOLADEC. 16, 2015
Hours removed from playing what Coach Sam Mitchell described as their worst game of the season, the Minnesota Timberwolves arrived in New York on Wednesday at 2:30 a.m. Mitchell thought that fatigue might be a factor in his team’s game against the Knicks that night at Madison Square Garden.The Knicks were in no position to commit random acts of kindness against a ragtag opponent. They ran out to a big lead and survived a lackluster second half on their way to a 107-102 victory. It made little difference to them that their win came against a tired, undermanned team.“We just continue to reinforce the message that the score doesn’t really matter at the end of the day,” Coach Derek Fisher said. “It’s how you’re playing possession to possession. What decisions are you making? Are you still taking good shots?”The game was a mixed bag for the Knicks (12-14), who led by 20 at halftime before they nearly let it all slip away.AdvertisementThe Timberwolves (9-16) cut the lead to 3 with 11.4 seconds left when Karl-Anthony Towns converted a 3-point play after he was fouled by Kristaps Porzingis. Forced to foul, the Timberwolves sent Arron Afflalo to the line, and he made four straight free throws in the closing moments. Minnesota was finally out of answers.AdvertisementCarmelo Anthony assembled a terrific all-around game in the win, finishing with 20 points, 15 rebounds and 9 assists, and Afflalo scored a game-high 29 points.“There comes a time where you kind of have to do something different,” Anthony said of his role as chief facilitator. “Especially on this team, there are some nights where I need to score a lot of points, and some nights it’s not. I just try to make a concerted effort at doing that.”Towns, a first-year center who grew up in Piscataway, N.J., finished with 25 points and 10 rebounds in his first N.B.A. appearance at the Garden.Unlike the Timberwolves, who were stuck with dreaded back-to-back games — they lost at home to the Denver Nuggets on Tuesday — the Knicks were coming off a lengthy break. Their previous game was on Saturday, when they salvaged some good feelings from an otherwise bleak three-game trip with a win over the Portland Trail Blazers.After the Knicks returned home, Fisher gave his players a day off, but then they practiced — and practiced hard, Fisher said.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“We needed to work,” he said. “It’s pretty much that simple. To try to develop the energy and the intensity and the mind-set to play in games, you need to practice those things.”The team’s recent trip was a disaster for Porzingis, who averaged 5.7 points and 4.3 rebounds and shot 24 percent from the field. After going scoreless against Portland, Porzingis acknowledged that he was tired. Fisher said that Porzingis would need to push through it.Advertisement“He may not have his legs back from the last two days of practice, honestly,” Fisher said before Wednesday’s game. “It’s all part of a season.”Against Minnesota, Porzingis made his first field-goal attempt, a 3-pointer, and blocked three shots in the first quarter. He even swatted an attempt by Towns at the rim. Porzingis had seven blocks in all, but otherwise he labored, finishing with 11 points and 6 rebounds and shooting 4 of 14.The Knicks pushed the tempo during a key stretch of the second quarter. Their approach had an effect on the Timberwolves, who did not look fresh.The Knicks scored 11 unanswered points to go ahead by 42-34. Afflalo had a layup and a 3-pointer during the run, and Anthony later made a step-back jumper to give the Knicks a 60-40 lead at halftime.But they struggled in the third quarter, cracking the door for Minnesota. Towns connected on two 3-pointers, and Zach LaVine (19 points) soared for a dunk that cut the lead to 8.In the fourth, Afflalo emerged once again, converting a 3-point play for a 13-point lead. But the Timberwolves refused to go away until the end.Minnesota, after showing so much early-season promise, has lost four straight. Before the game, Mitchell said he had considered making lineup changes. But his team was short-handed, so he did not have much room for creativity. Kevin Martin missed the game with a wrist injury, and Kevin Garnett rested.Mitchell made sure, more than once, to remind everyone within earshot that his team’s top three scorers — Andrew Wiggins, Towns and LaVine — were 20 years old.As for Porzingis, he seems to be part of a ballyhooed matchup every time he takes the court. On Wednesday, he faced Towns, a fellow lottery pick in this year’s draft, for the first time.Advertisement“He’s talented and proved it again,” Towns said. “I can’t wait to play against him for the next 20-plus years.”A version of this article appears in print on December 17, 2015, on Page B16 of the New York edition with the headline: Knicks Build Big Lead Before a Tired Team Nearly Lulls Them Into a Loss.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.