By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSDEC. 16, 2015
ALBUQUERQUE —  When Bob Davie became New Mexico’s coach in 2011, he said bluntly that he would make no promises. The Lobos had lost 35 of their last 38 games, and the previous coach had been fired after a slew of embarrassing off-the-field problems.Davie said only that he would seek to “stabilize this program.”Four years after taking over the embattled football program, and 14 years since being ousted as Notre Dame’s head coach, Davie, 61, has the Lobos playing in their first bowl game in nearly a decade. New Mexico (7-5) will meet Arizona (6-6) in the New Mexico Bowl on Saturday after a surprisingly solid season in which the Lobos shocked Boise State and Air Force, the Mountain West’s Mountain Division champion.Davie succeeded Lou Holtz at Notre Dame in 1997 and compiled a 35-25 record over five years. He was fired after finishing the 2001 season with a 5-6 record.Davie said his return to the college postseason, his first trip since the 2000 season, was “absolutely not” about redemption. It was about rebuilding a program that needed more work, with a bowl appearance as a first step, he said.Advertisement“The football gods smiled on us at times this year; I don’t deny that,” Davie said. “This will only be important to us if we take advantage of this and build on this. If we don’t, we are going to be back where we were.”In Albuquerque, where college basketball reigns supreme and where New Mexico’s upset of Boise State competed for attention with a U.F.C. championship bout victory over Ronda Rousey by the hometown hero Holly Holm on the same night, the football team struggled for a while to get the public’s notice.Yet since the Lobos became bowl eligible and accepted a bid to the hometown New Mexico Bowl, enthusiasm for the team is apparent. Local businesses are hanging Lobos posters. Fans are talking about the matchup at cafes. Local radio talk shows speculate on whether the Lobos have one last surprise left in them.The new and improved Lobos have also brought attention to Davie and his efforts to bring back a program that had been drawing record-low crowds before he came to town.“Bob Davie has done one of the best coaching jobs in the country,” said Arizona Coach Rich Rodriguez, who considers Davie a friend.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Davie’s last appearance in a bowl game, as Notre Dame’s coach, ended in a 41-9 loss to Oregon State in the Fiesta Bowl in 2001. A year later, he was gone. He took a job as an analyst with ESPN until he returned to coaching with the Lobos.AdvertisementReece White, a senior tight end, said none of that had played into his decision to choose New Mexico when Davie worked to recruit him.“I looked at the character of the person, and I knew he was the real deal,” White said. “He convinced us to buy in, and he won us over.”White said that his teammates wanted to win the bowl game, the Lobos’ first since 2007, for one another but that they would also love to earn a victory for Davie. “He has really turned this program around,” White said.To beat Arizona, New Mexico will have to play mistake-free football with its triple-option formation, Davie said. The Lobos will also have to slow down Arizona’s up-tempo air attack.“We can’t give up any big plays,” Davie said after Tuesday’s practice.When a reporter pointed out that the defense had shown improvement this season, Davie was unswayed.“We have looked better,” Davie said, “because in the past, we just weren’t very good.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.