By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSDEC. 16, 2015
Colts quarterback Andrew Luck returned to practice Wednesday but was ruled out of Indianapolis’s critical game Sunday against the Houston Texans.Coach Chuck Pagano said he was optimistic that Matt Hasselbeck would start against Houston despite missing Wednesday’s practice. Hasselbeck, 40, is still dealing with rib and neck injuries, but the Colts’ third-string quarterback, Charlie Whitehurst, has been with the team for only five weeks.Luck, recovering from a lacerated kidney and a partly torn abdominal muscle, will miss his fifth straight game, his seventh this season and his second in a row against Houston (6-7), which is tied with Indianapolis atop the A.F.C. South. Hasselbeck won his first four starts this season as Luck’s replacement, but has lost his last two.Sunday’s game will be a battle of backup quarterbacks. Houston Coach Bill O’Brien said that his starter, Brian Hoyer, would sit out after his second concussion in less than a month and that the Texans would turn to T. J. Yates.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.MANNING BACK ON FIELD The Broncos’ Peyton Manning returned to practice for the first time in 32 days, but not to his starting job. Brock Osweiler will make his fifth straight start at quarterback when Denver plays at Pittsburgh on Sunday. He is 3-1 in place of Manning, who has a torn plantar fascia in his left foot.AdvertisementVIKINGS HURTING ON DEFENSE Minnesota held three defensive starters out of practice — defensive tackle Linval Joseph (foot), linebacker Anthony Barr (groin and hand) and defensive end Everson Griffen (shoulder) — and listed eight defensive players in all, including five starters, on its injury report.AdvertisementSEAHAWKS’ CHANCELLOR SITS Seattle strong safety Kam Chancellor missed practice with a tailbone injury sustained in Sunday’s win over Baltimore. Cornerback DeShawn Shead (ankle) and defensive end Michael Bennett (toe) also sat out.The Seahawks signed running back Christine Michael to bolster an offensive backfield thinned by injuries to Marshawn Lynch and Thomas Rawls.RAMS CORNERBACK SET TO PLAY Cornerback Janoris Jenkins is expected to be in the Rams’ lineup for their game against the Buccaneers on Thursday night. Jenkins was a full participant in practice after being cleared from the N.F.L.’s concussion protocol, Coach Jeff Fisher said.A version of this article appears in print on December 17, 2015, on Page B17 of the New York edition with the headline: Luck and Manning Practice, but Won’t Start.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.