By BILL PENNINGTONDEC. 16, 2015
EAST RUTHERFORD, N.J. —  Carolina Panthers Coach Ron Rivera, whose team is 13-0, spent several minutes Wednesday in a conference call heaping praise on the 6-7 Giants. Most notably, Rivera compared wide receiver Odell Beckham Jr. to Jerry Rice, widely considered the greatest receiver in N.F.L. history.“He really has an opportunity to be one of those guys who you’ll start talking about,” Rivera said of Beckham, who has played only 25 N.F.L. games.Rivera added: “I’ve had the great fortune of watching Jerry Rice, and man, I see a lot of flashes. I played against Jerry. I see a lot of flashes in Odell’s game, and I think he’s a tremendous football player.”Rivera, whose team is set to visit the Giants on Sunday, also criticized the notion that Tom Coughlin’s job as the Giants’ coach was in jeopardy and vehemently defended the N.F.L.’s standings structure, which occasionally grants playoff berths to losing teams. The champion of the feeble N.F.C. East might end up with a losing record — as Rivera’s Panthers did a year ago in winning the N.F.C. South.Advertisement“You’ve got nothing to apologize for,” Rivera said of any division champion. “This just happened to be a down year for the N.F.C. East, but a team gets hot and gets on a roll like we did last year — you can make some noise in the playoffs.”AdvertisementThe 2014 Panthers, who were 7-8-1, upset the Arizona Cardinals in the first round of the postseason before losing to the eventual N.F.C. champions, the Seattle Seahawks.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Hey, if the Giants make it, good for them, because remember a couple years ago, they were 9-7,” Rivera said. “They got hot, they won their division, gave themselves a chance, and next thing you know, they win the Super Bowl.”Rivera continued: “I’m passionate about it because I’ve been in this league almost 30 years, and every time I turn around, somebody wants to change something. This league has been going pretty well, and things have been pretty good. The league is fine.”A FAMILIAR FACE The Giants signed defensive tackle Barry Cofield, 31, who was a durable starter on the 2007-8 team that won the Super Bowl. To make room for Cofield, the Giants released safety Brandon Meriweather, who did not play in the last two games because of a knee injury.Cofield was a fourth-round draft pick by the Giants in 2006 and became known for his run-stopping abilities. He left the team after the 2010 season and was out of the N.F.L. this season until Wednesday’s signing.The addition of Cofield might be in response to the Giants’ next two matchups — against Carolina and Minnesota, each of which has a potent rushing attack.The Giants, who lost four safeties to injuries in the preseason, signed Meriweather in August. He started alongside the rookie Landon Collins, but they struggled mightily in pass coverage. Meriweather’s exit leaves the Giants with only three safeties: Collins, the veteran Craig Dahl and Cooper Taylor, a third-year player who until recently had played sparingly.INJURY NEWS Linebacker Devon Kennard, who has hamstring and foot injuries, was ruled out for Sunday’s game. Left tackle Ereck Flowers, who left Monday’s game against Miami when he aggravated an ankle injury, was expected to be limited in Wednesday’s practice, but he appeared to be jogging and participating in drills with the team during the early portion of the practice open to the news media.AdvertisementPANTHERS RUSHER IS OUT Ron Rivera said that Jonathan Stewart, who is third in the N.F.L. with 989 rushing yards, had been ruled out for Sunday’s game with a sprained left foot. Rivera said Fozzy Whittaker or Mike Tolbert would start. (AP)A version of this article appears in print on December 17, 2015, on Page B17 of the New York edition with the headline: Panthers’ Coach Praises the Giants, Gushing Over One in Particular.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.