By SAM BORDENOCT. 8, 2015
LEVERKUSEN, Germany — They all giggled at first. Sitting around a conference table this summer, top officials for Bayer Leverkusen initially used Javier Hernández’s name as a placeholder, a symbol for the kind of forward they were hoping to add during the transfer period.Hernández, a Mexican star known as Chicharito, or Little Pea, is a small, quick, savvy striker who excels at artfully reading the spaces between defenders and fiercely poaching goals when opportunities are presented. A player like that would be perfect, all the Bayer executives agreed, as a complement to Stefan Kiessling, the 6-foot-3 German who had led the club’s attack for nine years.But signing Hernández himself seemed unattainable. He was under contract with Manchester United and playing on loan at Real Madrid. “Everyone laughed,” Jonas Boldt, the club’s sporting manager, said, “because it was a fantasy. But then we thought, well, maybe we should reach out and try. Maybe it could work?”It did. At the end of a last-minute sequence of events that Hernández called “unexpected” and Boldt labeled “a dream,” Hernández left the Premier League for the Bundesliga on Aug. 31. After a month of trying to expand his German vocabulary beyond “danke,” he arrived in California this week for Saturday’s Concacaf playoff match between Mexico and the United States feeling, as he put it, “a kind of confidence I haven’t felt in a very long time.”This is not ideal for the United States. Jurgen Klinsmann, the national team’s coach, has billed Saturday’s match at the Rose Bowl, which will decide which team represents the region at the 2017 Confederations Cup in Russia, as a major showdown. U.S. Soccer’s news releases have labeled the game “epic.”AdvertisementHernández figures to be the focal point of Mexico’s attack. While it was unclear who would partner with him at the top of Mexico’s formation — Giovani dos Santos was ruled out this week with a muscle strain — Hernández has been a favorite of Mexico’s interim coach, Ricardo Ferretti. If the United States is going to win, containing Hernández must be a priority.AdvertisementThat figures to be more difficult now, though, as Hernández’s self-belief is peaking.“My weakness has definitely been my confidence,” he said last week in an interview at Bayer Leverkusen’s headquarters. “It has been very difficult for me. There were so many times in the last years when I didn’t get chances, didn’t get chances, didn’t get chances, and sometimes I didn’t understand why. It hurt me. But now I feel like I am in a place where it will be different.”Hernández became the first Mexican to play for Manchester United when he joined the club in 2010 — a source of pride for him — but he has endured an up-and-down career in Europe. He won two Premier League titles with United (scoring 20 goals in his first season) only to fall out of favor in 2013, when Alex Ferguson stepped down as the manager.In 2014-15, Hernández was lent to Real Madrid, but again, he was in and (mostly) out of the lineup. He first heard from Bayer Leverkusen, among many other clubs, about the possibility of a transfer late in the spring. Hernández was interested, but Manchester United was not.Over the summer, the suitors for Hernández — which included Major League Soccer as well as teams in Spain and Italy — continued to check in anyway. Boldt texted with Hernández often as Hernández endured a frustrating few months: Logistical problems kept him from playing in the Copa América in Chile, and he missed Mexico’s Concacaf Gold Cup triumph after fracturing his collarbone  in an exhibition just before the tournament.United Coach Louis van Gaal began the preseason intending to use Hernández in a substitute role similar to one he had played in recent years — news that depressed Boldt and Leverkusen — but a few days before the transfer deadline, everything changed.On Aug. 26, Hernández badly missed a penalty kick in Manchester United’s victory over Club Brugge in a Champions League match; television cameras caught van Gaal looking incredulously at an assistant coach after the attempt, which went wide right after Hernández appeared to slip as he made contact with the ball.Days later, Hernández said, he had a meeting with van Gaal in which the coach informed him that he would be a backup player for the team during the season and that he was free to pursue a transfer. Then, on Aug. 30, word spread that Manchester United was trying to acquire the teenage striker Anthony Martial, which would push Hernández even further down van Gaal’s pecking order.AdvertisementBayer Leverkusen had stayed in touch with Hernandez and his agent throughout the summer and had just pocketed 22 million pounds (roughly $33.5 million) by selling the rights to the South Korean forward Son Heung-min to Tottenham Hotspur. Leverkusen sensed an opportunity. On Aug. 31, after hurried negotiations, Hernández arrived in Germany for a physical exam and the completion of his move.“All of it — the missed penalty, the look on the manager’s face, our sale of Son to free up some money — all of it needed to happen just that way for this to work,” Boldt said. “That’s football sometimes. It’s crazy.”Hernández laughed. “This club, it’s hungry — it is a club people know, but it wants to be bigger; it wants to prove more,” he said. “Like me.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Settling in will take some time. Hernández is searching for a house in Cologne or Düsseldorf, cities that are nearby. He is adapting to the pace of a new league. And he has a translator whispering in his ear in the locker room while Coach Roger Schmidt talks tactics in German.All of it is an adventure for Hernández, who said he hoped that his quick comfort in his new home would carry over to his international play. While the American midfielder Michael Bradley used the word “hate” in an Instagram post last week about the rivalry between the United States and Mexico, Hernández said that emotion was too strong for him. Still, he acknowledged that games like Saturday’s came with a different emotional level.He said he expected the crowd at the Rose Bowl to favor Mexico. While American fans are vociferous, he said, nothing quite compares to Mexicans who are living in the United States.“For the most part, I think, the Mexicans in America have had hard lives, have pushed so hard to reach America that when they have a chance to celebrate the Mexican national team, it is like for a day, they are back in their country,” he said. “For Americans, they are growing up as soccer fans. Soccer is still kind of a new sport for them. There are so many other sports, too, and it’s improving. But to Mexicans, it’s all there is. Soccer is everything.”That devotion, Hernández said, is part of what motivates him to seize the opportunity he has been given at Leverkusen. He did not want to come back to North America to play in M.L.S. or the Mexican league, where he began his career. He did not want to give up on his dream yet.Despite the uncertainty of the past few years, Hernández, 27, believes he can be a top player in Europe. He believes he can thrive. And in Germany, he believes he has finally found the place where it can happen.Because of an editing error, an earlier version of this article misstated the date on which Manchester United acquired the teenage striker Anthony Martial. His transfer was completed on Sept. 1, not Aug. 30.A version of this article appears in print on October 10, 2015, on Page D1 of the New York edition with the headline: Mexico Star’s Spirits Rise, and That May Deject U.S.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.