AdvertisementSupported byBy Rebecca R. RuizAs United States prosecutors delivered updates on Wednesday in their unfolding corruption case against global soccer officials and business executives, a federal judge expressed eagerness to move the case toward trial.“Begin to think seriously, given the passage of time, as to when we may proceed to trial,” Judge Raymond J. Dearie of Federal District Court in Brooklyn told the lawyers before him.The two defendants appearing in court were José Maria Marin, the former head of the Brazilian soccer federation, and Aaron Davidson, an American sports marketing executive.Both men — two of 41 defendants in the United States case, which centers on members of FIFA, soccer’s world governing body — were charged in May and are under house arrest. The first defendants convicted in the case, all of whom have yet to be sentenced, were charged in 2013.Mr. Marin, of Brazil, is living in an apartment he owns in Manhattan, and Mr. Davidson is at home in Miami.At Wednesday’s hearing — after which Mr. Marin paused to greet reporters and wish them a merry Christmas in Portuguese — prosecutors expressed frustration that Mr. Marin had not delivered in full on the $15 million bond securing his bail, which was promised to the federal government early last month. The court has granted several extensions.A lawyer for Mr. Marin, Charles A. Stillman, said his client had encountered “technical glitches” in transferring assets from Brazil to the United States in order to deliver a $2 million corporate surety bond. United States prosecutors have insisted that the bond be issued by a United States bank rather than a Brazilian one, in accordance with the terms of the bail agreement.Mr. Stillman told the judge on Wednesday, “They’re saying, ‘Should your 83-year-old client escape the clutches of the United States government, we don’t want to go to Brazil to collect the bond.’ ”Judge Dearie, expressing some sympathy for the situation, set Jan. 15 as the next date for the parties to convene to discuss the outstanding bond payment. A further update in the case for both Mr. Marin and Mr. Davidson is set for March.This month, prosecutors announced that three of the 14 defendants indicted in May had pleaded guilty. New charges were brought against 16 others. Of all defendants charged in the United States case — two of them corporations — 14, or more than a third, have pleaded guilty.Four others, including Mr. Marin and Mr. Davidson, have pleaded not guilty to the charges against them, including racketeering conspiracy, wire fraud conspiracy and money laundering conspiracy.“I’m not going to rush anybody,” Judge Dearie said in court on Wednesday, “but I am eager to get the case moving forward.”This week, two new defendants were arraigned in the case: Juan Ángel Napout of Paraguay, president of Conmebol, the South American soccer federation, who was arrested in Switzerland this month, and Rafael Callejas, a former president of not only Honduras’s soccer federation but also the country itself.In the coming days, two more international defendants are expected to be taken to federal court in Brooklyn to answer to the charges against them. They are Héctor Trujillo, the general secretary of the Guatemalan soccer federation and a judge on the Constitutional Court of Guatemala, and Eduardo Li, the president of the Costa Rican soccer federation and a Conmebol executive committee member.Mr. Trujillo was arrested when the international cruise ship he was on docked in Florida this month. Mr. Li, who has been in jail in Zurich since May, resisted extradition until last week.As of Wednesday, 14 defendants had been convicted; 23 had been indicted but had not been taken to court to file pleas; and four — Mr. Marin and Mr. Davidson among them — had been arraigned.Advertisement