AdvertisementSupported byBy Tim RohanBartolo Colon, who has become a favorite of Mets fans’ for his astonishing success on the mound and at the plate, will return next year. The Mets reached an agreement with Colon on a one-year contract, pending a physical, a person with knowledge of the situation said Wednesday. The deal would take Colon, a right-hander, through his 43rd birthday.Signing Colon gives the Mets flexibility. He will probably be the fifth starter for at least half the season, until Zack Wheeler returns from Tommy John surgery. Colon could then become a reliever, a role he welcomed and thrived in during the postseason.When the Mets signed Colon to a two-year, $20 million deal in December 2013, the move was considered a surprise. It was unclear how well Colon, who served a 50-game suspension at the end of the 2012 season for performance-enhancing drugs, would pitch at his age. But Colon has made at least 30 starts in each of the past three years and has posted a 4.13 E.R.A. during his time with the Mets.Colon has also become a leader, especially among the Mets’ Latino relievers, like Hansel Robles and closer Jeurys Familia, who has credited Colon’s advice for his early-career success.Others in the clubhouse respect and admire Colon for both his longevity and his obvious love for the game. The Mets’ dugout and the crowd — fans of the Mets and opposing teams alike — erupted in cheers whenever Colon got a base hit, made a behind-the-back toss to the first baseman or showed a glimpse of the natural athleticism that has defined his career.The Mets will be able to bring Wheeler along cautiously, in the way they did with Matt Harvey this season. The Mets have not put a firm timetable on Wheeler’s return, saying only that he is due back by midseason, but they have spoken at length about the benefits of giving a player as much time as possible before returning from Tommy John surgery. In the playoffs, when the Mets opted to ride their young pitching, Colon moved to the bullpen, appeared in seven games and recorded a 2.25 E.R.A. Manager Terry Collins praised Colon for his willingness to pitch whenever he was needed, without complaint and without showing fatigue. The Mets also announced Wednesday that Dick Scott would become their bench coach, replacing Bob Geren, who left to accept the same position with the Los Angeles Dodgers. Scott had been the Mets’ director of player development since 2013. Advertisement