By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSDEC. 18, 2015
DENVER —  Defenseman Francois Beauchemin readily acknowledged that he got a lucky bounce. Not that he was apologizing for it.It was just the way the night went for him. Just the way things have been going lately for the Colorado Avalanche as well.Beauchemin scored twice, including the tiebreaking goal late in the third period on a freak carom, Semyon Varlamov stopped 33 shots, and the Avalanche beat the Islanders, 2-1, at Pepsi Center on Thursday for their fourth straight win.Beauchemin got the game’s first goal in the opening period. Later, after digging out a rebound in the corner, he sent the puck toward the front of the net. It bounced off the skate of Islanders center Mikhail Grabovski and ricocheted past goaltender Thomas Greiss with 3 minutes 48 seconds left to play.Advertisement“Sometimes, you get that bounce,” said Beauchemin, who had his fifth career multigoal game. “At the end of the year I won’t remember how it went in. All I will know is that it will count.”AdvertisementThe result was a definite stunner for the Islanders, who outshot the Avalanche, 34-30.“Just bad puck luck,” Islanders forward Anders Lee said. “Stuff like that happens sometimes.”After winning three straight on the road, the Avalanche kept it up at home, where they have struggled this season, going 5-7-1.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Varlamov kept up his torrid play, too, earning the victory for a fifth straight start. He has limited Colorado’s opponents to five goals during the streak.Brock Nelson scored a power-play goal at 4:55 of the second period for the Islanders, who beat Colorado, 5-3, in Brooklyn on Nov. 30.The Islanders pulled Greiss with about 1:40 remaining for an extra skater, but they could not get anything past Varlamov.Nelson’s goal to tie the game at 1-1 came on a wrist shot past a screened Varlamov.A few minutes later, the Islanders caught a break when a puck that was headed into the net hit off the skate of defenseman Calvin de Haan, who was stationed right next to the left post.Beauchemin, who scored early in the first on a shot from near the blue line that sailed over the right shoulder of Greiss, was back on the ice two days after taking a big hit in a win at Chicago. He said after Colorado’s morning skate that he was feeling fine.Varlamov is returning to the form that made him tough to beat two years ago. He was stellar in the opening period, stopping 14 shots, including one down low from Ryan Strome.A version of this article appears in print on December 18, 2015, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: Avalanche Edge Islanders.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.