AdvertisementSupported byN.H.L. RoundupBy The Associated PressBack in net for the first time in five games, Minnesota Wild goaltender Devan Dubnyk had little time to settle in before facing a Rangers penalty shot.Dubnyk stopped an old teammate just 49 seconds in, then Mikko Koivu and the rest of the Wild took any further pressure off him.Dubnyk made 21 saves in his return to action after missing four games with a groin strain. Koivu had two goals and an assist, scoring for the third straight game, for Minnesota in a 5-2 win at home Thursday night.The Rangers lost their starting goaltender Antti Raanta in the first period when he was hit in the forehead area of his face mask by a slap shot from Wild defenseman Marco Scandella. Raanta allowed one goal on four shots.Rangers Coach Alain Vigneault said that Raanta had a head injury and that the team would call up a goaltender for Friday’s game at Winnipeg.Henrik Lundqvist relieved Raanta and stopped 27 of 31 shots.“I didn’t face so much in the first, so that was good,” Lundqvist said. “But it’s awfully tough to come in like that. In the first, after that, I think you’re in it. I played good in the second, but in the third I just need to be better. That fourth one’s a killer, and I know that comes down to focus, and I was surprised by the shot.”Rangers defenseman Keith Yandle got the penalty shot, but Dubnyk made a glove save on the attempt. The two played together last season in Arizona.“I’ve seen that move a couple times from him so I was ready for it,” Dubnyk said. “I actually didn’t think he was going to do it because he scored on me once that way in practice in Arizona. I kind of stuck my glove out there to try to protect from it and was preparing for something else. It’s a dangerous move, unless you know it.”It was the lone instance of Dubnyk being tested early.The Rangers’ first shot on goal other than the penalty shot came more than 13 minutes into the game. The Rangers had scored at least four goals in three of their previous four games, but Minnesota’s defense continued its recent string. The Wild have allowed nine goals in their last eight games, and just six in regulation during that span.Ryan McDonagh scored in the third period for the Rangers, who have lost four of five.“We’re going into the third period a lot of times trailing,” Vigneault said. “When you’re trailing, you’ve got to try and open things up a little bit, and it’s cost us.”KINGS 3, CANADIENS 0 Jonathan Quick made a season-high 45 saves as Los Angeles, the Pacific Division leader, won on the road against Atlantic-leading Montreal.The Kings improved to 20-9-2. The Canadiens, who have lost six of seven games, fell to 20-10-3.FLYERS 2, CANUCKS 0 Steve Mason made 36 saves, and Michael Raffl and Sean Couturier scored, leading host Philadelphia over slumping Vancouver.Philadelphia has won seven of 10 over all. SABRES 3, DUCKS 0 Chad Johnson made 44 saves for his first shutout in nearly 21 months as Buffalo stifled visiting Anaheim.Evander Kane, Jack McCabe and Jamie McGinn scored for the Sabres, who rebounded from a shutout loss Tuesday to the Devils.SHARKS 5, MAPLE LEAFS 4 Brent Burns banked the winning goal off Toronto center Peter Holland’s leg 2:13 into overtime, lifting San Jose to a road win over the Maple Leafs.Joe Pavelski, Patrick Marleau, Marc-Edouard Vlasic and Matt Nieto scored in regulation for San Jose, and Martin Jones had 28 saves.BLUES 2, PREDATORS 1 Vladimir Tarasenko scored a power-play goal with 5:20 left, and host St. Louis rallied past Nashville.FLAMES 3, STARS 1 Karri Ramo stopped 35 shots to help visiting Calgary overcome Dallas for the Flames’ seventh straight win.BLACKHAWKS 4, OILERS 0 Teuvo Teravainen had two goals and an assist, and host Chicago shut out Edmonton.Advertisement