By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSDEC. 17, 2015
NEWARK — Brandon Pirri said the Florida Panthers were enjoying themselves these days.With good reason.Pirri had a goal and two assists, Jussi Jokinen and Logan Shaw each had a goal and an assist, and visiting Florida beat the Devils, 5-1, on Thursday night.Florida has won two in a row.Vincent Trocheck and Corban Knight had two assists, Dmitry Kulikov and Reilly Smith also scored, and Al Montoya made 15 saves for the Panthers.“We’re having fun,” Pirri said. “We’re just enjoying the ride.”Five players finished with two or more points for Florida.Advertisement“We had the puck the whole night,” Pirri said.On the other end of the spectrum are the Devils, who lost for the second time in three games despite Cory Schneider’s 21-save effort.Advertisement“It wasn’t Cory,” Devils Coach John Hynes said when asked if he thought about starting the backup Keith Kinkaid. “Collectively we need to be better.”The Devils’ Sergey Kalinin made it 4-1 with a power-play goal with 6 minutes 22 seconds left, but Shaw scored an empty-net goal with 4:44 remaining.The Panthers went into the first intermission up by 2-0 on Jokinen’s power-play goal and Kulikov’s score.Jokinen’s sixth goal of the season opened the scoring at 9:32. He corralled Pirri’s stretch pass at the blue line, then split two defenders before snapping a shot past Schneider.About two and a half minutes later, Kulikov’s first goal of the season doubled the Panthers’ advantage, and it was the culmination of a long shift in which Florida’s top line of Jonathan Huberdeau, Aleksander Barkov and Jaromir Jagr maintained possession of the puck in the offensive zone for an extended amount of time.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Pirri scored his seventh goal of the season 2:42 into the second period to increase the lead to 3-0. Pirri ripped a drive from the right circle that beat Schneider cleanly.Pirri has two goals and four assists in five games since Dec. 8. Against the Devils, the line of Pirri, Knight and Shaw combined for two goals and five assists.“It’s fun right now,” Pirri said. “We’re going to be here for a while.”Neither team generated many offensive chances, with Florida finishing with advantages in shots on goal (26-16) and total attempted shots (33-26).AdvertisementMontoya is now 5-1-1 in eight games with a 1.79 goals-against average and .930 save percentage.“Solid, predictable game on our part,” Montoya said. “We made them work.”Smith jammed Trocheck’s feed under Schneider for Florida’s fourth goal at 7:28 of the third. Schneider stopped Smith’s initial shot, but Smith’s second jab at the puck led to his 10th goal of the season.Kalinin tipped Palmieri’s slap shot to spoil Montoya’s shutout bid. Palmieri was initially credited with the goal, but his shot glanced off Kalinin’s leg and in.“We didn’t play offensively the way we needed to play,” Hynes said. “We didn’t play a hard enough game.“This wasn’t a good game.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.