AdvertisementSupported byBy Ben StraussHAVANA — Clayton Kershaw stood on the lawn outside the Hotel Nacional, his profile set against a pink sky as the sun set over the Florida Straits behind him. Kershaw stretched; first his arm, then his back. Baseball in hand, he called to Jose Cruz Jr., a former big leaguer who now works for Major League Baseball’s players’ union, that he was ready to throw. A throng of Cubans watched Kershaw’s every move.Underneath where Kershaw stood were a maze of tunnels once manned by Cuban soldiers during the Cuban missile crisis in 1962. Now, nearly a year to the day after President Obama announced that the United States and Cuba would move to normalize relations, came the latest illustration of the new relationship — one of America’s best pitchers was having a catch in Havana. A giant commemorative cannon, a homage to Cuban nationalism, stood a few feet away.A few minutes later, Dariel Abreu, the 5-year-old son of Chicago White Sox first baseman Jose Abreu, tiptoed through the lobby of the Nacional. A White Sox cap on his head, he was on his way upstairs to finally reunite with his father, who had defected to the United States in 2013.“There are no words when you haven’t seen your son in so long,” Jose Abreu said, tears welling in his eyes.Baseball’s good-will tour of Cuba this week — which included eight major leaguers, four of them from Cuba — was both an exercise in baseball diplomacy and an emotional homecoming. Since Fidel Castro seized power here over five decades ago, Cuban players have been barred from the major leagues, mirroring the bitter political standoff between the two countries.Political ConcernsCuban players who did defect over the years so they could play in the major leagues often had to survive harrowing boat trips to eventually get to the United States. And once they had left Cuba, going back often seemed like a fantasy. But in a sign of how tensions have eased in the wake of Obama’s historic announcement, the Cuban government this week allowed Abreu, Los Angeles Dodgers outfielder Yasiel Puig, St. Louis Cardinals catcher Brayan Pena and the free-agent shortstop Alexei Ramirez to be part of the tour.With them came four fellow big leaguers: Kershaw, of the Dodgers; Miguel Cabrera, of the Detroit Tigers; Nelson Cruz, of the Seattle Mariners; and Jon Jay, of the San Diego Padres. Joe Torre represented Major League Baseball, alongside Tony Clark, the head of the players’ union, who was accompanied by two advisers, Omar Minaya and Dave Winfield.The trip, Major League Baseball’s first visit here since a 1999 exhibition between the Baltimore Orioles and the Cuban national team, comes amid some initial efforts by baseball authorities in both countries to create a new reality, one in which Cuban ballplayers might someday come and go freely between their country and the major leagues.This week, though, was heavier on symbolism than any announcements of future plans. “Baseball is life, yes or no?” Clark asked at a packed news conference on Tuesday afternoon at the Nacional. A chorus of “Si!” came from the crowd. “Having the opportunity to be here today is a snapshot of how baseball connects all of us,” Clark responded. But that connection hardly trumps existing political concerns. Seeming to underscore that fact, Cuba’s state-run newspaper, Granma, did not quote the Cuban major leaguers in its article about the Tuesday news conference, and a state-television news report about the arrival of all eight players included an interview with Cabrera, who is Venezuelan, but none of the Cubans.The four Cuban players also had travel restrictions placed on them. “This is a very important day, an important step,” Higinio Velez, president of the Cuban baseball federation, said of the visit after Tuesday’s news conference. But, he added: “Our principles are loyalty to the revolution and loyalty to our homeland and to historic leaders. We’re not ever going to lose dignity of our principles.” Velez is committed to the National Series, the 16-team domestic league in Cuba, and to the country’s national baseball team, which has been weakened over the years by all the talent that has fled the island. Players in the league earn anywhere between $40 and $200 per month, more than the $20 per month of the average citizen but a morsel when compared to what even the lowest-paid major leaguers get.It is no surprise, then, that more than 300 Cuban players have found a way to leave here since the early 1990s, with some estimates that more than 70 this year alone defected. Seeking a New SystemA better system is needed, and it was significant that Antonio Castro, who is Fidel’s son and the vice president of the Cuban baseball federation, addressed that issue on Thursday, the final day of the tour. Speaking to American reporters in Matanzas, a city east of Havana, he said: “We’re experiencing an era with a new relationship with Major League Baseball and the players’ association, one where we want the baseball players to play baseball, where they live in a normal world and they have the same rights.”Castro has been directly involved in the talks that have already taken place between American and Cuban baseball officials and was visible during the tour, at one point even taking a picture of Puig and Abreu at one of the clinics.Asked if he had spoken to his father about the tour, he smiled and said, “He’s a baseball fan.” It was a nice moment, one that complemented the hugs shared and tears shed as the tour proceeded. Pena, who has been a major league journeyman, left Cuba 16 years ago when he was a teenager. Outside the Nacional he posed for a family photo with more than a dozen aunts, uncles and cousins. “When he left, I never thought I’d see him again,” said his 84-year-old grandmother, Rosa Hernandez. Puig was reunited with his half brother, Yoan Hernandez, who sported a “Yasiel Sabe” T-shirt (“Yasiel Knows”); Abreu saw his son. Cubans mobbed the players’ tour bus wherever it stopped — including a lunch at the Floridita, once a favorite haunt of Ernest Hemingway’s. Abreu was asked over and over about the upcoming season in Chicago. Could he hit 30 home runs again? (He’s hit 36 and 30 in his first two years in the majors.) Everyone wanted a photograph. One woman asked Abreu to sign an envelope. On Wednesday morning, more than 150 children attended a skills clinic at Estadio Latinoamericano in Havana, but there was also another round of blurry-eyed reunions for the four Cuban players, this time with former teammates and friends and a generation of Cuban baseball heroes who remain on the island. Among them were Orestes Kindelan and Pedro Lazo, who received a colorful new glove from Puig. “Blue and red,” said Lazo, one of the greatest pitchers in Cuban history. “Cuba’s colors.”In the dugout at Latinoamericano, watching wide-eyed through a pair of sunglasses, was one of the top young Cuban players, the 22-year-old shortstop Lourdes Gourriel Jr. Hailing from a royal baseball family — his brother, father, uncles and a cousin have all starred in the National Series — Gourriel said he had never met a major leaguer, he had only seen them on TV. One day, he said, he would like to play in the United States, against the best players in the world, but only with his government’s permission.“Baseball is for the people here, for the community,” he said. “We are with them, and that is very important.” Those values, though, coexist with a fascination with the big leagues, las Grandes Ligas, as they are called here. As Kershaw walked past him, Gourriel asked a reporter, “Can you introduce me?”The tour may have meant even more to an older generation of Cubans, who remember just how close these two countries once were. A few blocks from the Nacional, Ismael Sene, once a revolutionary alongside Fidel Castro, later a Cuban intelligence official in Eastern Europe and now a baseball commentator here on a weekly baseball TV program, sat in his living room, gushing about the good-will tour.His bookshelves are lined with American baseball history books and videotapes, including a commemoration of one of the Yankees’ World Series championships in the 1990s. An Ichiro Suzuki bobblehead doll holds a prized place on a dresser next to a signed ball from Mickey Mantle.Sene remembered visiting Yankee Stadium during the 1950s. He opened one of his books to show off new autographs of Torre and Cabrera from this week’s visit.“I have met Pope John Paul II and Nelson Mandela,” he said. “Talking to Dave Winfield today was just as wonderful. For the older generation, we know the separation between us and the United States, so that is why I think today means more to us.”Next StepsThe next step in all this could be a spring training visit by the Tampa Bay Rays to play at least one game, maybe two, although nothing is yet official. But the heavy lifting of negotiations remains, as Major League Baseball, the players union and Cuban baseball officials at least talk about the way to have a real working relationship. Looming in the background is the United States trade embargo, which remains intact and largely prohibits American companies and citizens from doing business in Cuba.What an ultimate deal might look like — whether the Cuban government might someday borrow from Japan and create a posting system that would allow it to be financially compensated when players depart for the major leagues — remains to be seen.“We don’t have a great view of what their goals are,” said Major League Baseball’s top lawyer, Dan Halem, who took part in the tour and said he was sensitive to Cuban concerns that its own league survive if players could freely go to the majors. “I can tell you from our limited interaction that there is a willingness by them to speak to us,” he added. “We would like to see Cuban baseball be as strong as possible. It really is in M.L.B.’s interest.”Despite all the questions and all the misgivings of the last five and a half decades, there remains an unquestioned enthusiasm for Major League Baseball here, and a pride in seeing Cubans excel at that level. As Kershaw tossed the ball with Jose Cruz Jr., Luis Medina, a Havana resident, watched closely. He pulled out a packet of notes from his pocket. He showed a reporter an article, from a newspaper outside the country, about the good-will tour. He pointed at Kershaw. “Three hundred strikeouts,” he said. “He is the best, and the Cubans can play with him.”Advertisement