AdvertisementSupported bySports of The TimesBy William C. RhodenEAST RUTHERFORD, N.J. — Eli Manning made a rare departure from his script with reporters Wednesday when asked about Carolina Panthers quarterback Cam Newton’s post-touchdown dance called the dab.“Hey, whatever works for you, you know?” Manning said.Manning was asked if he was working on a touchdown routine, just in case.“I haven’t polished it up just yet,” he said, leading to laughs. “It’s got more work to do, it’s been in progress for 12 years, but still a little rusty. I haven’t fine-tuned it quite yet.”Manning’s up-and-down Giants will face Newton’s undefeated Carolina Panthers on Sunday in a matchup of N.F.L. quarterbacks who seem stylistically and philosophically opposed to each other.There’s Manning, 34, the quintessential pocket passer, perhaps a slowly dying breed. He delivered a spectacular performance at Miami on Monday and was honored as the N.F.C. offensive player of the week. But no dancing, no end-zone celebrations.Then there’s Newton, 26. Jubilant, effusive, highly mobile. He is the only quarterback in N.F.L. history to have 100-plus passing touchdowns and 25-plus rushing touchdown in his first five seasons. He has invigorated end-zone celebrations.Newton appears to feed off the attention. Manning is famously boring during locker room interview sessions and so notably mundane after Giants touchdowns that “Saturday Night Live” built a sketch around it when he hosted the show in 2012.But both quarterbacks have a sense of when to seize the moment. Manning sensed that the reporters surrounding him wanted to hear a little more about his celebration preparations.“A lot of reps?” he was asked.“A lot of time in the off-season and Tuesdays doing it,” Manning said, “but it doesn’t feel right yet.”Was he saving his dance for the next rushing touchdown? “Just when it’s ready,” he said. “When it’s ready, I’ll break it out. Don’t hold your breath.”Manning and Newton do have something in common, though: winning.In 2010, Newton led Auburn to an undefeated season and a national championship. Manning has a pair of Super Bowl rings and Super Bowl Most Valuable Player trophies on his mantel.“They’re the same; they’re both winners,” said running back Rashad Jennings, who has a locker next to Manning’s. “They’re both competitors, they’re both leaders and they both want to win, so I see them as the same.”During Newton’s outstanding season, he is challenging tacklers on the field and off.After the Tennessee Titans complained about Newton’s end-zone celebrations, he fired back: If you don’t like the celebration, keep me out of the end zone.That message seemed to resonate — ominously — with Giants defenders this week.“I kind of respected his comment he said earlier in the year when he said, ‘If you don’t want me to dance, keep me out the end zone,’ ” defensive tackle Cullen Jenkins said.Linebacker Jasper Brinkley agreed.“If you got a problem with him dancing, you gotta stop him,” Brinkley said. “The only way to stop him from dancing is not letting him score. It’s cut and dried.”Jennings turned the table on me and asked what I thought about Newton’s celebration. Did I have a problem with it?No, though I had to be honest. As someone who played defense from Pop Warner through college, I was the cause of many end-zone celebrations, not the beneficiary. But as a spectator and sportswriter, I enjoy the theater.Counting my preteenage years, I have watched end-zone celebrations for more than 40 years, going back to running back Hewritt Dixon and wide receiver Homer Jones. Al Davis and I had a running debate about who was the first to spike the ball in an N.F.L. game: Dixon, an Oakland Raider by way of Florida A&M, or Jones, a Giant by way of Texas Southern.We never resolved the debate.Newton dances, then rushes to the stands and hands the ball to a youngster. Who can disagree with that?“I don’t think anyone has a problem with the way Cam goes about his business,” Jennings said.He added: “He’s having a good time. I want people to have a good time. That how you’re supposed to live: Work hard, play hard. If that’s your personality, then dab all day.”Manning said he did not have a problem with Newton’s celebration, either.“We have guys who celebrate when they score a touchdown, and I’m fine with that,” he said. “You get in the end zone, you can celebrate. You don’t get a penalty, it’s all good by me. It’s not my style, but I’m not against it.”While Jenkins said he didn’t have a problem with Newton’s enthusiasm, he preferred Manning’s approach, which has evolved. Newton will evolve as well.“Eli’s not worried about having a camera on him, having attention on him,” Jenkins said. “He comes to do his job, and he wants to do his job well and see the team succeed. You respect that. You get the same thing from him every week every year. You have to respect it.”I enjoy watching Newton, and it’s intriguing to watch Manning make these late-season runs when he goes from vilified to glorified. What Newton and Manning also have in common is fickle fans.In the pocket, out of the pocket, you can dance, you can dab and you can shimmy. The only thing that really matters is who will be dabbing in February.Email: wcr@nytimes.com Advertisement