AdvertisementSupported byBy Jonah Engel BromwichAs a professional basketball player, Cleveland Cavaliers guard Iman Shumpert has experience performing under pressure. But few high-pressure situations on the basketball court could compare to the one he dealt with early Wednesday morning.According to his fiancée, Teyana Taylor, who posted the news on Facebook and Instagram, Shumpert helped deliver their baby when Taylor suddenly found herself in labor in the bathtub.Taylor did not know she was giving birth until she felt the baby’s head. “It took two 10 counts and two pushes with my fiancé playing doctor and she entered this world into his bare hands!” she wrote.According to the Facebook post, Shumpert then tied a pair of his red headphones around the umbilical cord of his daughter, whom they have named Iman Tayla Shumpert Jr., until an ambulance arrived five minutes later.Shumpert and Taylor were engaged in November during Taylor’s baby shower at the Museum of Contemporary Art in Cleveland. Even before the birth of his namesake, Shumpert had been especially affectionate on social media recently, posting a birthday note to Taylor on his Instagram account last week.“You have proven to me that love is real and genuine,” Shumpert said. “I know you can’t drink while you’re pregnant … and you’ll probably pass out after dinner and not make it to the club lol. But I’m screaming HAPPY BIRTHDAY to you while you’re in Chicago!”Taylor, 25 is a singer and music industry veteran who has appeared in several films and television shows. She has a significant social media presence, and her Facebook post about Iman Jr.’s delivery has received hundreds of thousands of likes from fans.After sitting on the sideline for most of the season with a wrist injury, Shumpert returned to the Cavaliers’ lineup last week and had an impact in the team’s victory over the Orlando Magic, scoring 14 points on 5-of-7 shooting.He now has a more joyful reason to miss the first-place Cavaliers’ next game. The Cavaliers are first in the Eastern Conference standings. Shumpert will not play, though not because of his wrist injury. His wrists appear to be in good shape.Advertisement