AdvertisementSupported byBy Tim RohanAt 10 a.m. Wednesday, with a horde of reporters and cameramen on hand to note the moment, Matt Harvey emerged from the Mets’ dugout with his teammates for their final workout before the postseason begins. For those who were wondering if Harvey could possibly miss a workout for a second straight day, the answer was no. He was on time, and the Mets took that as a signal to move past a story that created some uncomfortable headlines for him. Manager Terry Collins tried using humor. He told reporters that Harvey, a 26-year-old right-hander, could afford the fine the Mets had levied against him for being absent the day before. He joked that Bartolo Colon had gotten stuck in traffic Wednesday — which was an excuse Harvey apparently offered to the Mets the day before — but made it anyway.“He’s got four-wheel drive,” Collins said. As reporters pushed recorders in his face, Collins added, still in jest: “There’s so much panic around here. The place is so tense. We should be enjoying it a little bit more.”By “it,” Collins meant the playoffs, the moment, their impending division series against the Los Angeles Dodgers.In preparation for that series, the Mets were monitoring Wilmer Flores, who was still recovering from strep throat. And they were sending Steven Matz to Florida to throw about 90 pitches in an instructional league game to see if he was healthy enough to pitch in a potential fourth game of the Dodgers series.Collins planned to address his players before they worked out in Los Angeles on Thursday. More than half of the Mets projected to be on the postseason roster have never been in a playoff game.“The game’s the same, played with a little bit more intensity, played with a little bit bigger crowds,” Collins said. “The difference is you guys,” he added, referring to the reporters surrounding him. “I mean, we’ve worked out a lot. We haven’t had 15 TV cameras waiting for us to walk up the steps of the dugout. That’s what they’ve got to get used to.”That was why Collins spoke to Harvey again Wednesday morning and told him the team had moved on from his tardiness on Tuesday. Collins said: “He and I have this little game we play. ‘You go pitch good; I’ll take care of the rest.’ ” Although David Wright sounded upset about Harvey’s absence on Tuesday, Curtis Granderson said Wednesday that it was now a nonissue. His defense: Everyone is late at some point in their lives.And there was one more observation from Collins“We had a setback, a little bit of a problem,” he said. “On an off-day, who really cares? We’re going to make sure Matt gets on the plane today, gets on board. He’ll be with us tomorrow at the workout, I think.”Advertisement