By TOM PEDULLADEC. 17, 2015
FLORHAM PARK, N.J. —  Jets wide receiver Brandon Marshall reached into his locker on Tuesday and displayed his Christmas gift for quarterback Ryan Fitzpatrick. It was “Just Give Me the Damn Ball!” — an autobiography by Keyshawn Johnson, a former Jets receiver.Marshall laughed heartily, knowing that his willingness to share the load with Eric Decker had helped give the Jets a chance for an A.F.C. wild-card berth as they headed into the regular season’s final three weeks.Marshall and Decker are on course to become the franchise’s first pair of 1,000-yard receivers in a season since Johnson and Wayne Chrebet in 1998. Their emergence goes a long way toward explaining why the Jets, riding a three-game winning streak, take an 8-5 record into Saturday night’s road game against the beleaguered Dallas Cowboys.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“There is not an ego,” said Fitzpatrick, whose urgency to reach the postseason for the first time in his 11-year career also helped set the tone. “We’re all in this thing together, trying to win. We’ve all got that common goal.”AdvertisementMarshall, a 10-year veteran also seeking his first playoff berth, is the Jets’ first 1,000-yard receiver since Jerricho Cotchery totaled 1,130 yards in 2007. Marshall has 89 catches for 1,187 yards and 11 touchdowns. Decker is on a pace to reach 1,000 yards, having compiled 66 receptions for 875 yards and nine touchdowns.AdvertisementThey are one end-zone celebration away from becoming the Jets’ highest-scoring receiving duo. The Hall of Famer Don Maynard and Art Powell produced 20 touchdowns in 1960. Wesley Walker and Al Toon equaled that in 1986.Although John Idzik spent sparingly when he was the Jets’ general manager, his major free-agent move was signing Decker to a five-year contract worth $36.25 million before the 2014 season. Decker can achieve his third 1,000-yard season in four years.Mike Maccagnan, who took over as general manager when the owner Woody Johnson fired Idzik and Coach Rex Ryan at the end of last season, provided Decker with an ideal, if controversial, partner when he acquired Marshall from the Chicago Bears last off-season for a fifth-round draft pick.Marshall has a history of being difficult for coaches to manage and carried the reputation of being a diva in the mold of the ball-demanding Johnson. But Jets Coach Todd Bowles, who oversaw Marshall for three games as the Miami Dolphins’ interim head coach at the end of the 2011 season, never hesitated.“He’s doing the same things he did in Miami when I had him the first time,” Bowles said. “He’s just matured more as a person. He understands what it takes to win ballgames, and he’s a good leader for us.”Marshall is the first receiver in N.F.L. history to have 1,000-yard seasons for four teams.One of the few strengths for Dallas (4-9) is a pass defense that ranks fourth in the league, allowing 221.1 passing yards per game. But heavy attention paid to Marshall tends to make Decker, often operating in the slot, more productive. If defenses focus on Decker, who leads the A.F.C. with 47 touchdown catches since 2010, Marshall becomes more explosive.“It definitely opens it up,” Decker said of Marshall’s impact. “It makes it easier to run routes and get one-on-one matchups. To have someone of his caliber to lean on in situations, it makes holes in the middle open, and I can do my job.”Decker, in his sixth season, grew immeasurably when he played beside Peyton Manning with the Denver Broncos in 2012 and 2013. Decker, who played in the Super Bowl after the 2013 season, absorbed a tremendous amount of knowledge from Manning, who is known for maintaining voluminous notebooks.AdvertisementFitzpatrick said the 27 years of combined experience among him, Marshall and Decker had made a difference while they prepared for games and once the action began.“These guys have been in different systems and run routes different ways,” Fitzpatrick said. “It’s being able to make changes on the fly during the game, when we’re in the huddle or going to the line. A combination of those things helped us throughout the year.”Although Marshall and Decker were expected to play large roles, circumstances led the Jets to depend on them even more. Jace Amaro, a second-year tight end valued primarily for his pass catching, was placed on injured reserve before the season with a torn labrum. The Jets drafted Devin Smith, a receiver from Ohio State with blistering speed, in the second round. He sustained a punctured lung in preseason and adapted slowly to the pro game before being placed on injured reserve this week with a torn knee ligament.Although Marshall and Decker may represent the finest receiving tandem in the N.F.L., Marshall suggested that the assessment could best be made at the end of the regular season.“We’ll see in three weeks,” he said.A version of this article appears in print on December 18, 2015, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: Jets’ Prolific Receivers Thank Each Other for Sharing.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.