AdvertisementSupported byOn Pro BasketballBy Harvey AratonUpon his unanticipated return to the N.B.A., Jerry Colangelo especially enjoyed one Philadelphia news media report noting how the 76ers had not-so-coincidently hired a 76-year-old to restore their credibility.“It then said not to think this is a 76-year-old who doesn’t have the energy that’s necessary for the job,” he said.Age is a number, Colangelo contends, and in the case of the historically bad 76ers, the higher the better. Sam Hinkie, Philadelphia’s 38-year-old general manager, had turned the team into a competitive eyesore, and he desperately needed a father figure. With encouragement from an exasperated N.B.A. league office, back was Colangelo, the patriarch of USA Basketball and once upon a time — at just under 30 with the Phoenix Suns — the youngest general manager in sports.N.B.A. legend reminds us that Colangelo discovered right away what Hinkie has lately been learning the hard way: The draft is a veritable crapshoot. The Suns in 1969 lost a coin flip for the first pick. Instead of Kareem Abdul-Jabbar, who went to Milwaukee, the expansion Suns tried to rise with a less heralded big man, Neal Walk.Denied Abdul-Jabbar, who became and remains the league’s career leading scorer, Colangelo built the Suns into a strong — albeit championshipless — franchise that he eventually owned. The immediate goal in Philadelphia, where Colangelo was brought in last week as chairman of basketball operations, will for the foreseeable future be somewhat less ambitious.The 76ers, Colangelo said in a telephone interview from his home base in Phoenix, are merely “stretching for credibility.”Do we know of any 1-26 teams that are not? Recklessly inexperienced and also unlucky, the 76ers will on Friday night host the 12-14 Knicks, a team halfway to title contention, if only by comparison with the Sixers, described by Colangelo as a team of “a couple of talented young guys and D-League players.”Hinkie’s most damaging misjudgment has not necessarily been his willingness to sacrifice a few seasons to stockpile draft picks and build organically. His selection in three successive drafts of centers Nerlens Noel, the still-injured Joel Embiid and Jahlil Okafor has been dubious because none of them fit the court-spacing trend of being skilled outside the lane.Worse, even, than Hinkie’s cumulative draft record has been his stunning refusal to provide a support system for a youth-dominated roster and a head coach, Brett Brown, who had been a career-long assistant until Hinkie hired him in 2013.Recent revelations of off-hours skirmishes involving Okafor, the just-turned-20 rookie from Duke, exposed Hinkie for failing to provide player mentorship. Before joining the Sixers, Okafor had rarely lost a game, much less all but one of 27. He recently was caught on video on a darkened Boston street, dangerously lashing out at people who had teased him about his team’s record.Not a good look for Okafor or the league. Colangelo acknowledged the dire situation, saying the team had reached out to former players and solid citizens like Shane Battier and Elton Brand.“Classy guys like that, if interested, could really offer something to us,” Colangelo said.In dealing with the numbing beatings they have taken across the N.B.A. landscape, the players aren’t alone in need of confidants, or a good shrink. Brown’s career record is 38-153. Though he recently received a contract extension, he may soon have an experienced sidekick. The 76ers have acknowledged talks with Mike D’Antoni about an associate head coaching position.D’Antoni’s coaching roots are in Phoenix, which presages more Colangelo-inspired changes, possibly including his son, Bryan, formerly the executive steward in Toronto.Someone of Jerry Colangelo’s age and stature does not get involved to rearrange the furniture. Asked why he had agreed to return, and to a team in such disrepair, Colangelo said he was not playing gin rummy at the country club between dips in the sauna.In addition to running USA Basketball as its chairman, he has been involved in the upgrading of the basketball program at Grand Canyon University in Phoenix.“People ask me, ‘Jerry, when are you going to stop? ” he said. “Here’s what I say: I don’t like the word retirement. I say go as big as you can and as hard as you can — and you’ll know when you can’t.”He has been planning for the eventual relinquishing of his USA Basketball chairmanship to Mike Krzyzewski, who will turn the coaching reins over to Gregg Popovich after completing his third Olympic cycle, in Rio de Janeiro next summer. Succession has been the overriding theme of Colangelo’s approach to developing the national team from the disjointed, deflated program he inherited after the 2004 Games in Athens.Colangelo asked the N.B.A.’s best American players to view the team as something more than a personal branding enhancement and for long-term commitments that would help establish tradition for younger players to aspire to on the way up.“This is also how it should work with an N.B.A. team,” he said, citing Steve Nash’s apprenticeship in Phoenix for two years, sitting behind Kevin Johnson and Jason Kidd. Nash was then traded to Dallas upon request, Colangelo said, but eventually returned to be Phoenix’s pillar point guard.On display Wednesday night at Madison Square Garden, where the Knicks defeated Minnesota, 107-102, was Karl-Anthony Towns, drafted first in June by the Timberwolves and the beneficiary of the support system lacking in Philadelphia.Towns, who scored 25 points and grabbed 10 rebounds, was a force inside and out after saying before the game, “I always have high expectations for myself, so I feel like I’ve been underachieving so far.”He is extraordinarily talented, exceedingly poised. He is also 20 and has been heralded, like most first picks, as a savior. Flip Saunders, the Timberwolves’ coach and president of basketball who died of cancer in October, brought the wily Kevin Garnett back to Minnesota last season to help tutor the 2014 first-round pick Andrew Wiggins. When the team landed Towns, Saunders added the veterans Tayshaun Prince and Andre Miller.“That was how Flip envisioned the team,” said Miller, a 39-year-old point guard. “He told me there would be ups and downs, but the team needed veterans because the league’s maturity level has changed, and society has changed on how we view young guys and what we expect out of them. They get thrown to the wolves, and the toughest thing mentally when you’re losing is trying to get through the season, how to stay positive, try not to play with negative thoughts.”When Miller was a rookie in Cleveland, he recalled, the veteran Mark Bryant provided a steadying voice. When Garnett broke in with the Timberwolves in 1995, right out of high school, he leaned on Terry Porter, a 10-year veteran, and Sam Mitchell, a six-year vet and now — having moved up from staff assistant when Saunders became ill — Garnett’s head coach.Before Wednesday night’s game, Mitchell said that he had heard Garnett giving Towns the same advice on facing the Knicks’ prized rookie, Kristaps Porzingis, that he himself had given the young Garnett before Garnett took on the likes of Shaquille O’Neal and later Tim Duncan: Don’t make friends with guys you’re going to clash with for the next 10 to 15 years.A good argument can be made that understanding how to lose is requisite to learning how to win. Across the decades, Colangelo has been up, down and all around. There’s a new patriarch in Philadelphia, and the organizational pecking order is now age before Hinkie.Advertisement