AdvertisementSupported byBy Pat PickensNEWARK — South Florida is associated with snowbirds — retirees who migrate from the North to spend their later years in the comfort of warm weather — and professional hockey there is full of the N.H.L.’s version: The Panthers are one of the league’s oldest teams, averaging 28.5 years.But a closer look shows that the figure is misleading.“We don’t have a whole lot of guys that are in the middle,” Panthers Coach Gerard Gallant said. “We’ve got some old guys and some real young guys. It’s working out pretty good over all.”Jaromir Jagr, 43, is second on the Panthers in scoring, with 22 points, entering Friday’s game at Carolina. He continues to climb the career points list — he is fourth, logging his 1,824th point on a primary assist on Dmitry Kulikov’s goal in the Panthers’ 5-1 win over the Devils on Thursday night. Jagr’s goal last week against the Washington Capitals pushed him into a tie with Marcel Dionne for fourth on the career goal list with 731. Acquired from the Devils at last season’s trading deadline, Jagr has provided Florida’s young forwards with guidance that only someone who has played 21-plus N.H.L. seasons and five in Europe can provide.“I think everybody respects him,” forward Jonathan Huberdeau, 22, said. “When he talks, you listen to him. He’s been through so much, and he just knows the game. He was playing before I was born.”Jagr has won two Stanley Cups and two Olympic medals, including a gold for the Czech Republic in 1998, but he is not the only Panther with a championship résumé. Of the eight 30-somethings on Florida’s roster, four have won the Stanley Cup, and goaltender Roberto Luongo, 36, fell just shy of claiming it when Vancouver lost to Boston in seven games in 2011. Luongo was, however, part of two gold-medal-winning Canadian Olympic teams.Still, there is substantial youth on the roster, which has 14 players 25 or younger, including two who are currently injured. Huberdeau and Aleksander Barkov, 20, a Finnish-born forward who grew up idolizing Jagr, have been Jagr’s linemates for much of this season.“He works really hard every day,” Barkov said. “It’s hard to think that you have to work that hard like that for 25 more years, but you have to if you want to be like him.”Huberdeau, the No. 3 pick in the 2011 draft, won the Calder Trophy, given to the N.H.L.’s rookie of the year, for the 2012-13 season, when he was 19. Defenseman Aaron Ekblad claimed the Calder Trophy as a 19-year-old last season after being the first overall pick in the 2014 draft.Ekblad acts and plays like someone far older.“Each and every night, he’s consistent; you don’t get that a lot with young guys,” said Brian Campbell, 36, who was Ekblad’s defense partner last season. “Everyone sees the offensive upside, but he can play just as well defensively.”Ekblad spent last season living with his teammate Willie Mitchell but is living on his own this season. Mitchell’s wife, Megan, taught Ekblad the fundamentals of cooking, which he now enjoys doing in his spare time.“It’s a little strange to be on my own,” Ekblad said. “I’ve always liked it. I’ve always liked being responsible for everything I can handle.”Thus far, living alone has not adversely his play: Ekblad is on pace to equal his point total (39) from last season.Florida (16-12-4) had won eight of 11, but this season has had its bumps. The Panthers have been without the former first-round pick Nick Bjugstad, 23, who has had a reported case of migraine headaches. The Panthers rank 28th in the N.H.L. in average attendance, less than 13,000 per game, and they endured a 3-6-3 stretch in late November that they are still trying to recover from.A flu bug circulated among the team this week, first hitting Jagr and keeping him out of two days of practice and Tuesday night’s game against the Islanders. Barkov, who was also sick, had three points in the game, a 5-1 victory. Luongo stopped 33 shots, and all five Panthers goals were scored by players under 24.“That’s the way it should be,” Jagr said. “We’ve got a lot of young guys. When you look at it, almost everybody right now is 20, 22.”The Panthers lost some of their championship experience this week when the organization sent the veteran center Dave Bolland to the American Hockey League on a conditioning stint. Bolland, who scored the Cup-clinching goal for the Blackhawks against the Bruins in Game 6 in 2013, signed a five-year, $27.5 million deal with Florida before last season but has only 28 points in 78 games with the Panthers.“You want him to play better,” Gallant said. “You want him to work harder. You want him to compete harder. You want him to get involved scoring points and playing an all-around solid game. It’s just something to try and jump-start him.”The Panthers’ young players seem to enjoy playing in Florida, particularly Ekblad, who could be the best defenseman of his generation. And the Panthers will remain in Florida for the foreseeable future: Broward County last week promised the team $86 million after renegotiating the Panthers’ lease agreement at BB&T Center.Although the Panthers have reached the postseason only four times in 22 seasons, Ekblad has high hopes that the team’s older core will help the young players significantly alter that culture.“They teach us a lot, and it’s going to help Barkov, myself, Huberdeau in the next however many years that they want to keep us here,” Ekblad said. “I know we all want to be here for a very long time. We want to win Stanley Cups. We want to create a dynasty with this team.”Advertisement