AdvertisementSupported byFantasy football analysis for Thursday night’s game between the Tampa Bay Buccaneers and the St. Louis Rams. Check back Friday for analysis on Sunday’s games and Monday’s matchup between the Detroit Lions and the New Orleans Saints. You can also follow the Sablich brothers on Twitter at @5thDownFantasy.These player rankings from the Sablich brothers are for standard and PPR scoring formats and will be updated throughout the season.8:30 p.m. Eastern time. Line: Rams by 2.5Quarterback Jameis Winston (TB) — He has disappointed twice in the last three games despite favorable matchups against the Colts and the Saints. It is difficult to be too excited about him against a Rams defense allowing the seventh fewest F.P.P.G. to the position (15.3).Running Back  Todd Gurley (STL) — After back-to-back games with under 5 fantasy points, Gurley bounced back in a big way against the Lions, rushing for 140 yards and two touchdowns. The Buccaneers have the league’s eighth ranked run defense (94.1 Y.P.G.) but have allowed a back to top 10 fantasy points in nine of 13 games played. Doug Martin (TB) — Before keeping the Lions in check last weekend, the Rams looked plenty vulnerable against the run, allowing three backs (Adrian Peterson, Jeremy Langford and David Johnson) in the previous five weeks to score at least 18 fantasy points.Wide ReceiverTavon Austin (STL) — With Case Keenum at quarterback, Austin is a risky WR3. You can always hope for a big run play to make up for it, but that’s not something to count on in a fantasy playoff week.Mike Evans/Vincent Jackson (TB) — The Rams allow the fifth fewest fantasy points to receivers (17.8 F.P.P.G.). A tough matchup combined with Winston’s inconsistency pushed Evans down to a low-end WR2, even with Jackson expected to miss the game and possibly the rest of the season.The Sablich Brothers have provided award-winning fantasy football advice for The Times since 2010. For additional fantasy analysis, visit 5thdownfantasy.com and follow them on Twitter @5thdownfantasy.Advertisement