By VICTOR MATHERDEC. 17, 2015
The Club World Cup sounds like a big, important event, and in a way it is. Virtually every club in the world is technically eligible for the competition, from the mighty teams of Europe to the smallest of the Pacific islands.The team that wins each December is, nominally at least, the world champion of clubs.Barcelona played the Asian champion, Guangzhou Evergrande of China, in the semifinal on Thursday in Yokohama, Japan, winning 3-0 on a hat trick by Luis Suárez. But even many Barça fans probably did not take much notice.Indeed, there was more talk about events off the field than on. Lionel Messi missed the game because of renal colic, abdominal pain caused by kidney stones, and Neymar sat out with a groin injury. Concern about the health of those star Barcelona players trumped interest in the actual result of the game.Although the world’s continental champions gather each year to compete for the Club World Cup trophy, the event has struggled to capture attention. When Chelsea was crowned champions of Europe for the first time in 2012, it was considered the club’s high-water mark. Few remember or care that they lost the Club World Cup final seven months later.AdvertisementPart of the reason for the lack of interest in the tournament is its predictability, and Barcelona’s victory on Thursday over the best team in Asia was not a surprise.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In the 10 years that the current format has been used, the European champion has won seven times and the South American three. Only two teams from elsewhere, both from Africa, have ever made the final; both were shut out.In particular, European clubs and fans have been slow to embrace the event. While a Mexican or Chinese team might enjoy a chance to take on a European giant, few in Munich, Milan, Manchester or Madrid would get too excited about a game against T.P. Mazembe of the Democratic Republic of Congo, win or lose.AdvertisementThe final will again pit Europe against South America, when Barcelona plays River Plate of Argentina on Sunday. Should the underdog River win, it could be memorable for their fans. But win or lose, there is little chance that fans of Barcelona, or neutrals, will remember the game for long.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.