By EMMA STONEYDEC. 17, 2015
WELLINGTON, New Zealand — Super Rugby’s bold new era is due to kick off in less than three months, but there is a growing concern that at least two of the new teams could be more of a liability than an asset to the new-look Southern Hemisphere competition.Next year the number of teams will increase to 18 from 15, with new teams in Argentina, Japan and South Africa joining the existing ones in Australia, New Zealand and South Africa.Argentina’s Los Jaguares have made steady progress in their efforts to be ready when the season starts Feb. 26. They have a stadium deal in place in Buenos Aires, and they unveiled their coaching staff Wednesday, with Raúl Pérez as head coach. Of the 30 players signed so far, 22 played for Argentina at the Rugby World Cup, including their inspirational captain, Agustín Creevy, who will have the same role for Los Jaguares.But while the Argentines are on track for a February start, the same cannot be said for Japan’s Sunwolves or the Southern Kings in South Africa.AdvertisementThe Sunwolves, who will play home games in both Tokyo and Singapore, have stadiums lined up in both cities. And while the Sunwolves have the business side nailed down, they have not announced a single player signing with only 10 weeks to go.AdvertisementAt least five of Japan’s World Cup stars — Fumiaki Tanaka (Highlanders), Michael Leitch (Chiefs), Male Sa’u (Blues), Hendrik Tui and Ayumu Goromaru (both Queensland Reds) — have chosen to play at other Super Rugby teams in New Zealand and Australia.The Sunwolves also have no coach. Japan’s former coach, Eddie Jones, walked away from the franchise to join the Stormers before taking the England job, while the former Australia coach Robbie Deans and ex-Canterbury and New Zealand Under-20s coach Rob Penney — both currently coaching in Japan’s Top League — have ruled themselves out of contention. Former Hurricanes coach Mark Hammett is the latest to be linked to the position.The delay of such a critical appointment as coach is causing consternation at Sanzar, the governing body that oversees Super Rugby.“The biggest worry is that they have yet to appoint a coach,” Steve Tew, the chief executive of the New Zealand Rugby Union, said this week. “We are told that will be resolved before Christmas, and clearly that’s already too late.”The Southern Kings, who played in Super Rugby in 2013 before they were replaced by the Lions franchise for 2014, are also drawing concerns. The South African Rugby Union took over the management of the cash-strapped franchise from the Eastern Province Rugby Union last month after players and staff were owed up to four months’ salary.Several players have walked out, with hooker Michael van Vuuren threatening court action over the unpaid wages, while the assistant coach Carlos Spencer also left.Coach Brent Janse van Rensburg quit two weeks after being appointed and was replaced by Deon Davids, who has no Super Rugby experience.AdvertisementAn initial roster of 20 players was only announced last Sunday and contains just a few players who have played Super Rugby, including lock Steven Sykes, flyhalf Elgar Watts and prop Schalk Ferreira.Despite all that, Jurie Roux, the chief executive of S.A.R.U., is bullish about the progress made.“There has been a lot of overheated speculation about all manner of things, but we have not lost sight of our responsibility,” Roux said in a statement on Sunday.“Our only desire has been to rescue the Southern Kings from the parlous state in which they found themselves and put together a competitive squad to represent the people of the Eastern Cape with pride in Super Rugby.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But whatever progress Roux declares the Southern Kings have made, they and the Sunwolves are well behind the other teams, who have already begun work for the coming season, including strength and conditioning and strategy.Aside from the team problems, there are also fears that the complicated nature of the revamped competition will turn off fans.The new structure moves from a three-conference system of five teams per country to four conferences split into two unevenly sized groups.In the Australasian group, the Australian and New Zealand conferences will stay as they are, with five teams each.In the South Africa group, there will be two conferences of four teams each. In the first conference are the South African teams the Bulls, Stormers and Cheetahs, along with the Sunwolves. In the second, South African teams the Kings, Lions and Sharks are joined by Los Jaguares.The difference in conference size means different schedule setups for the four-team and five-team conferences.AdvertisementBut all will play a 15-game schedule and have two bye weekends before the playoffs start with the quarterfinals in July. The final is scheduled for Aug. 6.The playoffs will include the four conference champions, the three next-highest-ranked teams from the Australasian group and the next highest-ranked team from the South Africa group.“We are faced with a competition structure that is not as simple as we would like,” admitted Tew. “But it is not as confusing as some people are making it out to be. I think once it gets under way, people will understand it better.“Clearly we do not need to throw any more travel into the mix, and we’ve got a limited window. I think we’ve done the best job we could given all those circumstances.“Is it perfect? Clearly not. Will we continue to work on it as it evolves? Yes.”Tew hopes the Jan. 1 arrival of the new Sanzar chief executive, Andy Marinos, will prevent similar problems during any future expansion.Marinos played Super Rugby and has held several positions in S.A.R.U., including most recently the post of general manager of commercial and marketing.This latest competition restructure was partly as a result of wanting to keep South Africa in Super Rugby, which meant agreeing to S.A.R.U. demands for a sixth team.“He will lead the conversations that we need to have to make sure any future expansion is part of a very carefully thought out strategic framework, which frankly we haven’t had in the past because we’ve kind of had to wait every five years for South Africa to recommit,” Tew said. “Not ideal, but that’s just the way it’s been.”A version of this article appears in print on December 18, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.