AdvertisementSupported byKnicks 107, 76ers 97By Scott CacciolaPHILADELPHIA — The Knicks are embracing the soft underbelly of their schedule. On Friday, they showed up at Wells Fargo Center fully prepared to face a ragtag team dealing with change. The 76ers are not good, and the Knicks took advantage of an opportunity to inch back toward mediocrity with an easy 107-97 victory.The Knicks (13-14), who can return to .500 on Saturday, when the Chicago Bulls visit Madison Square Garden, pulverized the 76ers (1-27), the N.B.A.’s resident punching bag.Arron Afflalo led the Knicks with 22 points, and Carmelo Anthony added 16, as the team’s starters spent much of the second half on the bench. The Knicks’ reserves accounted for 52 points.“They kept the pedal down tonight,” Anthony said. Jahlil Okafor scored 20 points for the 76ers, who shot 6 of 24 from 3-point range but were no more dysfunctional than usual. They trailed by as many as 30.The Knicks’ arrival was preceded by an official announcement from the 76ers that the team had hired Mike D’Antoni as associate head coach. D’Antoni, 64, who coached the Knicks from 2008 to 2012, had been on sabbatical from the N.B.A. since April 2014, when he resigned as coach of the Los Angeles Lakers.D’Antoni, the famed innovator of the “seven seconds or less” offense from his time with the Phoenix Suns, will have a large hand in guiding the team’s offense, Coach Brett Brown said. D’Antoni was not with the team on Friday, which was fortunate. Based on the team’s performance here, and throughout the season, he has a lot of work ahead of him.Brown expects D’Antoni to be on the bench next week, when the 76ers embark on a six-game trip. Brown said he had spent two days this week meeting with D’Antoni. They also watched game film and talked strategy with the other assistants on Brown’s staff.“I can’t tell you how much I enjoyed talking to somebody of that experience,” Brown said. “I think we want to have some fun. We want to share ideas.”At the start of the season, Brown said he wanted to have a young staff that mirrored his young roster.“But we’ve always talked about having a free safety,” Brown said, “maybe somebody with N.B.A. experience, a graybeard type that I can personally talk to on maybe a different level.”The 76ers have lost seven more games during the last two weeks, but they have also made two key additions. On Dec. 7, the team named Jerry Colangelo its chairman of basketball operations. Brown recalled how Colangelo, the former owner of the Phoenix Suns, had immediately asked him how he could help. One of the topics that came up was the coaching staff.Colangelo, who knows D’Antoni from their time together in Phoenix and from their involvement with U.S.A. Basketball, mentioned that D’Antoni might be available. Brown said he had been intrigued by the possibilities.“Less than 24 hours later, he came in and said, ‘Mike is yours,’ ” Brown said, referring to Colangelo. “And so the speed of it caught me way off guard. But that’s how it all happened.”Brown said he could sense, based on their recent phone conversations, that D’Antoni was itching to return to coaching.“I could hear the crack of a 3-iron,” Brown said. “I think we’re all wired the same. We need to be busy. We need to be active. You need to feel like we’ve got a purpose and a place. Relaxation and time off gets the better of all of us. I’m at my worst when I have time off.”Given his roster and his team’s general ineptitude, Brown does not figure to have much time off anytime soon. On Friday, the 76ers helped make the Knicks look like the Showtime-era Lakers.The Knicks were already cruising early in the second quarter when Derrick Williams threw down an emphatic dunk off a lob from Langston Galloway. Their lead was 16 and growing, and their bench played a big role, combining for 25 points as the Knicks went ahead, 65-44, at halftime.“We were kind of able to get whatever we wanted early in that first half,” Anthony said. More important, the Knicks preserved their lead in the second half — at least until the final minutes. Coach Derek Fisher was hoping to see sustained energy after the Knicks nearly blew a huge lead in their victory Wednesday against the Minnesota Timberwolves.The 76ers, as they so often have this season, complied with their opponent’s plan.Advertisement