AdvertisementSupported byBy Marc TracyNearly eight years later, Mike Deane, the former Wagner basketball coach, can remember when Sacred Heart almost beat his team at the buzzer on Valentine’s Day 2008.“It was halfway in; then it popped back out,” Deane, now an assistant at James Madison, said of the would-be game-winner.Instead of a Sacred Heart victory, the game went to double overtime and ended with Wagner winning, 100-92. The Seahawks won all five of their overtime games that season, and 9 of 10 games decided by 5 or fewer points.Advanced basketball analysts have a statistic to describe teams like the 2007-8 Seahawks, whose exceptional record in close games improved their expected record of about 16-15 to an actual record of 23-8. It’s called luck.On Saturday, when Ohio State (5-5) visits Barclays Center, it will need luck in more than one sense. Not only do the Buckeyes play No. 4 Kentucky (9-1), which as usual is stacked with top prospects, but as of Friday they are ranked 340th among Division I’s 351 teams in luck, according to the statistics site KenPom.com. In contests decided by single digits, Ohio State is 0-4.“We’re trying to get a young basketball team to understand what happens when you’re not dialed in every possession,” said Coach Thad Matta, whose team starts four underclassmen.The luck statistic measures a team’s win-loss percentage against the win-loss percentage it is expected to have based on point differentials (adjusted for teams that play up or down to competition). In practice, it accounts for the results of close games played by teams whose games are not all close.The premise is that close games are inherently tossups. Over time, a team should win about half of them.“The teams that win the blowouts tend to be the best teams,” said Dean Oliver, the vice president for data science at TruMedia Networks, who invented the statistic in the 1990s. “Whereas the teams that win the close games — it doesn’t reflect as well on the quality of the team.”He added, “Even though we like to call those situations clutch, it does tend to be apparently more luck.”So far this season, the luckiest team is Alabama. The unluckiest, with a 3-6 record that should be closer to 6-3, is Harvard.  And going back to 2002, those 2007-8 Wagner Seahawks were the luckiest team over the course of a season. If, to paraphrase the former Yankees pitcher Lefty Gomez, a team would rather be lucky than good, is there such a thing as being good at being lucky?Several coaches of lucky and unlucky teams suggested there might be. It would entail performing well at the ends of games, when the rules are the same, but the circumstances are different — more plays out of timeouts, more deliberate fouls, greater intensity.Jack Perri, coach of Long Island University-Brooklyn, Division I’s fourth-luckiest team, credited his squad’s success this season in close games to a healthy team with enough players to practice end-game situations over and over again.“We tend to do a lot of four-, five-minute situations during the ending parts of our practice,” Perri said, adding, “It’s a philosophy thing: Here’s our mind-set; let’s really buckle down.”Deane, the former Wagner coach, thought back to Mark Porter, his senior point guard in 2007-8. Strength at that position — which is manned by the team’s primary ballhandler and court general — manifested most in late-game situations, Deane said.“You had complete confidence that something we came out of a timeout with, he was going to get it executed,” Deane said of Porter. “He was as good a defender as I’ve coached — especially on the ball, which helped him take the other team’s point guard out.”Wagner was the 11th-most experienced team that season, according to KenPom.com, while this year’s Buckeyes are the sixth-least experienced. It is logical that veteran savvy would help at the ends of games, and Ken Pomeroy, KenPom.com’s proprietor, said there was a slight correlation between experience and luck.One team whose poor luck played an outsize role was last season’s Richmond Spiders. With neutral luck, their 21-14 record would have been closer to 24-11. Perhaps they would not have lost, 70-67, to Virginia Commonwealth in the Atlantic-10 tournament quarterfinals and ended up as one of the first four teams out of the N.C.A.A. tournament.Several months later, Richmond Coach Chris Mooney marveled at the team’s 8-12 record in games decided by 6 or fewer points as well as at the sheer number of such games his team had. “You wonder what that is,” he said.Ultimately, even coaches — members of a tribe of control freaks — acknowledge that sometimes the ball bounces your way, and sometimes it doesn’t.Mooney recalled watching a game in which St. Bonaventure called timeout and drew up a play just before the end of the half, only to be greeted by an uncharacteristic zone defense from its opponent, Dayton. That tactical curveball succeeded in flustering the Bonnies, who tossed the ball around aimlessly and eventually put up a bad, 35-foot shot — which banked in. “It was the perfect strategic decision, perfect execution, and the kid made a shot,” Mooney said.But anyone who has sat down at a blackjack table knows that luck can cut both ways.At the end of the 2007-8 season, Wagner again played Sacred Heart, this time in the semifinals of the Northeast Conference tournament. The Seahawks hoped to secure their second N.C.A.A. tournament berth. But they trailed by 16 in the second half. After a furious late rally, Jamal Smith’s 3-point attempt, which would have given Wagner a 1-point lead with about 30 seconds left, bounced off the rim. Wagner lost, 55-49.Referring to his team’s earlier escape on Valentine’s Day, Deane said, “I would’ve traded that for the game in the tournament.”Advertisement