AdvertisementSupported bySports BusinessBy Joe NoceraJoe Nocera is the new sports business columnist for The New York Times. You can read more of his columns here.Last week, during the Major League Baseball owners’ meeting, the commissioner’s office issued a news release outlining its new netting policy.While he explained that he did not want to rob fans of the “unparalleled proximity and access to our players,” Commissioner Rob Manfred also said that was important “that fans have the option of sitting behind protective netting” in those areas of the ballpark where (and these are my words) a screaming foul ball coming into the stands at 85 miles an hour might crush the skull of a child. After a spate of recent injuries from foul balls and broken bats, resulting in both heightened awareness and lawsuits (one of which I wrote about last month), the league clearly felt it had to do something.What Manfred announced, however, could not have been more lame.Under the new policy, teams are “encouraged” to extend the netting behind home plate a mere 70 feet or so down the foul lines, to the “near ends of both dugouts” — that is, the end of the dugout closest to home plate. Note that this is not a mandate but merely a recommendation. It also calls on teams to “explore ways to educate their fans” on the inherent dangers of sitting close to the action and the importance of paying attention. And it wants teams and ticket vendors to make clear to the fans which seats are protected when they are buying tickets.There is so much wrong with this policy it is hard to know where to start.“Encouraged?” Something as serious as protecting fans from life-altering injuries should not be left to the teams themselves. Major League Baseball should insist on protective netting, just as the National Hockey League did in 2002 after a 13-year-old girl was killed by a flying puck.And the 70-foot extension baseball is suggesting is absurd. Think about it:Where do the hardest-hit foul balls land? The area between home plate and the beginning of the dugout certainly has its share of danger. But a large majority of foul balls that are truly crushed land beyond the end of the dugout; the injured fan I recently wrote about, Andy Zlotnick, who sustained severe facial and eye damage when he was hit by a ball at Yankee Stadium in 2011, was sitting some 50 feet past the end of the dugout. (Dan Halem, Major League Baseball’s chief legal officer, said in response to emailed questions that baseball studied data “regarding where foul balls and bats enter the stands.”) On Wednesday, the Minnesota Twins disclosed that by next season their netting would extend to the far end of the dugout, not the near end. That’s still not good enough, but it is better than the league’s new policy.It seems clear that the commissioner’s office and the teams have two primary concerns that are preventing them from extending netting all the way down the foul line.The first, which is implicit in the news release, is that baseball’s treasured intimacy between fans and players will be lost with additional netting.But that is a fixable problem. As anyone who sits behind home plate can tell you, netting technology is significantly improved, so the experience of watching the game through a net is not nearly as degraded as it once was.Besides, would it really be that difficult for teams to install netting that could be hoisted like a theater curtain between half-innings, thus still allowing the first baseman to toss a ball to a child as he trots to the dugout? The netting could then rise again as a batter steps up to begin the next inning. (Halem said that retractable netting would be “unfeasible and impractical in many ballparks.”)The second concern, I’m convinced, is that M.L.B. is worried that netting will make some of the most expensive seats, the ones around the dugouts, less desirable. One way some clubs took care of that problem with the seats behind home plate was to establish V.I.P. “clubs” for those fans. Many teams already treat the fans in those expensive dugout-area seats like V.I.P.s. With netting, they might be moved to add a few additional benefits. In any case, I seriously doubt that netting would degrade the economic value of those seats, though Halem says that “many fans desire seats that are not behind netting.”Now let’s tackle the part of the release that discusses the importance of fan vigilance. This has been baseball’s longstanding policy: it is up to the fans to pay attention, and when they come to the ballpark, they do so knowing that they are assuming the risk they might be hurt. As I have noted previously, this “assumption of risk” doctrine — also known as the Baseball Rule — has been accepted by most courts, and is the reason that ball clubs have escaped legal liability, even as some fans have racked up hundreds of thousands of dollars in surgical costs, along with permanent injuries, after being hit by a foul ball.But, as E. Michael Moran, an Atlanta lawyer, told me recently, “The game is different now. Ballparks are configured differently than they were 20 or 30 years ago; the foul lines are closer to the stands. Pitchers throw harder. Batters hit the ball harder. All these things increase the risk.” A sharply hit foul ball can reach the stands in a second or less. Can even the most attentive child really be expected to get out of the way in a second?Moran represents a young girl who was hit in the head by a Melky Cabrera foul ball during an Atlanta Braves game in 2010, resulting in a shattered skull and traumatic brain injury. Although the Braves tried to use the assumption of risk doctrine to get the case tossed, the Georgia court of appeals ruled last year that the case could go forward. After doing some discovery — and realizing, among other things, that the players union has tried to bargain for additional netting but had always been shot down by the league — Moran added Major League Baseball as a defendant.The lawsuit also notes that Cabrera has been a steroid user, he was suspended two years after hitting the little girl, which was a risk no fan could be expected to assume.In fact, baseball’s assumption of risk doctrine is under legal assault.Zlotnick, the fan who was hit in 2011, argues that his vision was blocked by umbrellas during a rainy game; his case is pending. Last month, an appeals court in Ohio reversed a lower-court ruling in favor of the Cleveland Indians in a fan injury case. In Boston, an injured fan is suing the Red Sox owner John Henry; according to her lawsuit, she was seated in an area above home plate that was supposed to have protective glass, but it had been removed for renovation.In Idaho, the State Supreme Court ruled a few years ago that a man who lost an eye — yes, lost an eye — during a minor league game could continue his lawsuit. As The Associated Press put it, the court decided not to impose the Baseball Rule, “instead choosing to let a jury decide if watching baseball is an inherently dangerous activity done at the spectator’s own risk.” It’s only a matter of time before the Baseball Rule collapses of its own immoral weight.In truth, if baseball started thinking more about the fans and less about its legal liability, much of the litigation around fan injuries might well go away.Zlotnick has spent his career as a real estate lawyer. In the years since his injury, he’s thought a lot about how teams might compensate fans for the medical cost of serious injuries (plus pain and suffering when the injuries are lasting) without creating a financial windfall for a fan who sprains a finger trying to catch a foul ball. To my mind, his most inspired idea is to use a method called, of all things, “baseball arbitration.”If you are a close follower of baseball, you know what baseball arbitration is. It is most commonly used in the three years before a player has full free-agency rights, during which he nonetheless can contest his team’s salary offer in arbitration. Here’s how it works: Both he and the team submit a dollar figure to an arbitrator. After a hearing, assuming the two sides don’t settle, the arbitrator must pick one of the two numbers. He’s not allowed to split the difference.Baseball arbitration is frequently used in the real estate industry. “It keeps everybody honest,” Zlotnick told me. Neither side has an incentive to submit an outrageous figure because doing so will virtually guarantee a loss to the more reasonable party.Applied to fan injuries, baseball arbitration would work the same way: the fan would submit medical bills and other documents relating to loss of work and the permanence of the injury. He or she would cite a dollar amount for proposed compensation. The team would submit its number. The arbitrator would decide. Personal injury lawyers would most likely turn down frivolous cases because they would be too expensive to prepare for, and would rarely be won.And teams would spend significantly less money than if they had to defend a lawsuit. Indeed, the amount of money needed to compensate for fan injuries would be peanuts for baseball, which generated $9.5 billion in 2015, according to Forbes, and hopes to increase that to $15 billion in the coming years.Zlotnick also believes that this compensation scheme should apply not only to fans who are hurt in the future, but also to those who have suffered in the past.Like Laura Turek, the single mom who was hit in the eye last season during a game between the Braves and the Milwaukee Brewers, and now has some $200,000 in medical bills. Or the woman who was struck in the face by a ball in 2011 during a game between the Houston Astros and the Baltimore Orioles. Ten operations later, she has permanent scars, facial paralysis and medical bills that exceed $500,000. There are more just like them.There’s another benefit that would arise from a compensation scheme for injured fans: Baseball would finally get religious about protecting fans with additional netting. The new policy announced by Manfred would be seen for what it is: a fig leaf.In addition to answering my specific questions, Halem sent me a statement late Thursday afternoon. “The recommendations strike a balance between providing a reasonable inventory of seats behind protective netting at each stadium while at the same time accommodating fans who desire seats with unobstructed access to players and on-field activity,” it reads. “Both fan safety and fan choice are extremely important to M.L.B., and these recommendations reflect those principles.”If only it were so.Email: nocera@nytimes.com Doris Burke contributed research.Advertisement