By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSDEC. 18, 2015
Tom Brady was listed on the team’s injury report on Friday with an illness that made him questionable for Sunday’s game against the Tennessee Titans.Brady did not practice with the team, according to the injury report.Since he took over when Drew Bledsoe was injured in Week 2 of the 2001 season, Brady has played in every game of every season except for 2008, when he was injured in the first quarter of the opener and missed the rest of the season.Brady’s backup, Jimmy Garoppolo, has appeared in four games this season and has not thrown a pass this year.STADIUM DEAL ADVANCES Lawmakers in St. Louis agreed to contribute at least $150 million toward the building of a new, $1.1 billion stadium that would help prevent the Rams from moving to Los Angeles.AdvertisementThe 32 owners are expected to vote as soon as January on whether the Rams, the Oakland Raiders and the San Diego Chargers can move to Los Angeles. In addition to considering their designs for stadiums there, the owners will consider whether host cities have made a good-faith effort to keep their teams.AdvertisementThe N.F.L. said host cities had until Dec. 30 to finalize their proposals. With a stadium designed, land acquired and now one of the last pieces to the financial puzzle ratified, St. Louis has gone the furthest of the three cities that face losing their team.Political and corporate leaders in Missouri have worked for more than a year on a design for a stadium by the banks of the Mississippi River that would replace the Edward Jones Dome, where the Rams now play. After surviving months of legal and funding hurdles and a two-hour debate on Friday that was interrupted by protesters singing Christmas carols, the city’s portion of the financing plan was passed.“Today’s vote of approval represents a significant milestone in the effort to see our N.F.L. stadium and riverfront renewal project come to life and, in doing so, keep the St. Louis Rams here in St. Louis,” Gov. Jay Nixon of Missouri said in a statement. “We recognize that our proposal will require extensive review before it is considered for approval by the N.F.L. We are confident that it will be well received.”The owners are split on which proposal they prefer for Los Angeles. E. Stanley Kroenke, who owns the Rams, wants to build an indoor stadium in Inglewood, south of Los Angeles, while the Chargers and the Raiders plan to build an outdoor stadium farther south, in Carson.The stadium would be paid for with at least $200 million from the N.F.L., though Commissioner Roger Goodell disputed reports that the league could contribute an extra $100 million. The sale of personal seat licenses and a mixture of bonds and tax credits would cover another big chunk. The Rams are expected to contribute $250 million, though Kroenke has not said publicly what he thinks of the plan. KEN BELSONBENGALS AND STEELERS FINED The N.F.L. fined five players from the Steelers-Bengals game last weekend a total of $118,649. Cincinnati linebacker Vontaze Burfict was fined $69,454 for three separate infractions.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.However, the league levied no fines over the pregame skirmish at midfield that began when Burfict and Pittsburgh linebacker Vince Williams tangled, butting their helmets at one point. Burfict was fined for roughing the passer, grabbing a face mask and unnecessary roughness.Pittsburgh cornerbacks William Gay and Brandon Boykin were each fined $8,681 for unsportsmanlike conduct over their group demonstration following Gay’s interception return for a touchdown.AdvertisementSteelers safety Mike Mitchell was fined $23,152 for a hit on a defenseless player, and wide receiver Antonio Brown was fined $8,681 for an illegal crackback block. (AP)MANNING SITS WITH SORE FOOT Peyton Manning’s left foot was sore so he did not practice after running the Denver Broncos’ scout team for two days.Manning’s foot has bothered him for months, and he has been sidelined since mid-November with a torn plantar fascia that required a cast or boot for 10 days.He returned to practice Wednesday but after two days of running the scout team, he reported to work saying he was sore.Coach Gary Kubiak had already ruled out Manning for Sunday’s game at Pittsburgh (8-5), when Brock Osweiler will make his fifth consecutive start for Denver (10-3).  (AP)PANTHERS TAKE IN STAR WARS Some of the unbeaten Carolina Panthers got in some bonding time away from the football field and went to the see the premiere of the new “Star Wars” movie.Panthers center Ryan Kalil said about 20 players made the trip.Kalil had “Purrbacca” T-shirts printed featuring the character Chewbacca made into the Panthers logo. Kalil rented out a theater in Charlotte months ago in preparation for the movie’s release.  (AP)A version of this article appears in print on December 19, 2015, on Page D3 of the New York edition with the headline: Patriots List Brady on Injury Report; St. Louis Approves $150 Million for a New Stadium .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.