By SCOTT CACCIOLAOCT. 7, 2015
About two hours before the Knicks opened their preseason schedule Wednesday night with a 100-81 victory over Bauru Basket of the Brazilian league, Coach Derek Fisher met with his players, he said, to address an issue that had nothing to do with basketball.“I’m here, I’m focused and it’s not something that’s going to take me away from who we are or what we’re trying to do,” Fisher recalled telling his players. “I assured them of that.”Fisher revealed that he had met with the team after he was asked during his pregame news conference about published reports that Matt Barnes, a former teammate, had confronted him on Saturday night at the Los Angeles-area home of Barnes’s estranged wife. Fisher did not deny that the incident had happened, and said that he did not want to talk about it.“Obviously, we’re public figures,” Fisher said, “but we’re at work. So I won’t be commenting on things that have happened personally or privately for me.”AdvertisementA spokesman for the Redondo Beach Police Department said officers responded to a call at 11:45 p.m. Saturday at the home of Gloria Govan, Barnes’s estranged wife and a star of the reality television show “Basketball Wives.” Barnes was present at the home, the police spokesman said, but Fisher was not named in the incident report. No charges were filed.AdvertisementWhen Fisher was asked if he expected any legal ramifications stemming from the incident, he said, “Guess we’ll see.”The New York Post was the first to report that Barnes, a forward with the Memphis Grizzlies, had confronted Fisher.Fisher, who filed for divorce from his wife in March, has a personal relationship with Govan, according to multiple reports. Fisher and Barnes were teammates on the Los Angeles Lakers from 2010 to 2012.After practice Saturday, Fisher traveled to Los Angeles, where his young children live. Fisher missed practice Monday because of what the team described as personal reasons.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.On Wednesday, Fisher declined to elaborate on his absence.“I don’t really want to get into why I really missed practice,” he said. “I guess I’ll cover that at some point.”If nothing else, it was unfortunate timing for an off-the-court issue to surface shortly before the Knicks played the first of six preseason games. The embers from last season’s disastrous 17-65 campaign were still smoldering when Carmelo Anthony joined Kristaps Porzingis, the team’s top draft pick, and the rest of the starters as fans at Madison Square Garden sought a glimmer of hope.Porzingis, a 7-foot-3 forward, looked anxious and eager to please — fans, he said, had been approaching him in recent days requesting a championship — but missed his first two shots. He appeared more comfortable as the game wore on, finishing with 7 points in 21 minutes. When he drained a 3-pointer in the third quarter, his teammates leapt off the bench.Anthony made his return to game action after undergoing knee surgery in February and showed no ill effects, collecting a team-high 17 points in 20 minutes. He connected on 5 of his first 6 shots as the Knicks escaped from a tight contest with a big run in the second quarter. The Knicks shot 48.7 percent over all.AdvertisementA spokesman for the Knicks said that Fisher, 41, had the “full support” of the organization. A spokesman for the Grizzlies said that the team was gathering information. Barnes, 35, has a long history of incidents on and off the court. Most recently, the N.B.A. fined Barnes $50,000 in May for directing inappropriate language to James Harden’s mother during a playoff game.Fisher said he was not concerned that anything involving his personal life would be a distraction for his players.“Like I said to them, you try your best,” he said. “I tried as a player for a long time to mitigate any distractions, but some things you can’t control. I was very honest with them as far as that goes.”He added: “They see me every day. Players are smart. They feel things very acutely. So if guys feel like I’m not here and not present, they’ll find out. But at this point, I don’t think that’s an issue.”A version of this article appears in print on October 8, 2015, on Page B18 of the New York edition with the headline: Before Defeating Visitors From Brazil, Knicks Confront an Episode From Los Angeles.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.