By HUW RICHARDSDEC. 18, 2015
LONDON — The Swansea-based Ospreys go into this weekend’s round of matches in the European Rugby Champions Cup hoping to give the knockout stages of the competition something it has lacked for the last four years — a Welsh dimension.Individual Welsh players who have migrated to English and French clubs have figured in that time, and World Cup final referee Nigel Owens from Wales has taken charge of two finals, but none of the Welsh franchises has made the quarterfinals since the Cardiff Blues in the 2011-12 season.But the Ospreys go to Bordeaux, France, on Saturday tied on points with the English club Exeter at the top of Pool 2, and with real hopes of progressing.“We want to perform well and win in every competition,” said Steve Tandy, the Ospreys’ 35-year-old head coach. “But Europe is big and special, and we’re very excited about it.”AdvertisementIn past seasons the Ospreys have tended to start fast in the Pro 12 league for Welsh, Irish, Scottish and Italian franchises — they are four-time champions, most recently in 2012 — but to disappoint in Europe, where three consecutive quarterfinals from 2008 and 2010 are the extent of their achievement.AdvertisementThis year has been different. Heavily depleted by World Cup call-ups, with about a dozen players called up by Wales, Canada and Fiji, they were further hit by injuries to experienced players.“We had to give two 18-year-olds their debuts against Munster, and only lost narrowly,” said Tandy, looking back on a Pro 12 start that has left them well behind the leaders.Nor can it be assumed that players returning from World Cups will be at their best. Fatigue, disappointment and a sense of anticlimax after chasing rugby’s greatest prize are all possibilities.Ospreys like Alun-Wyn Jones, now in his sixth season as captain and Dan Biggar — the flyhalf with the much mocked goal-kicking routine whose precision on penalties and conversions and combativeness in play made him one of the World Cup’s outstanding personalities — gave their all to Wales.“When they come back to us from Wales, they’re desperate to play for us. We have to manage them, rather than their asking for time off,” Tandy said. “And younger players see that attitude, and it rubs off on them.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.It was Biggar, recently voted Welsh Sports Personality of 2015, who scored all 19 points in the Ospreys’ victory over Bordeaux in Swansea last weekend, getting up from a forearm smash to the head (that earned the Bordeaux wing Jean-Baptiste Dubié a red card) to guide his team to a 19-15 win.“We know this weekend will be a different proposition,” Tandy said. “There will be a big crowd and they’ll be able to make quite a few changes. We know we’ll have to play a great deal better.”The Ospreys also have a poor record in France. But that they beat a French opponent in a European Champions Cup match without playing well was evidence of their progress.Advertisement“The margins in Europe are very fine. If you get off to a decent start, as we did by beating Exeter at home and then going to Clermont and getting two bonus points, it gives you confidence and momentum,” Tandy said.The 25-13 defeat of Exeter, currently second in the English Premiership, was the Ospreys’ first win against English opposition in nine matches since 2011.“It was a tight match, and Exeter had a couple of opportunities they didn’t take in the first half,” Tandy recalled. “The way we played in the second half, imposing ourselves on the match and denying them a bonus point, felt like something of a breakthrough.”Life won’t ever be easy for the Welsh franchises, forced to compete with richer English and French clubs that can maintain deeper squads and chase prime talent in the global marketplace.Teams like the Ospreys have to keep producing fresh talent and rely on a strong sense of local identity. “We’re very proud of bringing through young players like Olly Cracknell and Rory Thornton and of the high percentage of our squad who come from Ospreylia,” he said, referring to the club’s nickname for the area around Swansea and Neath in West Wales. “And we think that having players who have grown up in our system and who want more than anything else to be Ospreys gives us an edge.”The trip to Bordeaux will be followed after Christmas by a home clash with Clermont, runner-up in two of the past three seasons, and the trip to Exeter. “It will be tough,” Tandy said, “But 10 points from three games is a great position. It’s a great opportunity for us, and we mean to take this pool to the wire.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.