AdvertisementSupported byAnalysisBy Billy WitzThe Yankees were already well on their way to a drubbing in the first game of a doubleheader on Saturday when reliever Nick Goody unleashed a pitch in the bottom of the seventh inning that the Baltimore slugger Chris Davis swung at and missed. But in a manner fitting for how the day — and the week — unfolded for the Yankees, the pitch eluded catcher John Ryan Murphy and bounced to the backstop, allowing Nolan Reimold to coast home from third. That put the Orioles ahead by 10-2. Or so it seemed. Because a moment later, Yankees Manager Joe Girardi signaled to the umpires that he wanted to challenge the play, believing that Goody’s pitch had nicked Davis in the foot. If it had, the play would be dead, and Reimold would have to return to third. As it turned out, Girardi was correct. As it also turned out, it mattered little. The Yankees lost, 9-2.Girardi led the Yankees this season, which ended quietly with a 3-0 loss to the Houston Astros in the American League wild-card game Tuesday night, in what has become his distinctive manner — chin out, homework finished and fingers itching to push the right buttons.If Girardi seems to be forever seeking windmills at which to tilt or hills that he can push boulders up, Sisyphus-like — or pitching changes to execute — that is because that is exactly what he is doing. Tuesday’s showdown with the Astros was hardly the only game he managed this year as if the season depended on it.Whether he has been too relentless in that approach now seems open to question, particularly because the 2015 Yankees faded as the season drew to a close. Still, he remains the man trusted to push the team as far as it can go. And as Girardi himself might point out, the 2016 season is a mere six months away. “He’s living and dying every day with what his team does, whether it wins or loses,” General Manager Brian Cashman said. “He’s projecting how much he cares. He doesn’t take anything lightly.”That much is clear. Girardi always seems to have every angle covered, as was evident when he took reliever Justin Wilson out with a 1-2 count because a runner stole second base and batting averages against Wilson had spiked with runners in scoring position. It was evident, too, when he questioned Major League Baseball’s decision to start all of the games on the final day of the season at the same time. That was not fair to East Coast teams, Girardi said — asking them to play what might be the most important game of the season in late-afternoon shadows.Earlier this season, he scolded the Astros’ Carlos Gomez for his sportsmanship, leading the benches to empty. Gomez’s transgression? He had slammed his bat down in frustration after hitting a harmless fly ball. At the time, the Astros were beating the Yankees, 9-0, in a one-sided contest that they eventually won, 15-1. Nevertheless, Girardi was battling away. “You appreciate that every game is treated like a playoff game instead of looking ahead to the future,” pitcher Adam Warren said of Girardi. “Joe’s always in the moment; he’s always intense — locked in for that one game. You rarely see him break that character.”In Tuesday’s game, Girardi had a number of decisions to make — notably benching the $153 million center fielder Jacoby Ellsbury — but few once the game began. Because the Yankees were so rarely in position to threaten the Astros, there were few levers for Girardi to pull. That no doubt added to his frustration after the Yankees’ first postseason appearance in three years lasted only one game. So now he will begin again, with next season already in his sights and with the same desire inside him to get the Yankees to a 28th championship, which would match the number on his uniform.“He’s the most prepared manager I’ve ever worked for,” said the Yankees’ hitting coach, Jeff Pentland, who has worked for 12 managers and who coached Girardi when he was with the Chicago Cubs near the end of his playing career. “He does his homework.”Pentland added, “He’s on top of everything.”Girardi fastidiously follows the weather ahead of where his team is playing, and late last week, he did not need anyone walking him through the combinations and permutations of whom and where the Yankees would be playing Tuesday.Yet as much as Girardi knows, he reveals little, fencing away even the most trifling queries from reporters.“Strategy” is a common one-word refrain, meant to short-circuit an inquiry into a decision like why he did not have a batter bunt, why he changed pitchers or why he batted this hitter against that pitcher.When he was pressed after a game in early August about why he curiously relieved Wilson in the middle of an at-bat, Girardi built a wall that would have made Donald Trump proud. “I’m not telling you,” he said, exasperated. “You can write what you want. I’m not saying anything.”Not surprisingly, Girardi is no more forthcoming when a more substantive matter arises, as it did with the announcement that C. C. Sabathia was leaving the team to enter an alcohol-treatment program. Girardi was evasive Tuesday when questioned about an ESPN report that Sabathia was so inebriated Friday at the ballpark in Baltimore that a teammate had to come to his aid. Asked if anyone had told him about the incident before Sunday, when the team said Sabathia had asked for help, Girardi said, “No.” After a brief pause, he added, “I didn’t see it.”Meanwhile, as the role of the manager has evolved in baseball — away from the imperial figurehead toward someone who implements the organizational philosophies more steadfastly — Girardi has adroitly straddled both eras. His full-fledged embrace of statistical analysis, as denoted by the hefty binder that he consults daily, is paired with the gravitas of a former player, one who is still only a decade removed from his playing days.Sabathia, who arrived in New York in 2009, a year after Girardi, developed a close relationship with him through their families. “He understands family,” Sabathia said Saturday. “As a recent player, he knows how hard it is, and I think he knows how hard it is to have families and different things going on in your life that maybe you can’t make it on time for a stretch every day. If you’ve got something going on, he’s always there — like a big brother, I guess.”Still, one of the questions floating around the clubhouse on Tuesday night was how the Yankees, who at times looked as if they might be becoming a force again in the American League — they had the fourth-best record in baseball and a seven-game lead in the A.L. East on July 28 — could fall apart as the season concluded. There were 10 teams that had better records in the A.L. in August and September.“There were periods of time this year when this team looked like it had a chance to do some serious damage in October,” Cashman said. “But that team that we saw earlier wasn’t the team that finished.”The easiest answer is that Girardi was so focused on winning that he ran at least a few players too hard; the Yankees had the oldest opening-day lineup in baseball. He was criticized for overusing Dellin Betances, who threw more innings than any other reliever in baseball this season, including a recent appearance against the Mets when he was called upon in the eighth inning with the Yankees ahead, 5-0. But Girardi’s small circle of trust probably affected the Yankees more on the offensive end.Is it a coincidence that the only players who looked fresh at the end of the season were Didi Gregorius, Greg Bird and Rob Refsnyder (all 25 or younger) and 38-year-old Carlos Beltran, the only regular who was given frequent rest over the first half of the season?Alex Rodriguez (40 years old), Brett Gardner (32) and Chase Headley (31) all played more than 150 games — and Mark Teixeira (35) was on pace to do so when he broke his leg in August. Jacoby Ellsbury (32) played in 111 of the 119 games in which he was not on the disabled list. And Brian McCann (31), who had three extra-base hits after Sept. 1, started 119 games at catcher — his most since 2010.Whether Girardi will trust promising young players like Murphy, the versatile Dustin Ackley, Refsnyder or a young outfielder like Slade Heathcott or Mason Williams to take on a bigger role next year is uncertain. Bird might be back in the minors so he can play regularly if Teixeira and Rodriguez return in good health, Cashman said. Meanwhile, there is little doubt that over the winter, Girardi will examine any data, conduct his due diligence and head to spring training with plans and contingencies. As Cashman said, he does not take anything lightly.Which may or may not be a problem.Advertisement