By BEN SHPIGELDEC. 20, 2015
ARLINGTON, Tex. —  Here came the Jets, soaring, striving, believing. The playoffs beckoned, if they could just get there.“If it all comes together,” Coach Todd Bowles said last week, “we can be very dangerous.”To the rest of the league, Bowles presumably meant — not to themselves or to the welfare of their fans. Because on Saturday night, the Jets engaged in what has become a favorite pastime of theirs.They sputter. They fizzle. They flail.They win.Minutes after rescuing the Jets yet again, guiding the late comeback that keyed a 19-16 victory against Dallas that preserved their playoff hopes, quarterback Ryan Fitzpatrick gripped the lectern in the visiting room at AT&T Stadium. He wore his full uniform and a gash across the bridge of his nose that he fully expects will frighten his children when they see him on Sunday.No stitches necessary, he said. Just a little glue.“Everybody kept telling me I looked ugly,” Fitzpatrick said.AdvertisementHe leaves the modeling to Eric Decker and concerns himself with more consequential details.Like listening to receiver Kenbrell Thompkins, who in the first half told Fitzpatrick to watch for him again if the Cowboys deployed a certain Cover 2 look — then caught an inch-perfect 43-yard pass that led to Randy Bullock’s game-winning 40-yarder field goal with 36 seconds left.AdvertisementOr refining the pocket awareness that allowed him to escape pressure on a third-and-14 from the Dallas 27-yard line and connect with Quincy Enunwa for 24 yards on a pass Fitzpatrick called horrible. Two plays later, Fitzpatrick found Decker for a go-ahead touchdown.“I’m hoping he got enough votes for our team M.V.P.,” linebacker Calvin Pace of Fitzpatrick said, “because he deserves it.”Even by winning, and for the fourth consecutive week, it has not all come together for the Jets. Not on a night when they committed seven first-half penalties, missed an extra point and a field goal, shanked a punt, struggled on third down, bungled a fourth-and-1 from the Dallas 3.And yet, they are already dangerous.Dangerous because the two biggest plays in the game were made not by the Jets’ star receivers — Decker and Brandon Marshall — but their backups. Dangerous because Fitzpatrick flourishes in the fourth quarter, completing 10 of 12 passes for 132 yards and a touchdown — this two weeks after stunning the Giants. Dangerous because the Jets expect to win, regardless of the circumstances, and then they do.“We’re developing a way to win games,” said Fitzpatrick, who finished 26 0f 39 for 299 yards. “We’re developing that strength, that confidence.”That confidence will sustain them another week, before they host division champion New England in a game critical to their postseason chances. Even if the Jets (9-5) win their final two games, they are not guaranteed of making the playoffs.That hinges on factors out of their control, on the Pittsburgh Steelers and the Kansas City Chiefs, the teams that entered the weekend tied with them. The Jets are aware of this. They just do not think about it.AdvertisementThey will worry about the could-bes and might-have-beens if they materialize. In the present they will savor their first winning season since 2010 and this latest escape act.“You don’t nearly blow games when you win them,” Bowles said afterward. “You blow them when you lose them. You win how you win.”He added: “We grew as a team. We didn’t blow the game like we did Buffalo, we didn’t blow it like we did New England. We continued on with what we learned from the Giants.”Those first two games Bowles mentioned, the Jets bumbled in the fourth quarter. The third, they tied the score late, then won in overtime, saved by Fitzpatrick.By shaving his beard the week of Thanksgiving, he changed the Jets’ mojo, and his: nine touchdowns, three victories, no interceptions. With Fitzpatrick at quarterback, the Jets looked formidable, if not unstoppable.And then came Saturday night, when some passes drifted long and others wide. Fitzpatrick offset a possible momentum-changer — Calvin Pryor’s end-zone interception with just over five minutes left in the third quarter — by throwing a pick two plays later, to Terrance Mitchell, who had been promoted Friday from the practice squad.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Cowboys converted that takeaway — their first interception by a cornerback this season — into a 38-yard field goal by Dan Bailey that pushed their lead to 13-9 with 3 minutes 44 seconds left in the third, and it stayed there into the fourth quarter.Presented with a similar opportunity Saturday for a comeback, Fitzpatrick connected with Enunwa on the Jets’ biggest play to that point, before firing a 3-yarder to Decker that put the Jets back in front, 16-13.Four weeks after succumbing to a backup quarterback in Houston, the Jets, on their return to the Lone Star State, nearly lost to another. And this one, Kellen Moore, had not taken an N.F.L. snap before entering on the Cowboys’ fifth series. Moore, a left-hander, did what Matt Cassel could not: move Dallas downfield.AdvertisementMoore completed critical passes to Cole Beasley to keep alive a drive that ended with Bailey making a 50-yard field goal that caromed off the right upright with 1:55 left, tying the score at 16-16.The last time the Jets entered a game 8-5, in 2011, it was under similar circumstances: coming off a rout of a conference foe before facing a middling N.F.C. East opponent on the road.Destroyed by Philadelphia, the Jets lost their final three and fell out of contention.No way it could happen again? Right?“Truth be told, we shouldn’t have been in that situation,” defensive lineman Sheldon Richardson said. “It was a big stadium, but it wasn’t a big team. You feel me? We should have beat them a way lot more than we did.”Asked what contributed to their sluggish start, Richardson quipped, “jet lag.”Aside from two interceptions handed to the Jets by poor throws, the team’s lone redeeming moment, a Bilal Powell 12-yard touchdown run in the first quarter, was marred by Bullock’s missed extra point, his third of the season.When the first quarter ended, the Jets led by 6-3, and though they would soon add a field goal, their woes continued. A 15-yard horse-collar penalty on Pace positioned the Cowboys for their lone touchdown.After replacing an ineffective Cassel in the second quarter, Moore countered an all-out blitz by flipping a screen to Dez Bryant, who zipped past Darrelle Revis for a 10-yard touchdown that put Dallas ahead, 10-9, with 1:17 left before halftime.With Fitzpatrick content to use Powell out of the backfield, the Jets reached as far the Cowboys’ 22-yard line before setting up for a field goal on the last play of the half. Bullock made the 40-yarder, but an illegal-shift penalty cost the Jets five yards, and Bullock’s 45-yard attempt sailed right.AdvertisementThe Jets trailed at halftime, as they did two weeks ago against the Giants, not that it mattered. They had Fitzpatrick and Enunwa, Thompkins and Bullock, and here they come again — still soaring, striving, believing.They don’t know where they are going — playoffs? disappointment? — but they are eager to find out.EXTRA POINTSEric Decker and BRANDON MARSHALL set a franchise record with 21 combined touchdowns receiving for the season.A version of this article appears in print on December 20, 2015, on Page SP1 of the New York edition with the headline: Stymied and Error-Prone, Jets Secure Winning Record.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.