AdvertisementSupported byN.H.L. RoundupBy The Associated PressChris Stewart and Ryan Kesler each scored first-period goals, and Frederik Andersen stopped 21 shots as the Anaheim Ducks beat the Devils, 2-1, on Saturday night in Newark.Mike Cammalleri scored late in the third period to spoil Andersen’s shutout bid. Keith Kinkaid made 16 saves for the Devils, who dropped a second straight game, both at home.The Ducks, who came into the game with a league-low 55 goals, had scored only five goals in their previous five games this month.The Ducks, starved for offense all season, gladly accepted a lucky deflection as Stewart scored at 7 minutes 39 seconds on a centering feed from behind the net that glanced off Devils defenseman Eric Gelinas.Kesler doubled the lead with 15.2 seconds remaining.“I was really happy with the way we played,” the Ducks captain Ryan Getzlaf said. “We didn’t give them a whole lot.”COYOTES 1, ISLANDERS 0  Louis Domingue stopped 25 shots for his first N.H.L. shutout, Oliver Ekman-Larsson scored, and host Arizona beat the Islanders.The Coyotes stymied the Islanders despite having entered the night allowing a league-worst 4.6 goals per game in December.The Islanders have managed two goals in a three-game skid that followed a 10-game winning streak.STARS 6, CANADIENS 2  Jamie Benn had two goals and an assist and host Dallas beat Montreal in a battle of first-place teams.Benn regained the N.H.L. lead with 22 goals, passing the Blues’ Vladimir Tarasenko.Dallas, which leads the Central Division, scored within the first two minutes of each period to improve to 24-7-2 and reach a league-high 50 points in only 33 games. Montreal leads the Atlantic Division despite having lost seven of its last eight games.BLACKHAWKS 3, SABRES 2 Patrick Kane made his Buffalo homecoming a winning one by scoring the tying goal in the final minute and then adding the lone shootout goal in Chicago’s victory at Buffalo.Kane tied it with 34 seconds left while the Blackhawks enjoyed a six-on-three advantage.BLUES 3, FLAMES 2  Vladimir Tarasenko had a goal and two assists, lifting host St. Louis to a win over Calgary. Colton Parayko and Jori Lehtera also scored, and Brian Elliott made 36 saves for the Blues (20-10-4), who have won three straight.HURRICANES 2, PENGUINS 1  Jordan Staal and John-Michael Liles scored first-period power-play goals to lead visiting Carolina over struggling Pittsburgh.The Penguins have lost five straight. MAPLE LEAFS 5, KINGS 0  Jonathan Bernier stopped 26 shots in his first win of the season as Toronto beat visiting Los Angeles.Bernier was helped out by a strong defensive game but also made some memorable saves.BLUE JACKETS 3, FLYERS 2 Brandon Dubinsky scored in the sixth shootout round, the rookie Joonas Korpisalo stopped 5 of 6 attempts to get his first N.H.L. win, and host Columbus beat Philadelphia. Cam Atkinson also scored in the shootout for Columbus.PREDATORS 3, WILD 2  Mike Ribeiro had a goal and an assist to lead Nashville to a victory over visiting Minnesota. Filip Forsberg and James Neal also scored for Nashville, helping end a three-game losing streak.Advertisement