AdvertisementSupported byInboxTurning to Medical Professionals for Treatment of MigrainesTo the Sports Editor:Re “ ‘You Can’t Put Ice Over a Migraine,’ a Lurking Malady in the N.F.L.,” Dec. 13: As a headache specialist and epidemiologist who has published research on improving migraine diagnosis and management for migraine, I applaud The New York Times for shedding light on the challenges of migraine diagnosis and treatment within the United States population. However, I am disappointed that your article did not focus on the evidence-based treatments for migraine, and instead mentioned “treatments” that are not considered evidence-based.In addition, neurologists and headache specialists are trained physicians in evaluating and treating this highly prevalent and disabling condition. In fact, there are over 500 United Council of Neurologic Subspecialties certified headache specialists in the country. Perhaps the article could have encouraged individuals to seek professional medical help from a trained medical provider.MIA MINEN, New YorkThe writer is director of the New York University Langone Headache Center.A Horse Is Not a PersonTo the Sports Editor:Sports Illustrated has named Serena Williams as the newly rechristened honor of Sportsperson of the Year. She is clearly a worthy recipient. But American Pharoah was a finalist for this newly renamed award. Huh? Though the Supreme Court has anointed corporations as persons, neither it, nor any other body of substance, has done the same for those of the equine persuasion.If a thoroughbred can be Sportsperson of the Year, could I be in the running for horse of the year?ANDREW E. RUBIN, Marina del Rey, Calif.A Sport DenouncedTo the Sports Editor:Re “Conor McGregor Ends Title Bout With One Punch,” Dec. 14: Your coverage of the mixed martial arts fight between Conor McGregor and José Aldo was offensive and gratuitous. The video of Conor leveling Aldo and pummeling his face on the ground was an example of the mindless brutality of this “sport.” The broad coverage of Ronda Rousey, including her loss to Holly Holm, was similarly graphic and unnecessary.Mixed martial arts may be called a sport, but it is a primitive and disgusting one. It desensitizes its wild-eyed fans, who seem to derive great glee from the barbaric sight of two men or two women brutalizing each other.Might The New York Times consider ending its complicity with this awful activity?STEVE NELSON, New YorkSoldier Field Loses StatusTo the Sports Editor:Re “Still Standing in Chicago,” Dec. 13: Michael Beschloss’s article about Chicago’s Soldier Field omits an essential postscript: The United States Interior Department, following the recommendation of the National Park Service, stripped the renovated stadium (originally known as Grant Park Stadium) of National Historic Landmark status in 2006.The decision, which the Park Service based on “incompatible construction and the destruction of substantial historic material,” sent a strong message: Changes to the nation’s most venerated structures should respect, not destroy, the integrity of the original design.BLAIR KAMIN, ChicagoThe writer is The Chicago Tribune’s architecture critic.Gift Idea’s MessageTo the Sports Editor:Re “A Time Machine and Gifts That Are Less Realistic,” Dec. 13: After reading through nearly two pages of wonderful sports fantasy gifts, I was disgusted to find that your “editing elves” thought an appropriate choice of fantasy was for someone to wish to intentionally hurt an athlete. Chase Utley is a great ballplayer, always playing his hardest to help his team win.I’m sorry for what happened to Ruben Tejada, and I’ll bet Chase is, too. What a terrible message it sends to think that beating him up in a boxing ring or having a fastball thrown at his head would bring someone joy. You couldn’t do better? Shame on you.KAREN LAZAR, Oceanside, N.Y.Advertisement