AdvertisementSupported byRoundupBy The Associated PressTwo days after José Mourinho was fired for Chelsea’s feeble Premier League title defense and for “palpable discord” with his squad, his name was chanted throughout a 3-1 home victory over Sunderland.Blame was clearly not being apportioned to Mourinho for Chelsea’s nine losses in 16 league games before Saturday’s.After each goal in the victory, which ended a three-game winless run in league play and lifted Chelsea 4 points above the relegation zone, Mourinho’s name — not the scorer’s — was sung.“Absolutely and rightly so as well,” the team’s captain, John Terry, said when asked about the fans’ apparent discontent. “They will support us through the difficult period and when we come out on top sooner or later. If we keep on putting performances like that, the fans will be happy.”Chelsea’s game against Watford next weekend will be the start of Guus Hiddink’s second spell in charge. Hiddink, 69, was hired Saturday to lead the team until the end of the season and repeat the firefighting role he first carried out at Chelsea in 2009.But as Hiddink watched from high in the stands with the owner Roman Abramovich and the former striker Didier Drogba, his name was not sung once by fans — only Mourinho’s.The tone was set when Diego Costa and Cesc Fàbregas were booed as the starting lineup was read before the match. Although some stars were blamed for the abruptly end to Mourinho’s second stint as manager, only seven months after Chelsea won the title by 8 points, Terry denied that “player power” forced him out.Sunderland Manager Sam Allardyce highlighted the quandary for Chelsea players within minutes of Mourinho’s firing on Thursday. “It’s a pretty bad indictment on the players if they actually go and perform a lot, lot better than they have done recently just ’cause José’s lost his job,” he said.Mourinho, in a statement issued on his behalf by his management company on Saturday, suggested he wanted an immediate return to managing, emphasizing his enthusiasm and passion for soccer and revealing that he would remain living in London.“He will not be taking a sabbatical, he isn’t tired, he doesn’t need it, he is very positive, and is already looking forward,” the C.A.A. Sports statement said. In Manchester, Cameron Jerome and Alexander Tettey scored as Norwich stunned United by winning, 2-1, at Old Trafford for the first time since 1989.United has not won in six games, and Louis van Gaal’s position as manager could be under more scrutiny now that Mourinho is available. Tottenham won at Southampton, 2-0, to move to fourth, above United.In other action, Leicester, the surprise league leader, beat Everton, 3-2. The result means Leicester will be atop the league on Dec. 25 with 38 points. Last year on that date, it was at the bottom of the standings.P.S.G. STAYS UNBEATEN The French league leader, Paris St.-Germain, won at Caen, 3-0, to remain unbeaten at the halfway point of the season. P.S.G. has not lost in the league since a 3-2 loss to Bordeaux on March 15.MANAGER STILL WAITING Valencia Manager Gary Neville remained winless in two Spanish league matches as his team drew, 2-2, at home against Getafe.Neville started as Valencia’s coach with a 2-0 home loss to Lyon in the Champions League, followed by a 1-1 draw at Eibar in the Spanish league. Neville, a former Manchester United defender, got his first win on Wednesday, a 2-0 victory over third-tier Barakaldo in the Copa del Rey. BAYERN AWAITS NEWS Bayern Munich will take a comfortable 8-point lead into the Bundesliga’s Christmas break, during which Manager Pep Guardiola is expected to clear up his future. Bayern’s comfortable margin was created by its 1-0 win at Hannover and Cologne’s 2-1 home victory over second-place Borussia Dortmund.According to some German news reports, Guardiola has decided to leave Bayern when his contract expires at the end of the season. Bayern and Guardiola have declined to comment on the reports.Advertisement