By MARC TRACYDEC. 19, 2015
Ohio State inbounded the ball with five seconds left in the first half, up an unlikely 9 points against No. 4 Kentucky. Buckeyes guard JaQuan Lyle — one of six freshmen on the 12-man roster — received the ball around his own free-throw line, rushed up the court, pulled up about 30 feet out and made the shot.And why not? The Buckeyes made 7 of 12 deep shots in the first half on Saturday against Kentucky at Barclays Center. If Ohio State (6-5) was going to beat the Wildcats (9-2), it was going to take just such a reversal of the bad luck the young Ohio State team had experienced this season.The Buckeyes retreated to their locker room at halftime ahead, 37-25. They then managed to survive a hostile crowd and a 27-point second half from the Kentucky freshman Jamal Murray to upset the Wildcats, 74-67. Four Ohio State players scored in double digits, and a fifth, the sophomore Jae’Sean Tate, contributed 10 rebounds.“We got on the floor for loose balls,” Ohio State Coach Thad Matta said. “We deflected passes, guys laid out and got them. We had guys get rebounds out of their area.”AdvertisementHe added, “Hopefully, we made our own breaks.”Ohio State had been on the wrong end of several games recently, including a narrow loss to No. 8 Virginia and a 20-point thrashing last week at the hands of Connecticut.Advertisement“Complete opposite of last week,” said the sophomore Keita Bates-Diop, who finished with 14 points and 7 rebounds in 39 of the game’s 40 minutes.“People underestimated us,” he added.But few are likely to have left the game talking about the promise of Ohio State, which has one of the youngest teams in Division I and is about to face a tough Big Ten schedule.The story, rather, was the Wildcats, whose perfect run last year captivated the sport (until a loss to Wisconsin in the national semifinals) and who began this season ranked No. 2 in the Associated Press poll. Last season’s team was defined by its stingy defense. Though off-season rule changes have increased scoring, in 39 games last season the Wildcats gave up more than 74 points only once — 75, to Auburn.“We’re learning fast, but we need to learn a whole last faster,” said Kentucky forward Marcus Lee, a junior and one of just a few upperclassmen on the roster.“These guys have just played basketball in the past,” Coach John Calipari said of his five freshmen. “Now we have to teach them how to win.”The Kentucky result probably drew attention away from the upset suffered earlier in the afternoon one borough away by Kentucky’s longtime rival, Duke. The No. 7 Blue Devils lost to Utah, 77-75, in overtime at Madison Square Garden.It also overshadowed the earlier game at Barclays Center, in which No. 11 North Carolina fought back from an early deficit to dominate No. 22 U.C.L.A., 89-76, and improve to 9-2. The Bruins, who also beat Kentucky this month, dropped to 8-4.AdvertisementU.N.C. was forced to go to a smaller lineup as the junior Kennedy Meeks, a forward, was out for the second consecutive game with a bruised knee. The Tar Heels’ Brice Johnson, a 6-foot-10 senior, dominated with 27 points and 9 rebounds.The Kentucky-Ohio State game was not a pretty one, with numerous contested loose balls and even more missed shots.The distinct bright spot for Kentucky was Murray’s remarkable second half, in which he scored 27 points on 10-of-13 shooting, including seven 3-pointers. He scored 33 over all. Lee had 12 points and 9 rebounds.“That was one of the best performances I’ve seen in a short period of time,” Matta said of Murray.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Kentucky frequently appeared aimless on offense, passing the ball around to little effect, with players at times openly chirping at one another in frustration.Most conspicuously, the freshman Skal Labissiere, a 6-foot-11 forward who was a prized recruit before this season, scored 2 points and appeared to be a liability on defense. His lanky frame was pushed around during rebounding, and he missed assignments.On one play, Labissiere was lured away from his man, Ohio State center Trevor Thompson, by the crafty Lyle — who promptly tossed the ball over Labissiere to Thompson for an easy 2.For those who recalled last season’s Kentucky squad, whose defense was rooted in the acrobatic, lights-out play of the similarly tall and lanky Willie Cauley-Stein (then a junior, now of the Sacramento Kings), it seemed as though impostors had jumped into Kentucky’s home whites.AdvertisementIn crunchtime, Calipari chose to play the veterans Lee and Alex Poythress instead.“We’re not as good as we were a year ago,” Calipari said. “It’s pretty obvious.”The low point for Kentucky came with 11 minutes 28 seconds left, when the Wildcats fell behind by 16 points. After one error — an errant pass from Lee right to Bates-Diop — Calipari, typically animated and vocal even when his team is doing well, did not even get up from his chair. The sophomore guard Tyler Ulis, the team’s acknowledged leader, slammed the ball in frustration at the next timeout.Even so, Kentucky closed the gap to 63-60 with just over four minutes left. The Wildcats were catalyzed by an Isaiah Briscoe-to-Lee alley-oop and then were carried by Murray. They were also aided by the traveling troupe known as Big Blue Nation, which had packed the stands and screamed louder with every Murray 3-pointer.But Ohio State hung tight.If Kentucky is hoping for a pick-me-up, it will be disappointed: Its next game will be Saturday against its archrival, No. 19 Louisville, and the following weekend the Wildcats’ Southeastern Conference schedule will begin.“It’s basketball,” Lee said. “Do you want it to be one-sided? That would be boring.”A version of this article appears in print on December 20, 2015, on Page SP9 of the New York edition with the headline: Young Ohio State Team Reverses Its Fortune and Beats No. 4 Kentucky.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.