AdvertisementSupported byRoundupBy The Associated PressAksel Lund Svindal of Norway won the classic Val Gardena downhill Saturday for the first time in a World Cup race that may be better remembered for a safety airbag inflating in a crash involving the Olympic champion Matthias Mayer of Austria.Mayer lost control on the Saslong course in Italy and spun around, flying down the hill backward in midair. Before he landed on his right side, the airbag vest under his race suit inflated and softened his landing.The Austrian team said Mayer had fractured a vertebra and was likely to miss a month.Svindal clocked 1 minute 54.80 seconds for an advantage of 0.43 of a second over Guillermo Fayed of France. Svindal’s teammate Kjetil Jansrud finished third, 0.46 behind.SWISS WOMEN TOP THE PODIUM The Swiss skier Lara Gut narrowly beat her countrywoman Fabienne Suter to win a World Cup downhill race in Val d’Isère, France, and the American Lindsey Vonn skied off the course while chasing a 36th downhill win, which would tie a record.Gut edged Suter by 0.16 of a second to secure her 15th career win and her 23rd podium. Larisa Yurkiw of Canada finished in third place.Chasing a fifth World Cup title, Vonn still holds the overall lead over Gut, but by only 2 points. BROTHERS 1-2 IN SKI JUMP The World Cup leader Peter Prevc, 23, of Slovenia beat his 16-year-old brother, Domen, to win a ski jump large hill event in Engelberg, Switzerland.Noriaki Kasai of Japan finished third. NORWAY DOMINATES NORDIC Magnus Moan edged Magnus Krog by the length of a ski tip to lead a Norwegian sweep of the podium at a Nordic combined World Cup in Ramsau, Austria.Having started 20th after the ski jumping, Moan beat Krog for his 25th individual World Cup victory. A third Norwegian, Jarl Magnus Riiber, was one second behind in third. In the overall standings, Krog overtook the leader Fabian Riessle of Germany by 3 points.SPRINTER WINS ON HOME SNOW Federico Pellegrino won a fifth World Cup cross-country ski sprint in Dobbiaco, Italy. Cheered on by a home crowd, Pellegrino clocked 2:29.57 over the 1.3-kilometer course, edging out the American Simi Hamilton.The Olympic champion Maiken Caspersen Falla won the women’s event, finishing 0.17 of a second ahead of her fellow Norwegian Ingvild Flugstad Ostberg. Stina Nilsson of Sweden was third.FRENCHMAN TAKES SKI CROSS In San Candido, Italy, the Olympic champion Jean-Frédéric Chapuis of France won a second successive ski cross World Cup race. The Canadians Brady Leman and Johannes Rohrweck followed.Advertisement