AdvertisementSupported byBy Jeré LongmanPHILADELPHIA — Early this month, as the Eagles sought to end a three-game losing streak and remain in contention to win the N.F.C. East, the Fox announcer Charles Davis said of Philadelphia’s struggling quarterback, running backs and receivers, “You have to find ways to get them untracked.”In mid-October, after Mansfield University of Pennsylvania lost a women’s soccer match, 3-0, to Lock Haven, a headline on the Mansfield website lamented that the “Mountie Offense Can’t Get Untracked in Loss.”When Lucas Duda, the Mets’ first baseman, struggled in September after returning from a back injury, a headline in The New York Post explained “What the Mets Are Doing to Try to Get Lucas Duda Untracked.”Since appearing as a term in horse racing more than a century ago, “untracked” has gained common usage in sports to describe climbing out of a slump or a rut. Some language experts believe “get untracked” is a mishearing of “get on track.” Such misinterpretations, and reshaped meanings that can still make sense, are known by linguists as eggcorns, a reference to the way some people pronounce “acorn.”A pitch thrown “down the pipe” instead of “down the pike” is considered an eggcorn, as is “card shark” for “cardsharp.” For those of you scoring at home, an eggcorn is not to be confused with its cousin the mondegreen, a misheard lyric like “bathroom on the right,” instead of Creedence Clearwater Revival’s intended “bad moon on the rise.”The idiom “get untracked” seems to provoke a variety of responses among coaches, players, sportswriters, broadcasters and linguists. Some are unaware of the phrase, some are annoyed by its apparent suggestion of a derailing, and others embrace the expression’s metaphorical logic.“Clearly, it’s a mishearing,” said Paul Brians, an emeritus professor of English at Washington State University and the author of “Common Errors in English Usage.” “I think people are hearing the phrase ‘he’s got to get back on track,’ and they’re not catching that it’s on, space, track,” he added. “It’s coming across in their minds as ‘untracked.’ And of course, that is exactly the opposite of what they mean to say — that they’re getting back on track, not that they’ve derailed.”For Randy Harvey, the sports editor of The Houston Chronicle, “get untracked” is a linguistic pet peeve that ranks alongside “the young freshman” and games played under “clear skies.” (After all, there is only one sky.) “It never made any sense to me,” said Mr. Harvey, a former sportswriter and editor at The Los Angeles Times. “Untracked sounded like a train wreck.”Yet for a decade, language experts have taken notice of the sporting usage of “untracked” and “get untracked,” and entries in the American Heritage, Merriam-Webster and Oxford dictionaries have conferred the phrase with a linguistic legitimacy.The Oxford dictionary says that to “get untracked” is to “get into one’s stride or find good form, especially in sporting contexts.”Ben Zimmer, the executive editor of Vocabulary.com, said the idiom made a certain metaphorical sense. “If you think of the rut you’re getting out of as being a track that you’re stuck in, then you have to get untracked to get out of that,” Mr. Zimmer said. “If a player or a team is in a slump, it’s easy to visualize a rut or track that has to be gotten out of.”In a 2005 posting on Language Log, a blog operated by the University of Pennsylvania, the linguist Mark Liberman wrote that “untracked” appeared to be an eggcorn for “on track.” He also noted that in some nonsports articles, “untracked” meant “falling apart” rather than “getting it together.” Something else also seemed to be at play.“The pattern of usage in sports stories makes it seem like a matter of warming up,” Mr. Liberman wrote. “It’s as if an individual or a team naturally starts out tracked (not that anyone ever says that), and then if things go right, they can get untracked.”A 2014 discussion on the online network Stack Exchange questioned whether “get untracked” was a mishearing of “get on track.” A linguist writing under the name Sven Yargs noted that “get on track,” as a way of saying “get on plan,” appeared to have originated in the 1940s. “Untrack” as a description of escaping from a slump seems to have evolved from a horse-racing term for running at top speed that first appeared in the late 1800s.A horse-racing origin seems plausible, said Jan Freeman, author of the blog Throw Grammar from the Train, who explored “get untracked” in 2010 in a language column she formerly wrote for The Boston Globe.In an email, Ms. Freeman cautioned, however, “Nobody can ever answer a question about how an expression catches on. Some do; some don’t.”Ms. Freeman added, “Sports lingo especially seems as viral as teenage slang.”A search of The New York Times’s archives found a reference in 1894 to a thoroughbred named Prince George who struggled on a muddy racecourse and “did not seem able to untrack himself in the heavy going.”A 1921 review in The Times of “The Leather Pushers,” a book on boxing, quoted this line from the author, H. C. Witwer: “Roberts fin’ly untracked himself and sent the champ staggerin’ back with a wicked right uppercut.”In a 1927 baseball article, which recounted a victory by the Brooklyn Robins over the St. Louis Cardinals, John Drebinger wrote that “as might be expected, there had to be some peculiar baseball before the Flock family” — a slang reference to the Robins — “got itself untracked.”A 1945 article by Mr. Drebinger, who covered baseball at The Times for 40 years, noted that the New York Giants “simply couldn’t get themselves untracked in the opener” of a doubleheader. The exact phrase “get untracked” first appeared in The Times in 1946. Recounting a game between the Los Angeles Dons and the Brooklyn Dodgers of the fledgling All-America Football Conference, The Associated Press wrote, “The Los Angeles entry snapped into high for 14 points before the Dodgers could get untracked.”No current teams have found it more urgent to “get untracked” or “get on track” than the mediocre performers in the N.F.C. East. A recent visit to an Eagles practice found a mostly puzzled response to “untracked.”The defensive coordinator Bill Davis: “I always thought they were saying ‘on track,’ not ‘untracked.’ Going off the rails, you don’t want to be there.”Tight end Brent Celek: “ ‘Untracked,’ to me, would mean things are going awry. It’s bad. Let’s change it. Let’s tell them they don’t know what they’re talking about.”Hold on, said Jon Dorenbos, who snaps the ball for extra points, field goals and punts. “If you’re on the wrong track,” he said, “you have to get untracked to get on the right track.”Merrill Reese, the Eagles’ radio voice for 39 seasons, said he did not recall ever saying “get untracked.” Either way, there are more irritating phrases, he said. “So many sportscasters, every time they refer to the tight end, it’s ‘the big tight end,’ ” Mr. Reese said, laughing. “I have never in my life seen a small tight end. That drives me nuts.”Susan C. Beachy contributed research.Advertisement