By DAVID WALDSTEINOCT. 7, 2015
TORONTO —  Adam Basque was an infant in St. John, New Brunswick, when the Toronto Blue Jays last played in the postseason — 1993, when the Blue Jays won their second consecutive World Series.Over the next 22 years, a playoff drought settled over Canada that was so unyielding that Blue Jays fans had little concept of what it was like to see postseason baseball in October. So when the Blue Jays finally surged back to the postseason this year, nothing would stop Basque from attending the first two games. Not the cost. Not even a pregnant girlfriend.“She is 30 weeks pregnant, but I was not going to miss this,” Basque said Wednesday outside Air Canada Centre. “She’s really ticked off at me, but I had to come.”Basque, a 23-year-old firefighter, and his friend Lloyd Burnside, 28, a welder, each spent roughly $1,100 on tickets from an online outlet (in addition to airfare from St. John) for the first two games of the Blue Jays’ American League division series against the Texas Rangers. They also bought tickets to the Toronto Maple Leafs’ season-opening game against the Montreal Canadiens on Wednesday night to complete the junket.Advertisement“I have only a kind of a vague memory of ’93,” Burnside said while wearing a red Canadiens jersey and a Blue Jays cap. “So we decided we have to create some new ones.”AdvertisementFans are so excited, even in this hockey-centric city, that some of them are actually more focused on the Blue Jays than the Maple Leafs. To prove the point, a group of Blue Jays players received an enormous ovation when they were spotted at the Maple Leafs game.“That’s how you know,” Blue Jays pitcher R. A. Dickey said. “It’s opening night for the Leafs, it’s a hockey town, and everybody is talking about the Blue Jays. I was getting gas the other night, and this guy comes over, and he is beside himself how happy he is. He was bringing up ’92 and ’93 and saying we’re the greatest.”This team is a long way from the 1992-93 powerhouses that made the Blue Jays the envy of baseball. But they are considered a favorite to win the 2015 World Series. That quest starts Thursday when David Price throws the first pitch at Rogers Centre, the same building where, in 1993, Joe Carter hit his World Series-winning, ninth-inning home run.Then it was known as SkyDome, and in uniform that night was Al Leiter, now a broadcaster, who pitched for the Blue Jays from 1989 to 1995. He said the early ’90s were heady days in Toronto, great times to be a Blue Jay, with huge turnouts. In 1991, the Blue Jays became the first team to draw four million fans.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Leiter has returned to Toronto many times, but it was not until he was there last month with the Yankees for the YES Network that he was transported back 22 years to the delirium of that time.“It was so familiar,” he said. “Same building, same feel, some of the same fans. Electric. What’s happening is people are not just showing up; they are coming early, having a beer, making it a party, and making it a loud party. The atmosphere is just like what it was when I played here.”That feeling exploded before the playoffs even arrived. The fans recognized that Blue Jays General Manager Alex Anthopoulos had built a winner, with the acquisitions of Russell Martin and Josh Donaldson in the off-season, and he augmented the team at the nonwaiver trading deadline by acquiring Troy Tulowitzki, Ben Revere, LaTroy Hawkins and especially Price, who added instant credibility.Advertisement“Even the most casual fan could tell this team needed an ace,” Leiter said, “and they got him. The fans saw that and were like, ‘We’re in.’ ”After Price’s Jays debut at Rogers Centre on Aug. 3, he said he had never pitched in an atmosphere quite like that one — and he had pitched in a World Series, in 2008. Those loud, energized fans helped him increase the velocity on his pitches.“It can turn 95 into 96,” Price said. “It can make that hitter get to that pitcher’s pitch. It pumps you up.”Since Price, Tulowitzki and the others arrived, attendance has soared. All three of the Yankees games from Sept. 21 to 23 attracted at least 47,000 announced fans. In 20 of their final 21 home games, the Blue Jays drew at least 45,000.“People have been saying it for years around here,” Blue Jays Manager John Gibbons said. “If the team heats up, this place will explode. That’s what’s happening. This team represents the whole country, and this place is on fire.”Marjorie El Haq, a 20-year-old student from nearby Mississauga, said she planned to skip her last class on Thursday so she would be able to watch the game. As she strolled by Rogers Centre on Wednesday, she wore a vinyl Jays jacket with buttons, the kind worn by the players in 1993.“I wasn’t alive when they won the last one,” she said. “So I’ve never known a championship. I don’t even know; what’s it like?”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.