AdvertisementSupported byBy Tim CaseyPHILADELPHIA — Philadelphia Eagles wide receiver Seyi Ajirotutu has caught only one pass for 4 yards this year and become a forgotten man in the team’s offense. But if it weren’t for his smart, athletic special-teams performance earlier this month, the Eagles may be wondering how their season went wrong instead of contending for an unlikely playoff berth.Before facing the New England Patriots on the road on Dec. 6, Ajirotutu studied film of the defending Super Bowl champions. He knew the Patriots enjoyed catching their opponents off guard. And so, as the Patriots lined up to kick off after going ahead by 14-0 midway through the second quarter, Ajirotutu remained alert. He positioned himself in the front row of the return team, stood close to the left sideline near midfield and kept his eyes on kicker Stephen Gostkowski. When Gostkowski approached the tee and tossed the ball to his left to safety Nate Ebner, Ajirotutu understood the Patriots’ motives: They wanted to attempt a drop kick, embarrass the Eagles, regain possession and expand their lead. Four weeks earlier, they had successfully executed an onside kick in the first quarter against the Washington Redskins.“You have a light bulb in your head saying, ‘Trick play, trick play,’ ” Ajirotutu said. “We had talked about it all week. They have a tendency to surprise onside kick. We didn’t know how it was going to come, where it was going to come, but we had a feeling that it was going to come eventually sometime. Just stay ready, stay prepared and then make the play.”How can my team make the N.F.L. playoffs? It’s a simple question, but answering it can be devilishly complicated. This interactive simulator walks you through the scenarios.And that he did. Ajirotutu immediately ran backward, leapt and fell on the ball at the 41-yard line, a moment that in retrospect helped revitalize the Eagles. After Ajirotutu’s recovery, the Eagles scored the next 35 points and held on for a 35-28 victory, ending a three-game losing streak and pulling off one of the biggest upsets this season. They followed that up by defeating the Buffalo Bills, 23-20, last Sunday. Now, entering Sunday night’s home game against the Arizona Cardinals, the Eagles (6-7) are tied with the Giants and the Redskins for first place in the N.F.C. East. Even if the Eagles lose to the Cardinals, they will win the division and advance to the playoffs if they beat the Redskins at home Dec. 26 and the Giants on the road Jan. 3.It is a situation that few could have envisioned just a few weeks ago. On Thanksgiving, the Detroit Lions crushed the Eagles, 45-14, the second time in five days that Philadelphia had been dominated by a sub-.500 team. The previous Sunday, the Tampa Bay Buccaneers had gone into Lincoln Financial Field and won, 45-17, forcing three turnovers and compiling 521 yards of offense. After the Lions’ loss, Eagles Coach Chip Kelly motivated the team in part through positive reinforcement. Despite their 4-7 record at the time, he showed players highlights of the season and hoped the reel would help them stay positive heading into the Patriots game. Eagles offensive tackle Lane Johnson said he appreciated the gesture, but he realized where they stood. “We knew if you go out there and play like you’ve been playing, you’re going to get kicked in the face again, so something’s got to change,” Johnson said. “I just think everybody had internal motivation. Nobody was really pleased with three straight losses and things not going well. We knew it was a do-or-die situation and that people had to be accountable more than ever.”Although the Eagles have improved in their last two games, they are still below .500 and facing one of their most difficult challenges Sunday. The Cardinals (11-2) have won seven consecutive games and already clinched a postseason berth. They lead the N.F.L. with 417.5 yards per game and are second with 31.2 points per game. Quarterback Carson Palmer, who turns 36 on Dec. 27, has recovered from a torn anterior cruciate ligament he sustained last November and returned better than ever. Palmer, the top overall pick in the 2003 draft, is second in the N.F.L. in passing yards (4,003), touchdown passes (31) and passer rating (107.2). He leads the league with 59 completions of at least 20 yards and is completing 64.5 percent of his passes. It helps that he throws to what Kelly refers to as possibly the best group of receivers Philadelphia will see all season: Larry Fitzgerald, John Brown and Michael Floyd.“You’re tied to the hip at your quarterback, no matter where you’re a head coach,” said Cardinals Coach Bruce Arians, who coached at Temple from 1983 to 1988. “That relationship and how well that guy plays pretty much depends on your job. You can coach defense and you can run the football, but if you don’t have a quarterback, you’re not going to go anywhere.”Kelly knows that all too well. Since joining the Eagles in 2013, he has had three starting quarterbacks. In March, the team acquired Sam Bradford from St. Louis in exchange for Nick Foles even though Bradford missed all of last season while recovering from a torn A.C.L. Like his team, Bradford has been inconsistent this season, throwing 14 touchdown passes and 11 interceptions. Still, the Eagles are 6-2 in the last eight games when Bradford has played the entire way.During the third quarter of a 20-19 loss to the Miami Dolphins on Nov. 15, Bradford sustained a concussion and left shoulder injury and sat out the rest of the game. He was then inactive in the blowout losses to the Buccaneers and the Lions, but he returned against the Patriots and threw two touchdown passes. With the game against the Bills tied at 20-20, Bradford completed a 41-yard pass on third-and-3 to tight end Zach Ertz that helped set up Caleb Sturgis’s game-winning field goal. Afterward, several Eagles players wore black T-shirts with “53 Angry Men” in white lettering across the front. They were gifts from the owner Jeffrey Lurie, who had addressed the team before the Patriots game and told them to “play angry,” according to linebacker Brandon Graham.“Next thing you know, we have 53 angry men in our locker room,” Graham said. And, unexpectedly, 53 men whose postseason hopes remain alive. Advertisement