AdvertisementSupported byKeeping ScoreBy Benjamin HoffmanUnder Coach Brad Stevens, Boston has become the type of team that no one wants to play. The Celtics are not blessed with a true superstar, so they win with depth, strategy and execution. Boston can give even the best teams fits in many ways: Isaiah Thomas cutting to the basket, Jared Sullinger pulling down a tough rebound or Jae Crowder doing a little bit of everything, to name three. The team proved its ability to grind things out by forcing two overtime periods on Dec. 11 against the Golden State Warriors, who had been virtually unchallenged in a 23-0 start. Boston lost that game, but the effort sent a message that Stevens’s rebuilding project had shifted into the role of a contender.“Obviously, it was nice to get the win,” Stephen Curry, the Warriors’ superstar, told reporters after the game. “But we had to claw our way to it.”The only problem for the Celtics is that they are playing in the ultracompetitive Eastern Conference. (Yes, the Eastern Conference.)The Celtics have a 14-13 record, with the East’s fifth-best point differential, but they are 10th in the conference standings, two spots from a position that would qualify them for a playoff berth. In a league that has been dominated by the Western Conference virtually since the day Michael Jordan retired from the Chicago Bulls, the East is now the better overall conference. That could certainly be a fluke, but more than a quarter of the way into the season, it is becoming more notable each day. There are 10 teams in the East with winning records and just six in the West. There have been a few seasons in which the conferences had the same number of winning teams, but the last time the East had more winners than the West was 1998-99, the season after Jordan retired for the second of three times. Beginning with that season, a team from the West has won the N.B.A. title 12 times to the East’s five.But this season, the East is making up ground. Besides having more winning teams, the East is 77-77 against Western opponents, with Memphis evening the record for the West with a 96-84 victory over Indiana on Saturday night. Perennial contenders in the West, like Oklahoma City, Dallas, Houston, Phoenix and Portland, have losing records against the East, with the Trail Blazers, at 1-7, faring the worst.And in what may be the greatest triumph of the East this season, the Milwaukee Bucks became the first team to beat the Warriors. The conference often referred to as the Least suddenly has some bragging rights.Wins and losses are not always the best way to measure the quality of a team, though, so trying to figure out if the East has truly surpassed the West can be tricky. One measure of a team’s true worth is adjusted net rating, an estimate of a team’s point differential per 100 possessions adjusted to the team’s strength of schedule. By that measure, the West has the top three teams (San Antonio, Golden State and Oklahoma City), but the East occupies the next seven spots. Over all, the East has 10 of the top 15 in terms of adjusted net rating, according to the website Basketball Reference. So while it may still lag a bit at the very top, the conference does seem to have more quality teams.As for Boston, it has done a great deal to improve, yet it faces the possibility that it will not make the playoffs a year after qualifying with a worse winning percentage. So what is undoubtedly good news for the conference, and the competitiveness of the N.B.A. in general, may not be such a welcome change for Stevens and his players. Still, if the Celtics’ first 27 games are any indication, they will not be going down without a fight.Advertisement