By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSDEC. 19, 2015
ROME —  At 7 feet 6 inches, Robert Bobroczkyi, a 15-year-old from Romania, is already taller than the Knicks sensation Kristaps Porzingis — or any other N.B.A. player.He has a nice shooting touch and solid passing skills, too.So it’s no wonder that Bobroczkyi is generating buzz among youth league scouts in Europe.Bobroczkyi, however, lacks muscle on his 184-pound frame. He runs awkwardly and tires easily.That is why the Stellazzurra Basketball Academy in Rome, where Bobroczkyi is based, has decided to dedicate Bobroczkyi’s season exclusively to fitness and strength.Following an individual nutrition plan created for him by specialists at the National Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Md., Bobroczkyi is eating more than two pounds of pasta per day.Advertisement“We’re not interested in basketball right now; the top priority is his health,” said Giacomo Rossi, the academy’s general manager. “For someone with his physical stature, the usual practice sessions are just not enough. He needs individual attention.”Having helped Stellazzurra to the under-15 national title in Italy last season, Bobroczkyi is playing in only select tournaments this season.“We’ve got to make sure that five years from now, not only can he play basketball, but that he’s also a fairly normal person,” Rossi said. “This is going to be a long and difficult season for him, but it’s also going to be the most important season of his life.”Bobroczkyi is living with a host family in Frosinone — about an hour’s drive south of Rome — near a fully equipped physical therapy and rehabilitation center. His nutritionist also works for the Frosinone soccer club in Italy’s top division.“He eats seven times per day,” said Daniele Comandini, a physiotherapist who is working with Bobroczkyi. “He’s not eating McDonald’s or kebabs. That’s banned.”AdvertisementSince he arrived in Rome last year, Bobroczkyi has gained 30 pounds. And he is still getting taller.In August, Bobroczkyi was seen by physicians at the National Institutes of Health.“They performed every possible exam on him,” Comandini said. “He’s in perfect health.”Bobroczkyi runs awkwardly because his hips are slanted.“The problem with his hips is normal for someone of his height,” Comandini said. “He grew so rapidly that his hips don’t correspond with the other bones yet.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Bobroczkyi, whose father is 7-1, started playing basketball at age 5, and his idol was Yao Ming.“Now I have two,” Bobroczkyi said. “Anthony Davis and Kristaps Porzingis.”Bobroczkyi speaks five languages: Romanian, Italian, English, Serbian and Hungarian. Asked where he would like to play in the future, Bobroczkyi responded, “Euroleague.”Team officials said Bobroczkyi had a high basketball IQ, as evident in videos circulating on the Internet.“I think his greatest talent is his passing skills,” Rossi said. “On defense, he intimidates. But he needs to have the body that can stand up over the course of an entire game. He’s never going to be someone who can play all 40 minutes, but he’s got to be able to make an impact in the 20 minutes that he does play.”Bobroczkyi is scoring 6 to 7 points per game.Stellazzurra has players of 20 nationalities and four religions.“This is the best place for me to develop,” Bobroczkyi said.A version of this article appears in print on December 20, 2015, on Page SP8 of the New York edition with the headline: At 7 Feet 6, Teenager Has Scouts Buzzing.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.