AdvertisementSupported byTV SportsBy Richard SandomirThe past six weeks have transformed Jessica Mendoza from someone largely regarded as a softball analyst to one of the lead baseball voices at ESPN. She has performed so well in place of Curt Schilling on Sunday night games and during the Houston Astros’ 3-0 victory over the Yankees in the American League wild-card playoff game Tuesday night that ESPN has no option but to give her a high-profile slot.“Six weeks? No, it’s hasn’t been that long,” she said on Wednesday in a telephone interview. “It’s felt like one long day because I never wanted it to stop. I never wanted to let off the gas.”On Tuesday night, she showed her primary expertise in batting analysis, most notably on how the Astros’ George Springer was able to hit a double over Brett Gardner’s head: by standing far back in the batter’s box to react to Masahiro Tanaka’s splitter. But she also did good — and quick — work on pitch selection and outfield positioning.“I find that as far as my first step in, I talk to hitters, coaches and managers, and that’s the insight I want to share with viewers,” she said. “I’m hoping to build up to defensive strategy and pitching.”What she will do in 2016 will probably depend, in part, on whether Schilling has a future at ESPN — on Sunday night games or anywhere. He was initially suspended by the network for sharing a Twitter meme about Muslim extremists that featured a photograph of Adolf Hitler. His short punishment was then extended because of an angry response he emailed to an article on the website Awful Announcing about his activities on social media. His first day back was Wednesday, when he worked from an ESPN studio at the company’s headquarters in Bristol, Conn.Mendoza said she traded texts about pitching with Schilling after Tuesday night’s game.“He’s someone I’ve known a while and respect his knowledge, so we went back and forth about Tanaka” and Astros starter Dallas Keuchel, she said.So far, Mendoza has not heard from ESPN officials about what she will do next season. “And I haven’t even asked,” she said. “I’m as curious as anyone. I’m hooked. This is something I want to do more of.”And she will. John Wildhack, ESPN’s executive vice president for programming and production, lauded her in a way that offered little doubt about the company’s intentions.“You can expect that she has earned and will have a prominent role in our baseball coverage,” Wildhack said. “Her knowledge of the game is comparable to any baseball expert out there, and her knowledge of hitting might be the best of any analyst out there.”He added, “She deserves all the credit for displaying her talents, and it’s awesome that she got to do it on a big stage last night at Yankee Stadium.”Translation: Expect her to replace Schilling. It will be a smart and progressive move.Despite her success, Mendoza has faced criticism, largely on social media, from those who cannot accept that a woman is calling games or that a softball player — one of the best ever — is analyzing baseball. It is the sort of criticism that other female announcers have had to cope with. They have been judged by their looks and voices but not always their work. In Mendoza’s case, some of the comments have been nasty, like that of an Atlanta radio host, and some of it has demonstrated that she has not been judged by her knowledge.“Women announcing playoff baseball,” said a person on Twitter identified as @josephsouza9. “I’m sorry, but please no more.”Mendoza said that after Tuesday night’s game, her sister, Alana Dusan, texted her to say she was trending on Facebook, but Mendoza added that she was following the advice of friends not to listen to the unfiltered voices of the Internet.She is puzzled by those who cannot accept a softball player — an all-American at Stanford and an Olympic gold medalist — calling Major League Baseball.“My dad was a baseball coach, and then I switched to softball,” she said. “Baseball was all I knew until I crossed over. It never seemed like a big deal.”She said that Tim Walton, the coach who has led Florida to two consecutive women’s College World Series titles, has not been a target of criticism for shifting to softball from baseball, as a college and minor league pitcher.“The sports are not exactly alike,” she said, “but not different enough to where you can’t successfully understand each one.”Mendoza’s off-season will largely consist of softball clinics around the country and overseas for 12- to 18-year-old girls.“But I really like to reach out to them on body image, alcohol and drugs, and peer pressure,” she said. “It’s important to be a positive female role model in a world with a lot of Kardashians.”Email: sandor@nytimes.com Advertisement