DEC. 21, 2015
As the Falcons won for the first time since Oct. 25, Julio Jones ended a long drought of his own, scoring his first touchdown since Nov. 1. He finished with nine receptions for 118 yards, giving him 118 catches for the season, a franchise record. The old mark (115) was set by his teammate Roddy White in the 2010 season. “Roddy has been like a mentor to me,” Jones said. “Records are made to be broken. One of these young guys will probably break mine.”The Panthers’ Cam Newton threw for five touchdowns, but he was not the only quarterback to account for so many scores: The Vikings’ Teddy Bridgewater and the Redskins’ Kirk Cousins each threw for four touchdowns and ran for one in victories. Bridgewater, who completed 17 of 20 passes for 231 yards against the Bears, was the first Viking to throw for four scores in a game since Brett Favre did so in a playoff game in 2010. Cousins, who completed 22 of 28 passes for 319 yards against the Bills, set a franchise record with his sixth 300-passing-yard game of the season. His performance inspired chants of “You like that!” from the stands, a reference to what Cousins screamed after a comeback victory earlier this season. “I had to turn my headsets up a little bit,” Coach Jay Gruden said. “I couldn’t hear play calls and all that stuff.” In comparison with those players, Chargers running back Danny Woodhead was a disappointment; he accounted for only four scores (three receiving, one rushing) in a win over the Dolphins.INJURY REPORTBills running back LeSean McCoy hurt his knee. ... The Patriots had three big losses: linebacker Dont’a Hightower (knee), receiver Danny Amendola (knee) and safety Patrick Chung (hip). ... Texans receiver Cecil Shorts III is not expected to play next week after hurting his groin. ... Ravens cornerback Jimmy Smith injured his thigh. ... The 49ers, already missing three running backs, lost Shaun Draughn (knee).Information from The Associated Press A version of this article appears in print on December 21, 2015, on Page D2 of the New York edition with the headline: The Day’s Best.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.