By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSDEC. 20, 2015
Coach Pep Guardiola will leave Bayern Munich at the end of the season and will be replaced by Carlo Ancelotti, the team said Sunday.Ancelotti, winner of three Champions League titles, is a former coach of Real Madrid, Paris St.-Germain, Chelsea and Milan. He signed a three-year deal with Bayern.■ A double strike from Luis Suárez and a disputed opening goal from Lionel Messi led Barcelona to its third Club World Cup title as the team, the European champion, beat the South American champion River Plate, 3-0, in the final in Yokohama, Japan.  (AP)■ Gareth Bale scored four goals, Karim Benzema added three, and Cristiano Ronaldo had two as Real Madrid defeated nine-man Rayo Vallecano at home, 10-2, to pull 2 points behind the Spanish league front-runners Barcelona and Atlético Madrid.AdvertisementAtlético missed a chance to take sole possession of the lead after a 1-0 loss at Málaga as striker Charles Dias scored in the 86th.  (AP)Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.■ Liverpool slumped to a 3-0 defeat at Watford in the Premier League, while Swansea, playing without a manager, drew, 0-0, at home against West Ham. Liverpool now trails the Champions League places by 5 points, while Swansea stayed in the relegation zone after taking a point.  (AP)Advertisement■ Roma ended its winless streak with a 2-0 victory over Genoa in Serie A to relieve some of the pressure on Coach Rudi García, while the league leader Inter Milan lost at home, 2-1, to Lazio.  (AP)■ Hertha Berlin beat Mainz, 2-0, to consolidate third place in the Bundesliga before the winter break and improve its chances of qualifying for the Champions League. In the late match, Borussia Mönchengladbach rallied with 10 men to overcome Darmstadt, 3-2.  (AP)■ Lyon lost, 2-1, at Gazélec Ajaccio, heaping the pressure on the beleaguered coach Hubert Fournier after a fifth defeat in six league matches. Earlier, St.-Étienne beat third-place Angers, 1-0, to move up to sixth place as winger Benjamin Corgnet scored his first league goal of the season.  (AP)A version of this brief appears in print on December 21, 2015, on Page D4 of the New York edition with the headline: Guardiola Will Leave Bayern.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.