By JONAH BROMWICHDEC. 20, 2015
Every week, The New York Times will choose one essential game to watch, highlighting hot teams, winning and losing streaks and statistical intrigue in the N.B.A.The centerpiece of this season’s Christmas Day games is a 2015 N.B.A. finals retread: The Golden State Warriors face the Cleveland Cavaliers in California. It will be the first time that LeBron James and Stephen Curry have met since the finals, and it will be worth watching. But if the Warriors play at the level that has astounded the league this season, it may not be much of a game — and in any case, it is not one that anyone needs to be told to watch.A better competition, for the slightly less casual fan, could take place on Monday, when the Oklahoma City Thunder visit the Clippers in Los Angeles (10:30 p.m. Eastern, NBA TV). The third- and fourth-seeded teams in the Western Conference entering Sunday, the Thunder and the Clippers are in a similar position as they face up toward the superior San Antonio Spurs and the Warriors and hope that there is still a sliver of possibility for them to ascend to the same level.Over the last few seasons, in chasing better teams, the Thunder have been handicapped by their best players. Kevin Durant and Russell Westbrook are such accomplished scorers, regardless of the quality of the shot opening, that Oklahoma City has had a difficult time implementing a more systematic approach.AdvertisementBilly Donovan, the Thunder’s new coach, has attempted to change the culture, stressing ball movement. He has emphasized that, aside from offensive efficiency, pass-first basketball creates trust among teammates, a necessary lesson for a team that often feels like a collection of mismatched stars and sidekicks. Westbrook, at least, has bought into Donovan’s philosophy, averaging more assists this season than ever before.AdvertisementBut as a team, the Thunder have not significantly improved their sharing skills. They are averaging more assists than last season, but their assist percentage — the portion of their made baskets that are the direct result of a teammate’s pass — remains one of the lowest in the N.B.A. (The Warriors have the league’s highest percentage, and the Spurs have the fourth highest.) The Thunder’s off-ball movement is stagnant; too often, there is no one available to receive a pass from a driving Westbrook or Durant.That failure clouds the team’s successes. Durant has rebounded from a season of injury, returning to his effortless scoring ways, particularly in the second half of games. But when the Thunder fall short in close contests — as they have in the last month to the Cavaliers, the Miami Heat and the Atlanta Hawks — fans cannot be blamed for wondering whether there is a more reliable answer than Durant’s long-range jumpers.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Thunder rank second in rebounding in the league behind the Bulls, and their size and aggression inside give them an edge over trend-following small-ball squads. At its best, their defense is as tough and unyielding as any in the league. And in some games they do seem to have improved their passing: Blowout wins over the Grizzlies and the Lakers featured far more assists than usual. If discipline can transform that risk-averse experimentation into a habit, then the Thunder will step onto the N.B.A.’s top rung.In order to reach the same level, the Clippers have their work cut out for them. They have yet to notch a single impressive win this season. When they have competed with contenders, as in games against the Warriors, the Spurs, the Toronto Raptors and the Indiana Pacers, their schedule is dotted with losses. After losing to the Houston Rockets for the second time this season on Saturday, Clippers point guard Chris Paul lamented the low quality of their play.“We’re not a team that anybody needs to be worried about, I’ll tell you that,” he said.Paul’s frustration speaks to the Clippers’ inability to execute in late-game situations. But he is wrong. The Clippers have consistently played the Warriors competitively, and in the 2015 playoffs, they eliminated the Spurs in seven thrilling games. The Clippers are a nerve-racking opponent. If they can improve their late-game performances, they will be a threat.That improvement starts with their bench, which has played poorly in the fourth quarter. It is within Doc Rivers’s power as coach to switch his lineups, or as president of basketball operations to acquire new blood. But he has shown no intention of remedying the problem, and so the Clippers remain a step behind in the West.If Rivers needs a shake, the Thunder seem primed to deliver one. Over all, both teams are playing well, but the weaknesses — passing for the Thunder, bench play for the Clippers — have lingered for several seasons. Monday’s game could provide an impetus for either team to seek a more permanent solution. Either the Thunder need to redouble their efforts to get open and pass, or Rivers needs to rethink his roster approach. Making the right adjustment would help wedge the championship window open a little further. Failing to adjust could close it for good.An earlier version of this article misstated the day of the week that the Thunder were to visit the Clippers. It was Monday, not Tuesday.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.