AdvertisementSupported byCapitals 7, Rangers 3By Dave CaldwellRangers goalie Henrik Lundqvist peered through his mask, decorated with a glittering king’s crown, midway through what would be a harrowing second period for him on Sunday. He saw the Washington Capitals’ ever-dangerous Alex Ovechkin, unguarded and unhurried, measuring up his torpedo of a wrist shot.Not many N.H.L. goaltenders can stare down Ovechkin, although a month ago, Lundqvist probably would have stood a better chance. Ovechkin snapped a shot from 26 feet over the glove of a befuddled Lundqvist and into the net, and the red-hot Capitals went on to a 7-3 victory at Madison Square Garden.The loss was the 11th in 14 games for the Rangers (19-12-4), who fell 8 points behind the first-place Capitals (24-6-2) in the Metropolitan Division standings. Washington has won 12 of its last 14. Lundqvist, scorched for five goals on 24 shots, spent the third period on the bench.“I felt Henrik needed a break,” Rangers Coach Alain Vigneault said.It was the second time in six games that Vigneault had felt that way. When it was announced Sunday that Magnus Hellberg had replaced Lundqvist, Hellberg drew a round of applause from the crowd.“I don’t really have a good explanation,” Lundqvist said after the game when asked about his mediocre play recently. “Right now, when bad things happen, we get out of structure a little bit and give up chances. I have to look at my own game. I can’t just look at the team game. I have to be better. I know that.”Lundqvist was largely responsible for lifting the Rangers to 16 victories in their first 21 games. After a 3-0 shutout victory at home over Nashville on Nov. 23, Lundqvist had a 12-3-2 record, with a 1.74 goals against average and a .946 save percentage.But Lundqvist is no longer able to prop up a team that is flailing in its own zone. The Rangers cruised to an encouraging 3-1 first-period lead against the Capitals on goals by J. T. Miller, Chris Kreider and Dan Boyle, but they lost it in a hurry.Lundqvist gave up four goals in the second period and earned a seat at the end of the bench. He wore a gray Rangers cap. Lundqvist is 3-6-1 and has given up 36 goals in 11 games since the shutout in Nashville. His goals against average has swelled to 2.43, with his save percentage dropping to .925.“He’s working real hard, like the rest of our group,” Vigneault said of Lundqvist. “He’s no different. We need our top players to be at a top level in such a competitive league. Right now, as a group, we are all a little bit off. We will work together and get back at it.”The Capitals took the lead when Justin Williams was allowed to hang out in the low slot. He redirected a pass from defenseman Taylor Chorney for his ninth goal of the season at 12 minutes 3 seconds of the first period. But Washington’s lead lasted only 99 seconds, and the Rangers scored on consecutive shots to take a 2-1 lead. The first goal came from Miller on a determined one-on-three bull rush at 13:42, the second from Kreider on a power move at 15:44. Boyle then scored at 18:03.The Rangers outshot the Capitals in the first period, 15-7, and the Garden crowd took delight in serenading goalie Braden Holtby by singing his last name. What appeared to be a healthy lead, though, was gone — on consecutive shots — before half of the second period had been played.Seconds after the Capitals had killed a Rangers power play, Dmitry Orlov slipped a pass to Washington forward Evgeny Kuznetsov, who swept a backhand shot off the crossbar and past Lundqvist at 5:25 of the second for his 10th goal of the season.The Capitals scored again at 8:01, when T. J. Oshie motored around Rangers defenseman Marc Staal to pop in his 10th goal before he was upended and fell on the ice. Lundqvist said it was a shot he needed to stop. Ovechkin then beat Lundqvist on the power play at 11:03, and Williams scored his second goal at 19 minutes.“It is frustrating right now, but at the same time, nothing is going to get better if you keep thinking negatively,” said Rangers forward Mats Zuccarello, who was dropped from the top line Sunday.In came Hellberg, who had been called up from the Rangers’ top minor league team, in Hartford, after Antti Raanta was hit in the mask with a shot in a 5-2 loss on Wednesday to the Minnesota Wild. Hellberg gave up goals to Jason Chimera and Marcus Johansson before five minutes had been played.The Rangers were booed at the end of the game, and Lundqvist was the last player to step over the boards and retreat to the dressing room. The Rangers will play another tough opponent, the Anaheim Ducks, on Tuesday at the Garden. Their skid seems unending.“It’s something we’ve been able to do in the past,” the Rangers’ captain, Ryan McDonagh, said when asked about reversing the team’s course. “We’ll get back to it, I know.”Lundqvist sounded less optimistic, saying, “Right now, it’s a test for us mentally to turn this around.”Advertisement