By TOM PEDULLADEC. 20, 2015
EAST RUTHERFORD, N.J. —  Odell Beckham Jr. wowed fans last year as he compiled a record-setting rookie season despite having missed the off-season and the first four games of the regular season with a hamstring injury. Appreciation for his brilliance increased as his speed, elusiveness and penchant for photogenic one-handed grabs allowed him to stitch together six consecutive 100-yard receiving games, two shy of the N.F.L. record set by Calvin Johnson of the Detroit Lions in 2012.But after Beckham became frustrated early in Sunday’s game against the undefeated Carolina Panthers, he unveiled a darker side of his personality that most likely disturbed some fans and led several members of the Panthers to call for the league to suspend him.Carolina cornerback Josh Norman, whose suffocating coverage appeared to cause Beckham to unravel, was among those who appealed to the league to discipline Beckham after the Panthers escaped with a 38-35 victory at MetLife Stadium that kept their perfect run intact at 14-0.“When they put it on film and the league office takes a real look at it, we’ll see what they can do, because players like that don’t belong in the game,” Norman said. “I mean, it’s ridiculous. I understand you want to play, but let’s play within the confines of the league rules. Don’t do all that extra stuff. I know you get a little rattled. That’s cool. But if that’s not your game, don’t play somebody else’s game. You’re not going to win.”Norman continued: “The guy took a shot at me I don’t know how many times. To take a shot at a guy’s head, I mean, come on now. That’s kind of going a little bit too far.”AdvertisementBeckham’s frustration grew visibly when he was held without a first-half catch for the first time in his career. He dropped two passes, one on a fly pattern that almost certainly would have resulted in a touchdown on the Giants’ opening series.AdvertisementWith Carolina holding a 21-7 halftime advantage, Norman, a fifth-round draft choice who has blossomed into perhaps the league’s finest cornerback in his fourth season, became more conscious of guarding against the deep ball. Beckham made six catches for 76 yards and a touchdown, ending his bid for Johnson’s mark. His biggest play occurred when he got half a step on Norman — his adversary accused him of pushing off — and made a 14-yard grab in the left corner of the end zone with 1 minute 46 seconds left to cap the Giants’ comeback from a 35-7 hole to even the score at 35-35.Perhaps the ugliest moment during what Carolina Coach Ron Rivera called “a very crazy football game” was when Beckham launched himself at Norman’s head. In another, with the Giants trailing, 35-7, and facing fourth-and-2 at the Panthers’ 45-yard line late in the third quarter, Beckham made a sliding 5-yard grab only to undo that critical catch when he grabbed Norman by the foot to trip him, resulting in a 15-yard penalty for unnecessary roughness.Two plays after that, as tempers flared, Beckham and Norman drew offsetting unnecessary-roughness penalties. Another two plays later, Norman was whistled for the same infraction.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In all, Beckham was charged with three personal fouls. Although he expressed regret, he suggested that he had not been the aggressor.“You never want to hurt your team like that,” he said. “I have learned it all throughout my life, you know, always the second man gets called.”Beckham said he had never been concerned that he might be ejected.“We are out there playing football,” he said. “We are competing. You are a competitor. I’m a competitor. We are always going to go at it. Anybody who has played sports, you are competitive, and you are going to go as hard as you can.”Still, Cortland Finnegan, another Carolina defensive back, joined Norman in calling for league action.“Some of the stuff he was doing is not football related,” he said. “He swung multiple times.”A version of this article appears in print on December 21, 2015, on Page D3 of the New York edition with the headline: Panthers’ Defense Uncovers Beckham’s Dark Side.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.