By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSDEC. 20, 2015
Ryan Spooner scored the lone shootout goal, and Jonas Gustavsson made 29 saves to lift the Bruins over the Devils, 2-1, in Boston on Sunday.Loui Eriksson had a goal in the first period for Boston, which improved to 11-1-3 in its last 15 games and pulled 1 point behind first-place Montreal in the Atlantic Division.Andy Greene scored in the second for the Devils, who have managed only five goals in five games. They have dropped three straight and four of five.Spooner scored over the right shoulder of goalie Cory Schneider on the Bruins’ first attempt in the shootout. Schneider made 38 saves but is winless in his last four starts against Boston.AdvertisementTorey Krug, Brad Marchand, Patrice Bergeron and David Krejci all had great opportunities to score in overtime but were stymied by Schneider as the Devils were outshot, 9-2. Boston missed its best chance when Bergeron’s shot hit the side of an open net.“Cory was great,” Devils Coach John Hynes said. “When they had pushes he was able to come up with some big saves, and you saw what both goaltenders did in overtime.”AdvertisementGustavsson kept the Bruins in it in overtime by foiling a two-on-one break for Adam Henrique and Travis Zajac with 3:17 remaining with a pad save after Boston’s Zdeno Chara had fallen.Eriksson converted a perfect feed from Krejci to beat Schneider at 6:15 of the first period.Greene tied it when he redirected a pass from Lee Stempniak past Gustavsson at 1:51 of the second.The Devils dominated the second period with 13 shots but only mustered the one goal.PANTHERS 5, CANUCKS 4 Jaromir Jagr scored his 732nd goal to move past Marcel Dionne for fourth place in N.H.L. history, and Aleksander Barkov tallied the winner in a shootout as Florida topped visiting Vancouver.Barkov scored against Jacob Markstrom, who had entered the game when Ryan Miller left with an injury after allowing a goal on two shots in the shootout.Jared McCann scored in the shootout for Vancouver, but Roberto Luongo stopped Sven Baertschi to seal the win.LIGHTNING 5, SENATORS 2 Mike Angelidis scored his first N.H.L. goal in almost four years, and host Tampa Bay cruised over Ottawa.AdvertisementThe Lightning also got two goals from Steven Stamkos, including one of two late empty-netters. Nikita Nesterov and Alex Killorn had the other Tampa Bay goals.RED WINGS 4, FLAMES 2 Dylan Larkin and Brad Richards scored 45 seconds apart in the second period to help power Detroit past visiting Calgary.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Gustav Nyquist scored to give Detroit a two-goal lead late in the second period, and Justin Abdelkader scored an empty-net goal with 30 seconds left in the game.BLACKHAWKS 4, SHARKS 3 Jonathan Toews scored at 2:21 of overtime to give surging Chicago a home victory over San Jose.In the first period, Patrick Kane scored his 21st to help Chicago win for the seventh time in nine games.A version of this article appears in print on December 21, 2015, on Page D5 of the New York edition with the headline: Bruins Top Devils in Shootout and Gain on the Canadiens.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.