AdvertisementSupported byBy Marc TracyTUSCALOOSA, Ala. — Avery Johnson, Alabama’s new basketball coach, lapsed into the local dialect last month while answering a question about who would start at point guard in the season opener the next week.“It’s been a pretty strong competition,” he said. “But there’s no quarterback controversy.”In the land of the Crimson Tide, football touches everything. But Johnson, 50, who played 16 seasons in the N.B.A. and coached for parts of seven more with the Dallas Mavericks and the Nets, is not daunted by that fact; rather, he intends to use it to improve his team’s popularity and fortune.“We’re going to leverage the success of football,” Johnson said in an interview in his recently renovated office. Since then, the Tide have gone 7-2 as they seek to make the N.C.A.A. tournament for just the second time in 10 seasons.Johnson’s approach is being replicated across the Southeastern Conference as its members, flush with football money, begin to shower a healthy slice of the cash on basketball. This season alone, the conference welcomed several prominent coaches — not only Johnson but also Mississippi State’s Ben Howland, formerly of U.C.L.A. and Pittsburgh, and Tennessee’s Rick Barnes, formerly of Texas.The result could be that in a few years, the SEC takes a place among the men’s basketball conferences commensurate to its status in football, where it arguably rules the roost both competitively and financially.SEC programs have had basketball success before. Arkansas and Florida have combined to win three national championships, and there is always the Big Blue elephant in the room: Kentucky, an eight-time N.C.A.A. tournament champion, a 46-time regular-season SEC champion and the college basketball program with the most wins ever. But the last SEC team to make it to the Final Four besides Kentucky or Florida was Louisiana State in 2006 — Mississippi State was the last before that, in 1996 — and a more competitive conference from top to bottom could profoundly alter the sport’s landscape.“We’re successful in every sport we compete in as a conference,” said Scott Stricklin, Mississippi State’s athletic director. “There’s absolutely — with the resources we have, the geographic footprint and talent available, the commitment we have from our fans — no reason for us not to be good in men’s basketball.”Perhaps nobody exemplifies that swagger like Texas A&M Coach Billy Kennedy, who promised in March that the Aggies would earn an N.C.A.A. tournament berth in 2016 — their first in five years.This season, Kentucky and Texas A&M are ranked in The Associated Press’s Top 25, with South Carolina and Vanderbilt lingering. The Aggies edged Gonzaga, then ranked 10th, on Nov. 26 and routed No. 16 Baylor on Saturday. Last month, Alabama defeated Wichita State and Notre Dame, both of which were ranked at the time. Louisiana State boasts perhaps the country’s best player in the freshman Ben Simmons, who is widely expected to be the first overall pick in the coming N.B.A. draft. And next year, the SEC will supplement Kentucky’s typical haul of top recruits with the nation’s sixth-, 11th- and 17th-best classes (Mississippi State, Alabama, Auburn), according to the composite rankings listed at 247Sports.com.But success will not come cheap. Alabama is paying Johnson $2.8 million per year through 2021, nearly $1 million more a year than it paid its previous coach, Anthony Grant, whose firing cost the Crimson Tide another few million. Howland’s salary is double that of his predecessor, Rick Ray. And where Auburn had paid Tony Barbee $1.5 million a year, it pays his replacement, Bruce Pearl, $2.45 million a year, in addition to a $500,000 bonus. (Pearl achieved success at Tennessee before the N.C.A.A. effectively suspended him for three years for lying in the course of an investigation into recruiting violations.)Several SEC programs have commenced pricey upgrades to their facilities. Florida plans to spend $64.5 million on its arena. Arkansas just opened a $25 million practice center.It is no secret where the spare change comes from: The SEC Network, the College Football Playoff and conference expansion have all raised revenues, a large majority tied to football. From 2013 to 2014 — not including individualized revenue sources like ticket sales and donations — the conference’s take increased to $436.8 million, or $31.2 million per member, from $292.8 million, or $20.9 million per member.But just as important is the exposure that the SEC Network, which began airing programs in August 2014, provides. The network allows every men’s conference game to be televised nationally, a powerful recruiting tool. Last season, it broadcast 118 SEC men’s basketball games, compared with only 68 combined across the network’s corporate siblings ESPN, ESPN2 and ESPNU, according to a spokeswoman from the ESPN-owned SEC Network. “There’s so much more visibility,” Howland said in an interview. “We’re so easy to watch. And it’s being produced and directed by ESPN.”Even Kentucky Coach John Calipari, who requires little assistance in recruiting, has acknowledged the benefits.“Every game’s on national television,” he said on the network as part of a televised panel. In March — perhaps prompted by the experience of watching Auburn, in its first season under Pearl, advance to the conference tournament semifinals — Alabama Athletic Director Bill Battle began a search for a new coach of his own. After unsuccessfully pursuing one candidate — widely reported to be Wichita State’s Gregg Marshall — Battle consulted several basketball-savvy confidants as well as experts like San Antonio Spurs Coach Gregg Popovich and settled on the high-energy, telegenic Johnson.Before the season, Battle was already praising Johnson’s salesmanship.“He invited all the presidents of the fraternities and the sororities, fed them pizza, went around one by one and made them shake his hand, tell him they were coming and going to bring people,” Battle said. “He’s great.”For the first time, Alabama held a Tide Tipoff rally at Coleman Coliseum on campus, an event modeled after Kentucky’s annual Big Blue Madness. Johnson also spoke at a rally the night before the football team’s homecoming game, demanding 15,000 fans for the basketball team’s home opener, against Kennesaw State. The game ended up drawing an announced crowd of 14,970 — the largest for a home opener since 1989, when the Tide’s opponent was North Carolina.At an exhibition game against Division II Trevecca Nazarene the week before, a smaller crowd flecked in houndstooth — an eternal tribute to the former Alabama football coach Bear Bryant — had exhibited a passion that many regulars identified as new.Alex Tucker, a junior from Decatur, Ala., said of last year, “No one showed up,” and added, “I don’t know much about basketball; I just know we haven’t been great.”Alabama coasted to an 87-65 victory in the exhibition, with Trevecca Coach Sam Harris expressing astonishment at how much faster Alabama had played compared with last season. By contrast, Johnson, in a three-piece suit and cuff links, expressed dismay that his team had not played fast enough.But first, upon sitting down to the microphone, he expressed the mildly frustrated determination of the big-time college basketball coach. “Well,” he said, “Roll Tide.”Advertisement