By BILL PENNINGTONDEC. 20, 2015
EAST RUTHERFORD, N.J. —  On the third play of the Giants’ game with the Carolina Panthers on Sunday, wide receiver Odell Beckham Jr. dropped a near-certain touchdown pass. It seemed a premonition for the browbeaten Giants, and Beckham, the focus of the team’s offense, did not catch a pass in the first half.But nothing would have foretold just how rattled, uncontrolled and overwrought Beckham would be by the third quarter. By then, a harried Beckham had committed three personal fouls, dangerous penalties that may yet get Beckham, the Giants’ most dazzling player, fined or suspended by the N.F.L.At that point, Beckham appeared to embody his team’s disorderly unraveling in a pivotal game that the Panthers led by 28 points in the third quarter.Predictable outcomes, however, are hard to come by this season for the Giants. Led by Eli Manning, the woebegone Giants were resurrected and astonishingly charged back — with Beckham’s help — to tie the game with slightly less than two minutes left in the game.AdvertisementEvery Giants fan must have sensed what would happen next. The Panthers swiftly and convincingly sliced through the Giants’ defense, kicking a 43-yard field goal as time expired for a 38-35 victory that kept Carolina undefeated through 14 games.AdvertisementFor the Giants (6-8), it was the sixth time this season that the deciding points in a loss had been scored in the final 90 seconds of a game. The defeat also ensures that the Giants, and Coach Tom Coughlin, will have a third successive season without a winning record. The team’s chances of a playoff spot are remote.The Giants had tied the game with a 28-point comeback, and their defense had shut down the Panthers in their past two possessions. Now with less than a minute to play in the fourth quarter, the Panthers were trying to set up a field goal, but at the Giants’ 47-yard line, they were out of range. Then wide receiver Ted Ginn Jr. burst into the open for a 12-yard reception, leaving the Panthers facing a dicey 53-yard attempt. But after an incompletion, Carolina quarterback Cam Newton scrambled for 10 yards, setting up a 43-yard field goal as time expired. 
		That is the number of yards Carolina gained on the ground, 100 of them credited to Newton, who averaged 12.5 yards on eight carries.The Giants play a Sunday night — and outdoor — game at Minnesota. The Giants will be hoping they have not been eliminated from the chase for a playoff berth by kickoff against the Vikings.In the aftermath, the depressing reality of their situation left the Giants not only thunderstruck but staggered. The stirring 28-point comeback mattered little because it led to yet another loss in the final seconds. And the dramatic Beckham subplot, which included vengeful hand-to-hand combat with Carolina’s top cornerback, Josh Norman, had the team backpedaling.Coughlin, who said that Beckham had lost his composure, was asked repeatedly if he had considered taking Beckham out of the game to calm him down, especially after two unnecessary-roughness penalties in three plays.Coughlin at first indicated he did not want to remove Beckham from the game. A couple of minutes later, he called it a “strong consideration.”Asked if he was worried that overly emotional play could derail Beckham’s career, Coughlin answered: “As I said, we have made great progress along those lines. Today was a step backwards.”Coughlin then suggested that leaving Beckham in the game was meant to help his maturation.“He’s got to learn at some point how to deal with some things on the field,” Coughlin said.Beckham declined to specifically address the actions that led to his penalties. Asked if he was concerned he might be ejected from the game, Beckham said: “No, we are out there playing football. We are competing.”AdvertisementHe continued, “You know, always the second man gets called.”When Carolina Coach Ron Rivera was asked if he had considered taking out Norman, who was usually covering Beckham, Rivera’s response echoed Coughlin’s.“If they pulled Odell out, I would have pulled Josh out,” Rivera said. “Josh has got to learn to play through those things.”With Beckham initially a nonfactor in the game — he did not catch his first pass until roughly five minutes remained in the third quarter — the Panthers built a comfortable 35-7 lead.They built that advantage on the incomparable dual-threat abilities of quarterback Cam Newton, who had 340 passing yards, 100 rushing yards and five touchdown passes without an interception.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Newton helped break open a 7-7 game late in the first half when he faked a run around the end and then tossed a 37-yard touchdown pass to tight end Greg Olsen, who was open because Giants safety Cooper Taylor sprinted up to stop Newton on the play. About two minutes later, Newton’s third touchdown pass gave the Panthers a 21-7 halftime lead.The Giants were no more of a factor in the early parts of the second half, and Carolina steamrollered to its 28-point lead. While the Giants’ running attack had one of its best games this season, the rest of the offense was stagnant without Beckham, who tried to trip Norman after one play and drew a personal-foul penalty.Two plays later, Beckham came back after a running play and appeared to instigate a helmet-to-helmet collision with Norman, a maneuver that was whistled for unnecessary roughness and started a fracas on the field.Beckham, who was violently trading blows with Norman on multiple plays, had already been called for unnecessary roughness early in the second quarter on a running play when he and Norman tangled on the right side of the formation. Norman had also been penalized for unnecessary roughness.
            The Giants’ loss to Carolina on Sunday was the latest in a series of late collapses.        With 1 minute 43 seconds left in the fourth, the Giants, leading by 3, were at the Dallas 1-yard line. On third down, they mystifyingly shunned a clock-eating running play, and with no receiver open, quarterback Eli Manning threw the ball away, stopping the clock. The Giants settled for a field goal. The Cowboys responded with a six-play drive capped by Tony Romo’s 11-yard touchdown pass to Jason Witten with 7 seconds to play. With the Giants leading by 10 points in the third quarter, Manning was steps from the end zone when he was sacked and fumbled the ball. The Falcons responded with two touchdowns, including Devonta Freeman’s decisive 2-yard run with 1:14 left in the fourth.The Giants were ahead by a touchdown when Saints quarterback Drew Brees threw a 9-yard scoring pass with 41 seconds left. They then ran three plays but were forced to punt with 20 seconds to play. Marcus Murphy’s 24-yard return featured a fumble that led to a face mask penalty, giving the Saints the ball at the Giants’ 32. Kai Forbath kicked a game-winning 50-yard field goal on the final play.The Giants took a 26-24 lead on Josh Brown’s 29-yard field goal, but that left Patriots quarterback Tom Brady 1:47, enough time to engineer a drive that ended with Stephen Gostkowski’s winning 50-yard field goal with 1 second left. The Jets scored 10 unanswered fourth-quarter points to tie the game, kicked a field goal on the opening possession of overtime and then watched as Giants kicker Josh Brown, who had not missed a field-goal try in nearly a year, hooked a 48-yard attempt left, ending the game.  At that juncture in the third quarter, Manning approached Beckham.“I just told him, ‘Let’s get back to playing football,’ ” Manning said. “ ‘Play football and play the game. Don’t get caught up in this.’ I think he was able to dial back in and make some big plays for us.”AdvertisementThe Giants’ rejuvenation began when tight end Will Tye caught an 8-yard touchdown pass to cut the Carolina lead to 35-14. A 38-yard touchdown run by running back Rashad Jennings early in the fourth quarter made the score 35-21.Suddenly, anything seemed possible.A Newton fumble deep in his own territory brought the MetLife Stadium fans to their feet. Soon, Manning, who completed 29 of 46 passes for 245 yards and four touchdowns, tossed a screen pass to Shane Vereen, who bulled into the end zone for an 8-yard touchdown that cut the Panthers’ lead to 35-28.The tying drive featured a pivotal 40-yard reception by Beckham. Later, on a fourth-down play, Manning was under pressure in the pocket but lofted a nifty, precise pass to the back left corner of the end zone. Beckham ran under the ball and made a diving catch for a 14-yard touchdown that tied the game, 35-35, with 1 minute 46 seconds remaining.But as in so many Giants games this season, their defense could not keep the opposition from moving into position for a late game-winning score. Newton completed three passes and scrambled for important yardage twice. Graham Gano nailed the 43-yard field goal that sent the stunned Giants retreating to a losing locker room yet again.As his players solemnly digested the defeat, Coughlin was asked if the last-minute defeats felt like stomach punches.“Sometimes lower,” Coughlin said.A version of this article appears in print on December 21, 2015, on Page D1 of the New York edition with the headline: Wild Day Has Predictable End for Giants.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.