By ROB HUGHESDEC. 20, 2015
LONDON — Even when he is out of the game, José Mourinho is up front, on screen and pitching for his next big role in management.The coach was fired by Chelsea on Thursday. By Saturday, he was prominently seated at the first game to be televised that day in England. And though his lips were sealed because of his buyout deal with Chelsea, word quickly spread that he is in no need of a sabbatical: He is fit, fresh and eager for the next truly big job that might be worthy of his talents.Mourinho is aiming at Manchester United, and the current manager there, Louis van Gaal, knows it. The fact that van Gaal is a friend who once hired and mentored Mourinho does not assuage the fear that the ambitious younger man is looking for employment.“Yes, I worry about my job,” van Gaal said late Saturday after his Manchester United team had embarrassingly lost at home to Norwich City, 2-1. “Because I know,” van Gaal went on, “that belief in a manager is very important, and when you lose games, the belief in a manager will decrease. That is happening now. I cannot close my eyes to that.”AdvertisementChelsea, meanwhile, was winning again. In the first game of the post-Mourinho era at Stamford Bridge, there was a surreal atmosphere to Chelsea’s 3-1 victory over Sunderland. Chelsea had scored just two goals in its last five games under Mourinho, but it was up by two against relegation-haunted Sunderland within 13 minutes of the start.AdvertisementThe crowd, though, was divided. Some of the fans were holding up cardboard cutouts of Mourinho. Some were hissing and booing toward the owner, Roman Abramovich, who sat beside Guus Hiddink, the veteran Dutch coach who has accepted the job as Chelsea’s interim manager through the end of this season. Didier Drogba, the onetime Chelsea goal scorer who is being tipped as a future coach, was there as well.And as the first goals went in, off a header from Branislav Ivanovic followed by a superb shot into the top corner by Pedro Rodríguez, some spectators were busy booing selected players.Ivanovic had been given this burlesque mockery. Cesc Fàbregas and Diego Costa were getting it, too. Even Oscar, the Brazilian who had been in and out of Mourinho’s lineups and who was running Saturday’s show with his eager midfield skills, was subjected to intermittent abuse.Mourinho wasn’t there. He purposefully wasn’t at any Premier League game, but chose instead to watch Brighton against Middlesbrough in the next division down. The explanation from his representatives was that he loves soccer and chose this game to avoid speculation and to show support for Middlesbrough Coach Aitor Karanka, who was Mourinho’s assistant at Real Madrid.Chelsea is paying Mourinho to stay away, and all the while, one word that Mourinho used after his final defeat with Chelsea has been festering. That word was “betrayed.”Last Monday, after a 2-1 loss to Leicester City, Mourinho said on television that he felt betrayed by players who had disregarded his detailed instructions for how to stop Leicester from scoring.Mourinho’s postgame comments were tantamount to his application for his next job. It wasn’t he who failed against Leicester, it was players who did not carry out orders. The word is also out that Mourinho did not have full control over which players Chelsea acquired during his stay as coach.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.How disingenuous this is to Leicester City. Its team has scored against everybody since the start of the season. Leicester, which won again on Saturday against Everton, has now completed the unprecedented feat of entering Christmas Day in first place after it was in last place in the Premier League last Dec. 25.AdvertisementIt cannot be overtaken in first, no matter who wins Monday’s game in London between its closest challengers, Arsenal and Manchester City.What can stop Leicester’s incredibly spirited rise above these big boys? Chelsea is one of the opponents that has the money to try to tempt Leicester to sell either of its two shooting stars, Jamie Vardy and Riyad Mahrez.Leicester Manager Claudio Ranieri has advised the team’s Thai owners against selling anyone. Ranieri, in fact, wants to buy during the January transfer window. He has only been back in England since last summer, but more than a decade ago Ranieri built the Chelsea team that gave Mourinho his first English title during his first stint with the club.What Ranieri is now trying to say is that Leicester has something special, an extraordinary team unity. He has traveled the world as a coach and never come across a more spirited locker room.This could be Leicester’s one, and only, chance in its history to win a title. It is enhanced by the managerial turmoil at the bigger clubs.Chelsea has set this in motion by firing Mourinho. Manchester United is getting close to panic, not simply because van Gaal’s team has failed to win in six games in the Premier League and the Champions League, but because his methods are proving dull to audiences who expect a more adventurous style at Old Trafford.Mourinho is an opportunist waiting for the next big vacancy. But he is not the truly special one that the rich owners are looking for. That would be Pep Guardiola, the former Barcelona coach and current Bayern Munich coach.Munich confirmed Sunday that Guardiola will leave after this season, and be replaced by Carlo Ancelotti. Manchester City is the favorite to get Guardiola, but United, Chelsea, even Arsenal have been on his radar.Mourinho is out there, but for once he might be somebody’s second choice.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.