AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressIslanders Coach Jack Capuano had been waiting for the captain, John Tavares, to break out of his scoring slump, and that patience paid off Monday night.Tavares had two key assists 43 seconds apart in the first period of a 5-2 home victory over the Anaheim Ducks. Tavares’s assists on Islanders’ second and third goals were his first since a 3-1 win over the Philadelphia Flyers on Nov. 25, a stretch of 12 games.During that span, Tavares scored three goals.“It was just a matter of time,” Capuano said. “He got rewarded.”Tavares, the top pick in the 2009 draft, leads the Islanders in goals (13) and is second in assists (12) and points (25).“I know I need to be a lot better,” Tavares said. “I’ve been feeling a lot better, more like my game.”The Islanders ended their three-game losing streak and improved to 19-11-5. They also passed the idle Rangers for second place in the Metropolitan Division.Jaroslav Halak made 27 saves for the Islanders. Cal Clutterbuck, Travis Hamonic, Brock Nelson, Josh Bailey and Matt Martin scored.“I’m just trying to make plays,” Tavares said. “I’ve had some good games in this stretch and just haven’t gotten rewarded.”Anaheim dropped to 12-15-5 with its third loss in five games. Carl Hagelin and Josh Manson had goals for the Ducks, the N.H.L.’s lowest-scoring team.“You feel like you’re not going to score,” the Ducks captain Ryan Getzlaf said. “We have to be mentally stronger.”Frederik Anderson allowed three Islanders goals on 11 shots in the first period and was replaced by John Gibson before the start of the second. Gibson finished with 18 saves.“His decision,” Anderson said of Coach Bruce Boudreau’s opting to make the change.The Islanders swept the season series. They also defeated the Ducks, 4-1, on Nov. 13.Hagelin put Anaheim on the board 6 minutes 52 seconds into the game with his third goal of the season. It began with Hagelin attempting a shot that was blocked by Calvin de Haan, but Hagelin found the loose puck and snapped a quick shot that beat Halak.Anaheim had a lead, but the Islanders ended the period scoring three goals in a five-minute span. The Islanders pointed to Martin’s fight with Manson, after the Anaheim defenseman checked Islanders defenseman Nick Leddy.“It was the right thing to do,” Capuano said of Martin. “It gave us momentum.”And the Islanders took advantage.Clutterbuck equalized at 14:54 with his seventh goal of the season. He skated along the goal line before firing a shot that Anderson could not stop.The Islanders went ahead with a minute left in the period on Hamonic’s second goal of the season, and they extended their lead to 3-1 on Nelson’s wrist shot from the slot with 16.3 seconds left.Manson’s second goal of the season 7:32 into the third period cut the deficit to 3-2. But Bailey’s goal 2:03 later allowed the Islanders to regain their two-goal advantage. Martin’s empty netter with 2:33 left ended the scoring.“You get some goals, and it does wonders for you,” Tavares said. “We got some chances and a few goals. We were able to settle in.”Advertisement