AdvertisementSupported byN.B.A. RoundupBy The Associated PressRoughly 24 hours after one of their worst performances, the Nets produced one of their best.Brook Lopez had 21 points and 12 rebounds, Thaddeus Young added 16 points and 13 rebounds, and the Nets beat the Bulls, 105-102, in Chicago on Monday night to end a five-game losing streak.“We came in focused, we were energetic, and our bench did a great job of coming in keeping the energy high and responding to runs,” Lopez said. “We were all there for each other. We were pulling for each other.”It was quite a contrast from Sunday, when the Nets lost at home to Minnesota, 100-85.“We just did everything better,” Nets Coach Lionel Hollins said. “I thought we came out from the start with a lot of fight and purpose.”Wayne Ellington, coming off the bench for the Nets, shot 5 of 9 from the field and had 13 points.One disappointment for the Nets was that Joe Johnson, who was 10 for 38 in his last four games, continued to struggle, shooting 5 of 15. “He’s just not finishing some of the shots he normally finishes,” Hollins said. “That happens.”Jimmy Butler scored 24 points and Pau Gasol 20 for the Bulls, who lost their third straight and lost center Joakim Noah late in the third quarter with a left shoulder sprain.Butler, who was 11 for 20 from the field, said before the game that he did not regret critical comments he had made regarding the first-year coach Fred Hoiberg after a loss to the Knicks on Saturday. “I put a lot of it on myself now, because I have to lead better,” Butler said before the Nets game.Hoiberg said he was surprised his team did not respond with a better effort against the Nets.“It’s very disappointing,” he said. “This is a tough loss. You have to win your home games. We’ve dropped a couple in a row now. It’s a bad, bad loss.”The Nets led by 12 at one point and took an 85-78 advantage into the fourth quarter. Chicago opened the period with 4 quick points to cut the gap to 85-82, but the Nets responded with a 9-2 spurt.The Bulls rallied again, and Gasol hit a pair of free throws with 20.9 seconds left to leave the score at 101-99.With the shot clock off at that point, the Bulls had to foul, and Jarrett Jack sank both free throws to give the Nets a 103-99 edge with 10.6 seconds to go. Lopez then blocked a shot attempt from Butler, grabbed the loose ball and was fouled with 4.8 seconds remaining. He sealed the result with a pair of free throws. Butler then hit a meaningless 3-pointer with a tenth of a second left.“Butler made some tough shots, obviously, but for the most part we stuck together and clamped down defensively, limiting them to one shot,” Lopez said. “That gives you a lot of confidence when you’re coming down the other end in control of the game.”SPURS 106, PACERS 92 Kawhi Leonard had 24 points, and San Antonio surged past Indiana to remain undefeated at home, at 16-0. David West had 7 points and 5 rebounds in his first game against the Pacers since he left in the off-season to sign with the Spurs.ROCKETS 102, HORNETS 95 James Harden scored 36 points, and Houston won at home after squandering a double-digit fourth-quarter lead.HAWKS 106, TRAIL BLAZERS 97 Dennis Schroder scored 18 points for host Atlanta, which won its fourth straight. Schroder, Atlanta’s backup point guard, lost a tooth cap in a collision, he said, but he casually slipped it into his sock and remained in the game.The Trail Blazers’ starting guards, Damon Lillard (plantar fasciitis) and C. J. McCollum (sprained ankles), sat out, Lillard for the first time in his career.WIZARDS 113, KINGS 99 John Wall was just 4 for 15 from the field but had a career-high 19 assists, Martin Gortat had 27 points and 16 rebounds, and Washington won at home even though injuries limited Coach Randy Wittman to using only eight players.CELTICS 113, TIMBERWOLVES 99 Kelly Olynyk scored 19 points, Jae Crowder had 18, and Boston ended a three-game losing streak with a home victory, during which the crowd begged to see Minnesota’s Kevin Garnett, who played for the Celtics for six seasons.Timberwolves Coach Sam Mitchell said before the game that Garnett, 39, would rest because the team had played Sunday against the Nets. The crowd chanted, “We want K. G.!” close to a dozen times.JAZZ 110, SUNS 89 Gordon Hayward scored 24 points as Utah cruised to a home victory.Advertisement