AdvertisementSupported byMagic 107, Knicks 99By Scott CacciolaDespite playing lackluster defense and leaving the 3-point line vacant for the Orlando Magic for much of Monday night, the Knicks had opportunities at Madison Square Garden. Opportunities to improve their defense. Opportunities to take the lead. Opportunities to leave the building with a winning record.The Knicks wasted them all in a 107-99 loss that ended their four-game winning streak.“We had to play uphill the whole night,” Coach Derek Fisher said. “Anytime we kind of got right there to the edge, they would make a tough shot or we’d turn it over or we wouldn’t come up with a loose ball. They capitalized on it. It’s tough when you’re relying on every bounce to go your way.”The Magic (16-12) led from start to finish. They shot 51.2 percent from the field and, more important, 45.5 percent (10 of 22) from 3-point range.The Knicks (14-15) leaned heavily on Lance Thomas, who did just about everything in the second half. He led a big surge in the third quarter when it looked as if the Magic were about to pull away. Then, in the fourth, Thomas drove for a layup, trimming Orlando’s lead to 1. But the Knicks’ momentum evaporated.Nicola Vucevic, who made a layup to initiate a big closing run for the Magic, finished with 26 points on 13-of-19 shooting.“We lost,” said Thomas, who made all nine of his field-goal attempts, finishing with 24 points off the bench. “There are no moral victories. I hate losing.”Robin Lopez, who was responsible for defending Vucevic for much of the game, said he had probably erred by giving Vucevic room to roam free along the perimeter. Vucevic made shot after shot.“I think he hit some tough shots, but some of them were too easy,” Lopez said, adding: “I don’t know if I offered enough resistance frequently enough. That’s all on me.”Carmelo Anthony had 23 points for the Knicks, but he told reporters after the game that he had sprained his right ankle.“I was trying to get it worked on, tried to keep it loose, tried to get back out there,” said Anthony, who scored 15 points in the first half before the injury.Asked about his status for Wednesday’s game against the Cleveland Cavaliers, Anthony said, “It’s hard to tell at this moment.”The Magic and the Knicks were familiar opponents. On Nov. 25, Orlando dealt the visiting Knicks a 100-91 loss. It was the first game in which Scott Skiles, the Magic coach, decided to bring Victor Oladipo off the bench. Skiles wanted more scoring punch from his reserves. The move was a success at the time, and it has remained one.The Magic have won 10 of their last 14 games. After losing on Sunday to the Atlanta Hawks, the Magic looked energized from the start, running out to a 52-46 lead at halftime.The Magic led by as many as 9 in the third quarter, but the Knicks refused to wilt — at least not until late in the fourth.“We didn’t get the stops at crucial points in the game,” Thomas said. “It’ll come. We’re going to figure it out.”Kristaps Porzingis struggled again, finishing with 9 points and shooting 3 of 12 from the field. Over his last seven games, he has averaged 7.9 points and 5.4 rebounds while shooting 29 percent. Porzingis said his mechanics felt fine.“Just not falling,” he said. “Maybe a little off balance. Maybe I need to take my time a little bit more. Maybe I need to be focused a little more. All those little things add up. Sooner or later, they’ll start to fall again. I’m not too worried about that.”Early in the second half, Porzingis appeared to be a step slow on a defensive possession and quickly found himself stationed on the bench. He played sparingly down the stretch as Fisher favored Lopez’s size against Vucevic, which turned out to be a flawed plan, and Thomas’s scoring abilities, which were not enough.REBOUNDSKyle O’Quinn, who had been playing well off the bench for the Knicks, missed the game after spraining his right ankle in Saturday’s win over the Chicago Bulls. Derek Fisher said he was hopeful that O’Quinn would return Wednesday against Cleveland. ... DERRICK WILLIAMS, who had more than $600,000 worth of jewelry stolen from his apartment early Saturday, declined to answer questions about the theft.Advertisement