AdvertisementSupported byN.F.L. RoundupBy The Associated PressMatthew Stafford passed for 254 yards and three touchdowns, and the Detroit Lions held off a late surge by host New Orleans to defeat the Saints, 35-27, on Monday night.Detroit (5-9) raced to a 28-3 lead, but Drew Brees threw two touchdown passes — one after a Lions fumble — to help New Orleans (5-9) pull to 28-20 with about 10 minutes left.Detroit’s Joique Bell scored on a 1-yard touchdown run to put the game away.Brees passed for 341 yards and three touchdowns, becoming only the fourth quarterback to surpass 60,000 yards in a career while also eclipsing the 4,000-yard mark for the 10th straight season.But the Saints’ loss guaranteed consecutive losing seasons for the first time since Sean Payton became coach in 2006.Golden Tate caught two touchdown passes for Detroit.BRONCOS STICK WITH OSWEILER Brock Osweiler remained the Broncos’ starting quarterback pending medical tests on his injured left shoulder, and Peyton Manning will try to return to practice Wednesday.On Monday, Broncos Coach Gary Kubiak said “nothing has changed” regarding his quarterback situation, a day after Denver blew a 14-point halftime lead for the second consecutive week and were defeated by the Steelers.Kubiak said that Osweiler was sore but that “all indications are that he’ll be O.K.”Osweiler was injured when he scrambled for 7 yards in the second quarter of Denver’s 34-27 loss at Pittsburgh.Manning has missed five weeks with a torn plantar fascia in his left foot.WOODSON TO RETIRE Raiders safety Charles Woodson will retire after 18 seasons.Woodson said he would end his career after the final two games of the season. He said he realized late last month that he could not play another season and wanted to announce his decision before playing his final home game Thursday night against the Chargers.Woodson was one of the top defensive backs to play the game. He is tied for fifth in N.F.L. history with 65 interceptions and is still playing well at 39. He has five interceptions and three fumble recoveries this season, ranking him second in the N.F.L. in takeaways.APPEAL IN BRADY CASE IS HEARD The N.F.L. told a federal appeals court that Commissioner Roger Goodell was well within his authority to suspend Patriots quarterback Tom Brady in the controversy surrounding improperly inflated footballs.The league made its arguments in a brief filed with the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit, in Manhattan. The court has been hearing an appeal of a judge’s ruling that nullified Brady’s suspension. It will hear oral arguments in March before issuing a decision.In papers filed this month, the N.F.L. Players Association argued that Goodell ignored the collective bargaining agreement when he upheld Brady’s suspension in July.The N.F.L. countered in its papers that the contract gave Goodell authority to discipline players for conduct “detrimental to the integrity of the game.”Advertisement