By BEN SHPIGELDEC. 21, 2015
Instead of going Christmas shopping, as he thought he might wind up doing, Todd Bowles spent much of Sunday at the Jets’ complex. He and his staff analyzed film from the Jets’ 19-16 victory over the Dallas Cowboys and then started to prepare for their rematch with the New England Patriots.Those responsibilities prevented Bowles from watching any of the Pittsburgh Steelers’ comeback against the Denver Broncos, whose loss after they led by 17 points foiled the Jets’ hopes of improving their playoff status. Despite sharing a 9-5 record with Pittsburgh and the Kansas City Chiefs, the Jets slipped behind them in the A.F.C. wild-card standings on tiebreakers.“You’ve got to win the last two games and just hope for the best — that’s all you can do,” Bowles said in a teleconference Monday. He added: “We’re just going to try to win those two games and make positive steps going forward. If the football gods deem that we’re worthy and somehow we win the last two games, maybe we will, maybe we won’t” — make the playoffs — “but you can’t worry about it because you can’t control it.”As Bowles said, the Jets are at the mercy of other teams. By this time next week, they will be preparing for a finale, at Buffalo, that could determine their presence in the postseason. Or they could be eliminated from contention, failing to reach the playoffs for a fifth consecutive season.AdvertisementThe only certain way to maintain relevance is to defeat the Patriots. Even if that happens, the Jets will need some assistance.AdvertisementWinning their final two games, and finishing the season on a six-game streak, would not guarantee the Jets a postseason berth. Pittsburgh, Kansas City or Denver would have to lose once. Only two 11-5 teams have missed the playoffs since the season expanded to 16 games in 1978, the 1985 Broncos and the 2008 Patriots.The Jets could slide in at 10-6 as long as one of those three teams lost their last two.According to the N.F.L., four A.F.C. teams can clinch a playoff berth in Week 16, but the Jets are not one of them. They could be eliminated, though, by a combination of results: a loss to New England coupled with victories by Pittsburgh (at Baltimore), Kansas City (versus Cleveland) and Denver (versus Cincinnati), which plays next Monday night. If the first three outcomes happen, chances are that Bowles will find a way to have the television on.There could surely be worse positions for the Jets — heading into their Week 16 meeting with New England last season, they were 3-11 — but it must frustrate them that winning the last four games has hardly improved their standing.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Chiefs keep winning, with eight victories in a row. So do the Steelers, who have won five of six. And now the Jets face an opponent vastly superior to the teams they have dispatched during this streak. Those four victories came against teams — the Miami Dolphins, the Giants, the Tennessee Titans and Dallas — that are a combined 18-38 this season. The A.F.C. East champions, the Patriots, are 12-2, and with a victory Sunday, they would clinch home-field advantage throughout the playoffs.“There’s a different feeling about the game; it’s not necessarily the Patriots,” Bowles said, adding; “We’ve got to give ourselves a chance. It doesn’t matter who we were playing this week — it would be an important game; it would be a big game.”The last time the Jets played New England, on Oct. 25, they held a 20-16 lead with less than eight minutes left but allowed two late touchdown passes by Tom Brady. That loss showcased a team struggling to handle late-game situations.Since then, the Jets have bungled away potential comebacks in losses to Buffalo and at Houston, but they went on to demonstrate impressive composure in comebacks against the Giants and Dallas, which led by 13-9 with nine minutes remaining. Until the Jets edged the Giants on Dec. 6, all six of their previous victories had come after they led at halftime or went ahead early in the third quarter.Across the fourth quarter and overtime against Dallas and the Giants, Ryan Fitzpatrick completed 71.8 percent of his passes (28 of 39) for 326 yards, two touchdowns and no interceptions. More than any Jets quarterback in years, Fitzpatrick has inspired confidence and belief among his teammates.“We’ve grown some,” Bowles said. “You have to play the game on Sunday to find that out.”That game will reveal whether the Jets are a potential force or if they have just beaten inferior opponents. It will decide their playoff viability. It will also be the most important of Bowles’s tenure, although he does not choose to view it that way.Advertisement“Hopefully, I have a long career,” he said, “and have bigger ones.”EXTRA POINTSTodd Bowles said the back contusion that sidelined linebacker David Harris for the final three quarters Saturday night should not jeopardize his availability for the New England game. Bowles said cornerback Dee Milliner, who strained his hamstring on special teams, was day to day.A version of this article appears in print on December 22, 2015, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: Chasing a Playoff Spot, the Jets Must Win and Hope.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.