AdvertisementSupported bySports of The TimesBy William C. RhodenThe N.F.L. did as expected Monday and suspended Giants receiver Odell Beckham Jr. for one game. Beckham’s behavior on Sunday, when a personal feud with Carolina Panthers cornerback Josh Norman became a brawl, was outrageous even by N.F.L. standards, and the only question was what took the league so long to act. Except that we know what took so long. After watching this organization bumble through scandal after scandal, we should know by now that protecting the N.F.L. shield comes first.The N.F.L. has mounted a high-profile initiative against concussions, so after the commissioner, Roger Goodell, watched a young star launch himself at the head of a defenseless opponent in a high-profile game involving an undefeated team, that young star had to go. But for only one game. If you’re doing the right thing, Beckham should have been suspended for the rest of the season. But that would have doomed the big-market Giants, one of the pillars of the N.F.L., to no postseason hope. Not a good look for the shield. What’s mysterious is how the feud between Norman and Beckham was allowed to escalate. In the aftermath of Sunday’s game, Giants Coach Tom Coughlin has been criticized. Why didn’t he sit Beckham when it became clear that the young receiver had become unglued?That’s easy. Coughlin was trying to win a game. During a conference call Monday, Coughlin said that he had been trying to let Beckham play through the emotion and learn — under pressure — about maintaining his composure.“There’s a young player that’s being educated that, quite frankly, is an excellent football player,” Coughlin said. “If we were to have a chance to win the game, I wanted him to be out there, I’ll be honest with you.” Asked if he regretted not having sat Beckham for a few plays or a quarter, Coughlin said: “I’m not talking about regrets. I regret we didn’t win.”I appreciate Coughlin’s candor. The coach is trying to save a job, trying to end the Giants’ playoff drought. Unfortunately, the shoulders on which the Giants’ playoff hopes rest belong to a young player who went emotionally haywire in a way that few of us had ever seen before Sunday. Norman had gotten so deeply into Beckham’s head that he had become an implant. To his great credit, Coughlin did not toss Beckham under the bus. He referred to Beckham’s great energy and enthusiasm. “He is an emotional young man,” Coughlin said. “He wears his emotions on his sleeve.”What we saw on Sunday went far beyond wearing emotions on one’s sleeve. It showed the malevolent side of a player we thought we knew. Beckham seems nice enough, but his eruption reinforced the reality that beyond the clubhouse and the locker room, we really don’t know the people we cover.In any event, the officials were just as culpable as Beckham and Norman. I would argue even more so because they have the power to throw players out of the game. They did not exercise that power. How did they continue to allow a well-documented feud between a high-profile receiver and an elite cornerback blow up into an embarrassment?How did the officials allow a Panthers practice player to step onto the field during pregame warm-ups near the Giants’ sideline with a baseball bat? Yes, I know that it’s a prop and a practice player used that bat in a menacing way to taunt Beckham, but how did officials not notice this and not stop it?Had the officials been following the Beckham-Norman “Hunger Games” narrative during the week, they might have been able to defuse the disruption way before the game. How about calling the players over during warm-ups and letting them know they would be ejected at the first sign of any nonsense?Shortly after Beckham dropped a sure touchdown pass early in the game, he and Norman got into a wrestling match — in front of an official. No calls. No warnings. With the players apparently emboldened by the officials’ live-and-let-live attitude, the personal battle escalated, driven largely by Beckham.During Monday’s conference call, Coughlin was asked what he hoped his young star had learned.I don’t believe Beckham has learned anything. This is his fourth misconduct incident.“I hope he learns exactly what should be learned: that there is no place in this game for these personal battles,” Coughlin said. “That it is team first, team last, team always, and nothing stands above that. And that he is responsible to his team and to his franchise, to his ownership, just as we all are.”We’ll see. Beckham has served notice to every defender in the N.F.L. that he is combustible and thin-skinned and does not respond well to adversity. But all the venom should not be directed at Beckham, Coughlin and the officials.Beckham deserves what he got, and I would have given him more. But Beckham is the product of a system in which talent trumps character and discipline. In a perfect world of Sunday school and Boy Scouts, Coughlin would have sat Beckham down. But Coughlin is the highly compensated prisoner of an industry in which winning at all costs is tacitly encouraged.And the officials have been allowed to work part time in what is clearly a full-time job. They are all symbols of an opulent, prosperous, increasingly soulless N.F.L., whose first instinct is to protect the shield, whose highest value is money.And we love the product. Too bad for us.Email: wcr@nytimes.com Advertisement