AdvertisementSupported byTV SportsBy Richard SandomirThere was little doubt Sunday that Giants receiver Odell Beckham Jr. had earned his bad-guy credentials as he punched, slapped and tripped his chief rival, Carolina cornerback Josh Norman. But when he launched a helmet-to-helmet hit in the third period — “He came flying in at the end of this play,” Joe Buck said — the Fox Sports crew suggested that his behavior had become worthy of ejection. “They just might throw him out of this game,” Troy Aikman said, and quickly added, “Coach Coughlin doesn’t tolerate this stuff.”Scorecard: They didn’t eject Beckham for three unnecessary roughness penalties. And while Coughlin doesn’t condone such behavior, he did not clearly demonstrate that during the game.Yet however embarrassing it was to witness Beckham’s meltdown in the first three quarters, he was allowed to play past his bad acts and contribute to the Giants’ stirring late comeback, which fell short in a 38-35 loss.“I don’t think you can get much uglier,” Mike Pereira, the former referee who is Fox’s in-house football rules maven, said after the helmet-to-helmet hit. “You’ve proven that flags won’t do the trick.”And, he said, there was “no maximum number of penalties that can eject you.”The N.F.L. did the officiating crew’s job on Monday by suspending Beckham for one game.Was the referee afraid of tossing out a marquee player like Beckham and being subjected to even more criticism and second-guessing than N.F.L. officials usually draw? Still, the officials should have known by the time Beckham speared Norman that a pattern had developed: Beckham was out to get that highly regarded cornerback without regard for incurring a concussion or breaking a jaw or cheekbone.“That’s a big-time blow,” said Aikman, who sustained concussions as a player. “I don’t get it.”Coughlin didn’t get it, either, at least as an exercise in optics. The Giants’ best offensive player had come unhinged. He was accumulating penalties and getting outplayed by Norman. And Coughlin appeared not to do anything to calm, or castigate, Beckham. While Coughlin gave him a talking-to at halftime, for the TV audience, Sean Ryan, the Giants’ receivers coach, was the designated therapist. At one time in his coaching career, a red-faced Coughlin would probably have stalked Beckham down the sideline and screamed at him in front of a national audience. But Coughlin is more avuncular and less emotional these days, and he left Beckham to talk to Ryan, which sent the wrong message. The vision of Coughlin’s counseling Beckham might have shown fans that his actions were intolerable.On NFL Network later that day, Willie McGinest said that as a rookie with the New England Patriots, he got into a similar situation on the field and was pulled aside by Coach Bill Parcells.“He took me out of the game for a few plays and had a conversation with me,” McGinest said. “He said, ‘I understand what you’re going through, but you’re hurting yourself because you’re not going to be out there, you’re going to get ejected or you’re going to get a penalty, and you’re hurting your teammates because you won’t be out there.’ ”Beckham’s behavior was visually mesmerizing, a running story as involving as the game would become as the Giants tied it at 35-35 before losing in the final seconds. My eye would try to see where he lined up, on the top or bottom of the screen, or in the slot; I’d follow him live as far as Fox would let me, to see if he began his route without incident or simply crashed into Norman. A couple of times, I’d see him on the periphery after a play, trying to instigate something. He seemed hellbent on seeking excessive or unnecessary contact. Beckham’s three quarters of dysfunction provided a feast for Fox. It showed replays of as many physical eruptions as its cameras could locate, starting with the one in the first quarter when he was so outraged that he removed his helmet and shouted. After a close-up showing his hand on Norman’s face mask later in the game, Aikman said, “Josh Norman is getting pounded each time, and he’s waiting for them to throw a flag. Not only will there be a penalty, there’s a chance he gets tossed.” Well, not a chance at all. So concerned was Fox that it not miss a fracas that it kept a small shot of Beckham on-screen during a game break when the network went to its Los Angeles studio for an update of scores.Reporting from the sideline, Erin Andrews brought some clarity to the Beckham-Norman battles. In the first quarter, she said that Norman was told by several members of the Panthers’ defense that “enough is enough,” and was told to stop engaging physically with Beckham. And in the fourth quarter, Andrews explained that Ryan had given Beckham a “talking-to” on the sideline, which prompted Beckham to apologize to his teammates and exhort them, saying, “We’re getting our tails kicked, and no one cares.”Beckham returned to his old form in the fourth quarter, scoring the tying touchdown against Norman before tearing his helmet off and leading the cheers at MetLife Stadium from a sideline bench. He thought he had the last laugh on Norman — who complained bitterly about something after the reception — until Graham Gano kicked the winning field goal with five seconds left.Email: sandor@nytimes.comAdvertisement