AdvertisementSupported byBy Bill PenningtonThe swift ascent of Odell Beckham Jr. in American sports culture has almost been like one of his acrobatic, physics-defying end zone catches — meteoric and captivating. But in the past two days, the incandescent Beckham has, at least, temporarily fallen back to earth with a stain on his shimmering image.The N.F.L. announced on Monday that it had suspended Beckham, the Giants’ sensational young receiver, for one game after a petulant contest on Sunday in which he repeatedly tangled with Carolina Panthers cornerback Josh Norman. The suspension was for multiple acts as Beckham was whistled for three personal fouls for unnecessary roughness. But the most glaring incident came in the third quarter, when Beckham, running at full speed, slammed his helmet into the side of Norman’s.In announcing the suspension, the league referred to the vicious collision as a flagrant hit against a defenseless player, “in which Beckham left his feet prior to contact to spring forward and upward into his opponent.”Beckham is appealing the suspension. Appeals are usually heard and decided within two days. If the suspension holds, Beckham will forfeit $52,529, or one-seventeenth of his 2015 salary of $893,009, and he will not be permitted to be around the team for any practices or functions until Dec. 28.But this is also the fourth time Beckham has been suspended or fined in his short career for violent acts or temper tantrums. In 2014, he was fined $10,000 for kicking Rams linebacker Alec Ogletree in a brawl-filled game in St. Louis. The same month, he was fined $11,025 for taking off his helmet and throwing it to the turf during a prolonged protest of a late tackle out of bounds. Early this season, Beckham was fined $8,681 for throwing a punch at Buffalo Bills safety Duke Williams.The N.F.L. said it was still reviewing the conduct of other players in the game for additional discipline, leaving open the possibility that Norman could be fined, although not suspended.The suspension, for Sunday’s road game against the Minnesota Vikings, is an embarrassment for Beckham, who in two seasons has become one of pro football’s most popular and celebrated players and the focal point of the Giants’ offense. His spectacular one-handed catches and entertaining end zone dances after touchdowns have made him a marquee name in sports and a frequent pitchman for commercial products across multiple media platforms. Beckham also graced the cover of Madden N.F.L. 2016, the best-selling sports video game.After the game, Beckham defended himself.“We are out there playing football,” he said. “We are competing. You are a competitor. I’m a competitor. We are always going to go at it.”Norman, however, was incensed by Beckham’s actions.“The guy took a shot at me I don’t know how many times,” he said. “To take a shot at a guy’s head, I mean, come on now. That’s kind of going a little bit too far.”Giants Coach Tom Coughlin on Monday both reprimanded and supported Beckham.“I will not defend his actions because they were wrong,” Coughlin said in a conference call with reporters. “But I will defend the young man and the quality of the person as long as I’m able.”Coughlin continued: “There are qualities that Odell brings to this football team the likes of which I’ve never seen. He has great energy, he has great enthusiasm, he gives great effort and he does it literally every day that he walks out on the field.”Coughlin called Beckham “emotional” and said curbing his on-field excesses was an ongoing process.Disciplining Beckham could not have been easy for the N.F.L., which moved the Giants’ next game, in Minnesota, to Sunday night from its original 1 p.m. scheduled start, in part to feature Beckham in prime time.In that game, the Giants may be trying to keep their playoff hopes alive. Just last week, Beckham received the most votes of any wide receiver from fans in the league’s Pro Bowl balloting. A Sunday night appearance would also have put Beckham in a highlighted spot for fantasy football contestants nationwide.Much of the buildup to the game against the Panthers centered on how Beckham, who has scored 25 touchdowns in 26 career N.F.L. games, would fare against Norman, Carolina’s top cornerback, who earlier this year limited the production of the top receiver on several other teams.The Beckham-Norman matchup quickly turned into a ferocious confrontation, with the two players clashing in hand-to-hand combat as Beckham unsuccessfully tried to get open for passes from Giants quarterback Eli Manning. Beckham and Norman exchanged forearms, shoves and openhanded punches. At one point, Norman picked up Beckham and threw him to the turf. No penalties were called.By early in the second quarter, with Beckham still without a catch, the battle grew more hostile.On a Giants running play, Beckham, who was far from the primary action, charged at Norman’s head with his hands and arms up. Norman answered with a blow to Beckham’s face mask as the two tangled for a few seconds. Beckham was called for his first unnecessary-roughness penalty after the play.Beckham finally made his first catch of the game with about five minutes remaining in the third quarter, but the Giants were being routed, 35-7, and Beckham still appeared to be irritated. After a second Beckham reception near the sideline, Norman made the tackle and stood over Beckham. As Norman began to walk away, Beckham tried to trip Norman by grabbing his leg.That drew a second unnecessary-roughness penalty on Beckham. Two plays later, Giants running back Shane Vereen ran up the middle for 19 yards. Norman and Beckham clashed briefly at the start of the play until Norman drifted over to the area of the field where Vereen was being tackled. Beckham, who had run upfield, suddenly turned and sprinted back toward the scrum. That is when he lowered his head for the helmet-to-helmet collision, which also was whistled for unnecessary roughness. Two plays after that scuffle, Norman was penalized for unnecessary roughness.Beckham’s actions may have been motivated, in part, by frustration with Norman’s smothering defense and his own failings. A minute and a half into the game, Beckham was clear with the end zone in sight, but he dropped a pass from Manning.But Beckham was the key to the final Giants drive, beating Norman for a touchdown to cap a comeback and tie the score at 35-35 with 1 minute 46 seconds left.Beckham finished the game with six catches on nine targets for 76 yards.Manning did not condone Beckham’s transgressions in the game, but he did go out of his way to stand behind Beckham, saying that Norman, who was generally the aggressor in the first quarter, was equally to blame.“I don’t think either one was in the right, but I didn’t think one was worse than the other,” Manning said in a conference call with reporters Monday.Manning was also offended that Norman took his criticism of Beckham to the news media after the game.“He cried a little bit,” Manning said. “I didn’t think that was really necessary. I think Odell took the higher road, and I’m proud of him for that.”Manning later did a little trash talking, although in his typically subtle way. He credited Beckham for regaining his composure later in the game, and then Manning mentioned that the Panthers were in a zone defense for almost the entire game — except for when Beckham caught a fourth-quarter touchdown pass.“It was probably the only time Norman played Odell man-to-man, and Odell beat him.”But the Panthers had the last laugh in the game, driving into field-goal range after that touchdown and winning, 38-35, to stay unbeaten and deal the Giants’ playoff hopes a major blow. Norman rubbed it in on Twitter.Buffalo players were critical of Beckham after the Bills lost to the Giants in a penalty-filled game in October.Cornerback Stephon Gilmore called Beckham “a prima donna.”Linebacker Preston Brown was more harsh, saying that Beckham was hitting players after the whistle at the end of plays.“That’s what he does — he’ll get away with it,” Brown told The Buffalo News. “He’s the golden boy of the league. He’s on the cover of Madden. Sometimes, you get away with stuff like that.”Victor Mather contributed reporting.Advertisement