By CHASE STUARTDEC. 21, 2015
Third down, 5 yards to go.The Pittsburgh Steelers led the Denver Broncos by 7 points with 1 minute 30 seconds remaining and had the ball at their own 46-yard line.Denver had just used its final timeout. Most teams would have run the ball in this situation. A conservative run, followed by a punt, would probably have given the Broncos the ball inside their 20 with about 40 seconds left.But unlike all other teams, the Steelers have Antonio Brown. Pittsburgh called for a pass, and Ben Roethlisberger found Brown for an 8-yard gain, allowing the Steelers to kneel to run out the clock in a 34-27 victory. It was the final reception in another marvelous game for Brown, who caught 16 of the 18 passes thrown his way for 189 yards and two touchdowns.When a receiver can convert 89 percent of his targets into catches while averaging 11.8 yards per catch, conventional coaching methods go out the window. Put simply, a pass to Brown is one of the surest plays in football.AdvertisementOver his last six games, Brown has 64 receptions for 868 yards and six touchdowns, and Pittsburgh has scored at least 30 points in each game. At this rate, he will earn strong consideration in the voting for offensive player of the year.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.With 116 catches through 14 games, Brown is 28 receptions from breaking the single-season N.F.L. record, set by Marvin Harrison in 2002. Brown is also nearing the single-season record for receiving yards, set by Calvin Johnson in 2012. Brown has 1,586 yards and needs 379 to break the mark. Given Brown’s dominant play and the poor pass defenses of Pittsburgh’s next two opponents, Baltimore and Cleveland, neither mark is out of reach.AdvertisementOf course, had Roethlisberger not missed time this year with an injury, Brown would have a much higher chance of breaking those records. In three games started by Michael Vick this season, Brown totaled just 11 catches for 111 yards and no touchdowns; Brown can match those numbers in about three quarters with Roethlisberger.Brown has been one of the best wide receivers in the N.F.L. for each of the last three years. He had 1,499 receiving yards in 2013 and 1,698 yards last year, and he will almost certainly set a career high this season. He and Jerry Rice are the only players with at least 1,499 receiving yards in three consecutive seasons, and he and Wes Welker are the only players with at least 110 receptions in three straight years.Given the number of great receivers in the game today, including some players who are flashier than Brown, it is easy to overlook his consistent run of greatness. But observers should not: He is currently producing at one of the best rates in N.F.L. history.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.