By ANDREW DASDEC. 21, 2015
If you took vacation this week, lucky you. Your first present arrives on Monday afternoon, gift-wrapped by your friends at NBCSN.If Chelsea is the Premier League’s raging Dumpster fire and Manchester United is the nervous nitroglycerin factory next door, then what are Arsenal and Manchester City? A pleasant distraction, that’s what.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Second-place Arsenal and third-place City meet on Monday afternoon in London (3 p.m. Eastern time, NBCSN) to determine who gets to be second to Leicester City on Christmas. (Yes, Leicester City, 5 points clear as of Monday morning, will sit atop the Premier League table at Christmas. What a time to be alive.)The result obviously has stakes in the title race, but also on the impending coaching carousel. The latest rumors? José Mourinho and Pep Guardiola to Manchester. Manuel Pellegrini to Chelsea. And Arsène Wenger? He never goes anywhere.The holiday is usually a soccer-free zone — perhaps the only day of the year on which there are no top-flight games — but this year there are a handful. The problem is, if you are up for a little East Riffa vs. Al Hala in the Bahrain Premier League, you are probably going to have to get updates from someone at the game. Stunningly, it’s not on TV.It’s a little grim, with leagues in France, Italy, Germany and Spain on breaks of varying lengths. But NBC will go all out with coverage of the Premier League’s busy Boxing Day schedule on Saturday. It starts with Stoke-Manchester United (7:45 a.m., NBCSN), a game Louis van Gaal could need to win to save his job, and ends with the first NBC Premier League doubleheader: Newcastle-Everton at noon and Southampton-Arsenal at 2:45 p.m.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.