By VICTOR MATHERSEPT. 30, 2015
It is familiar and disheartening news for Bulls fans. Derrick Rose is hurt. Again.A stray elbow from a teammate caught Rose in the left eye and he sustained an orbital fracture at the team’s first practice Tuesday. He was to have surgery Wednesday. There was no official timetable for his return, though there was hope, based on similar injuries, that he would be ready around the start of the regular season on Oct. 27.Rose’s career started with dazzling promise. In his third season, 2010-11, the team was 62-20 and advanced to the conference finals. Rose won the N.B.A.’s Most Valuable Player Award. Fans were thinking that a title, or even a dynasty, lay ahead.The next season, the Bulls tied for the best record in the league and seemed poised for the championship. But with a minute left in their first playoff game, Rose landed awkwardly and tore the anterior cruciate ligament in his left knee. Without him, the Bulls were eliminated by the eighth-seeded 76ers.Rose missed all of 2012-13. Late that season, he returned to practice, but wound up not playing, even in the playoffs. Many fans and news media members were critical of the decision. It was the end of the honeymoon for Rose and Chicago.AdvertisementRose returned for 2013-14, but after playing 10 games, he missed the rest of the season with a meniscus tear in his right knee. He missed 20 games last season with the same injury. He did return for the playoffs, where the Bulls lost, four games to two, in a creditable effort against LeBron James and the Cleveland Cavaliers.AdvertisementThe N.B.A. is a superstar-driven league, and the Bulls have all their eggs in Rose’s basket. Though they made a coaching change in the off-season, hiring Fred Hoiberg to replace Tom Thibodeau, their playing personnel is largely unaltered.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Jimmy Butler is still Rose’s backcourt mate, though the two have not always meshed. The big man Pau Gasol had an astonishing EuroBasket tournament this month, pulling Spain to victory nearly single-handedly. But he is 35. The leading scorers after those three, Aaron Brooks and Taj Gibson, are veterans unlikely to terrify opposition defenses, and Gibson is coming off ankle surgery.Bobby Portis, a forward from Arkansas, was drafted late in the first round, but is not expected to be a game-changer. Hoiberg may bring in a faster pace than Thibodeau’s deliberate style.Before Rose’s latest injury, the Bulls were generally considered along with Atlanta to be the main challengers for Cleveland’s Eastern Conference title.The optimistic view is that Rose is that rare commodity, a proven superstar. He will be 27 when the season starts, still in his prime. Even in losing to the Cavs last season, he led the team in scoring and assists, and had 25 and 30 in the Bulls’ two wins in that series. The rash of injuries he has suffered may be a run of extraordinary bad luck that is due to change. You can hardly fault Rose for catching an elbow in the wrong place.The pessimistic view is that Rose is simply injury prone and that his days as an M.V.P. or even a transcendent star are over. Rose also faces the worrying prospect of a lawsuit from a woman accusing him of sexual battery. He also rubbed some fans the wrong way Monday by openly speculating about becoming a free agent in two years.Perhaps Rose will be back in a mask for opening day, a rematch against the Cavaliers in Chicago. Perhaps he will show the form of his first few seasons and lead the team on a deep playoff run. In that case, the practice mishap will be a footnote.But if instead Rose falls into another pattern of injury, a random elbow will seem less like an accident and more like a portent of doom.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.