By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSDEC. 22, 2015
The Devils were hardly at their best Tuesday night. Thanks to a 132-second stretch of the first period, they got away with it.The Devils scored on three straight shots midway through the period, ending Jimmy Howard’s night, and held on for a 4-3 win over the Red Wings in Detroit.Kyle Palmieri had a goal and an assist for the Devils. Jordin Tootoo, David Schlemko and Sergey Kalinin also scored.Dylan Larkin, Mike Green and Riley Sheahan scored for Detroit.The Devils took the game’s first penalty when it was called for delay of game exactly midway through the first. Henrik Zetterberg took a holding penalty 37 seconds later, ending Detroit’s power-play chance.AdvertisementThe Devils scored on their power play, though. Palmieri fired the puck off the end boards, and the rebound bounced back at Howard. He was only able to knock it out in front of the net, and Palmieri snapped the rebound past him for his 14th goal at 12 minutes 5 seconds.Advertisement“I know how the boards are here, and I thought their guys were flat-footed and I could beat them to the net,” Palmieri said. “I got a lucky bounce, and I was able to put it in.”Just 42 seconds later, the Red Wings turned the puck over in their own zone. Andy Green slapped the loose puck toward the net and Tootoo, an ex-Red Wing, tipped it for his third goal.Schlemko made the score 3-0 at 14:17, beating Howard on a pass from Palmieri and giving the Devils goals on three consecutive shots.Red Wings Coach Jeff Blashill didn’t hesitate, yanking Howard in favor of Petr Mrazek.“That wasn’t all about goaltending, but we’ve got to do something to flip the momentum there,” Blashill said. “Jimmy has been really good for us all season, but this was a night where we had to make a change.”The game was the second-shortest of Howard’s career not involving an injury.“We got off to a good start and took advantage of some opportunities,” Devils Coach John Hynes said. “After that, we knew we were going to have to hold off Detroit’s storm.”The Red Wings got on the board late in the period when Larkin ripped a power-play shot over Schneider’s shoulder. Larkin leads all rookies with 13 goals, but this was his first career power-play goal.Detroit got a second power-play goal at 12:31 of the second, with Green one-timing a slap shot past Schneider for his second of the season.Advertisement“We did a lot of good things tonight, especially getting the two goals on the power play,” Zetterberg said. “There’s a lot here we can take into the break. We just needed to get two points out of this.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Devils regained a two-goal advantage early in the third when Kalinin beat Mrazek for his fifth of the season after Jakub Kindl’s turnover.Sheahan made the score 4-3 at 14:23, scoring his fourth of the season.The Red Wings pulled Mrazek late, but Niklas Kronwall was called for interference at 19:02 when Stephen Gionta threatened a breakaway on the open net.BLUES 2, BRUINS 0 Jake Allen stopped 32 shots for his fifth shutout, Vladimir Tarasenko and Robby Fabbri scored third-period goals and visiting St. Louis cooled off Boston with a victory.It was only the second regulation loss in 16 games for Boston (11-2-3). St. Louis posted its fifth win in seven games.The Bruins had won six of their last eight at home.Boston goalie Tuukka Rask made 27 saves, but lost in regulation for the first time in 11 starts after going 8-0-2.CANUCKS 2, LIGHTNING 1 Daniel Sedin scored the go-ahead goal in the third period, Jacob Markstrom made 26 saves and road-weary Vancouver beat Tampa Bay. Sven Baertschi also scored for the Canucks, who finished their road trip 2-3-1.Vancouver, which had one power play, allowed just one goal on 10 short-handed opportunities.Tampa Bay got a goal from Jonathan Marchessault.AdvertisementThe Canucks’ captain, Henrik Sedin, contributed an assist after missing two games with a lower-body injury. The starting goalie Ryan Miller, who left with cramping during the shootout of Sunday’s 5-4 loss at Florida, was scratched.WILD 2, CANADIENS 1 Jason Pominville and Charlie Coyle scored for Minnesota, and the Wild beat teetering Montreal to stick the Canadiens with their fifth straight loss.Daniel Carr spoiled the shutout bid by Darcy Kuemper by scoring between the pads with 7:14 remaining, giving the Canadiens some life. Kuemper and the Wild clamped down from there, dropping the Canadiens to 1-9 in their last 10 games.STARS 4, BLACKHAWKS 0 Patrick Sharp had a goal and an assist in his first regular-season game against his former team, leading host Dallas to a victory over Chicago.Sharp scored 11 seconds into the third period to give Dallas a 2-0 lead in what had been a game with few chances between the highest-scoring teams in the Western Conference.PANTHERS 2, SENATORS 1 Aleksander Barkov scored the winning goal in a shootout to lift streaking Florida over visiting Ottawa.Brandon Pirri also scored a shootout goal for Florida. Roberto Luongo stopped both Ottawa attempts to give the Panthers their fifth straight win.A version of this article appears in print on December 23, 2015, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: Devils’ Quick Attack Defeats Red Wings; Blues Shut Out Bruins in Boston.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.