By BILL PENNINGTONDEC. 22, 2015
 A day after he was suspended for one game by the N.F.L. for unsportsmanlike and dangerous play, Odell Beckham Jr. was the only Giant named to the Pro Bowl. Beckham was also the team’s lone representative in the Pro Bowl last season, when he was a rookie.The Pro Bowl rosters are chosen based on voting by players, coaches and fans.Two other Giants were named Pro Bowl first alternates Tuesday: Josh Brown, the place-kicker who until recently had not missed a field goal, and wide receiver Dwayne Harris, selected as a return specialist.Beckham, who has 91 receptions and 1,396 receiving yards this season, has appealed his suspension. The hearing on that appeal is expected to be held Wednesday, with a decision announced quickly thereafter.The circumstances that led to Sunday’s Giants game with the Carolina Panthers, in which Beckham was whistled for three unnecessary roughness penalties as he tangled repeatedly with cornerback Josh Norman, continued to have repercussions across the N.F.L.AdvertisementCarolina Coach Ron Rivera denied that his players threatened Beckham before the game or that they directed homophobic slurs at him.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Two Giants players said Beckham was taunted and threatened with a baseball bat that the Panthers had on the field.AdvertisementVideos have been posted on the Internet that show Beckham being restrained by teammates as he shouted toward the end of the field where the Panthers were warming up. But there was no audio of the budding confrontation or evidence of what started it.Rivera called the turn of events “somebody’s attempt at spin control.” He also labeled the situation a soap opera.“I’m a little disappointed in it, to be quite honest, because a lot of it has been assumptions and innuendos,” Rivera said. “We’ve not heard from Odell. He hasn’t released a statement. Their organization hasn’t released a statement. But I keep hearing all these things that everybody else is saying.”Rivera continued: “If there’s something out there that’s factual — if there’s truth, if there’s hard evidence, please present it to us as well, so we can react accordingly. We don’t tolerate that here.”Rivera also said he was going to put an end to a frequent Panthers pregame routine, which is bringing a baseball bat onto the field for warm-ups. It has been viewed as a motivational symbol. The N.F.L. issued a memo that reminded teams that no objects unrelated to game uniforms or playing equipment are allowed on the field before games.It was suggested that motivational objects, like a baseball bat, be left instead in the locker room.The A.F.C. and N.F.C. teams that will play in the Pro Bowl will be chosen at a later date, and there will be several additions to the rosters. For one, teams bound for the Super Bowl probably will have representatives who will be unable to play, and other Pro Bowl selections will withdraw with injuries.A version of this article appears in print on December 23, 2015, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Beckham Is Lone Giant Named to the Pro Bowl.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.