By JONATHAN GILBERTDEC. 22, 2015
BUENOS AIRES —  Seventy-five team directors had placed their votes in envelopes, and Argentine soccer was moments from electing its first new leader after 35 years under the rule of Julio Grondona, a strongman of Latin American soccer politics who died in 2014. But hope quickly turned to despair: The 75 votes somehow produced a 38-38 tie, a stunning rejection of basic mathematics.The botched election for the presidency of the Argentine soccer federation this month was viewed by many Argentines as a national disgrace. But in its dysfunction, it offered a view into the perils faced by the new figures battling to control the region’s influential soccer organizations in the wake of a sweeping corruption scandal, and how difficult it will be to coax leaders whom fans can trust out of what many consider a tainted talent pool.“I can’t trust any of them now — they’re all sullied,” said Patricia Rodríguez, 55, a travel agent, referring to Luis Segura and Marcelo Tinelli, the two candidates in the tied vote. “It’s such a shame, because I had great hopes.”Ms. Rodriguez’s comments could be repeated all over South America. Of the more than 40 defendants charged in the United States Justice Department’s broad investigation of corruption in world soccer, more than half hail from South America. Every country in the continent’s 10-member confederation, Conmebol, has had at least one senior soccer official charged in the case. The defendants include the past three Conmebol presidents, three former presidents of the Brazilian national federation and the current or former presidents of the federations of Bolivia, Chile, Colombia, Ecuador, Peru and Venezuela.AdvertisementIn Argentina, the federation’s presidential election was rescheduled for last Friday, but in a turn that further exasperated the country’s fans, Mr. Tinelli won a court order postponing the vote indefinitely. For the moment, talks are reportedly underway between the candidates about forming a crisis committee to lead the federation until a new president can be selected.AdvertisementMr. Segura, 73, has been the interim president since Mr. Grondona’s death. But because he had been a vice president at the federation for more than a decade, he is largely viewed as a fusty continuation of Mr. Grondona’s leadership. Mr. Tinelli, 55, a popular television host and a relative outsider at the federation, has been proposing increased transparency. But the chaotic election process left many in Argentina skeptical that either man could realistically carry through needed reforms.“They learned in Grondona’s shadow,” Javier Cantero, a former president of Independiente, one of Argentina’s so-called big-five teams, said of figures like Mr. Segura and some of the voters. Calling for overhauls that would make the federation’s dealings more open, Mr. Cantero added, “It’s a closed door locking in a putrid smell.”Mr. Grondona cemented power by negotiating lucrative TV and advertising contracts for the federation, then used its financial clout to exert influence over club directors, said Hernán Castillo, who has written a book about Mr. Grondona. After rising to the presidency in 1979, during a military dictatorship, Mr. Grondona was re-elected eight times. Only one candidate, Teodoro Nitti, a former referee, ever officially stood against him; Mr. Nitti won just a single vote.Allegations of corruption shadowed Mr. Grondona for years, but he was never convicted of a crime. Now, two of his closest aides are under house arrest — accused by the Justice Department of receiving kickbacks worth hundreds of thousands of dollars at a time from sports marketing executives in exchange for rights to the Copa Libertadores, South America’s premier club competition.The charges against the men, the former Conmebol general secretaries José Luis Meiszner, 69, and Eduardo Deluca, 75, emerged on the day of the fumbled election. To those in favor of reform, the tied vote was a perfect symbol of a resistance to change that they fear will thwart even the most basic reforms.“It’s a joke that they expect us to believe it was a mistake,” said Brenda Aznar, 26, a secretary for an accounting firm.In neighboring Brazil, the federation president, Marco Polo del Nero, and two of his predecessors, Ricardo Teixeira and José Maria Marin, have been indicted.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Marin, who was detained in Switzerland in May, agreed to be extradited to the United States. But after Mr. del Nero — who is accused of receiving kickbacks from sports marketing executives — took a leave of absence to defend himself in the case, there have been calls in Brazil for his resignation and a new election to replace him.AdvertisementThere will also be elections at Conmebol next month; the organization sank into disarray when Juan Ángel Napout, 57, its Paraguayan president, resigned after his arrest in Switzerland and extradition to the United States this month. Mr. Napout has denied receiving millions of dollars in the kickback scheme. His two predecessors in the post, Paraguay’s Nicolás Leoz and Uruguay’s Eugenio Figueredo, had been indicted in May.Hewing to pleas for reform, Wilmar Valdez, 50, the Uruguayan who was named Mr. Napout’s interim replacement until the elections, in which he will run, told the Argentine newspaper La Nación, “I want true change for South American soccer.”Fans on the continent have little faith in such pledges, pointing to a tainted generation of soccer leaders.“The possibility for change is there,” said Nicolás Lobos, 28, who manages a restaurant in Buenos Aires. “But it’s difficult to frame it from the perspective of officials, who often veer away from the hopes of fans.”Still, some observers said Argentines should be optimistic, highlighting the fact that there was a competitive election at all, even if it produced a comical result and will have to be repeated.“Soccer is the people’s sport, but the discussion was always a closed one,” said Ezequiel Fernández Moores, a sports columnist for La Nación. “At last, after 35 years of monopoly power, there’s a public debate.”A version of this article appears in print on December 23, 2015, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Botched Vote Reflects Trouble in Region .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.