AdvertisementSupported byBy Rebecca R. RuizOne of the soccer confederations at the center of the United States’ unfolding corruption case has started playing offense and, embracing the role of victim, has set out to reclaim tens of millions of dollars it says it lost through a kickback scheme orchestrated by its former leaders.Concacaf, the regional confederation overseeing soccer in North America, Central America and the Caribbean, sued in United States District Court in Los Angeles on Monday, accusing four corporations and two businessmen of a “clandestine, kickback-based and parasitic relationship” with two former Concacaf officials: Jeffrey Webb, who served as the confederation’s president, and Enrique Sanz, who was its general secretary.According to Concacaf’s complaint, in less than three years, Mr. Webb and Mr. Sanz steered at least $40 million in contracts for all Concacaf travel toward Cartan Tours, owned by David G. Elmore. In exchange, the complaint says, Mr. Webb and Mr. Sanz received kickbacks while manipulating internal presentations to keep fellow Concacaf officials from seeing how travel costs had ballooned; within two years, Concacaf said, expenses for the organization’s signature tournament, the Gold Cup, more than doubled.Concacaf is not suing either Mr. Webb — a convicted defendant in the Justice Department case whose name in the 42-page Concacaf complaint appears more than three times as often as Mr. Elmore’s — or Mr. Sanz, who has not been charged by the Justice Department but figures into its indictment as a co-conspirator. The allegations in Concacaf’s complaint have not surfaced in the United States’ indictment.The other defendants in Concacaf’s suit are three companies affiliated with Cartan Tours: Elmore Sports Group, iSports Marketing and Gant Travel.Daniel L. Gamba, an executive, was also sued.Cartan Tours called the Concacaf suit “baseless” on Tuesday, noting in an email that it “grossly distorts the parties’ business relationship in an effort to weave a tale that has no basis in fact.”The company said it planned to make its own claims for damages in response. The United States Attorney’s Office for the Eastern District of New York, which brought the FIFA case, declined to comment on whether its investigation had uncovered any evidence related to Concacaf’s suit.The suit signals Concacaf’s active embrace of the role of victim, which the United States assigned it in May, when the first set of charges in the case was unsealed. Federal prosecutors have portrayed FIFA, the governing body of world soccer, and regional confederations like Concacaf as hijacked entities that were deprived of their leaders’ honest services and harmed by their personal greed.Asked about the suit on Tuesday, Concacaf said in a statement that it would “seek restitution and other damages from those who cause harm to the confederation, no matter the person or organization.”Evan M. Norris, assistant United States attorney for the Eastern District of New York, said this month in Washington, as the Justice Department announced 16 new defendants in the continuing case, that it was too early to know the scope of all victims in the case, but he noted that he was hopeful “true victims” would receive forfeited funds.“It’s fair to say that certainly FIFA, Concacaf, Conmebol, soccer federations whose officials have engaged in bribery, are victims in this,” Mr. Norris said. “Their constituents — including the youth leagues and the other members of those bodies that rely on them for support — were harmed by the corruption of their officials and former officials.”To date, more than a dozen officials from the Concacaf region have been charged by the Justice Department with felonies, including racketeering, wire fraud and money laundering. Mr. Webb is one of 14 convicted people in the case; he is awaiting sentencing and has promised to pay more than $6.7 million to the government, according to prosecutors.Antonia M. Apps, a lawyer with Milbank, Tweed, Hadley & McCloy and a former federal prosecutor, said that it most likely would be futile for Concacaf to sue Mr. Webb for damages, given his status in the United States’ case.Ms. Apps said the government was sure to be careful about the way it distributes the money it collects from convicted defendants. So far, it has pledges of more than $190 million in forfeited funds, though only a fraction of that has been received.“Concacaf might have to make a case it’s a clean shop and it’s not going to give the money back to criminal participants,” she said. “If the government thought money was going to be siphoned back to bad actors, it would probably fight giving back any.”Advertisement