AdvertisementSupported byBy Karen CrouseINDIANAPOLIS — Like other fourth-grade girls, Courtney Bartholomew practiced a signature that reflected her future aspirations. But her mother recalled that while her friends scribbled the surnames of boys they had crushes on, Bartholomew, already hopelessly devoted to swimming, wrote “U.S.A.” at the end of her name.Bartholomew’s childhood dream of representing her country in an international competition was realized this month when she competed for the United States against Europe in the Duel in the Pool short-course meet here.Bartholomew, a decorated senior at the University of Virginia, wasted no time introducing herself to the wider world. In her first event, the 200-meter backstroke, she finished second to Katinka Hosszu of Hungary, one spot ahead of the American-record holder, Missy Franklin. Bartholomew also led off the winning 4x100 medley relay.The next day, she broke Natalie Coughlin’s four-year-old American short-course record in the 100 backstroke, beating a field that included Hosszu and Franklin, who had both raced in the 200 freestyle minutes earlier.“I actually went into the meet thinking I wanted to score 1 point for the U.S. the whole weekend, and I did it my first race,” Bartholomew, 21, said. “It was kind of hard to process.”It was a dazzling debut and also, quite possibly, her national team swan song. Bartholomew’s international career may have the life span of a mayfly because of the calculus of world-class swimming.Bartholomew, who is on an athletic scholarship, cannot afford to continue swimming for long beyond the N.C.A.A. championships in March. A runner-up in the 100- and 200-yard backstrokes at last year’s N.C.A.A. championships, Bartholomew has helped the Cavaliers’ women’s team, fifth last year, to its first No. 1 ranking in the College Swimming Coaches Association of America national poll.“If I don’t have any endorsements or sponsorships next year, I’ll have to enter the world of real adults,” she said.Until her performance here, Bartholomew’s plan was to bow out after the N.C.A.A. championships. The United States Olympic trials, which will be held in Omaha from June 26 to July 3, were not on her radar.“After N.C.A.A.s, I thought maybe I’ll be done and enjoy the spring like a normal senior,” Bartholomew said.With a top-two finish in either backstroke event at the trials, Bartholomew can secure a berth to the Rio Olympics and almost certainly a national training stipend reserved for those whose times rank in the top 12 in the world.But the Olympics are contested in a 50-meter pool, and Bartholomew, who is strong off the walls, has experienced more success in the 25-yard pools used in N.C.A.A. competition and the 25-meter courses favored in Europe, where her strong underwater kicking off the turns is a bigger asset.Bartholomew’s Duel meet times in the 100 and 200 backstrokes catapulted her into the top three in the world this year in the short-course rankings. She is outside the top 25 in both events in the long-course rankings. But under Virginia Coach Augie Busch, Bartholomew has made steady improvement.Busch, whose father, Frank, is the national team director, grew up on a pool deck but took a detour in college to play volleyball at Ohio State. The exposure to another sport shaped Busch’s ideas about training swimmers. His team’s weekly regimen includes jogging, spinning classes, yoga and running stadium steps.“I’m interested in making them more athletic, more aware of their bodies,” he said. “A pretty significant percentage of our training is out of the water.”Busch’s methods were a revelation to Bartholomew, who said she did no training outside the pool through high school. Under Busch, her backstroke has become more balanced and more efficient, which bodes well for long-course success.Bartholomew may never know how much more she can improve under Busch’s tutelage.She has a job lined up after graduation, as a sales representative for Oracle, the integrated cloud application and platform services company. After her fourth interview with Oracle, Bartholomew was offered the position the week before the Duel meet. Her swims in Indianapolis unsettled her short-term future like a cannonball off the blocks.“Duel in the Pool completely changed the timeline for how I felt the next few years were going,” said Bartholomew, who is scheduled to start her job on July 18. The Rio de Janeiro Olympics will run from Aug. 5 to 21 and will be followed by the lucrative European World Cup pro series, held in pools like the 25-meter course used for this month’s United States-Europe competition.Along with the American record, Bartholomew gained the confidence that she can compete with the world’s best. Busch cut back on her training leading to the Duel so she could secure her N.C.A.A. qualifying standards at a meet in Georgia the weekend before the international Duel. Bartholomew was rested for her national team debut, but that does not mean she was not weary.Before the start of the meet, Bartholomew, a double major in foreign affairs and media studies, had to finish and file a paper. Her hotel room had no Internet connectivity, she said, so she sat in the lobby, tuned out the myriad distractions and completed it. In between sessions of the meet, she studied for a Spanish final and made headway on another paper due after she returned to campus.Hosszu, who competed at the University of Southern California, has seen her times drop significantly since college, an improvement she chalks up to becoming “a 24-hour athlete.”How might Bartholomew fare in the pool without the added distractions and stresses of classes? It is an intriguing question, but it will be a moot point unless she can secure a swimsuit endorsement or some other sponsorship deal after college.Her parents, who have supported her swimming since she started at age 5, have contributed enough, she said.“It’s time for me to pull my own weight,” Bartholomew said.She will get no argument from her father, Charles, an architectural drafter, or her mother, Anne, a registered nurse.“I would certainly support her minimally, but not to the extreme,” Anne Bartholomew said. “It’s time for the real world. Swimming has gotten her to this point. It’s helped her get a double degree at the University of Virginia. You have to become a part of the work force at some point and start to give back.”Advertisement