AdvertisementSupported byBy Bill PenningtonEAST RUTHERFORD, N.J. — Giants coaches and players gather for the traditional start of their workweek every Wednesday morning, but this week, the meeting in the team’s auditorium was not about blocking, tackling or anything to do with football.On Monday night, the Giants’ locker room, meeting areas and training rooms had been scrubbed with disinfectant because tight end Daniel Fells had been hospitalized with methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus, or MRSA, a dangerous bacterial infection.At the Wednesday morning meeting, players concerned for their health had questions about how the team’s training complex had been sanitized and what additional precautions were being taken to prevent the spread of the infection. Practice resumed as usual afterward, but not before a gaggle of Giants doctors, trainers and health specialists tried to assuage the players’ worries.“Guys were taking it pretty seriously,” said cornerback Prince Amukamara, who was stricken with MRSA as a freshman at the University of Texas. “I know all about it. It was the worst. I was in bed for three or four days. I felt like I was almost paralyzed. It took me about a week to get better.”Linebacker Mark Herzlich, the Giants’ representative for the N.F.L. Players Association, said there was a MRSA protocol established for teams to follow.“It lays out what kind of precautions are to be taken, and that’s what the trainers and doctors were talking to us about today,” Herzlich said after practice. “There was the sanitization of the complex, and we use special soaps, and we’re reminded about various team policies to make the environment as clean and safe as possible.“We as players are reminded what the symptoms are, and it’s up to us to tell someone if we have any swelling, suspicious skin abnormalities or a fever. We have to say something and get treated, because it can be deadly.”Giants Coach Tom Coughlin said Wednesday that he had been told that Fells, who has been hospitalized for several days, could be released and allowed to go home Thursday. Originally dealing with an ankle sprain, Fells was placed on injured reserve Monday, which means he is sidelined for the season.Several N.F.L. teams have had MRSA outbreaks, most notably the Tampa Bay Buccaneers in 2013. The Buccaneers’ kicker at the time, Lawrence Tynes, had the infection and has not played since. Tynes, a former Giant, is suing the Buccaneers for $20 million, claiming that unsanitary conditions led to his illness.Giants wide receiver Odell Beckham Jr. said he knew that there was always a chance of a bacterial infection in a locker room environment.“It’s kind of the nature of the beast,” Beckham said. “Everybody is sweaty and dirty. So now they just want to make sure it doesn’t spread to other guys.”Beckham also responded to accusations made by Buffalo players Tuesday that he had thrown punches during the Giants’ victory over the Bills on Sunday and had acted like a “prima donna.” The Giants said the league fined Beckham an undisclosed amount.“I’m not worried about the Buffalo Bills; they’re in the past,” Beckham said. “We beat them last week.”Beckham said it was hard for him to play with passion and to control his emotions because he felt singled out by opposing defenses.“It’s hard for me to walk the line when they’re out there targeting me,” he said. “As much as they can say that they’re not — they are. That’s just the case. I get punched every game. I get hit in the face every game.”Asked if the Bills’ criticism upset him, Beckham said: “It doesn’t bother me. I sleep like a baby.”Coughlin, who met with Beckham on Wednesday, seemed to want to counsel Beckham but not to inhibit him.“Obviously, I was disappointed because I think he’s beyond and above a lot of that stuff,” Coughlin said. “And he’s an emotional guy. ‘Hey, let’s face it,’ I told him. ‘I want you to continue to block the way you’re blocking.’ He flies around out there. I want him to play that way.”EXTRA POINTSThe Giants signed wide receiver Myles White from the practice squad. ... Victor Cruz, who aggravated a calf injury, did not practice. Neither did linebacker Devon Kennard, who has a hamstring strain, or cornerback Jayron Hosley, who sustained a concussion Sunday.Advertisement