AdvertisementSupported byRangers 3, Ducks 2 | OvertimeBy Allan KredaMats Zuccarello picked the perfect time to net his first overtime goal in almost five years. In their final game of the year at Madison Square Garden, the reeling Rangers earned a much-needed victory Tuesday when Zuccarello scored a power-play goal at 2 minutes 37 seconds of overtime to lift them to a 3-2 win over the Anaheim Ducks.“I think we deserved it today, it’s nice to get 2 points again,” said the understated Zuccarello, who last scored in extra time in January 2011, when he notched the first goal of his N.H.L. career to beat Carolina.  The Rangers needed the boost from Zuccarello, their top goal scorer, winning for just the fourth time in their last 15 games. Henrik Lundqvist, who was pulled after giving up five goals in two periods in a desultory 7-3 loss to Washington on Sunday, made 17 saves. Derick Brassard added two goals and an assist for the Rangers, who entered the game on a 3-9-2 slide.Zuccarello’s 15th goal of the season on a setup from Dan Boyle put the Rangers (20-12-4) ahead of the Islanders in second place in the Metropolitan Division by a point heading into the Christmas break.Anaheim’s Rickard Rakell had tied the score on a long shot from the left wing that eluded Lundqvist to the glove side at 17:06 of the third period, shocking the crowd and sending the contest into extra time.“It was a must-win for us for so many reasons,” said Lundqvist, who improved to 16-9-3. “It was a very tight game and hard to create any chances.” After Corey Perry gave the visitors a 1-0 lead at 11:16 of the first, Brassard answered with an unassisted goal at 17:50 after he intercepted a clearing pass by defenseman Josh Manson and whipped the puck past goaltender John Gibson.Brassard and linemate Zuccarello then teamed up after another Ducks giveaway early in the third to put the Rangers ahead, 2-1.Brassard scored his 13th of the season from in front of Gibson at 2:44 after Ducks forward Jiri Sekac coughed up the puck.After starting the season 16-3-2, the Rangers began a confounding swoon with a home loss to Montreal on Nov. 25.Heading into that game, the Rangers led the Islanders by 11 points. After the loss to Washington and the Islanders’ 5-2 win over Anaheim on Monday, the Islanders moved ahead of the Rangers by a point.Against the offensively challenged Ducks, the Rangers wanted to concentrate on defense, not a surprise considering they had surrendered 17 goals in their previous three games, all defeats.“There’s no doubt that with the number of goals we gave up in the last few games, there was a real strong focus on playing better team defense,” Rangers Coach Alain Vigneault said. “I thought we played the right way.”Despite allowing the late goal that forced overtime, the Rangers were understandably jubilant with the result, even against an inferior opponent like the Ducks, who have scored a league-low 61 goals this season.  “That was a lot better than the past games, obviously,” Brassard said. “We competed hard, we made some good plays.”Lundqvist spoke of the need for a break after a particularly rocky stretch that saw the Rangers lose games at Vancouver, Edmonton and Calgary, followed by Minnesota and Winnipeg. “It’s been a lot of hockey, traveling and a lot of games,” he said. “I think it’s the perfect time for us to get away from it a little bit.”Two hours before the game, the Ducks’ Carl Hagelin, a former Ranger, said he thought it would an emotional night after spending “four unbelievable years” with the Rangers.“It may be kind of weird first couple of shifts; after that you’re in it,” Hagelin said. “These are guys I battled in practice. It shouldn’t be too awkward.”Hagelin was on the ice for the opening face-off in each period, skating on a line with Nate Thompson and Andrew Cogliano. Wearing a burnt orange jersey instead of the red, white and blue of the Rangers, Hagelin, who was held without a shot, received a warm welcome as he waved to the crowd early in the first.The Ducks, who won 51 games last season, now sit last in the Western Conference. They fell to 12-15-6.Hagelin, 27, has only three goals in 33 games for the Ducks, who reached Game 7 of the Western Conference finals last year before losing to the eventual Stanley Cup champion Chicago Blackhawks.“I got traded to a good team,” Hagelin said. “We have a lot of potential. We just have to figure it out.”Advertisement