AdvertisementSupported byBy Naila-Jean MeyersEvery Tuesday, The New York Times will look at the week ahead in the N.H.L., highlighting hot — or not so hot — teams and players. (All times Eastern.)Dallas Stars vs. Chicago Blackhawks and St. Louis BluesThe West-leading Stars (25-7-2, 52 points) face their top Central Division rivals three times in six days, beginning with a home game against the Blackhawks (20-11-4, 44 points) on Tuesday. It is, surprisingly, the first meeting between the teams this season. That does not mean they aren’t familiar with each other; in the off-season, Dallas acquired forward Patrick Sharp and defenseman Johnny Oduya, key members of the Blackhawks’ recent Stanley Cup-winning teams.After the Christmas break, the Stars move on to a home-and home series against the Blues (20-11-4, 44 points) on Saturday and Sunday. St. Louis goalie Jake Allen shut out the Stars on Dec. 12, which is no small feat. It is the only time this season that Dallas, the league’s highest scoring team with 3.5 goals per game, has been held scoreless.Oduya, who won two Cups with Chicago, is looking forward to seeing what his new team can do against tough competition.“We’re a younger team, and that’s a good way to learn, playing against the best,” he said. “For us being on top now, being hunted a little bit more than in the past, I don’t think I would pick another scenario. This is a perfect setup for moving forward as a group.”Anaheim Ducks at Rangers, Tuesday, 7 p.m.No team may need the Christmas break more than the Rangers and goalie Henrik Lundqvist. They have lost 11 of their 14 games since Nov. 25. In their last five losses, they have given up five or more goals, and their confidence seems to fray more and more after each one. On Tuesday, the Rangers welcome the Anaheim Ducks and their former teammate Carl Hagelin to Madison Square Garden. The Ducks, a Western Conference finalist last season, have not been very good this season, entering the game in last place. Hagelin, a popular two-way forward for the Rangers, has not done much — only three goals and five assists — for Anaheim since arriving in an off-season trade, but the Rangers probably still wish they could afford him. The good news for the Rangers is that after Tuesday, they do not play again until Monday.Montreal Canadiens at Washington Capitals, Saturday, 7 p.m.The Canadiens could also use some time off. Like the Rangers, the Canadiens are in a skid, befallen by injuries. Like the Rangers, the Canadiens are now looking up at the Capitals in the standings. Washington (25-6-2, 52 points) has surged to the top of the Eastern Conference, entering its break on a six-game winning streak. Montreal (20-12-3, 43 points) has lost eight of nine heading into Tuesday’s game at Minnesota and has been outscored, 30-14, in that span. A 3-2 loss to Washington on Dec. 3 started the nine-game slide, and a rematch may not be a welcome sight right after the break.United States vs. Canada, Saturday, 1 p.m.The world junior championship, which features many top N.H.L. prospects, begins this week in Helsinki, Finland. The tournament does not waste any time getting to a marquee event, with the United States and Canada facing off in group play. The United States won the event in 2013, and Canada is the defending champion. The American team led by potential top-10 draft picks, including the projected No. 1, Auston Matthews, and Matthew Tkachuk. Canada features forwards Dylan Strome and Mitchell Marner, the third and fourth picks in this year’s N.H.L. draft.As women’s hockey grows more popular, and its players grow stronger and faster, the sport is confronting an issue that has also plagued football and men’s hockey in recent years: concussions. Seth Berkman explored the issue of concussions in women’s hockey for The New York Times last week.Ryan Spooner, Boston BruinsThe struggling Canadiens can hear footsteps in the Atlantic Division. The Bruins are on the rise, earning points in nine of their last 10 games, including six wins. Boston (19-9-4) entered Tuesday’s game against St. Louis one point behind Montreal in the division standings.A key to their recent success has been scoring depth, particularly from their young third line of Spooner, Frank Vatrano and Jimmy Hayes.Spooner, a 23-year-old center who was a second-round draft pick in 2010, spent much of the past two seasons in the American Hockey League. He has 10 points in his last seven games, bringing his season total to 22, a career high.He has developed good chemistry with Vatrano, 21, an undrafted rookie who grew up in East Longmeadow, Mass. Vatrano, who played for UMass last season, started this season in the A.H.L., scoring 10 goals in 10 games for the Providence Bruins. He had a hat trick in Friday’s 6-2 victory over Pittsburgh, during which Spooner collected four assists.“That’s the potential that Ryan has when he sets his mind to it,” Bruins Coach Claude Julien said in an article in The Boston Globe. “It’s as simple as that. Some of it is experience. Some of it is confidence. Some of it is maturity. He’s a young player.”Advertisement