By KEN BELSONDEC. 22, 2015
Researchers at several universities and research institutes were awarded almost $16 million Tuesday to find a way to diagnose, while victims are alive, chronic traumatic encephalopathy, a degenerative brain disease linked to repeated head hits in contact sports.The National Institutes of Health and the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke issued the seven-year grant as part of a long-term study of brain disease in former N.F.L. and college football players, many of whom sustained multiple concussions on the field.Despite the implications that the research may have on football players and the N.F.L., no league money will be used to help pay for the grant.For years, researchers have been able to diagnose C.T.E. only by examining the brains of players who died and whose families agreed to donate the organ, a limitation that has slowed efforts to determine who is susceptible to having the disease.AdvertisementThe new study, considered among the most ambitious in the field of sports-related brain injury, aims to develop ways to spot the disease in the living and figure out why certain players get it and others do not. A more comprehensive understanding of the disease, the researchers said, may lead to ways to prevent it.Advertisement“There are so many critical unanswered questions about C.T.E.,” Dr. Robert Stern, the lead principal investigator and a professor at Boston University School of Medicine, said in a statement. “We are optimistic that this project will lead to many of these answers, by developing accurate methods of detecting and diagnosing C.T.E. during life, and by examining genetic and other risk factors for this disease.”The grant did not come from a pool of money created in 2012 when the N.F.L. pledged $30 million to the N.I.H. to pay for research on C.T.E. and other issues related to head trauma and said it would not have any veto power over how the money was used.The N.I.H. had asked to use some of it, but after encountering delays with the Foundation for the National Institutes of Health, which is administering the money, it decided to finance the grant with other funds, said a person familiar with the process but who spoke on condition of anonymity because the researchers’ statement is the official comment.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The foundation said the N.F.L. was willing to contribute to the new study, but it was the N.I.H.’s decision to finance it on its own.“N.I.H. made the decision to fund this study in its entirety,” said a statement from the foundation, which added that the N.F.L. has no control over the use of the funds or veto power over any grant decisions.In its own statement, the N.I.H. did not explain why the N.F.L. was not contributing money but credited the league with supporting eight other studies related to brain injuries.“We expect that the N.F.L. will fund future studies to help improve player safety and health, on and off the field,” the statement said.AdvertisementESPN reported Tuesday that the N.F.L. did not want its money used for the research because researchers from Boston University, who have been critical of the league and the way it has handled concussions in players, were involved. The report said the N.F.L. managed to influence the foundation administering the funds.In response to the ESPN report, the N.F.L. spokesman Brian McCarthy said that the league did not “pull funding” from the study, that “the N.I.H. makes all funding decisions” and that the N.F.L. has no “veto power” over its $30 million grant to the N.I.H.Dr. Stern declined to comment on the funding issue.The inability of doctors to diagnose C.T.E. in living patients has been in the forefront of a debate over a settlement between the N.F.L. and all retired players.The deal, which is being appealed, pays up to $4 million to former players found with C.T.E. who died from 2006 to April 2015, when the settlement was approved by a federal district court judge. During an appeals hearing in November, objectors to the settlement said that the cutoff date was arbitrary and that it should cover the possibility that doctors find a way to detect the disease in living patients.The new study involves about 50 researchers from 17 research institutions, including the University of Arizona, Banner Alzheimer’s Institute, Boston University, the Brigham and Women’s Hospital and the Cleveland Clinic.A version of this article appears in print on December 23, 2015, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: $16 Million for Brain Study, but $0 From N.F.L. .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.