By ROB HUGHESDEC. 22, 2015
LONDON — England is the last place on earth professionals would want to play if they wished to spend Christmastime with their family. Instead, they are asked to give up their holiday celebrations to fight for precious points on the field.No Arsenal fans will be complaining after their club beat Manchester City, 2-1, on Monday night in a stadium packed with 60,000 spectators. It was a contest that many believe will prove pivotal to who wins the Premier League title, and both clubs will be back on the road for Saturday’s full schedule of games up and down the country.This is a charitable time as far as Arsenal is concerned. It has a tradition of every player donating one day’s pay to children’s causes, each year raising about $330,000.Since the 2014 World Cup in Brazil, Arsenal’s Mesut Ozil has quietly paid for surgeries for children with cleft palates in remote parts of Brazil and Africa. It seems the perfect fit for Ozil, who played for Germany in the World Cup. He is a quiet man who finds his voice when it serves a good purpose.AdvertisementFor many Arsenal fans, it has taken two full years since the manager Arsène Wenger acquired Ozil from Real Madrid for $63 million to appreciate what he really brings to the team.AdvertisementHis worth is growing on them. Monday’s game at the Emirates was cautious and cagey until Ozil opened up City’s defense with two deft, almost sleight-of-foot passes along the ground. It still required spectacular finishes by Theo Walcott and Olivier Giroud to convert those passes into goals, but the Arsenal crowd now appreciates that it has a playmaker whose stealth is intrinsic to Arsenal having its best chance in a decade of challenging for the Premier League title.If they are honest, the Gunners’ supporters might admit to mistaking stealth for laziness in Ozil. They listened too much to pundits on television. They shook their heads and complained about Wenger wasting their money. And now, they are realizing they may have been wrong all along.Week after week, in an Arsenal team that is finding greater unity — or “solidarity” as Wenger calls it — Ozil is the one who cuts open the opponent like someone using a can opener. Twice on Monday, Manchester City lost track of Ozil in similar positions on the left side of the penalty area.Big mistake. Arsenal defender Laurent Koscielny — another player whose eye for a pass is underrated — guided the ball from the halfway line to the feet of Ozil, who spotted Walcott’s movement ahead of him.Walcott, who has come back after a career-threatening Achilles’ tendon injury to gradually regain his confidence, turned and struck a fearsome shot from 26 yards that rose into the far corner of City’s goal.That was 33 minutes in, and a dozen minutes later Ozil repeated the exercise, this time ushering Giroud into a position from where the striker held off a heavy tackle from Nicolás Otamendi as he rifled in the second goal.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.City fought back because the club has, by common consent, probably the biggest collection of talents in the English league this season. Yaya Touré did what he deceptively always seems to do: In a rousing finish, he appeared to amble forward and then hit an unstoppable volley into the net.Sometimes the City fans think of Touré what the Arsenal followers were led to believe about Ozil. They see the big man’s unhurried, languid style, and they complain that he appears not to be trying — until he summons a strike from out of thin air to give his team hope.AdvertisementThe goal that made it 2-1 came from the right edge of the penalty area. Touré had allowed the ball to pass in front of him, and with no warning and no time for any defender or the goalkeeper to shut him down, he simply lofted the ball into the perfect spot between the angle of the crossbar and the goalpost from 20 yards out.That kind of a goal is instinctive, just as Ozil’s 15 assists for Arsenal involve instinct about what his colleagues will do. If only he scored more, Wenger has said, Ozil would be recognized as the best player in England at the moment.The best finishers — two of them, at any rate — this season happen to be Jamie Vardy and Riyad Mahrez, whose goals have propelled Leicester City to the top of the league, two points ahead of Arsenal and six points above City.The packed Christmas to New Year period — when English teams play as many as four games while all the other big leagues around Europe are resting — will sorely test Leicester’s ability to stay with the giants.“It is a very intense period,” Wenger said Monday. “Tonight was about pace and intensity and spirit and organization and brilliance to a very high level. Our solidarity helped us until the end, but now we have to find the resources for the game at Southampton on Saturday.”City has to regroup, and to find those extra resources for its home game Saturday against Sunderland. Leicester, the team that won’t go away, has a tough trip to Liverpool. To those critics who doubted Leicester would even get to Christmas in this lofty position, the club just keeps on showing them that team spirit is half the battle to winning.Significantly, the only club that has beaten Leicester to date this season has been Arsenal. Wenger suggests that is because his players have matured, allowing the club to overcome injuries that are keeping Alexis Sánchez and five others out until well into January. Regardless, Arsenal and Ozil are becoming very good at the right time, whether it is on the field or off.A version of this article appears in print on December 23, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.