

      By VICTOR MATHER

DEC. 24, 2015

Every sports fan knows to watch the Super Bowl, the Masters and the Summer Olympics. But what about the Arctic Winter Games, the World Snooker Championships and the Futsal World Cup? 
After stops in Marrakesh, Morocco; Bangkok; and Nîmes, France, the archery tour heads to Las Vegas for the final leg. Archery officials have been trying to liven up the sport for spectators, with head-to-head shootoffs and visits to exotic locations. The American Erika Jones is a two-time defending champion in the compound bow event.It’s a bicycle race, but over a course so rutted and muddy that riders frequently must pick up their bikes and carry them. A winter tradition in Central Europe, the world championships this year return to the sport’s spiritual home, Belgium. A Belgian has won a medal in the men’s elite race for 18 straight years.They may not be the best skiers in the world, nor the best shooters. But they sure are the best skier-shooters. And they are coming to the United States for the first World Cup event here in five years. Martin Fourcade of France and Emil Hegle Svendsen of Norway, who staged a memorable finish in the mass start event at the Sochi Olympics, will be among the big names scheduled to compete.A multisport competition for people from Arctic regions. Teams from Canada, Alaska and Russia, among others, compete in winter sports like skiing and snowboarding, as well as indoor events like wrestling and table tennis. More unfamiliar are the traditional games like snow snake, a javelin-like event in which competitors throw a spruce stick underhand across a snow field, and Alaskan high kick, in which entrants try to jump and kick a dangling stuffed sealskin ball with one foot while holding the other foot with a hand.Two years since Sochi and two years before Pyeongchang, it is a transitional time in figure skating. In 2015, Javier Fernández of Spain, fourth at the Olympics, surprised the gold medalist Yuzuru Hanyu, Denis Ten and the American Jason Brown to win his first world title. It is not clear that this is a changing of the guard, though, as he is older than all three. But on the women’s side, Elizaveta Tuktamysheva, who turns 19 on Dec. 17; 17-year-old Satoko Miyahara and 16-year-old Elena Radionova, none of whom skated in Sochi, swept the world medals.Canada is a 34-time world champion, the reigning Olympic gold medalist and the world’s No. 1 ranked team. But the Canadians have uncharacteristically lost the last three world titles, finishing second, fourth and third in Nova Scotia last season, while Sweden and Norway have swapped titles. They will try to remedy that in Basel, where a total of 45,000 curling enthusiasts turned up for the nine-day championship in 2012.The annual event is shrouded in uncertainty as the five-time world champion and the game’s most colorful figure, Ronnie O’Sullivan, continues to be an enigma. O’Sullivan was expected this month to play in his first competitive match since April, after skipping all the major tour events and saying he did not like the pressure of being at the top. In a testament to his amazing talent, he is still the bookmakers’ favorite for this event, though it is anyone’s guess if he will even show up.IndyCars will roar around South Boston near the waterfront in the inaugural Grand Prix of Boston. Road races downtown have a mixed history in America. Various proposals for a Formula One race in the New York metropolitan area, especially in North Jersey, have been mooted for years. An Indy race in the Inner Harbor in Baltimore is on indefinite hiatus after three years. Boston will try to do better. (Not everyone in nearby apartments is enthusiastic.)Futsal is a five-a-side indoor variant of soccer. Unlike the indoor game most familiar to Americans, there are no boards to bounce the ball off. Brazil and Spain have won all seven previous editions of the World Cup. The American team is to try to qualify for the 2016 event at a tournament in Costa Rica in May; it failed to do so in 2012 with a team of Major Indoor Soccer League players, but was a silver medalist in 1992.After a 12-year absence, this international event returns. The eight teams of elite pros will include the top six hockey nations: Canada, the United States, Russia, Sweden, Finland and the Czech Republic, as well as a team of players from other European countries and a team of young North American pros. Canada has won this event, and its predecessor, the Canada Cup, five times out of seven. In 1996, the United States took the gold, by far its most important international hockey win since the 1980 Miracle on Ice.Advertisement