By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSDEC. 23, 2015
Dirk Nowitzki moved past Shaquille O’Neal into sixth place on the N.B.A.’s career scoring list and later made the go-ahead basket with 19.2 seconds left in overtime as the Dallas Mavericks earned a 119-118 road victory over the Nets on Wednesday night.J. J. Barea had 32 points, a career high, and added 11 assists for the Mavericks. Nowitzki scored 22 points, giving him 28,609 in his career, and Wesley Matthews finished with 17.Thaddeus Young had 29 points for the Nets, his season high.Nowitzki will have plenty of time to think about what it means to pass O’Neal, a longtime rival who helped the Miami Heat beat the Mavericks in the 2006 finals. But on Wednesday, the most important thing to Nowitzki was earning a win one night after a loss in Toronto.“That’s what I play for, is to compete at the highest level for this franchise, for this team,” Nowitzki said. “Obviously No. 6 in the bigger picture is a lot bigger than this win in Brooklyn in December, but when you’re out there, you don’t think about that. You want to get this win bad and fight out there against a talented team.”AdvertisementHe has some work to do to move into the top five on the N.B.A.’s career scoring list: Wilt Chamberlain is fifth, with 31,419 points.AdvertisementNowitzki entered the game needing 10 points to surpass the 28,596 scored by O’Neal, who is eligible for induction into the Hall of Fame next year.Nowitzki moved ahead of O’Neal with a high-arching jumper from the corner with 9 minutes 51 seconds left in the second quarter, at a time when just about all of the Mavericks’ shots were going in. Dallas started 20 for 25 from the field. Barea made his first eight shots, finally missing with an air ball as the shot clock was running out late in the period.The Nets, though, made 12 of their first 14 shots of the third to surge into the lead, and they had a 92-81 advantage in the fourth. But they could not hold on in losing their fifth straight home game.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The game went to overtime when Young followed a 3-point play by Barea with a 3-pointer to tie the score at 108-108 and then blocked a Barea shot on the final possession of regulation.Matthews then hit two 3-pointers in overtime, and Barea added one, but the ball went inside the arc to Nowitzki with Dallas down by 1. After Nowitzki’s basket, Jarrett Jack missed a jumper on the Nets’ final possession.Dallas point guard Deron Williams was sidelined with a strained hamstring, sitting out what would have been his first game back in Brooklyn since the Nets bought out the final two seasons of his $98.5 million contract over the summer. Devin Harris, another former Nets guard, remained out with a strained right hamstring.MAGIC 104, ROCKETS 101 Evan Fournier hit a short bank shot with 14.2 seconds left, and Tobias Harris made two free throws with 1.1 seconds left to help Orlando hold off visiting Houston.A 3-point attempt by the Rockets’ Marcus Thornton missed at the final horn, ending Houston’s three-game winning streak.SPURS 108, TIMBERWOLVES 83 Kawhi Leonard had 19 points and 6 rebounds, and San Antonio bullied Minnesota in the paint during a road victory. Danny Green broke out of a season-long shooting slump with 11 points as the Spurs won their seventh straight.AdvertisementCELTICS 102, HORNETS 89 Kelly Olynyk scored 20 points, and Boston survived a fourth-quarter rally in a victory at Charlotte.An Associated Press report in the N.B.A. roundup in some editions on Thursday about the Nets’ 119-118 loss to the Dallas Mavericks misstated, in some copies, the number of points Dirk Nowitzki had scored in his career after getting 22 against the Nets. It was 28,609 points, not 22,609.A version of this article appears in print on December 24, 2015, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: Nowitzki Moves Up Scoring List and Downs the Nets.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.