By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSDEC. 23, 2015
For the first time since taking over Denver’s offense from an injured Peyton Manning, Brock Osweiler made clear that he had no intention of giving up his job easily.Osweiler will make his sixth straight start at quarterback for the Broncos (10-4) when they host the Cincinnati Bengals (11-3) on Monday night.Since taking over for Manning in the third quarter against Kansas City on Nov. 15, Osweiler had insisted that the job and the team belonged to Manning.However, Osweiler acknowledged Wednesday that his mentality all along had been to make any decision tough on the coaches if and when Manning was healthy enough to return from a torn plantar fascia in his left foot.Advertisement“I think that’s any athlete’s mind-set,” Osweiler said. “You know, once you get your feet on the field, you don’t want to go back to the bench, if you will.”AdvertisementManning returned to practice last week, but only for two days. He was too sore to practice Friday. Although Coach Gary Kubiak refused to characterize it as a setback, he said, “The progress stopped last Thursday.”On Wednesday, Manning returned to practicing on his own at the team’s indoor complex.Osweiler is dealing with some health problems, too: a sore left shoulder and an infected left eye.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.He hurt his shoulder on a 7-yard scramble at Pittsburgh last week and grimaced on handoffs afterward, but said it did not play a role in his poor second half that followed a four-touchdown first half in Denver’s 34-27 loss.“It’s O.K.,” Osweiler said. “This time of year, I think everybody’s banged up.”PETERSON EXPECTS TO PLAY Vikings running back Adrian Peterson said he was confident he would play this weekend against the Giants despite a sprained left ankle that forced him out for part of the last game. Peterson did not practice Wednesday and was listed on the injury report with a shoulder issue as well, but he said he would be fine Sunday.Peterson, the N.F.L.’s rushing leader, was hurt in the second quarter last week against Chicago.HOYER TRYING ACUPUNCTURE Texans quarterback Brian Hoyer has turned to acupuncture after sustaining his second concussion in a month.Hoyer returned to practice on a limited basis, but he remains in the league’s protocol after incurring a concussion Dec. 13 and is questionable for Sunday’s game against the Titans. He said that he started seeing an acupuncturist after his first concussion, on Nov. 16, and that he had continued to see the specialist since the second one.EAGLES CORNERBACK RETURNS The rookie cornerback Eric Rowe returned to practice for the Eagles, while two other starters on defense remained out. Rowe, who sustained a concussion in the Eagles’ 40-17 loss to the Cardinals on Sunday, passed the N.F.L. concussion protocol and was cleared to return to the practice field. Unless he has a relapse, he will start Saturday night when the Eagles host the Redskins.The veteran cornerback Byron Maxwell and the third-year defensive tackle Bennie Logan remained out of practice.A version of this article appears in print on December 24, 2015, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: Osweiler, Set to Face Bengals, Is in No Hurry to Give Up Job.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.