AdvertisementSupported byBy Bill PenningtonEAST RUTHERFORD, N.J. — Odell Beckham Jr. entered the N.F.L. offices in Manhattan around midday Wednesday, hoping to get his one-game suspension for unsportsmanlike and dangerous play overturned. About 90 minutes later, Beckham left the building looking unsettled, his right hand stretched across his brow. Late in the afternoon, the N.F.L. announced that the appeals officer James Thrash, a former receiver, had upheld the suspension, imposed by the league.When the suspension was affirmed, Beckham, in a sweeping apology, said he had embarrassed himself and Giants fans and had let his teammates down.“I wasn’t raised to act like I did the other day,” Beckham said in a statement issued by the team. “I am not here to make excuses for my conduct. This isn’t about anything that was said or done to me. This is about my behavior, and I am responsible for my behavior.”Beckham, a rising star on the American sports scene and one of the N.F.L.’s most popular players, observed that he was a role model for many young fans.“Many of the parents of those kids have asked since Sunday what they should say to their children about my conduct,” Beckham said. “I don’t have the perfect answer, but I think one thing they can say is how I handled myself the other day is an example of how not to conduct yourself. I displayed poor sportsmanship. And those parents can also say that when you act like that, there are consequences. And I hope to be an example of somebody who did something wrong and learned from it.”On his Twitter account, Beckham said he had pursued the appeal because he owed it to his teammates to do everything he could to play Sunday against the Minnesota Vikings. Instead, he will miss the game.“I dropped the ball on sportsmanship on Sunday,” Beckham also wrote. “I apologize to my teammates, the Giants organization, and to all fans of the NFL.”The N.F.L. suspended Beckham on Monday for reckless play in Sunday’s game against the Carolina Panthers. Beckham repeatedly tangled with cornerback Josh Norman and was whistled for three personal fouls for unnecessary roughness. But the most glaring incident came in the third quarter when Beckham, running at full speed, launched himself through the air and slammed his helmet into the side of Norman’s. The league called it a “flagrant hit against a defenseless player.”On Wednesday, the league did not elaborate on its reasoning for the punishment. Thrash was jointly appointed and compensated by the N.F.L. and the N.F.L. players’ union to decide appeals of on-field player discipline.Earlier in the day, the league fined Norman about $26,000 for his role in the clash.It was the fourth fine or suspension for Beckham in his two seasons with the Giants. Beckham, the only Giant selected Tuesday to the Pro Bowl, will forfeit $52,529, or one-seventeenth of his 2015 salary of $893,009. He is not permitted to be around the team for any practices or functions until Monday.While Beckham’s appeal hearing was playing out in Manhattan, the circumstances that led up the suspension — Sunday’s game and especially the moments before the game — were still being hotly debated, from the Panthers’ headquarters in North Carolina to the Giants’ training complex.After Wednesday’s practice, Giants punter Brad Wing said that on Sunday, he witnessed Marcus Ball, a Panthers practice-squad player, walk at least 10 yards into the Giants’ half of the field during warm-ups while holding a baseball bat. Ball then told Beckham, “I’ll be the reason why you’re not playing today — and other games,” Wing said.Wing said he had never before seen any player associated with the opposing team cross over to his team’s end of the field. He said Ball had been targeting Beckham with a “legitimate threat.” Wing, who played college football with Beckham at Louisiana State, said he believed the episode “may have had an impact on how Odell was acting.”A video of the incident surfaced Monday on the Internet, showing Beckham shouting toward Ball as Ball walked onto the Giants’ end of the field. Wing is in the video interceding, along with a couple of other Giants.Wing said that because of Ball’s remark, he and other Giants kept Beckham and Ball apart. Wing said that a referee eventually came over and led Ball, still holding the bat, back to the Carolina half of the field. Ball, Wing said, immediately walked over to Norman and spoke with him for a minute or so.Wing said the confrontation between Ball and Beckham began when Ball, who was inactive for the game and dressed in a black sweatsuit, was standing near the 50-yard line.“Odell was dancing and doing what he does in warm-ups, and he saw this person with the bat staring at him,” said Wing, who at the time did not known who Ball was. “Odell approached him and stuck out his hand as you would to shake someone’s hand. This person just looked at Odell’s hand and wouldn’t shake it.”Wing said Ball and Beckham started exchanging words and shouting at each other.“Odell said: ‘Why aren’t you playing? You’re not dressed to play,’ a couple of times,” Wing said. “That’s when I heard the Panther player say this was going to be Odell’s last game.”Wing added, “I think it did kind of shake Odell a little.” But Wing and other Giants in the vicinity of the incident said they did not hear any Panthers player direct homophobic slurs at Beckham, as had been reported. Wing said Beckham had indicated that he had been subjected to homophobic taunts during other parts of the season.Before practice, Giants Coach Tom Coughlin offered a defiant and passionate defense of Beckham, insisting the Panthers were also to blame for Sunday’s out-of-bounds behavior.“To depict this as Odell Beckham being wrong, and the only one wrong, is not right — it’s not fair, it’s not justice, and it’s not the way it was,” Coughlin said. “If you’re naïve enough to think that way, then you better do some soul-searching yourself. Beckham certainly was wrong, and we said he was wrong from Day 1. But there were factors involved, starting in pregame, which are well documented, which indicate that there was an attempt to provoke him. He was provoked.”Coughlin continued, “If you know the situation in pregame with the baseball bat and if you know what occurred at the very beginning of the game, you can understand that there was two sides to this and not just one.”The Panthers had previously used bats for pregame motivation. The bats are said to be symbolic of home runs, or “taking the wood” to an opponent. But Carolina Coach Ron Rivera on Tuesday denied that Beckham had been threatened, and Ball rejected the charge Wednesday.Rivera also said that he was going to forbid his team to take baseball bats onto the field for the rest of the season. Advertisement