AdvertisementSupported byBy Jason Sablich and Justin SablichFantasy football analysis for Thursday night’s game between the San Diego Chargers and the Oakland Raiders. Check back Friday for analysis of Sunday’s games and Monday’s matchup between the Cincinnati Bengals and the Denver Broncos. You can also follow the Sablich brothers on Twitter at @5thDownFantasy.8:25 Eastern. Line: Raiders by 5.QuarterbackPhilip Rivers (SD) — The Raiders’ 28th-ranked pass defense (265.6 Y.P.G.) has managed to keep opposing quarterbacks under 20 fantasy points in four of the last six games. Rivers managed 336 passing yards and three touchdowns (along with two interceptions) against the Raiders in Week 7, but that was with Keenan Allen to throw to. According to Rotoviz.com, Rivers is averaging more than 8 fantasy points less per game without Allen (18.1), and has been highly inconsistent of late, and cannot be trusted as more than a QB2 this week. Derek Carr (OAK) — He’s been quietly consistent in the touchdown category, with at least two in each of his last four games. In Week 7, he had three scores and 289 yards against the Chargers. We like him as a higher end QB2 play with QB1 upside this week.These player rankings from the Sablich brothers are for standard and PPR scoring formats and will be updated throughout the season.Running Back Melvin Gordon/Danny Woodhead (SD) – Both backs had been pretty useless on fantasy teams in recent weeks, before Woodhead exploded for three touchdowns last weekend (all receiving) against the Dolphins. You still can’t count on either, especially against a Raiders run defense that has yielded only 12.3 F.P.P.G. to the position over the last three weeks.Latavius Murray (OAK) — He tallied 88 yards and a touchdown in Week 7, and on the season the Chargers have allowed the fifth most fantasy points to backs (21.6 F.P.P.G.).We like him as a solid RB1 play this week. Wide Receiver/Tight End Amari Cooper/Michael Crabtree (OAK) — While the Chargers are one of the tougher matchups for receivers on the season (18.4 F.P.P.G.), both Cooper and Crabtree found the end zone in Week 7, and Cooper had his second-highest receiving-yard total (133). Both are fairly safe starts, with Cooper — coming off two touchdowns against the Packers — a solid WR2 play.Antonio Gates (SD) — He has at least six receptions and eight targets in each of his last three games. He’ll remain heavily targeted in this Allen-less offense, and is one of the safer TE plays this week against the Raiders (10.7 F.P.P.G., third most).The Sablich Brothers have provided award-winning fantasy football advice for The Times since 2010. For additional fantasy analysis, visit 5thdownfantasy.com and follow them on Twitter @5thdownfantasy.Advertisement