
Sports of The Times By                     
 WILLIAM C. RHODEN
 
DEC. 23, 2015
FLORHAM PARK, N.J. — Brandon Marshall has never been to the N.F.L. playoffs, and he may not go this season even if the Jets win their final two games. But Marshall, perhaps more than any Jet, understands the fine line that separates success and failure in the league — and what it feels like to be on the wrong side of it.With two games left in the regular season, the Jets need substantial help to reach the playoffs. At a minimum, they need wins in those last two games, starting with Sunday’s against the New England Patriots.For Marshall, that makes the game the most important one of his career.“Yes, absolutely,” he said. “Because it’s the next one.”
                How can my team make the N.F.L. playoffs? It’s a simple question, but answering it can be devilishly complicated. This interactive simulator walks you through the scenarios.            What amazes many young players who enter the N.F.L. is not so much the accelerated speed of the game but the virtually nonexistent margin for error.Advertisement“If you look at most games, you’re talking about the difference in a game is about two plays,” Jets linebacker Demario Davis told me earlier in the season.AdvertisementThat’s a couple of dozen plays a season. A tackle made. Or missed. A yard gained, or allowed. A fumble. A catch. A drop. Those vital few plays added together — none of them necessarily judged as season-defining moments at the time — are usually the difference, Davis said, between first place and last.For Marshall, another matchup with the Patriots has him thinking about one play in particular. The Jets’ 30-23 loss at New England in October seems like a lifetime ago but tucked inside it is a moment that still haunts him.The Jets led by 17-16 early in the fourth quarter and had driven to the Patriots’ 12-yard line. On a third-and-7 with just under 13 minutes to play, Marshall dropped a tough but — for someone of his stature — catchable back-shoulder pass in the end zone that would have padded the Jets’ slim lead. Instead, they settled for a field goal.The Patriots, granted a reprieve, scored touchdowns on their next two drives and won the game. Marshall berated himself on Twitter — saying he should be “walking back to New York” after the way he had played — but said the missed opportunity would be “my fuel to get better.”That certainly seems to have been the case. Marshall hasn’t dropped much this season and on Saturday pushed his receiving total beyond 1,200 yards. This week, he was named to the Pro Bowl for the sixth time in 10 seasons. But he is still looking for his first postseason experience.If he and the Jets don’t get there, they can look at the handful of plays or coaching decisions that will have kept them out.Their first loss of the season came in Week 3, at home against Philadelphia, as Ryan Fitzpatrick threw three interceptions and the Eagles’ Darren Sproles returned a punt 89 yards for a touchdown.AdvertisementThe loss to New England a month later included not only Marshall’s pivotal drop but also questionable clock management by the Jets’ first-year coach, Todd Bowles, late in the game, which ended when Marshall was called for a false start.A bad loss at Oakland a week later was distinguished by a gaggle of blunders, and a damaging home loss to Buffalo will be remembered for Bowles’s decision to go for it on a fourth-and-short in the closing minutes rather than kick a field goal. He then compounded the error by directing a potential winning pass toward Kellen Davis, not Marshall.The Jets are closing strong — they have won four straight since Thanksgiving — but it may be too late. In a division that has been dominated by New England, five losses, largely determined by a dozen or so bad plays, are more than enough to wreck yet another Jets season.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.After the October loss to New England, Bowles brushed off any long-term implications by saying, “It’s one game; we’re 4-2.” After the loss to Buffalo dropped them to 5-4, Bowles was asked about the playoff implications and whether another unnecessary loss would finish the team’s playoff chances. “We’re not even thinking playoffs right now,” he said at the time. “It’s a long season. We’re 5-4. We’re in the middle of the pack with everybody else.”The Jets followed that up with a loss to Houston that dropped their record to .500.Only then did Bowles address the culture of losing that was suffocating a promising season. How does a franchise that has gone without a title for more than 40 years, one that has missed the playoffs the last four seasons, end the cycle?“The way we finish ballgames is to execute and play situational football,” Bowles said. “I think once it gets down to the end of the ballgame, there’s a bust here or a bust there that we have to get better at. And that comes with mental toughness, and that’s something that has to be ingrained every year, whether it’s a new coach or rather it’s the same coach.”The most consistent N.F.L. franchises live in the moment as they plan for the future. But perhaps because of the volatile, highly emotional nature of the game and the short season, in which every game counts, football players and coaches can become so preoccupied by the here and now that many cannot appreciate that what they do in each moment can have a deleterious impact on their teams, their careers and even the course of their franchises. Yesterday and tomorrow are inextricably linked, one moment at a time.The next ones will come Sunday and, if the Jets can win then, at Buffalo on Jan. 3. But because of missteps they made in the fall, the Jets may need a winter miracle to break their playoff drought.Email: wcr@nytimes.com A version of this article appears in print on December 24, 2015, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: Handful of Plays May Keep Playoffs Out of Jets’ Grasp.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »