AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressThe international ski federation on Wednesday banned camera drones from its World Cup races, a day after one of the flying objects crashed and nearly hit the Austrian skier Marcel Hirscher during a slalom race in Italy.The ski federation will prohibit drones “as long as I am responsible,” said Markus Waldner, the director of men’s races. Waldner said he had made the decision “because they are a bad thing for safety.”He added: “It was huge luck that Marcel was not hurt. I am very angry.”The drone, carrying a television camera, shattered on an icy slope just behind Hirscher, an Olympic silver medalist who has won four straight World Cup overall titles, a few seconds after he had started his second run in a nighttime race in Madonna di Campiglio.“I didn’t know what it was, but I felt something,” said Hirscher, who was unhurt and continued his run, finishing second behind Henrik Kristoffersen of Norway. “I thought it was a course worker behind me, or a gate.”Course workers slip through the gates shortly after each skier to smooth the snow surface for the next competitor.“I am very relieved that nothing happened,” Hirscher said, adding: “That would have been a very serious, bad injury. There are a lot of cool things nowadays. But you have to guarantee the safety, and that was just insane.”Waldner said that the federation had agreed to let its broadcast partner, Infront Sports & Media, use the drone at the slalom, but that the pilot was not allowed to fly the camera directly over the racecourse.“He did not follow our instructions,” Waldner said. “He had to fly outside of the racetrack and follow the racer from a 15-meter distance. Then there would have been a margin, and nothing could have happened.”Infront said in a statement: “We are extremely relieved that apparently no one was hurt. At the same time, this incident is being taken very seriously, and the circumstances leading to it are currently being examined. An update will be provided as soon as secured information is available.”Drones have been used many times at ski races. The ski federation said the technology was aimed at enhancing the experience for television viewers by providing moving pictures from overhead angles that regular cameras could not reach.The federation also said legal restrictions on the use of drones at events were not as tight in Italy as in many other countries.Advertisement