By KEN BELSONOCT. 7, 2015
The N.F.L.’s long march back to Los Angeles made a stop in New York, where the 32 team owners met on Wednesday to consider proposals from teams that want to relocate there, what they might have to pay to move and other issues related to what has turned into a convoluted sweepstakes.While the Oakland Raiders, the San Diego Chargers and the St. Louis Rams have announced plans to build stadiums near Los Angeles, there is no consensus among owners as to whether one or two teams will move.The owners are debating whether to support the Rams’ plan to build an indoor stadium as part of a large entertainment complex or a proposal by the Chargers and the Raiders to construct an outdoor stadium with more room for tailgating.Either proposal will require the support of at least three-quarters, or 24, of the owners. A vote will occur as early as January, but probably no later than March, so the team or teams can start selling tickets and sponsorships in Los Angeles for the 2016 season.Advertisement“We need to find long-term solutions here,” Commissioner Roger Goodell said after the meeting. “There’s interest in being back in the entertainment capital of the world.”AdvertisementFor several hours, the owners met without their counterparts from the Chargers, the Raiders and the Rams present. Publicly, few of them have said which proposal they prefer, but the Dallas Cowboys’ Jerry Jones appears to support the Rams owner E. Stanley Kroenke and his plan to build a domed stadium in Inglewood, Calif.Although officials from Oakland, San Diego and St. Louis did not make presentations Wednesday, the owners were apprised of the efforts in those cities to keep their teams. The task force planning a stadium in St. Louis said Wednesday that it had secured a commitment from National Car Rental to spend $158 million for the naming rights to a venue that would be built only if the Rams or another N.F.L. franchise made a long-term commitment to play in the city.The owners also heard from the firm hired to come up with estimates for a relocation fee that a team would have to pay to move to Los Angeles, a figure that could run into the hundreds of millions.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Despite the complexities, the N.F.L. appears unwilling to delay moving a team to Los Angeles for another year.“The bus is moving forward,” said Art Rooney, Jr., a co-owner of the Pittsburgh Steelers and a member of the six-man committee focused on the league’s return to Los Angeles for the first time since 1995.Separately, the owners voted unanimously to play regular-season games outside the United States through 2025, and for the league to schedule games in countries beyond England.The N.F.L. has played regular-season games in London since 2007. This year, the league announced a deal to start playing games in a new stadium being built by Tottenham Hotspur.AdvertisementEngland will remain a focus for the N.F.L. But the league is looking at adding a game in Mexico City as soon as next season.“The great news is we now have an opportunity to look elsewhere,” said Mark Waller, who runs the league’s international operations.Waller said work still needed to be done at the main stadium in Mexico City, particularly for accommodating on-field operations. The league, though, said it had media deals in place, making Mexico an attractive place to play. The N.F.L. has not played there since 2005 in a game that set an attendance record.Waller said that if logistical problems were solved in Mexico City, the N.F.L. would play a game there in 2016. If not, a fourth game could be added in London.A game in Germany, where the N.F.L. once operated a league, is also under consideration, but Waller said the league wanted to expand to Mexico first.The league could also return to Canada, where the Bills played several preseason and regular-season games in recent years.A version of this article appears in print on October 8, 2015, on Page B21 of the New York edition with the headline: Owners Weigh Two Proposals for Los Angeles.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.