By CHRISTOPHER CLAREYDEC. 23, 2015
In a year when the sports news was so often dark and demoralizing, women provided much of the light and the lift.From baselines to finish lines, there were women excelling under pressure, and the world was often watching closely.Serena Williams successfully fought off big trouble and nagging injuries for much of the season and came within two matches of the first tennis Grand Slam since 1988. Along the way, the 34-year-old American star sparked in-depth discussions about everything from race relations to body image to foul language, eventually becoming the first woman since the distance runner Mary Decker in 1983 to be named Sports Illustrated magazine’s sportsperson of the year without sharing the award.The United States women’s soccer team, ably led by Carli Lloyd, beat Japan in the final of the World Cup in Vancouver, British Columbia, watched by an average television audience at home of 25.4 million and by record audiences elsewhere.AdvertisementRonda Rousey, an American mixed martial artist, dominated her weight class and sport like few athletes in history until suddenly, stunningly, she did not: Her compatriot Holly Holm knocked her out with a kick to the head in Melbourne, Australia, in front of a crowd of more than 56,000.AdvertisementThat stopped Rousey from remaining undefeated but did not stop her from being the highest paid mixed martial arts fighter — female or male — or the most searched active athlete in the world on Google and Yahoo.There was more, much more.Katie Ledecky of the United States was the dominant figure at the world swimming championships in Kazan, Russia, winning four individual gold medals and setting three world records. Lydia Ko, an 18-year-old New Zealander, became the youngest player — woman or man — to be ranked No.1 in professional golf when she was still 17. And then Alissa St. Laurent, a Canadian ultra-runner, became the first woman to win the 125-kilometer Canadian Death Race in the Rocky Mountains.Simone Biles, an American who has yet to compete in the Olympics but is already, at 18, one of the greatest gymnasts in history, won her third straight world all-around title. Genzebe Dibaba of Ethiopia, the latest Dibaba sister to rise to prominence on the track, set world records at 1,500 meters outdoors and 5,000 meters indoors.Jessica Ennis-Hill of Britain returned from pregnancy to reclaim her world title in the heptathlon. Lindsey Vonn of the United States returned from major injuries to resume winning ski races on the World Cup circuit.There were false notes, too. The Kenyan marathon star Rita Jeptoo was banned for two years because of a positive test for the blood booster EPO, a ban that she is contesting. Suzann Pettersen of Norway drew criticism for not showing sportsmanship at golf’s Solheim Cup by insisting that she had not conceded a short putt after one of her opponents had picked up a ball, assuming exactly that. The American team, inspired by the slight, roared back from a big deficit to win the trophy from the Europeans.But there was also a jarring counterpoint. As visible as female athletes were in 2015, women lost prominence and power in another key domain in the sports world: the boardroom.Stacey Allaster, chief executive of the WTA Tour, stepped down citing burnout and the desire to spend more time with her young children. Debbie Jevans, a Briton who was perhaps Europe’s leading women’s sports executive, also cited personal reasons for resigning as chief executive of England Rugby 2015 less than six months before the start of the Rugby World Cup that she had been instrumental in organizing.AdvertisementAnother industry leader, Mary Wittenberg, who oversaw the New York City marathon as chief executive of New York Road Runners, resigned to lead a start-up lifestyle company, Virgin Sport.Allaster, Jevans and Wittenberg were all replaced by men, and by year’s end there was no woman leading a major professional sport, not even one for women. Steve Simon is in charge of the WTA, Michael Whan is in charge of the L.P.G.A., Jeff Plush runs the National Women’s Soccer League in the United States and Mark Tatum oversees the W.N.B.A., the most prominent women’s professional basketball league, on an interim basis after Laurel J. Richie stepped down after five seasons in 2015.In the Olympic microcosm, where there has been considerable emphasis on this issue and where the percentage of female athletes at the Summer Games is fast approaching 50 percent, only one of the 28 Summer Olympic sports federations has a female president. That is the International Triathlon Union, headed by Marisol Casado of Spain. Only one of the seven Winter Olympic sports federations has a female president: the World Curling Federation, led by Kate Caithness of Britain.Considering the scandals and governance crises that enveloped leading male-dominated federations like FIFA and the I.A.A.F. in 2015, more women in power looked very much like part of the solution. The men could clearly benefit from new perspectives.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“For me, the most important thing about diversity in a workplace is definitely making everyone feel included,” Wittenberg said. “But the diversity that comes from diversity of thinking is also invaluable, and if you don’t have diversity around your executive table or any table, I think you really run a risk today. Organizations, and especially political organizations that lack diversity in any number of ways, including gender — you’re not coming close to representing a world view. Leadership today should be challenged at every turn.”Despite the regression at the top of the sports world’s corporate flow chart, it was still a year for breaking down gender barriers.Jessica Mendoza, an American softball star and Stanford University alumnus, became the first female analyst for a Major League Baseball game in the history of the American television sports channel ESPN. Jen Welter became the first woman to coach in the National Football League in the United States when the Arizona Cardinals hired her as an assistant coaching intern for training camp and the preseason. By year’s end, Chan Yuen-ting had became the first female head coach in the history of Hong Kong Premier League soccer, taking over at Eastern.But top coaching positions for women remain difficult to secure and have become, in some cases, even more difficult to secure. At the women’s soccer World Cup, 16 of the 24 head coaches were men.The American college system, one of the world’s great sources of women’s sports talent, has seen a significant drop in the percentage of women who are coaching women’s teams since the introduction of Title IX legislation in 1972. Title IX mandated gender equity for girls and boys in educational programs, including sports, that receive federal funding. The mandate does not apply to coaches, and as the prestige and paychecks of coaching women’s collegiate teams have increased exponentially, so have the number of highly qualified male applicants.Advertisement“You have plenty of women athletes who have never had a female coach, so they’ve never seen a woman in power,” said Nancy Hogshead-Makar, a former Olympic swimming champion from the United States who now heads Champion Women, an advocacy organization for girls and women in sports. “So there’s that adage that you have to see it to believe it. They need that role model to think, one, that they can get into that field but, two, that they can have that sense of authority and that sense of leadership for themselves in their professional life.”Claudia Bokel, a former Olympic fencer for Germany who is a member of the International Olympic Committee, agrees that role models are important. But she not only sees progress, she also represents it as the first female chairman of the I.O.C.’s athletes commission, a post that gives her a spot on the I.O.C.’s powerful executive board.“We’re four women in the I.O.C. executive board, which is quite a high percentage,” Bokel said of the 15-member group. “So I think we are getting there.”The other female members are Anita DeFrantz, Gunilla Lindberg and Nawal el-Moutawakel, the vice president.Presidencies remain elusive, however.“The pipeline of talented young women is quite deep and pretty broad in sports management right now,” Wittenberg said. “If those women get the opportunity to keep growing, then it will definitely be a different conversation in 10 years time.”For now, the executives’ collective clout is not in the same league as women’s collective impact on the fields and courts of play. Amid the ambient gloom, it was still their year in many respects, from Roberta Vinci’s charming interview (“Sorry, guys, sorry”) after she ended Williams’s Grand Slam bid to Lloyd’s GIF-ready goal from midfield against Japan to Holm’s swift and brutal kick.A version of this special report appears in print on December 24, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.