AdvertisementSupported bySpecial Report: Year in SportsBy Christopher ClareyIt is as rare as a belly laugh from Bill Belichick, but it does happen: The game hyped as the game of the year actually turns out to be the game of the year.So it went in 2015, when the New England Patriots and Seattle Seahawks, the top teams in professional football (the American version), met in Super Bowl XLIX in February in Phoenix. They kept it compelling down to the final minute, which featured an interception for the ages as well as a brawl that might have been the most watched brawl in history, in light of the record United States television audience of 120 million.Naturally, there were other candidates in the great game department. Japan’s stirring upset of South Africa in their first match of pool play at the Rugby World Cup in England in September was a shock and an emotional tour de force. But it ultimately did not reshuffle the deck: South Africa went on to finish third while Japan failed to advance even to the quarterfinals.If we can consider a single game in a tennis match, there was the seventh game of the final set in the United States Open semifinal in September between the No.1 seed, Serena Williams, and the unseeded Italian Roberta Vinci.Williams was two victories from the first Grand Slam in 27 years. Vinci looked on paper (and hard court) like easy pickings, but that was before Williams let the moment and the history get to her. That was also before Vinci held off a game point on Williams’s serve by winning a rally brimming with Latin flair. She then cupped her hand to her ear and let Williams’s fellow Americans know that she deserved a little love of her own.Bravado and Vinci would eventually win out as the Italian broke serve in that fateful game and then finished off the earthquake of an upset with plenty of help from the overwrought Williams, who sometimes looked as if she were playing with ankle weights instead of ankle braces.The final of the women’s World Cup in July was a jaw dropper for different reasons, as the United States quickly transformed what was supposed to be a tight, tactical duel between undefeated teams into a rout in Vancouver, British Columbia. The Americans scored four goals in the first 16 minutes, with Carli Lloyd accounting for three — one of them on a shot from midfield that caught Japan’s goalkeeper, Ayumi Kaihori, too far from her net. But the rest of the Americans’ 5-2 victory — and there was plenty of it — was not nearly such must-see television.European soccer’s Champions League final in June was longer on suspense. But Barcelona and its remarkable attacking trio of Lionel Messi, Luis Suarez and Neymar still beat Juventus soundly, 3-1.No, it was the Super Bowl’s turn. This was true despite the fact that many a non-American struggles to understand the rules and appeal of the country’s favorite diversion. This was also true despite the stiff headwinds facing the National Football League: the dead-serious concerns about head trauma and domestic violence, and the less-weighty obsession with whether Tom Brady and the New England Patriots were responsible for deflating footballs earlier in the playoffs in search of an unfair advantage.Deflategate (the French daily Le Monde called it “Le Deflategate”) dominated the build-up to the Super Bowl, and then dominated the off-season, too, with Brady initially suspended for four games before that ruling was overturned by a federal judge.But the Super Bowl was full of drama minus the courtroom. The game had all the classic ingredients, including a contrast in coaching styles, with the dour and opaque Belichick in charge of the Patriots and the animated chatterbox Pete Carroll directing the Seahawks.It was 14-14 at halftime, then 24-14 in favor of Seattle in the fourth quarter, and then it really got good: Brady and New England rallied to score two touchdowns and take a 28-24 lead, only to see Seattle and the quarterback Russell Wilson move the ball back down the field in a beautiful hurry.The pièce de résistance of that drive was a preposterous 33-yard catch by Jermaine Kearse that was deflected by the cornerback Malcolm Butler and then bounced off Kearse’s thighs, knees and gloved fingertips before — lying flat on his back — he finally controlled it.If there were ever a right moment for the NBC commentator Al Michaels to reprise his famous “Do you believe in miracles?” line from the 1980 Olympic hockey tournament, this was it. Michaels resisted, but Brady, deflated beyond any doubt at this stage, could not suppress a long and mournful “Mannnnn” as he sat next to the Patriots offensive coordinator, Josh McDaniels, on the sideline.The Patriots, after all, had been done in by wonder catches in Super Bowls past (see the New York Giants receiver David Tyree pinning the ball to his helmet in XLII).This time it was first and goal for the Seahawks from the 5-yard-line with a minute and six seconds to play. On the next play, Marshawn Lynch, Seattle’s bruiser in chief, ran the ball down to the 1 before Dont’a Hightower somehow shrugged off a block and brought the big man down just short of a touchdown.American football, American sport in general, is numbers driven, and the numbers were, as usual, available. According to Advanced Football Analytics, Seattle’s chances of winning at this stage were 88 percent, and frankly that seemed conservative.But a game of the year on a planet overrun with games cannot end predictably. On second down and goal with 26 seconds left and Lynch still willing and available to take another handoff, Seattle took the road less traveled — and passed.It made all the difference. Butler, a reserve cornerback and undrafted rookie who was understandably convinced he would be the goat after Kearse had played pinball wizard at his expense, turned out to be quite the contrary.This was not by chance. He recognized an opportunity and made it happen, correctly reading the pick play and slant route the Seahawks were counting on and beating Ricardo Lockette to the ball as he and Lockette collided.It was the first interception of Butler’s N.F.L. career.End of drive. End of a truly super Bowl. But only the start of the coffeehouse debate: “Why the $%&# hadn’t the Seahawks handed the ball off to Lynch?”Carroll, once he had returned to upright position, had explanations, some of them even logical, but Brady and the Patriots had the essential.“Heck of a game,” Brady said to Wilson as they shook hands.Game of the year.Advertisement