By TYLER KEPNEROCT. 7, 2015
Carlos Beltran is 38 years old, more than a decade removed from his early career with the Kansas City Royals and the Houston Astros, who meet in an American League division series starting Thursday at Kauffman Stadium in Kansas City, Mo. Naturally, when asked Tuesday what most impressed him about the Astros, who had just vanquished his Yankees in the A.L. wild-card game, Beltran cited their youth.“Young team,” he said. “They play hard; they have speed; they have three good outfielders playing out there.”The same could be said of the Royals, who swept through the A.L. playoffs last fall with an all-out blitz on the bases and in the outfield. This will be a high-energy series, with the Royals — the defending A.L. champions and the owners of the league’s best record this year — trying to fend off a team riding the same kind of high that they felt after winning the wild-card game last season.“Nobody really gave us anything at the start of the year, and I don’t think anybody gave us a shot at the end of the year,” said Houston’s Dallas Keuchel, who stifled the Yankees for six innings in Tuesday’s 3-0 win. “We’ll have as much fun as we possibly can in Kansas City.”AdvertisementThe comparison between the teams goes only so far. Both teams steal bases, but their hitters are far different. The Astros’ hitters led the A.L. in strikeouts while the Royals’ hitters had the fewest. The Astros finished second in home runs while the Royals finished second to last. The Astros drew the fifth-most walks, and the Royals drew the fewest.Kansas City has lined up Yordano Ventura to start Game 1, with Johnny Cueto in Game 2 and Edinson Volquez in Game 3. The Astros would seem likely to start the 19-game winner Collin McHugh in the opener, with Keuchel on track for Game 3 in Houston, where he was 15-0 this season.AdvertisementWHEN A STAR IS NOT A STAR It would be hard to find a better active position player who has never been picked for an All-Star team than Royals first baseman Eric Hosmer. A two-time Gold Glove winner, Hosmer hit .351 in the postseason last year and followed up with a terrific 2015: a .297 average, 18 home runs and a career-best .822 on-base plus slugging percentage.FIERS’S HARROWING JOURNEY Astros starter Mike Fiers, who threw a no-hitter in August, is lucky to be alive. In January 2008, as he drove overnight from his home in Florida to the University of the Cumberlands in Kentucky, he fell asleep. He crashed into a guardrail along Florida’s Turnpike and was ejected through his windshield. He dislocated his hip and had four fractures in his back. “I had to use a walker and have a back brace on all day until I went to sleep at night,” Fiers said in 2012. He missed the 2008 season and transferred to Nova Southeastern University in Florida, closer to his home, and was drafted as a sixth-year senior in 2009.HOW LOW CAN HE GO? The Royals’ Wade Davis, a rare late-inning reliever with three dominant pitches (fastball, cutter, curveball), took over the closer’s role in September after Greg Holland’s elbow injury. Davis had a 0.94 E.R.A. this season after posting a 1.00 mark last year. He is the only pitcher in major league history to have two seasons of at least 65 appearances and an E.R.A. no higher than 1.00. “I’ve been in awe of him since he picked up a ball,” said Chicago White Sox starter Chris Sale, who led the A.L. in strikeouts.HE’S IN THE RIGHT PLACE Strange stuff you notice while looking at the scoreboard during an Astros game: The team’s catcher, Jason Castro, is from Castro Valley, Calif., and his name is a mash-up of his position (C) and his organization (Astro).SCOUT’S HONOR Royals reliever Ryan Madson had Tommy John surgery in 2012 and did not pitch that season or the next. He sat out 2014 and would probably have stayed retired, but then he started giving pitching lessons to children near his home in California. When Jim Fregosi Jr., a Royals scout who signed Madson for Philadelphia in 1998, took a high school prospect to Madson for tutoring, Madson could feel the life returning to his arm. “I said, ‘If you can throw the ball across a mound, I’ll sign you to a minor league contract because I believe in you,’ ” Fregosi said. Madson signed the deal, made the team, appeared in 68 games and posted a 2.13 E.R.A. — the best mark of his nine full major league seasons.ROLE MODEL FOR SPRINGER The Astros beat out the Minnesota Twins, among others, for the second A.L. wild-card spot. In doing so, right fielder George Springer sent his hero home for the winter. Springer grew up near New Britain, Conn., when Torii Hunter, who went on to a long major league career, played for the Class AA team there. Springer, then 8 years old, was friends with the son of the team’s public-address announcer, and he tossed around a football with Hunter at a team barbecue. “It was something special to me,” Springer told The St. Paul Pioneer Press last month. “He’s been my idol ever since.”AdvertisementDROUGHT IS OVER After 1,691 career games, Royals outfielder Alex Rios has finally reached the postseason. Rios, who has also played for the Blue Jays, the White Sox and the Rangers, had the highest game total among active players without a postseason appearance. With Jose Bautista, Edwin Encarnacion and Chase Headley also reaching the playoffs for the first time this fall, the new leader in the dubious category is Milwaukee first baseman Adam Lind, who has played 1,102 career games, mostly for Toronto.ALL THOSE YEARS AGO The man who started the Mets’ last postseason game, Oliver Perez, is still around as a left-handed specialist in the Astros’ bullpen. Perez, who sometimes twists his body toward second base before delivering a pitch, has meandered through four organizations, as well as the Mexican League, since the Mets released him in 2011. But left-handers hit just .185 off him this season, with 33 strikeouts and five walks in 98 plate appearances. (Righties, alas, hit .310.)COMMON ALUMNI Outfielder Terry Puhl, who hit .372 in three playoff series for the Astros in the 1980s, spent his career with Houston until a 15-game cameo with the Royals in 1991. Shortstop Buddy Biancalana, a sensation for the Royals in the 1985 World Series, had the opposite experience, ending his career with 18 games for Houston in 1987. Biancalana gained a measure of fame in that ’85 season when David Letterman compared his career hits total to that of Pete Rose, who was then chasing Ty Cobb’s record. Biancalana, who was 113 for 550 in his career, finished 4,143 hits behind Rose.PLAYOFF HISTORY The Astros would have faced the Royals in the 1980 World Series had they held their three-run lead in the eighth inning over Philadelphia in the decisive game of the National League Championship Series. So this is the teams’ first meeting in the postseason and the first between the cities’ teams since Jan. 16, 1994, when Joe Montana and Marcus Allen led a furious fourth-quarter comeback to lift the Chiefs over the Oilers, 28-20.A version of this article appears in print on October 8, 2015, on Page B17 of the New York edition with the headline: Searching for Comparison to Astros? For Starters, Check the Other Dugout .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.