AdvertisementSupported byBy Tim RohanShortly after the Mets lost the World Series last month, Daniel Murphy stood at his Citi Field locker answering questions about his two ugly errors in the final two games against Kansas City. Surrounded by reporters, Murphy noticed David Wright motioning for him.“Sorry, guys,” Murphy said. “The captain needs me.”So Murphy followed Wright back onto the field, where they and their teammates received one final ovation from Mets fans who were appreciative of everything the club had accomplished in 2015. Murphy, who had propelled the Mets through much of the postseason with a stunning, and record-setting, streak of home runs, received some of the biggest cheers. Now, however, those cheers may start turning into boos. Murphy, a 30-year-old second baseman, agreed on Thursday to a three-year deal with the rival Washington Nationals, pending a physical, according to a person in baseball with knowledge of the situation. The signing will add another layer of intrigue to the intense competition between two teams in the National League East. The 2016 season has already become more interesting.For Mets fans, Murphy’s departure stings, but it comes as no surprise. When the Mets acquired second baseman Neil Walker from the Pittsburgh Pirates this month, it became clear that Murphy, a free agent seeking a substantial multiyear deal, would be playing somewhere else in 2016.Now he is, for a team that is scheduled to play the Mets 19 times next season, with the first meeting coming on May 17 at Citi Field.The Mets drafted Murphy in the 13th round in 2006 and watched him reach the major leagues just two years later. He could drive Mets fans mad with his inconsistent defense and occasionally illogical base running, but he could always hit, which he demonstrated dramatically during the 2015 postseason.Suddenly displaying more power than at any other point in his eight-year tenure with the Mets, Murphy set a major league record by hitting a home run in six consecutive playoff games. In effect, he powered the Mets into the Series. Sports Illustrated featured him on its cover. Children mobbed him for autographs in a local park. One of his teammates, Curtis Granderson, joked that he would be able to tell people he played with Babe Ruth.Along with Wright, Murphy was also one of the few Mets who had lived through the team’s lean years, six consecutive losing seasons that did not end until this year. He was a respected clubhouse leader who organized Bible-study sessions on road trips and talked hitting with rookies.And hitting was certainly what he did best. During the regular season in 2015, Murphy batted .281 and had 54 extra-base hits and 73 R.B.I. Over all, he hit .288 as a Met with 62 home runs. His left-handed bat was consistently dangerous, whether he hit second in the batting order, or third, or even in the cleanup spot. He made the 2014 All-Star team, and in 2015, he struck out just 38 times in 499 at-bats, a testament to his discipline at the plate.Still, when Murphy became a free agent last month for the first time in his career, the Mets showed little interest in retaining him. His postseason home runs had increased his market value, making him more expensive to re-sign, and the Mets were clearly weary of his misadventures in the field. In addition, the Mets were intrigued by the potential of Dilson Herrera, 21, who may turn out to be the Mets’ second baseman of the future.So for the Mets, a more sensible plan was to trade for Walker, a steady player who is roughly equivalent to Murphy — they are even the same age — but who is signed only through next season. That, in turn, allows the Mets to let Herrera keep developing in the minor leagues for another season and then decide whether he seems ready to take over in the major leagues in 2017.Murphy becomes the third significant Met to depart this off-season. The first, the veteran left-hander Jon Niese, was traded to Pittsburgh in the deal for Walker. Outfielder Michael Cuddyer retired. Another important Met from 2015, outfielder Yoenis Cespedes, is also certain to be with a new team next season. He is seeking a free-agent deal for more than $100 million — much more than the $37.5 million that Murphy is receiving, according to multiple reports. The Mets will receive a high draft pick as compensation for losing Murphy. His imperfections made him the perfect Met, but now he is gone. Advertisement