By CHRISTOPHER CLAREYDEC. 24, 2015
In sports, as in life, there is what you must do and then there is what you should do.For now, nothing legally obliges Vin Lananna and the leaders of the 2021 world track and field championships in Eugene, Ore., to surrender their prize and re-enter a formal bidding process next year. Their small city remains — paradoxical but true — a fine and bold choice for this major event and the only vehicle available at the moment to bring it to the still-vital United States market.But in view of the circumstances and in light of track and field’s shattered credibility, handing it back would be a strong signal that the sport is truly serious about embarking on a more transparent path, one in which too much power and influence no longer rests with too few.“I think that would be very, very natural,” Bjorn Eriksson, the former head of the 2021 bid team from Gothenburg, Sweden, said in a telephone interview. “I would be happy if Gothenburg would try a second time, just for fairness and justice.”The United States, long the dominant nation in track and field, has never staged the world outdoor championships, which began in 1983 and are the sport’s leading non-Olympic event.AdvertisementMajor American cities have been unable to muster the financing, track-specific facilities and public interest. But last year, Eugene — home to the University of Oregon and to a passionate track-and-field fan base — bid for the 2019 championships, losing a close vote to Doha, Qatar.AdvertisementEugene officials were encouraged by that strong finish and by feedback from the sport’s governing body, the International Association of Athletics Federations. And so, led by Lananna, an associate athletic director at Oregon, they made another push. Lananna is president of Tracktown USA, the private entity with links to Nike that submitted the original bid. He lobbied for 2021 while emphasizing that Eugene’s coalition of public and private financing might not hold firm for long. He traveled to Monaco in February to meet discreetly with Lamine Diack, then the I.A.A.F. president.“He made it very clear when I talked to him that it will not be his decision, that it will be a decision of council and it will be a democratic process,” Lananna said of Diack in a telephone interview on Saturday.Diack, eager to bring the world championships to the United States as part of his presidential legacy, decided to put Eugene on the agenda at the I.A.A.F. council meeting in Beijing in April. Lananna said Diack never made it clear to him there would be a vote on 2021 during that meeting.“We didn’t know what he was going to do,” Lananna said.Yet despite Gothenburg’s interest, the I.A.A.F. council chose to skip a formal bidding process and instead vote on whether to award Eugene the event unilaterally. The vote, by secret ballot, was 23-1 in favor with one abstention.“We had to make a strategic decision, and to go to the United States is very important to us,” Diack said in an interview on the day of the vote.It was a landslide, but the understandable concern at this stage is that it might have been more of a mudslide, now that Diack is under formal investigation for corruption in France, where prosecutors are examining his role in suspected doping cover-ups. French prosecutors also have indicated that they are investigating the process that led to Eugene’s receiving the 2021 championships.Lananna said he was “100 percent confident” that Eugene’s candidacy had adhered to all legal norms. On Saturday, he said he had not been contacted by French authorities.Advertisement“Everybody’s troubled by the whole thing — who couldn’t be?” Lananna said. “But 23 people voted for it. This is not a Diack decision. This was 23 people that were on the council, and they decided strategically this was the right thing. It’s still the right thing.”And yet irrespective of the vote, Diack clearly drove the timing of the decision.“The interesting thing is he actually claimed as late as, I think, in January that there should be a fair process, and that no decision should be taken until the different bids have been evaluated,” Eriksson said. “And suddenly something happened, and the question is why and how?”Reopening the bidding process would also allow further public scrutiny of Nike and its role in Eugene’s candidacy: welcome in light of the new I.A.A.F. president Sebastian Coe’s longstanding commercial ties to the company that he only recently severed; welcome, too, in light of Lananna’s connections even if Lananna says that Nike, based in nearby Beaverton, played no formal role in the bid.Eriksson wants a full accounting of 2021, preferably from the French police. No evidence has surfaced publicly that Diack’s interest in and connection to Eugene was corrupt. But the process, even if it proves free of corruption, was flawed, and with Coe and the I.A.A.F. scrambling to institute internal reforms and external oversight, allowing a process like Eugene 2021 to stand seems badly out of tune with the times. Why clean house and skip a room?Coe, who said he voted for the Eugene 2021 proposal, maintains that the decision was the correct one in light of the need to rebuild interest in the United States.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Do I think the council made the right strategic decision? Yes I do,” he said. “All I would say is if anything surfaces that would make me uncomfortable about the nature of the decision that was taken that day or the background to it, I will act very swiftly.”Coe said the same for Doha, which secured the 2019 championships through a formal bidding process that is under scrutiny in the wake of allegations that a Kenyan track official received motor vehicles as a gift from the Qatar Association of Athletics Federation.“It’s not just world championships,” Coe said. “We’ve got to be clear that decisions that are made are made on a level playing field.”AdvertisementWould the Swedes still be interested? “It depends on what’s happening on the other side of the table,” Eriksson said. “Are we dealing with 100 percent honest people?”Lananna is not prepared to take the risk of being magnanimous, even if a revote could be organized quickly, presumably in 2016, the year it was supposed to have been in the first place.He pointed out that commitments have been made in Eugene, and the expansion of tiny, iconic Hayward Field, expected to begin later this year, will be done differently if the championships are coming.“I would say it was like a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity,” Lananna said. “We’re in the right place at the right time, and if we were to go down any other route I think we would essentially put the opportunity at risk.”Acknowledging that “there’s a credibility issue right now,” he said: “Let’s restore the faith in the sport by hosting it in the United States for the very first time. To me, that’s the very best way we can build a future for the sport we love.”But building a future is also about something more. It is about showing fans, athletes and the residents of Gothenburg that track and field can now be trusted to do the right thing even when it is risky, even when it is inconvenient.The On Track and Field column on Friday, about the controversial process that awarded the 2021 world track and field championships to Eugene, Ore., misstated part of the name of the stadium that would host the event. It is Hayward Field, not Hawyard Field.A version of this article appears in print on December 25, 2015, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: Plea for Global Good: Rebid on 2021 Worlds .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.