By KEN BELSONDEC. 24, 2015
OAKLAND, Calif. — It was group therapy night on Monday at Ricky’s Sports Theater and Grill, where clumps of Raiders fans alternated among anger, hope and fatalism.On Thursday — Christmas Eve, no less — the Raiders played their last home game of the year, and possibly their last home game ever in Oakland.After yet another underwhelming season ends, the Raiders, along with the San Diego Chargers (who lost to Oakland, 23-20, in overtime Thursday night) and the St. Louis Rams, are expected to apply to relocate to Los Angeles. The 32 N.F.L. owners could vote as soon as Jan. 12 on whether to allow one or two of them to leave.At Ricky’s, in San Leandro, a 10-minute drive south of O.co Coliseum, fans stewed amid the old Raiders programs, bobbleheads and jerseys lining the walls, fearing the worst about the possible move yet looking for signs of optimism.They had been here before — the team left Oakland for Los Angeles after the 1981 season but returned in 1995.AdvertisementAnd so over wings and beers, members of Save Oakland Sports, a fan group, worked through the scenarios: The Rams move, and the Chargers and the Raiders stay; the Chargers and the Raiders, who want to build a stadium together near Los Angeles, move; the Raiders build a new stadium in Oakland; and on and on.Advertisement“We live in this era of stadium roulette, where you don’t know which chamber the bullet is in,” said Dave Newhouse, a longtime sportswriter who covered the Raiders in the 1970s. “You’ll never see a more abused set of fans.”More than in previous years when the N.F.L. flirted with putting a team in Los Angeles, all signs suggest the league is taking the issue seriously, with a high probability that at least one team will land there next season or the season after.The reason a move seems likely now is that the owners of three teams are willing to put up the total cost, or close to it, of building a new stadium there. They have also arrived at the point where they can get out of leases in their home markets.But the league owners have not reached a consensus on how to proceed.Some owners favor a plan by the owner of the Rams, E. Stanley Kroenke, to build a domed stadium on the southwest fringe of Los Angeles, as part of a retail and entertainment district in Inglewood, Calif. Other owners like the proposal made by the Chargers and the Raiders, which calls for an outdoor stadium in Carson, about 15 miles south of downtown Los Angeles, that would be built by a venture with Disney’s chief executive, Robert A. Iger, at the top.Before moving forward, the owners must, according to their relocation guidelines, take into account what Oakland, San Diego and St. Louis have done to keep their teams.St. Louis has done the most. It cleared many legal and financial hurdles in planning for a new $1 billion stadium, largely government-funded, on the banks of the Mississippi River. The Rams have not publicly commented on the stadium proposal.Civic advisers in San Diego proposed building a new stadium next to the Chargers’ current home, but the team dismissed the effort as too little, too late.AdvertisementOakland lags behind.The city has said that it cannot afford to spend hundreds of millions of dollars on new stadiums for the Raiders and the Athletics, who share O.co Coliseum (the “O.co” derives from Overstock.com’s marketing name, although local residents still call it Oakland Coliseum). Oakland and Alameda County are still paying off their share of a $220 million renovation that added more than 10,000 seats and suites, nicknamed Mount Davis in reference to Al Davis, the Raiders’ owner at the time.Mayor Libby Schaaf said the city, which along with the county owns the land around the Coliseum, could retire the roughly $100 million in debt on the building and make infrastructure improvements on the property if the Raiders built there. But Schaaf said that might not be enough to impress the league.“I know the N.F.L. doesn’t expect a fully baked proposal from Oakland,” Schaaf said in an interview this week. “Oakland has a very complex situation, and we’re really committed to threading the needle of keeping this team we love but also being responsible to our taxpayers.”Schaaf is hopeful, however, that when the owners weigh what city or cities they are willing to abandon, they recognize that Oakland has a booming economy in the country’s sixth-largest television market. (St. Louis is the 21st largest; San Diego is the 28th.) And while the Raiders (7-8) have not finished with a winning record since 2002 — and they are out of playoff contention for the 13th straight season — the team has a rich history in the city dating to 1960.The Raiders could also stay by default if the league’s owners decide that only one team could succeed at selling enough luxury seats, suites, regular tickets and sponsorships in the Los Angeles area, which has not had an N.F.L. team in two decades.“I’ve always looked at this as the owners trying to solve a Rubik’s cube blindfolded with vertigo,” Andy Dolich, a former executive with the A’s, the San Francisco 49ers and other teams, said of all the variables confronting the league. “Just because someone spent $60 on a Raiders jersey doesn’t mean he is going to spend $60,000 on personal seat licenses to see the Raiders in Los Angeles.”Through a spokesman, the Raiders’ owner, Mark Davis, declined to be interviewed.On Thursday morning, a dozen or so fans stood in the rain outside the Raiders’ offices to let Davis know of their devotion.“Stay in Oakland, Mark; do what’s right,” screamed Ray Perez, a fan who goes by the nickname Dr. Death. “This is bigger than football. This is our family crest.”AdvertisementAt the stadium a few hours later, Andy Coronado, a retired deputy sheriff from Stockton, was calmer. Sitting in his black and silver bus, he said that he preferred the Raiders stay put but that he would follow them to Carson if they moved.“Business is business,” he said. “If they go, I go.”Many other fans nearby were less accepting, including the mayor’s mother, Barbara Schaaf-Schock, a fan since the 1960s.“As far as I can tell, there’s a wall around Oakland,” she said when asked if she would travel to Los Angeles to root for the team.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Davis has said he would prefer to stay in Oakland. Under one scenario, that would be a possibility, but perhaps only for an additional year. It would hinge on only the Chargers or the Rams — not both — moving to Los Angeles next season, giving Oakland more time to come up with a way to keep the team.If no progress was made, the Raiders could apply to move in 2017 and share the stadium built by the Chargers or the Rams.“Moving it back a year might buy them time politically and economically,” said David Carter, the executive director of the Sports Business Institute at the University of Southern California.That is the hope Raiders fans are clinging to. They are encouraged when Davis professes his love for Oakland yet are dismayed to read news reports that say the team is open to moving to cities like San Antonio.“The Raiders have been threatening to move somewhere else for 35 years, and the fans just keep coming to the games,” said Chris De Benedetti, another member of Save Oakland Sports. “If there’s a bad idea hall of fame, the Raiders moving to L.A. again would be a first-ballot entry.”AdvertisementNot to add to the angst, but the Golden State Warriors, who play in an arena next door to O.co Coliseum, have laid the groundwork for a move to San Francisco. The A’s have fought for years to move to San Jose but have been rebuffed by Major League Baseball.At least those teams would still be in the region.A Raiders move nearly 400 miles away to Southern California — a six-hour drive or worse — would send fans into a tailspin and, in their view, contradict the team’s silver-and-black bad-boy motif, which they believe befits the city’s roughhewn edges and industrial past.In a room at Ricky’s on Monday, a couple of dozen members of the Raiders Booster Club were having their annual Christmas toy drive. After a loss the day before to the Green Bay Packers, which ensured another nonwinning season, the boosters contemplated the game Thursday against the Chargers.Contrary to the hand-wringing at the other end of the restaurant, a more resigned mood prevailed.“It’s one conversation we don’t talk about at the meeting because there’s nothing we can do about it,” said Wayne Deboe, the chapter president. “So far, there’s been talk but no action.”A version of this article appears in print on December 25, 2015, on Page B7 of the New York edition with the headline: In Oakland, Some Fear Meaning of ‘Last Home Game’ .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.