AdvertisementSupported byBy Harvey Araton and Scott CacciolaThe Golden State Warriors will take an intimidating 27-1 record into their Christmas Day showdown with LeBron James and the Cleveland Cavaliers, the group they conquered in six games in last season’s N.B.A. finals. As good as the Warriors were then, they are better now, led by the increasingly amazing Stephen Curry, who has bumped James aside as the most dynamic player in the league.So how do you beat Curry and his supporting cast? How do you cope with a team that ranks No. 1 in the league in offense, and a respectable No. 7 in defense, and uses the 3-pointer to simply overwhelm the opposition? The New York Times posed those questions to some smart basketball minds at all levels of the game — high school, college and the pros.• • •Pete Carril, former Princeton coach and Sacramento Kings assistant. Carril was known for slowing the pace in the college game, albeit with a longer shot clock.“I’ll tell you, this kid Curry is probably the best shooter I’ve ever seen — that’s 70 years. Where’s the flaw? He’s an expert dribbler, very fast, sees everyone who’s open. If you don’t get up on him, he shoots from 25. If you get up on him at 25, he shoots from 30. If you get up on him at 30, he’ll go by you. He also guards people. And he’s playing with other shooters — anybody on that team can make a 3-pointer, and Klay Thompson is about as good at it as Curry.“I don’t have any revolutionary ideas, but the way I would want to play them is to work it so you took every shot with five or less seconds on the clock. You’d have to quit shooting fast, never off the first pass. I wouldn’t even fast break on them. Of course, the fans don’t want to see that. What did they say about watching my teams at Princeton? It was like going to the dentist. But I’m trying to win the game, so I want to try anything I can to get them out of their rhythm, limit their possessions as much as I can, put them to sleep.”• • •Richie Adubato, longtime N.B.A. assistant, former head coach of the Dallas Mavericks and the W.N.B.A.’s Liberty, and now a broadcaster for the Orlando Magic.“Starting off with Curry, I have never seen anybody handle and shoot off the dribble like him. Usually guys have to come back to a proper shooting form off the dribble. He goes behind his back, through his legs and shoots from the side, from his hip, off one foot, falling back.“The only guy I can think of who played like him was Pete Maravich, and even he had to pretty much get back into normal shooting position for his jump shot. Talk about Jordan, Kobe, the great scorers of all time, never seen anybody like this guy. He could be the best one of all before he’s finished.“In planning for them, we all know how good they are, how deep they are. The normal decision with great, great players has always been to let him get his 40 and shut everyone else down, or go at the great player and make the other guys beat you. In this case, because of how creative Curry is and how good Thompson, Draymond Green and the other guys are, it has to be a variety of things. For instance, I would trap Curry in a lot of pick-and-roll situations, but then, of course, you have to have quick defensive rotations.“I would also try to force him to the baseline and trap him there with the nearest big guy. But you can’t give him the same look every time; he’s too smart, too fast, too good with the ball.“The one thing you have to do is run him off the 3-point line as much as you can. When I had Becky Hammon with the Liberty, she was a little like Curry in the women’s game. Only 5-6, but she was so good at the 3-point line that you had to get her off there. So what happened next? She would go in the lane, and even though she couldn’t really jump, she knew how to use her body and use the rim for protection. They couldn’t block her shot; I only remember Lisa Leslie blocking her once or twice. Same thing with Curry. At least in the lane, you are taking some of the court away from him.“On offense, I’m going to post him up every time — hopefully with a guard who has size and strength over him. He’s a tough kid, but if you have a guy who can score down there, pick up a foul or two on him, the help will come, and then you’ll get some open looks.“Of course, they are not a one-man team, far from it, but it all begins with Curry. So my strategy is basically this: Trap him and post him. And most of all, when defending him, you’ve got to understand that he’s not easily giving up his dribble, which means you have to work that much harder.”• • •Steve Finamore, coach of East Lansing High School in Michigan, former assistant at St. Peter’s College (now St. Peter’s University) in Jersey City, and former member of the support staff for Tom Izzo at Michigan State.“I have watched Golden State very closely. Here’s what I would do if I was preparing a scouting report for our team. Defense: Be ready to play at the start. Golden State strikes quickly. They are jumping out to big leads early. Have to match their energy at the start of the game. You have to know where Steph Curry is at all times. He’s the craftiest player we have seen in a long time. Trap him every chance you get. Other three defenders have to see the ball and rotate, anticipating where his next pass is going. Rotation on defense has to be quick; you can never relax. See the ball!“High hands on all closeouts on their outside shooters. Box out, rebound and run. All five guys have to hit the boards. Can’t give them any second-chance opportunities. Most importantly, get back on defense. Can’t jog back. Have to find your man in transition and match up quickly. Switch all ball screens. Talk on defense. Defend with toughness. Play physical.“Offense: Pound it inside. Use up the shot clock as much as possible. Be patient. Can’t get caught up in outscoring them. Slow the game down in the halfcourt set. Take Curry in the post. Make him work on defense. Move the ball. It can’t stick. Make their defense work. Don’t force the issue. Drive the ball to the basket; don’t settle for outside shots. Missed outside shots lead to run-outs for their fast break. Send four guys to the offensive glass. Their wings are leaking out to start their break.“Over all: If you fall behind by a lot early in the game, you can’t think it’s over. Have to keep battling. Body language has to be strong. Play with confidence. Rebound, get the 50-50 balls, play with energy and effort. The little things have to be covered. Christmas night they play the Cavs. Jan. 25 they play the Spurs. Two teams I think can beat them.”• • •Isiah Thomas: Liberty president, Hall of Fame point guard with the Detroit Pistons.“First of all, I like the idea of the Warriors’ dominance. Never been one to be into this parity thing. What Golden State is doing is great for our league. They’re really, really — and I’ll say really about 10 times — good. And if other teams can’t reach their level of greatness, go home and practice. Get better.“Having said that, it’s not going to be a game plan of X’s and O’s that beats them. You can’t even begin to implement a game plan against them unless you have convinced your guys to take on the challenge of staying in front of their man. It’s going to be a mind-set, pros against pros, five against five, deciding that you have to stop your man, guard your man, 94 feet, 48 minutes. If Curry comes down and hits a 3 from 29 feet with a hand in his face, there’s nothing you can do about that.“Listen, we’ve had great offensive players before in this league. I played against two of the best — Michael Jordan and Kareem. Michael would get 30 and 40 against us, but I don’t remember him getting them without a hand in his face.“The rules favor the offense now; that’s the way it is in all sports. That’s what people want to see. How good would Larry Bird shoot with the way defense is played now, especially on the perimeter?“I played on some of the best defensive teams ever, my whole life — high school, college, pros — when you could actually get close to the ball. Now, with the rules being what they are, you have too many people can’t play defense, make no attempt. Right now perimeter defense in the N.B.A. is kind of the worst I’ve ever seen, an absolute joke.“If I’m playing against the Warriors, I’m not changing anything I do offensively. You say Pete Carril says he’d slow it down — but he played that way against everybody. What I’m saying is that you have to have five defenders playing their man, particularly guards who are willing to guard, keep Curry and Thompson in front of them. And don’t lose them no matter how many passes they make. I watched the game in Indiana — they got all kinds of open looks. That’s a credit to their patience and ball movement. But that also means guys stopped guarding.“We keep talking about Curry and Thompson, what they do offensively, but they are also two-way players. All of their guys are. So you look at what Golden State has done — they’ve taken old-school basketball and put it into a new-school style of play. You pass, you move, you cut, you screen — and then, on the other side of the ball, you guard.”• • •Scott Davenport, coach at Bellarmine University in Louisville, Ky., a perennial Division II power.“Their ability to pass the basketball is so important. Look at their assist totals — they lead the league in that category. So how do you stop them? I think it’s very difficult and next to impossible to defend against their chemistry. We gave our players here an article that was based off of the N.B.A. playoffs: How often do players tap hands? How often do they fist bump? How often do they acknowledge each other?“I gave that to our players, and I think the one item that we referenced in this article was: How do you defend chemistry? It’s so difficult. You can run Steph Curry off the 3-point line. You can try to out-tough Draymond Green. You can try all those things. How do defend chemistry? Well, you have to draft better than they do and create a better team. Because it’s impossible to defend chemistry.“If you study successful teams — like, you know how much I like the San Antonio Spurs. Well, you look at the way they draft and compare that to the way that Golden State drafts or the way Atlanta has drafted. It’s kind of eerie how similar it is. Draymond Green was a second-round pick. Steph Curry went to Davidson. So that’s what I’m saying. You just have to counter with a better roster or better chemistry. So when you’re asking me, How do you defend Golden State? It’s impossible.“I keep telling our players that the N.B.A. has the best players and the best coaches in the world. They’re the best 30 coaches and the best group of athletes in the world, in any sport. They just are. They play 82 games. It’s incredible. But how come everybody can’t do what Golden State is doing? Because it’s really easy to say, and it’s hard to do.“Mostly, I think it is great for the state of basketball what they’re doing. Because we need young kids to mimic Steph Curry. They can’t mimic LeBron James. That’s impossible. We had 1,200 kids at our summer camp, and they all might grow up to be Steph Curry physically. None of them are going to grow up to be LeBron James: 6-foot-8 and however much he weighs.“So I think it’s great for the game of basketball, just like the Spurs were great for the game. And it’ll raise every level, from a high school freshman team to a varsity team to Division I, II and III. It’ll raise the level. Now, everybody will want to do it. And it’ll be very difficult to do. But the fact that everyone will try is what’s great.”• • •Anthony Bozzella, women’s coach at Seton Hall, which led the Big East Conference last season in defensive field-goal percentage.“I think you have to keep the ball out of Curry’s hands as much as possible. He’s such a dominant player with the ball, and he attracts so much attention. And he can obviously score from anywhere. But I just want to try to keep the ball out of his hands. I’m not saying you face-guard him or anything like that, which is almost impossible in the N.B.A. But whenever you have a chance to double him, you want to try to force him to get rid of the ball.“If Green and Harrison Barnes and a couple of the other players — other than Thompson — want to shoot the ball, you’ll live with that. But Curry is just so effective at getting easy baskets. So we would trap a lot more of their pick-and-rolls. Not traps that are necessarily designed to create turnovers, but traps so that he gets rid of the ball. Ultimately, as great as Green and Barnes are, they’re not him. So let’s force Curry to be more of a facilitator.“Listen, I’m not an N.B.A. coach, and they’re the greatest coaches in the world — they really are — but I just think switching on every screen allows him to have a mismatch so often in a game. So if we’re not switching and we’re doubling him as often as possible, I’d want a quicker guard defending him. I don’t want him going by us. Because then it’s over for us. I see everyone switching on him.“I will also say N.B.A. coaches are so smart, a lot of them don’t want to tip their hand before the playoffs. Because I guarantee, during the playoffs, you’ll see some different schemes. To beat them four times in a series, you’re not switching on every ball screen. I’m interested to see how the Cavs defend them; I really am.“I would really crowd Thompson, too. I don’t want him making six or seven 3s a game. He’s a very good player, but he will take some bad shots at times. He’s such a volume shooter. You look at his percentage, and it’s good. But that’s because he’ll make five in a row; he’s streaky. But if you crowd him, he’ll take some bad shots. I’m never helping off of him.”• • •John Lucas, former N.B.A. player and coach.“The Warriors remind me of the old Don Nelson-coached Warriors, with Chris Mullin, Mitch Richmond and Tim Hardaway. They were always a mismatch nightmare. Everybody was out of position against them. So these Warriors are a lot like that, creating the same problems for teams.“You have to play the whole 48 minutes against them, because they’re never out of a game even if you build a lead against them. They can hit a couple of 3s, and they’re right back in the game. You have to obviously guard above the 3-point line, which makes you vulnerable against the drive. I think one key that no one realizes is how important Draymond Green is to them, because he’s a power forward who can handle the ball, create mismatches and move people around. They also have Andrew Bogut, who comes in, and his presence makes it difficult for defenders to double Green.“It’s a nightmare. No matter who’s on the floor for them, they’re capable of doing three things — dribble, drive and shoot. A lot of teams have players with specialties. All of their guys are basketball players who can do pretty much everything.“The one thing I’d try to do is make them shoot 2s. If I can make them play a traditional game with 2-point shooting, then I’ve got a chance. You can’t outscore them from the 3-point line. I would try to guard above the 3-point line, and then I would probably switch on screens, like everyone else is doing. But I would extend that defense as far as possible.”• • •Kenny Charles, former Fordham and N.B.A. player.“The game has changed. When we played, there was no way guys would just go under screens on pick-and-rolls. These days, there are way too many open jump shooters. It’s interesting to me. And the game isn’t rough enough. What we would consider a normal game, guys today think it’s brutal.“For example, if it’s Randy Smith and I — he was my backcourt teammate — we’d switch a lot on screens. But we’d also fight through screens. We used to go through screens with our elbows high. If you’re going to pick us, you’re going to pay. You’re not going to pick us and have us run around the screen. The game is different now, and some of the rules have changed, but I would’ve defended them differently. If you lose to them, fine. But at least make them work.“And I love them, please, because it’s fun to watch them. But they’re too comfortable. You’re curious how they’d play in my era. I saw that Charles Barkley said recently that he would rough them up. You have to. You’d be clean about it; you’re not trying to hurt them. Nothing illegal. Nothing dirty. But I’d want to make them work and see what happens. No one knocks them off of their positions. And I don’t blame them; no one’s knocking me off of my position. But you want to find out how good they really are.“We had precision teams in the ’70s, too — teams like the Knicks and the Celtics. But nobody was going to run away with 28, 29 wins in a row.“Also, if Curry doesn’t have a great game, you have to beat them. If he scores fewer than 30 points, you have to beat them. And I would put my quickest, strongest guy on him. I would’ve loved to have seen Curry against Scottie Pippen or Michael Jordan, two guys who were long and had quickness.”• • •Brendan Suhr, associate head coach at Louisiana State and a former longtime N.B.A. assistant.“They’re phenomenal. They’re my favorite team in the whole league. But what you have to do against a team like that, or at least try to do, is keep them from playing their pace, their style. You have to walk the ball up the court, literally. The only time you want to fast-break is if you have a wide-open shot, or you’re pushing the ball after a steal or a turnover. Other than that, you have to have incredible discipline. But this all comes with an asterisk, of course: None of this stuff is working right now.“I’ve also always believed in going after their best player. Make Steph play defense every time down the court just to tire him out. I have to put him in a lot of situations where he’s defending screens on the ball and off the ball, and I have to try to wear him out. Then again, frankly, nothing seems to be doing any good against him right now. Every team has tried everything. So whether you’re going to trap them on pick-and-rolls, switch on pick-and-rolls — this guy is as good as I’ve ever seen.“When you have that kind of greatness, all you can hope for is for him to have a rough day. That’s all. To be honest with you, he’s the best shooter I’ve ever seen in the league, and I think he’s the best player in the game. Every night, he’s able to impose his will on the other team, and that’s a sign of greatness. The other thing I love about him, more than anything, is that he lifts his teammates up to his level. No other star in the league is doing it to that extent.“When this team gets to play their style, they’ll impose their will. I’m not very good at math, but what’s their record right now — 27-1? That means one out of every 30 times, someone got lucky. And it wasn’t even a very good team. When they’re playing a big-time opponent, they’re ready to go, man. The only thing that can beat them is the schedule. They had two injuries and a back-to-back after a double-overtime game when they lost to the Bucks. The league office can stand up — it won that game as much as Milwaukee did.“You can only hope for foul trouble to their key players. It’s not a very optimistic viewpoint. And I really believe that, as my friend Jeff Van Gundy would probably say, that in a seven-game series, I don’t think you can beat them if they’re healthy. It’s one thing to win a game or two games against that team, but to beat them four times? I don’t know how you can do that. I think we should just end the season right now. I don’t know what Adam Silver’s TV deal is, but I’d put every game of theirs on national TV.“One more thought: One of the key reasons I feel they’re winning, even in Steve Kerr’s absence, is that they have such a great culture, and I think you cannot overlook that. They have a total acceptance of their roles.”Advertisement