AdvertisementSupported byWarriors 89, Cavaliers 83By Scott CacciolaOAKLAND, Calif. — David Blatt, the coach of the Cleveland Cavaliers, was on the team bus heading to Oracle Arena on Friday morning when he had the strange sensation that he had just left this place. How long had it actually been since the Golden State Warriors ousted the Cavaliers in the N.B.A. finals? To Blatt, it felt like yesterday.“It’s hard not to think about it,” Blatt said, “but it doesn’t do any good.”As much as the Cavaliers have sought to move on from the disappointment of that series, played more than six months ago, many of the complex emotions have lingered: a mix of regret and resolve, the grief over what could have been and the hope of what still could be.The Cavaliers waited 192 days to get another crack at the Warriors, and if the environment felt familiar to them — same heightened level of anticipation, same deafening arena, same formidable opponent — so did the result, as the Warriors escaped with an 89-83 victory.For two opponents capable of exquisite, high-level basketball, the game was more like a mud-wrestling match than a dance recital. The Cavaliers (19-8) shot 31.6 percent from the field. The Warriors (28-1) committed 16 turnovers. They also had to overcome an injury to Stephen Curry, who struggled early before emerging late.Draymond Green had 22 points, 15 rebounds and 7 assists for the Warriors, who won their 32nd straight regular-season home game, a stretch of brilliance dating to January. Curry, who was hindered by a strained right calf, finished with 19 points and shot only 6 of 15.“We wanted to send a message,” Curry said. “I don’t know how long it’ll last going into the playoffs, but every time you play a team that’s playing well and at the top of the league, you want to show up.”The Cavaliers managed to draw hope from the loss. They could not have shot the ball more poorly, finishing a ghastly 5 of 30 from 3-point range, yet their defense limited the Warriors to their lowest point total of the season. James went 4 of 9 from the free-throw line, yet he soared for consecutive dunks late in the fourth quarter that gave his team life.“We gave ourselves a chance,” said James, who had 25 points and 9 rebounds. “If we play like that defensively, we’re going to be a very tough team to beat.”As for the Warriors, they again showed that they could win a defensive tussle. Curry recalled one possession in which he was simply turning to run upcourt. He was neither coming off a screen nor searching for the ball, but he found two defenders impeding his path.“And they weren’t going to leave,” he said.Curry realized then that it was going to be that kind of night, and he said he was happy to play the role of facilitator, deferring to teammates like Green and Klay Thompson.“We obviously want to play better offensively,” Curry said. “But we got stops and grinded it out. For 48 minutes, we pretty much made it difficult for them to get any clean looks.”Golden State tried to create some separation late in the fourth, but its offense was more of a slow drip than water gushing from a fire hose, and the Cavaliers were not finished.Kevin Love (10 points, 18 rebounds) followed James’s back-to-back dunks with a tip-in that cut the Warriors’ lead to 4. James had a chance to make it a one-possession game, but he missed a pair of free throws. Curry capitalized with a layup that pushed the lead back to 6.Both teams missed critical free throws down the stretch, and the Cavaliers were trailing by 85-81 when James launched an air ball from beyond the 3-point arc. The Warriors corralled the rebound, and Andre Iguodala made two free throws with 12.7 seconds remaining to seal the win.“We’ll take a win however we can get them,” said Thompson, who finished with 18 points and 6 rebounds.The lone blemish on the Warriors’ record remains a 108-95 loss to the Milwaukee Bucks on Dec. 12. Since that defeat, which came at the end of a seven-game trip and less than 24 hours after a two-overtime victory over the Boston Celtics, the Warriors have won four straight.Christmas Day games have long been the province of the league’s most compelling, competitive teams (and the Lakers, who were scheduled to face the Clippers on Friday night). The N.B.A. placed 10 teams on this year’s holiday schedule — five nationally televised games stretched across nearly 13 hours and two networks.Some of the usual suspects were left out of the mix, the Knicks among them — a product of their woeful record last season. Carmelo Anthony said it was disappointing.“I love that showtime, especially in New York,” he said this week. “But we’ll get our shot at it. They’ll come back to us.”Perhaps, but Friday’s stage belonged to transcendent players like Curry and James, and to league powers like the Warriors and the Cavaliers, and to their growing rivalry.When these teams met in the finals last season, the Cavaliers were a beaten-up group. They were already missing Love, who had injured in his shoulder in the first round, and then Kyrie Irving fractured his left kneecap in Game 1. James managed to carry a huge load for the duration of the series, but the Warriors won in six games.On Friday, the Cavaliers were much more complete. Love has played terrific basketball this season, but Irving only recently returned to the lineup, and his progress has been halting. He finished with 13 points and 2 assists in 26 minutes, shooting 4 of 15 from the field.As much as the participants tried to paint the game as little more than business as usual, both sides played through some early jitters: missed layups, turnovers and physical defense. The officials let them play on. The game was a bruising affair, and it stayed that way.Like Blatt, Curry said he found himself reflecting on the finals as he drove to the arena.“It definitely refreshed some good memories,” he said.Several hours later, Curry left with some more.REBOUNDSThe Warriors’ Harrison Barnes missed his 12th straight game with a sprained left ankle. Brandon Rush started in his place.Advertisement