AdvertisementSupported byBy Dave SeminaraWhen Jacksonville Jaguars kicker Jason Myers blasted a kickoff through the uprights, moments after missing his seventh extra-point attempt of the season in a Week 14 win over the Indianapolis Colts, the home crowd gave him a sarcastic ovation, prompting him to slam his helmet into an equipment bag.Why the fuss over the loss of a single point? Here’s why:Last season, N.F.L. kickers missed a total of only eight extra points, converting 1,222 of 1,230 attempts. Twenty-six teams did not miss a single attempt, and before this season, it had been 14 years since any kicker missed more than two in a year.Fans became accustomed to near perfection.But this year, after teams voted by 30-2 in the off-season to move extra-point attempts back to the 15-yard line from the 2, these kicks have been anything but automatic.Through Week 15, four kickers, including Myers, had a lower conversion rate for point-after attempts than for field goals. After years in which the league’s conversion rate hovered around 99 percent, league kickers have combined to miss 63 times. That translates to a 94.2 percent success rate.It also makes extra points a more interesting factor as the 2015 season moves toward a conclusion and battles for postseason berths are resolved.Tree diagrams representing the full range of outcomes for teams that are in or have a shot at the N.F.L. playoffs.Extra-point attempts had been spotted at the 2 since 1929. In 1974, the N.F.L. moved the goal posts to the back of the end zone. Even so, until this year, extra points had always been a 19-yard chip shot.Now, however, they are not. And yet the expectations of fans and, to some degree, coaches have not really changed.“The expectation is that you’ll make every single extra point,” said Matt Stover, a retired kicker whose record of converting 422 consecutive extra points was broken this year by the Patriots’ Stephen Gostkowski, whose last miss came in 2006, his rookie season. “But moving it back from the 2 to the 15 is like turning a 2- or 3-foot putt into a 6- or 7-foot putt. A lot more can go wrong.”Myers can attest to that. His seventh miss of the season put his conversion rate at just 76.7 percent. He responded to the jeers by converting his next eight attempts, improving to 81.6 percent.In any case, a low point for kickers remains Steve Little’s 1979 season, when he made only 75 percent of his extra-point attempts.Little’s own story is a harrowing one and far removed from the ebb and flow of the 2015 N.F.L. season. But at its heart, it does point to the singular pressures that kickers face as they stand around and wait to take aim at the goal posts, often enough with a game on the line.Steve Little and his older brother, Gene, honed their kicking skills while learning to play soccer in the European cities Geneva and Oslo. Their father worked for Caterpillar, and the family moved often because of his job, even relocating overseas. Eventually, Steve Little was recruited to be a defensive back or a quarterback at the University of Arkansas, but when coaches saw how strong his leg was, they made him their kicker and punter.He was named an all-American in 1977, the year he equaled an N.C.A.A. record by converting a 67-yard field goal. (The record stands.) Little was one of only four kickers in N.F.L. history to be picked in the first round of the draft. The St. Louis Cardinals raised eyebrows by selecting him 15th in 1978.But he struggled at the professional level, converting just 10 of 19 field-goal attempts and 24 of 32 extra-point tries in 1979. His woes continued into the 1980 season as he missed five of his first eight field-goal attempts. After he missed extra-point attempts on Oct. 5 and Oct. 12, Cardinals Coach Jim Hanifan, had seen enough. He pledged to bring in challengers to practice. If Little outkicked them, he would keep his job; if not, he would not.On Oct. 15, Little squared off in practice against Neil O’Donoghue, an Irish-born kicker who was best known for a spectacularly bungled field-goal attempt in 1978, in which he chased after a bad snap, whiffed and then toppled to the ground. The kickers each had 16 attempts, from various distances. Little made nine, O’Donoghue 14.The following day, the Cardinals placed Little on waivers.“If you don’t do your job for two and a half years, you lose your job,” Hanifan told The Associated Press at the time.In a recent interview, Gene Little said that his brother, whom the Cardinals also used as a punter at times, did not immediately share the bad news with anyone — not his wife, Cindy, him, or his parents. Instead, he went to a few bars, and, after a night of drinking, lost control of his car on wet pavement, hydroplaning off Interstate 270 near St. Louis.The car skidded more than 100 feet before crashing into a road sign. Little’s neck was broken, and he was paralyzed. He would be a quadriplegic for the rest of life.According to an article in The St. Louis Post-Dispatch, it took five men to get Steve Little out of the vehicle. There was a beer can between his legs.“He couldn’t pick up the phone to call any of us when they put him on waivers,” Gene Little said. “He must have felt like ‘I’m supposed to be the best kicker in the world; how can I tell anyone I was released?’ ”After the accident, sympathy letters poured in by the thousands, but Gene Little said that the family never heard from Hanifan, who declined to be interviewed for this article through an intermediary.Less than six months after the accident, and just a week before Little was to leave a rehabilitation facility, his wife served him with divorce papers. She told The Los Angeles Times that the divorce would have happened even without the accident.Gene Little filled the void, becoming his brother’s caregiver, a role he would fill for 19 years until Steve Little died of cardiopulmonary failure in 1999, at 43.During those 19 years, Steve Little eventually gained a small amount of movement in his right shoulder, just enough to operate a mechanized scooter and eat his food if it was cut up for him. A few years after the accident, he started to receive a $4,000-a-month disability check from the N.F.L., but it barely covered the expense of hiring someone to care for him while his brother was at work.And Gene Little said that his brother struggled to come to peace with his fate.Now, looking back, Gene Little said that to him, kickers were like “lone rangers.” “As far as the gift of kicking a football, Steve was as good as anyone,” Gene Little said. “But once you start missing, self-doubt creeps in. A kicker who’s been released is like an outcast — they’re on their own little island.”Stover was never subjected to a kicking competition during practice, as Little was. He said the league’s collective bargaining agreement forced teams to evaluate other kickers outside team practices.But Stover said many kickers in the N.F.L. have no real job security and are always a few misses away from finding their job in jeopardy.Stover believes that moving the extra point back has put kickers under more pressure than ever before. Still, when Troy Vincent, the N.F.L.’s executive vice president for football operations, called him during the off-season to ask his opinion on what should be done to change the extra point, Stover supported the idea of making it harder. Moving the ball back was fine with him.“Making it more difficult values the position,” he said. “It shows you who the very best kickers are in the league — the guys who still aren’t missing.”But with two weeks to go in the season, more guys are missing. A very tough sport has gotten a little tougher.Advertisement