AdvertisementSupported byN.B.A. RoundupBy The Associated PressNo team is better on Christmas than the Miami Heat. And even in an ugly game, their best players, Chris Bosh and Dwyane Wade, delivered when it mattered most.Bosh scored 30 points and grabbed 10 rebounds, Wade added 19 points, and the Heat survived some shaky moments to beat the visiting New Orleans Pelicans, 94-88, in overtime on Friday — spoiling Anthony Davis’s dazzling debut as part of the N.B.A.’s holiday lineup.With their seventh straight win on Christmas, the Heat improved to a league-best 10-2 on the holiday.“Just an ugly game by both teams, but in this league, you’ve got to win the pretty ones and the ugly ones,” said Wade, who has received the most All-Star votes among Eastern Conference guards this season. “It wasn’t going right for us — Chris had it going to keep us afloat — but at the end, I think it just came down to getting some great stops, and we got some timely buckets.”Bosh and Wade combined to score 13 of Miami’s 16 points in overtime.“When the pressure is highest, that’s when they show the most courage,” Heat Coach Erik Spoelstra said.Hassan Whiteside had 17 rebounds for Miami, which improved to 9-1 against teams from the Western Conference. The Heat are only 8-10 against Eastern Conference opponents.Davis was stellar in his Christmas debut, leading the Pelicans with 29 points and 15 rebounds and adding 4 assists, 4 steals and 3 blocks. But he missed a contested jump shot on New Orleans’s final possession of regulation, and the Heat took control in the extra period.Ryan Anderson scored 18 points for the Pelicans, including a tip-in with 1 minute 45 seconds left in regulation that gave New Orleans its first lead, and Eric Gordon finished with 16. Gordon’s 4-point play with 31 seconds left in overtime cut the Pelicans’ deficit to 4, but they got no closer.Miami committed 18 turnovers, but New Orleans scored off only one of them. The Heat outrebounded the Pelicans, 57-45, and Bosh had 21 of his points after halftime.“Christmas Day against one of the best in the league,” Bosh said. “I’m going to rise to the occasion.”ROCKETS 88, SPURS 84 James Harden had 20 points, and Houston slowed down soaring San Antonio with a home victory.The improved Houston defense held the Spurs to a season low in points to end their seven-game winning streak, their longest of the season.Houston mounted an 8-2 run to take a 78-71 lead with about five minutes left. Tim Duncan made a hook shot after that, but Harden hit a 3-pointer. A layup by Duncan came next before Harden brought the crowd to its feet with an off-balance 3-pointer from the corner that made the score 84-75.Soon after that, the Spurs resorted to intentionally fouling Dwight Howard on two straight possessions. He missed all four free throws, and a basket by LaMarcus Aldridge made the score 86-81.Kawhi Leonard made a 3-pointer after two free throws by Houston to allow San Antonio to cut the lead to 4, but he missed a shot a few seconds later, and Houston held on for the victory.BULLS 105, THUNDER 96 Jimmy Butler scored 23 points, and Pau Gasol added 21 points and 13 rebounds as Chicago stopped a three-game losing streak with a victory at Oklahoma City.Derrick Rose finished with 19 points for the Bulls, and Taj Gibson had 13 points and 10 rebounds.Kevin Durant had 29 points, 9 rebounds and 7 assists for Oklahoma City, and Russell Westbrook added 26 points, 8 assists and 7 rebounds. The Thunder had won three straight and nine of 10.Oklahoma City shot 38.5 percent from the field, its third-worst mark of the season.Advertisement