By CHRISTOPHER CLAREYDEC. 25, 2015
Safely on terra firma in Tasmania after finishing second last year in the Rolex Sydney Hobart Race, the Australian sailor Jimmy Spithill declared, “We can’t leave it at that.”True to his word, Spithill is back for another crack at his country’s most famous regatta, back for another shot at the perennial winner Wild Oats XI and a second chance to give the American billionaire Jim Clark and his Australian wife, Kristy, what they paid for when they commissioned Comanche, their cutting-edge, 100-foot super maxi.The goal was to break speed records, which Comanche managed quite nicely in its first year of existence, setting a 24-hour distance mark for a monohull in July. But the goal, above all, was to win the Hobart, the 628-nautical-mile race that leaves every Dec. 26 from Sydney Harbor, racing across the Bass Strait and on to Hobart, on the island of Tasmania.“In Australia, it’s a lot like the Kentucky Derby in America — sort of a day the nation stops and watches the race,” said Spithill, an up-tempo redhead who likes to train for sailing by boxing. “So it’s great to be a part of it.”AdvertisementHe is best known for his exploits in the America’s Cup, which he has won twice as a helmsman and skipper for Oracle Team USA.AdvertisementBut Spithill, 36, also has a long and bittersweet connection with the Hobart, as the race is known in Australia. His first appearance, as a teenager, was in the tragic 1998 edition of the race.Spithill was on Ragamuffin, the yacht owned and skippered by the hard-nosed Australian sailing icon Syd Fischer. A devastating summer storm struck.“James got a bit seasick, but other than that, he was good,” Fischer recalled recently.Although Spithill, Fischer and the rest of Ragamuffin’s crew emerged unscathed, others in the fleet did not. Five boats sank and six sailors died.“It was a brutal, extreme way to begin,” Spithill said. “It was like an initiation rite.”Fischer, who is now 88 and still racing in the Hobart, would go on to play a pivotal part in Spithill’s career. He gave the younger sailor his first role in the America’s Cup, as helmsman for the tight-budget challenger Young Australia in 1999.“I’m not surprised at his success,” Fischer said. “What I saw in him was he had the right attitude, and he’s very determined and he’ll work at it. That’s the key.”The two men had common ground. Spithill said he and Fischer both came from modest backgrounds, and both were intensely competitive in other sports in their youths.“I also think he sort of liked the fact that I tried to sail and lead by example,” Spithill said. “There are lots of guys out there who can talk well. One thing I learned from him, and I don’t know if you know what a feather duster is, but Syd used to say to me when something was going good, ‘Be careful because you can be a rooster one day and a feather duster the next.’ It’s just a good way of saying: Always keep yourself grounded. It doesn’t matter what you win or how important you think you may be.”AdvertisementAt Oracle Team USA, Spithill, as skipper, calls many of the shots, but to get back into the Hobart, he willingly accepted a subsidiary role on Comanche. He works under Ken Read, the American skipper who has worn many a hat in the yachting world and remains president of North Sails while carving out time to chase trophies and thrills on Comanche.“Last year when Jimmy said, ‘I want in,’ I said we have pretty much the afterguard sorted out,” Read said, referring to the strategic leadership group on board.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I told Jimmy it was going to be a job kind of grinding winches like everybody else and doing some driving,” he added. “And he’s like: ‘I’ll do anything. I’m in.’ For me that was perfect, exactly the right answer, and he did exactly that. He did anything possible and sure enough — what a shocker — he was one of the fastest drivers right out of the blocks.”“After last year, Jimmy was like the first phone call,” Read said. “He said, ‘I want in again.”’In his professional career, Spithill has never been accused of lacking confidence, as anyone can confirm who saw him project unwavering and seemingly illogical belief during the 2013 America’s Cup, when Oracle was trailing Emirates Team New Zealand, 8-1.Oracle went on to complete one of the great sporting comebacks, sweeping eight straight races and retaining sailing’s most prestigious trophy at the expense of the Kiwis and their skipper, Dean Barker.“He’s just a competitor,” said Tom Slingsby, a fellow Australian and a teammate of Spithill’s with Oracle. “It doesn’t matter if we’re playing table tennis or having a sit-up competition or a chin-up competition, Jimmy’s there trash talking you and doing anything he can to get under your skin. He just wants to win. He’s one of the fairest but most competitive people I’ve ever come across. He’s legit.”“What you saw last time when he was talking smack to Dean Barker — I mean it’s the same thing exactly he does to me on the golf course,” Slingsby added. “When I’m above a putt to win the game, he’s just taunting me.”The Slingsby-Spithill rivalry also extends to the water: They duel in practice as helmsmen of Oracle’s two main training boats. They will also be on different boats during the Hobart, with Slingsby returning to the afterguard on the 100-foot maxi Perpetual Loyal.But the duel at the head of the fleet for line honors is expected to be another showdown between Comanche and Wild Oats XI, the Australian maxi that has dominated its home race for most of the last decade.Advertisement“It will be one hell of a battle,” Spithill said.A version of this special report appears in print on December 27, 2015, on Page SP4 of the New York edition with the headline: A Shot at Redemption for a Swaggering Sailor.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »