AdvertisementSupported byRedskins 38, Eagles 24By Billy WitzPHILADELPHIA — With the ball sitting at the Philadelphia 6-yard line with six seconds left in the first half and no timeouts remaining, Washington quarterback Kirk Cousins had options as he stood behind center. He could look toward receiver Pierre Garcon, who would run to the corner. He could throw the ball away and settle for a chip shot of a field goal. But Cousins took a path less traveled. When he received the snap, Cousins dropped to a knee. Realizing he had not chosen wisely, Cousins rose to his feet and made a halfhearted attempt to run. Then he considered a throw. Finally, he appealed to the referee. But it did no good. The clock, along with a chance for the Redskins to pad their lead, had expired. The play had little to do with the outcome, a decisive 38-24 Redskins victory on Saturday night, but it had everything to do with the way football has been played this season in the N.F.C. East, which Washington clinched with the win. Although it should be said that the Redskins did not so much win the division as put it out of its misery. Whereas teams like the Jets and the Denver Broncos are left to ponder the possibility of winning 11 games and not making the playoffs, the dysfunction and disarray that have been so epidemic in the N.F.C. East had, until Saturday night, allowed the Eagles and the Giants to hold out hope of a playoff berth without a winning record.And perhaps it was worth hoping for, given that the Eagles had beaten New England three weeks ago and that the Giants have the institutional mojo of a couple of out-of-nowhere Super Bowl runs. Instead, the Giants (6-8) and the Eagles (6-9) will play each other next week because they are required to do so. The Giants will have to go through the motions Sunday night at Minnesota.The division champion Redskins (8-7) have not beaten a team with a winning record this season, and the victory Saturday night doubled their win total on the road.Washington’s reward does not appear to be much of one: a likely playoff game against Seattle, which, with five consecutive wins, is rounding into the form that took it to the verge of back-to-back Super Bowl titles.“We don’t listen to the outside naysayers,” Washington linebacker Will Compton said. “Individually, we control what can control and we come to work every day.”That’s smart advice in this division, where the tumult arrived long before the season — and it rarely abated, on or off the field.The Giants’ star defensive end, Jason Pierre-Paul, blew off part of his hand in a Fourth of July fireworks accident, and the team’s season has been defined by the creative manner in which it has squandered late leads. The Dallas Cowboys’ owner, Jerry Jones, drew a torrent of criticism after signing defensive end Greg Hardy, who had a domestic violence conviction overturned, and the Cowboys’ season — they were, at one point, considered Super Bowl contenders — cratered early when quarterback Tony Romo was injured.And in Philadelphia, the former Eagles running back LeSean McCoy accused Coach Chip Kelly of getting rid of the team’s best black players. On the field, Kelly’s reputation as an offensive visionary has been soiled as the team missed the playoffs for a second consecutive season.Questions about Kelly’s job came quickly. Asked how much of the Eagles’ plight was his responsibility, Kelly said: “One hundred percent. It’s all on my shoulders. It’s the same thing I said a year ago — it’s unacceptable.”Nevertheless, Kelly said he was not concerned about getting fired. “I don’t think anybody in my situation will tell you they’re worried about it,” he said. “If they’re worried about getting fired, then they probably should have already been fired.”Now that the Giants have been eliminated, their coach, Tom Coughlin, will soon be answering similar questions. If there was one team in the N.F.C. East that generated few expectations, it was the Redskins, who have long been the league’s standard bearers for dysfunction. This season appeared no different, with the owner Daniel Snyder fending off increased pressure to change the team’s nickname, the erstwhile franchise savior Robert Griffin III being banished to third-string quarterback and the wife of General Manager Scot McCloughan taking to Twitter to accuse a reporter of trading sexual favors for information from her husband.For a team that had won seven games over the last two seasons, there was little sign that it would be breaking character.“I guess you dream and you hope, but it certainly wasn’t likely,” Cousins said of winning the division. “I don’t think many people expected it.”Cousins, notwithstanding the occasional blunder, has justified Coach Jay Gruden’s decision to start him. He completed 31 of 46 passes for 365 yards and four touchdowns against the Eagles. As for his kneel down, Cousins said: “In the moment, I had a mental lapse. I should have thrown it away to kill the clock.”The Redskins’ defensive front consistently pressured Eagles quarterback Sam Bradford, sacking him five times, and tight end Jordan Reed caught nine passes, two for touchdowns.But the best thing that can be said about the Redskins is that they were not the Eagles.If there was any curiosity about why the Eagles’ receiving corps is so beleaguered, there was ample evidence. Nelson Agholor dropped a touchdown pass, Josh Huff dropped a ball that hit him in the chest, and Riley Cooper scuttled a potentially momentous start to the second half by failing to hold onto a deep heave from Bradford.Not to be left out, tight ends Brent Celek and Zach Ertz fumbled the ball after catches, with Celek fortunate enough to recover his. “It’s been a frustrating year,” Eagles safety Malcolm Jenkins said. “Guys put in the work, but for whatever reason, it’s not coming together on game day.”The Eagles’ last real hope evaporated when running back DeMarco Murray, who has been a huge disappointment after starring for the Cowboys last season, dropped a pitch from Bradford that DeAngelo Hall scooped up and returned 17 yards for a touchdown late in the third quarter, giving Washington a 30-17 lead.The stadium began to empty when Cousins hit Garcon with a 13-yard touchdown pass with 8 minutes 55 seconds left, putting the Redskins ahead, 38-17. When the final seconds ticked off, the Redskins celebrated more than a game. “I think we’re undervalued,” said receiver DeSean Jackson, who was cut by the Eagles two years ago. “Everybody is really not giving us the credit we deserve. As long as we don’t shoot ourselves in the foot, we’re going to have a great chance here in the playoffs.”Advertisement