AdvertisementSupported byN.B.A. RoundupBy The Associated PressPaul Millsap scored 22 points, Al Horford added 19 points, and the Atlanta Hawks won their sixth straight game with a 117-98 victory at home over the Knicks on Saturday night.Carmelo Anthony, returning after missing one game with a sprained right ankle, finished with 18 points and 12 rebounds for the Knicks, who have dropped three straight and seven of 11.The Knicks’ big men took a beating. Robin Lopez needed six stitches above his right eye, and the rookie Kristaps Porzingis had X-rays on his right finger, which were negative.Atlanta trailed by as many as 15 in the first quarter but blew past the Knicks in the second half, taking a 20-point lead on Thabo Sefolosha’s 3-point play midway through the fourth.Mike Scott had a season-high 18 points and Jeff Teague had 17 for the Hawks, who are a game and a half out of the Eastern Conference lead.Lance Thomas and Derrick Williams each scored 12 for the Knicks.The Hawks disrupted the Knicks’ passing lanes on defense and passed the ball crisply around the perimeter on their end, outscoring them by 15 in the third. Millsap had 11 of Atlanta’s 27 points in that quarter.“We couldn’t slow them down and stop the penetration,” Knicks Coach Derek Fisher said. “So they continued to get in our paint almost the entire second half.”The Knicks hit 10 of 13 from the field to build their 15-point lead in the first. Anthony scored 9 points and had 6 rebounds in the period, but he took only eight shots in the rest of the game.The Knicks finished the game shooting 48.1 percent.“We’ve just got to want it more,” Anthony said. “This is a stretch where we can kind of define ourselves.”WIZARDS 111, NETS 96 John Wall had 22 points and 13 assists, Marcin Gortat scored 25 points, and visiting Washington beat the Nets for its fourth straight victory.The rookie Jarell Eddie made four 3-pointers and scored 12 points in the fourth quarter of his N.B.A. debut, helping the Wizards blow open what was a 2-point game after three quarters. Washington, despite a number of injuries, returned to .500 (14-14) for the first time since it was 6-6 a month ago.Brook Lopez had 19 points and 11 rebounds for the Nets, who lost their sixth straight home game. Thaddeus Young finished with 16 points and 14 rebounds.“It takes a lot of effort to win in this business. It’s not easy,” Nets Coach Lionel Hollins said. “You can’t play when you want to play. You’ve got to play every night, every minute.”Wall had his ninth game this month with at least 20 points and 10 assists, bursting past the slower Nets throughout the game and setting up easy opportunities for the Wizards, who shot 50 percent from the field.The Nets committed nine turnovers in the fourth quarter and lost for the seventh time in eight games.“They hit a few big 3s,” Lopez said. “I don’t think we did a good job of adjusting to what they were doing. It kind of just fell apart from there. They got hot and kept going.”MAVERICKS 118, BULLS 111 J. J. Barea made seven 3-pointers, a career high, and finished with 26 points, and Dallas beat visiting Chicago.Derrick Rose led the Bulls with 25 points, including 9 in the fourth quarter, but had a pivotal turnover before being called for a five-second violation when Chicago had a chance to tie the game in the final 11 seconds.CELTICS 99, PISTONS 93 Avery Bradley scored 18 points, Isaiah Thomas had 17 points and 9 assists, and Boston won at Detroit.Pistons center Andre Drummond had 22 points and 22 rebounds for his fifth 20-20 game of the season. Coming into the day, Houston’s Dwight Howard had the only other 20-20 game in the N.B.A. this season.RAPTORS 111, BUCKS 90 DeMar DeRozan scored 22 points and Terrence Ross added 18 to lead Toronto at Milwaukee.DeRozan could have been the first Toronto player to score 28 points or more in five straight games but was scoreless in the final three minutes.SPURS 101, NUGGETS 86 Kawhi Leonard had 20 points as San Antonio beat Denver to remain undefeated at home.San Antonio extended its franchise record for consecutive wins at home to 26, including a record 17 straight to open this season.GRIFFIN OUT TWO WEEKS The Los Angeles Clippers star Blake Griffin was expected to miss at least two weeks with a partly torn left quadriceps tendon. The Clippers said Griffin was injured during their victory over the Lakers on Friday night.Advertisement