AdvertisementSupported byBy Dave CaldwellDuke outlasted Indiana in overtime, 44-41, under leaden skies at Yankee Stadium on Saturday to win the sixth Pinstripe Bowl, but an eagerly awaited number of higher importance, at least to the baseball team that runs the show, was announced in the second quarter: 37,218.That was the attendance figure for a football game on a sodded-over diamond between two universities far better known for basketball. It was far smaller than the record 49,012 at last year’s game between Penn State and Boston College, but the Yankees expected that.Although seats in the top level at Yankee Stadium were not sold, the Yankees’ team president, Randy Levine, said Saturday’s game, the first that did not include a team from the Northeast, had drawn “a little bit of a good walk-up” and would make some money.Even though the attendance figure was the lowest in the history of the game and halted a four-year streak in which the Pinstripe Bowl drew successively larger crowds, Levine labeled the effort to lure fans to the first Pinstripe Bowl held on Dec. 26 “very successful.”In an interview before the game, Mark Holtzman, the Yankees administrator who is the executive director of the Pinstripe Bowl, said, “We knew we weren’t going to have 48,000, a sellout, but we knew for some games we’d have to scale down the stadium a little bit.“Like I’ve said, we’re committed to this long term,” Holtzman added. “We want to bring a wide variety of teams here. Both teams have gone through their allotments. They’ve worked very hard at it. I think we’re going to get a high TV rating, too.”It was entertaining, anyway. Duke (8-5) sent the game into overtime on a 5-yard run by quarterback Thomas Sirk with 41 seconds left, then won its first bowl game since the January 1961 Cotton Bowl on a 36-yard field goal by Ross Martin. A potential game-tying field goal by Griffin Oakes barely sailed wide right for Indiana (6-7).“We kind of overcame me,” Duke Coach David Cutcliffe said after calling a quarterback sneak on a fourth-and-1 in the fourth quarter that picked up no yardage.The lower-profile bowl games like the Pinstripe Bowl have proved to be a hard sell: In the 12 bowl games played entering Saturday, only three drew more than 30,000, with the Bahamas Bowl between Western Michigan and Middle Tennessee luring a scant 13,123.Before Saturday, only five of the 11 bowl games that returned from the 2014 slate drew better crowds. The Las Vegas Bowl, which pitted two nearby rivals, Utah and Brigham Young, had a crowd of 42,213, better than the 33,067 who saw Utah play Colorado State in 2014.The Yankees appeared to be in a fix because Rutgers and Boston College had losing records this year, and Connecticut, an American Athletic Association team, was not under consideration because the bowl is contractually obligated to the Big Ten and Atlantic Coast Conference. The 2013 Pinstripe Bowl, won by Notre Dame over Rutgers, drew 47,122.The Pinstripe Bowl caught a break because the temperature at kickoff was relatively balmy 51 degrees — “Yesterday, I thought I was in Miami,” Levine said — but Holtzman said the Yankees had made a concerted three-week push to sell tickets to the 40,000 Indiana and 25,000 Duke alumni in the metropolitan area.Alumni and fans already knew that the Duke basketball team was a regular participant at Madison Square Garden — the Blue Devils played three games there between Nov. 20 and Dec. 19 — but the football team had not played in New York since 1953.Both teams were given a lot to do while in town, with visits to the New York Stock Exchange and the National September 11 Memorial and Museum among the attractions.Duke’s president, Richard Brodhead, said, “I very much doubt that anybody was missing the palm trees this week.”Saturday’s game was Indiana’s first bowl appearance since 2007 and its first football game in New York since a 13-0 loss to Fordham at the Polo Grounds in 1939. Moreover, these two basketball powerhouses had not met in football since 1984.For many years, a Duke-Indiana bowl matchup would have lacked sizzle, anyway, since both programs were mediocre — and often worse. Duke was 2-33 in the three seasons before Cutcliffe took over as coach in 2008, and Indiana was 1-11 in 2011, Kevin Wilson’s first year as coach.But Saturday’s game was the fourth consecutive bowl appearance for Duke, and Indiana is regarded as an emerging program.“Duke football is really a model for where Indiana football wants to go,” Indiana Athletic Director Fred Glass said.Befitting two basketball schools, the game overflowed with points. The teams combined for 1,203 yards. Sirk, who left the game two plays before Martin’s winning field goal, finished with 163 yards passing and 155 yards rushing. Indiana running back Devine Redding gained 227 yards rushing, and quarterback Nate Sudfeld passed for 389 yards.And, as a bonus, a touchdown was scored by an Indiana redshirt freshman running back named, yes, Alex Rodriguez.Though Wilson was disappointed with the loss, he called the game “a good branding opportunity.”Advertisement