By JOE DEPAOLODEC. 26, 2015
LEXINGTON, Ky. —  At one point in the second half, Kentucky Coach John Calipari was so animated after a failed offensive sequence that he tripped and fell backward into his bench.Calipari turned to one of the players who broke his fall, the junior forward Derek Willis, and screamed for him to check into the game. After a few seconds of play, Calipari turned to the scorers’ table and called Willis back. Calipari thought the better of the move, with the emotion having worn off.The sequence summarized a game in which, for both teams, energy trumped efficiency.No. 12 Kentucky and No. 16 Louisville, longtime staples of March basketball, faced off Saturday in a game that felt very much like December. Each team turned the ball over 15 times, and each gave it away during a frenzied final minute.Louisville’s Trey Lewis was called for traveling while going in for the game-tying layup with 43 seconds remaining. Then, with a chance to close it out, Kentucky’s Dominique Hawkins pump-faked with 1 second left on the shot clock and was unable to get a shot away before time expired.AdvertisementIn the game’s final play, Louisville’s Damian Lee missed everything on a 3-point attempt from the corner, and the Wildcats escaped with a 75-73 victory.Kentucky (10-2) was looking to avoid consecutive defeats, after losing last week to unranked Ohio State. The Wildcats are 29-6 following a loss during Calipari’s tenure.Afterward, Calipari praised the urgency of his team’s play.“They do know this is who we have to be and how we have to play,” he said. “That kind of energy, that kind of aggressiveness, that kind of attack.”Kentucky excelled despite the absence of its freshman guard Isaiah Briscoe, who turned his ankle during pregame warm-ups and did not play. Tyler Ulis, a sophomore, filled the void in the backcourt, leading the Wildcats with 21 points. He made a crucial 3-pointer with 4 minutes 57 seconds to go to stall Louisville’s momentum. The Cardinals (11-2) had nearly erased a 16-point deficit, cutting the lead to 1. But Ulis’s basket, with the shot clock about to expire, gave the Wildcats breathing room.“The clock was running down,” Ulis said. “I had no choice but to shoot it. I shot it in rhythm, and it went in.”AdvertisementCalipari gave Ulis credit for making the big shot when the team needed it most.“Courage.” Calipari said. “He’s not afraid to miss.”Forward Alex Poythress, a senior, added 14 points for Kentucky, and twice sent the Rupp Arena crowd into a frenzy with emphatic slam dunks. He also made a crucial block that prompted Calipari to gush in the postgame news conference.“It was ridiculous,” Calipari said. “Only Superman could make that play. And he made it.”Poythress credited the nature of the Kentucky-Louisville rivalry with serving as the catalyst for his team’s high-energy play.“We wanted to come out and make a statement,” he said. “We came out and wanted to compete.”It was a solid performance in defeat by Louisville, whose only loss entering Saturday’s game was by 71-67 to No. 1 Michigan State on Dec. 2. The Cardinals have feasted on a weak schedule. But it is the two narrow defeats against top-tier competition that have given the Cardinals hope that they could be a threat come the N.C.A.A. tournament.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Cardinals have played well despite being the subject of an N.C.A.A. investigation. In a recently published book, an escort claimed that Andre McGee, a former member of the Louisville coaching staff, hired her and others to dance for and have sex with recruits and players.Louisville Coach Rick Pitino did not meet with the news media after Saturday’s game, leaving the assistant coach Ralph Willard to speak for the team.“Guys just dug in,” Willard said. “These kids have character. They’re not going to surrender.”He added, “We had a chance to come back and win the game, which is what you want on the road against a very good basketball team.”A very good basketball team that, by Calipari’s own admission, is not quite as good as the one the Wildcats fielded a season ago, when they nearly completed an undefeated season, with stars like Karl-Anthony Towns.Advertisement“Enthusiasm matters,” Calipari said. “Fight matters. Obviously, we’ve got to have a good team with skilled players. And I think we do.”A version of this article appears in print on December 27, 2015, on Page SP5 of the New York edition with the headline: Kentucky Eludes Louisville in a Slovenly Showdown.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.