AdvertisementSupported byInboxAlert: Baseball Stadiums Need NettingTo the Sports Editor:Re “More Netting, Yes, but With a Catch,” Dec. 19: Paul O’Neill was at the plate. I knew from watching him play for several years as a Yankee that he often hit vicious line drive fouls into the stands behind third base. I was seated about 20 rows deep, just beyond third base. I was focused on the play on the field. I never even had time to react to the ball that hit off my right hip and then caromed probably 50 feet before being caught by someone sitting five or six rows from the field and farther down the left-field line.Thankfully, I was not injured. But “being alert” for foul balls is inadequate warning. Put up the net.ROBERT S. NUSSBAUM, Fort Lee, N.J.To the Sports Editor:In the 1970s, attending my first baseball game, I was hit by a screaming line drive off the bat of Cesar Cedeno and ended up in the hospital. For years as a child, I lived in fear of attending games. Nobody should have to miss a ballgame for fear of being struck and hospitalized or worse. Major League Baseball should show it cares about its fans by extending the netting surrounding the field.In the ’90s, I lived for a year in Japan, where the netting around the field is much more extensive than here in the United States. My enjoyment of baseball was not diminished at all sitting behind an extended screen. If Major League Baseball hears from enough fans like me, maybe it will act to protect us rather than waiting for an adult or child to be killed.CHRIS RICHTER, BrooklynThe Heart of a Head ProblemTo the Sports Editor:Re “A Sport Grows Bigger, Faster, Dire,” Dec. 20: Seth Berkman’s shocking concussion stories of elite hockey women misses the heart of the problem. Talented girls and young women pressure themselves to play through brain injury because they are keenly aware their hockey careers have a limited duration.A significant absence for concussion recovery after age 12 is a near-sure career derailment, as slots on the best travel or national development teams are strenuously contested and strictly limited. Youth travel teams are completely unregulated in terms of concussions. High school teams must comply with state laws and state athletic association policies. Canadians may approach concussion safety more seriously, but they still compete for American college scholarships.Policies should step in where girls and parents fail to appreciate the long-term health consequences.DOROTHY BEDFORD, Valley Forge, Pa.Slipping From English’s TrackTo the Sports Editor:Re “A Description as Enigmatic as How to Escape a Slump,” Dec. 20: As a longtime fan of most sports, I managed to miss out on the “Untracked” phenomenon until reading this article. The genesis of American English is always interesting, but maybe more so in the world of sports. I suppose there was not enough room to include the trend to classify injured players as “out with a groin” or “sidelined with an ankle.”More annoying is the adjusting of baseball’s infield positions by shifting toward first base referred to as being “in the shift.” When said with enthusiasm, it sounds very much like the American military three-word phrase for coming under heavy attack, usually as in artillery fire. I could go on, but too much typing “gives me a wrist.”DAN FARAONE, Belfast, Me.Advertisement