AdvertisementSupported byBy Bill PenningtonEAST RUTHERFORD, N.J. — Preparing to play Sunday’s game with the Minnesota Vikings was far from a typical workweek for the Giants.Yes, things began with the Giants losing yet again in the final seconds of a game. That is old hat to the Giants by now. Six times this season, they have lost in the final 75 seconds of play.But last weekend’s defeat to the Carolina Panthers devastated their faint playoff hopes and came with outlandish consequences because their most explosive player, Odell Beckham Jr., spent much of the game in uncontrolled combat with Panthers cornerback Josh Norman. Together, it was a double whammy that threw a team that was already in turmoil down the rabbit hole of N.F.L. disciplinary outcomes and intricate, late-season playoff possibilities.The Giants staggered forward day by day anyway, often not knowing which players were going to play, or when that would be decided. They also never knew if the coming game was going to matter, at least when it came to the season’s pre-eminent, oft-stated goal: making the playoffs.Tree diagrams representing the full range of outcomes for teams that are in or have a shot at the N.F.L. playoffs.On Monday, Beckham was suspended for one game. But for the Giants, the length of the penalty might as well as have been the rest of the season, since the players were well aware that they could almost certainly not afford another loss. As Beckham was being pilloried outside the organization, the Giants’ primary leaders, Coach Tom Coughlin and quarterback Eli Manning, did not seem to know whether to reproach Beckham or defend him. So each did both.By Wednesday morning, the team gathered at its New Jersey training complex. The players sat in the long rows of the building’s auditorium awaiting the weekly inspirational speech Coughlin delivers.Beckham was absent. He was in Manhattan at the N.F.L.’s Park Avenue offices appealing his suspension. Because the Giants steadfastly believe that the Panthers goaded and taunted Beckham into his over-the-top behavior, as the players assembled, there was hope in the auditorium that the suspension might be overturned once the full story was told.In the meantime, Coughlin pointed out a few statistics for his charges, because Coughlin likes to use a good number or two to make a point. One statistic that might have had particular relevance in the aftermath of the Beckham affair: The Vikings have committed just 81 penalties, second fewest in the league.Unmentioned was the superstar not in the room. Coughlin did not talk directly about Beckham.“But they were aware of the hearing or whatever you call it,” Coughlin later said of Beckham.The Giants then went to practice not knowing who the starting wide receivers would be against Minnesota. Already without Victor Cruz, who has been sidelined the entire season with a calf-muscle strain, the passel of receivers available to Manning at Wednesday’s practice consisted of Rueben Randle, Myles White, Geremy Davis and Hakeem Nicks.Nicks was out of football until the Giants signed him last month. Many thought his career was over. Dwayne Harris, another talented receiver, sat out practice with a sore shoulder.Manning was asked if he had enough weapons. It is hard to fluster the Giants’ quarterback.“We’ll go about our business,” Manning answered flatly. “The guys know what they’re doing; guys know the pass routes.”After practice, there was still hope that Beckham might return to practice Thursday. That ended around 5:30 p.m. when his suspension was upheld by the league.The next day, Coughlin moved on from the adversity. It seems as if he has spent the entire season having to overcome some kind of difficulty. The tone was set a month before training camp opened with Jason Pierre-Paul’s Fourth of July fireworks accident.How can my team make the N.F.L. playoffs? It’s a simple question, but answering it can be devilishly complicated. This interactive simulator walks you through the scenarios.“The due process has taken place,” Coughlin said Thursday. “The issue is at rest. The suspension is there, and we accept it.”While it lasted, the Beckham saga may have been wearying to the Giants, but at least it provided a distraction from the understanding that they were in complete limbo when it came to their destiny. In general, entering the weekend, the Giants’ best hope of making the playoffs had them winning against Minnesota and in their final game at home against Philadelphia, with the Washington Redskins losing their final two games. Even one Redskins victory meant elimination for the Giants, and Washington accomplished that Saturday night.The Redskins’ 38-24 victory against the Eagles guarantees that the Giants-Vikings game, before a national television audience, will be meaningful for few Giants fans other than participants in fantasy football.The gloom of the possibility of being eliminated even before Sunday’s 8:30 p.m. kickoff, coupled with the Beckham outcome, started to take some of the buoyancy out of the Giants’ locker room atmosphere by midweek.Justin Pugh, the offensive lineman, said he knew that the Giants needed the Redskins to lose, but he was not sure he could root for the Eagles on Saturday night. When told that the best outcome might actually be if the Redskins and Eagles tied, Pugh replied, “Well, good, I’m rooting for a tie, then.”There has not been a tie this year in the N.F.L.The Giants practiced Thursday, though they mostly left the team’s complex by midafternoon to try to enjoy the eve of the holiday. The next day was Christmas, but it was treated like any other Friday, with an easy workout session called a recovery day. There were also meetings and a gathering where offensive plays and defensive schemes are rehearsed at a leisurely pace. It is called a walk-through, a good term for Christmas Day when temperatures in northern New Jersey approached 70 degrees.On Saturday, the weather forecast for the Giants’ arrival in Minnesota called for temperatures in the middle teens. That was about 5 degrees higher than the temperature forecast for kickoff Sunday night in the outdoor, uncovered stadium where the Vikings are temporarily playing.The site is the campus of the University of Minnesota, and that is where the Giants’ workweek, which began in the wake of a pivotal, hot-tempered game against Carolina, will finally wind to an end.In the midst of tumult last week, as the Giants prepared to play Minnesota, Manning was asked for a prediction about Sunday night. He paused to smile before answering, as if weighing all of the events of the last several days. But he was not giving anything away, either.“It will be cold,” he finally replied.Advertisement