AdvertisementSupported byVikings 49, Giants 17By Bill PenningtonMINNEAPOLIS — About an hour before kickoff Sunday night, the Giants spread out across 40 yards, taking up nearly half the field to warm up. Coach Tom Coughlin, as he always does, walked briskly through his team’s broad formation, stopping to acknowledge each player individually.To the Giants, the game was hollow of import, but Coughlin moved energetically through the group nonetheless, shaking hands with many players and slapping the backs of others. He patted some on the shoulder pads. The moment was lighthearted, but it was also melancholy. The Giants knew their season, and maybe much more, was all but over. The Coughlin era with the team could be in its last days.The mood grew more bleak because the Giants (6-9) were never in their game against the Minnesota Vikings (10-5), losing in an embarrassing, disconcerting 49-17 rout.“I didn’t see it coming,” Coughlin said of the loss. “It’s very difficult for me to explain.”As bad as the Giants were on Sunday, the overarching context of the event was decided Saturday night, when a Washington Redskins victory ensured that the Giants would miss the playoffs for the fourth straight season. This will also be the Giants’ third successive losing season.On Sunday night, what seemed most clear about the Giants was the inevitability of substantial change. Coughlin may have only one more chance to perform his pregame ritual of greeting the players. They will finish the season at home against the Philadelphia Eagles next Sunday.Coughlin, whose last seven teams have qualified for the postseason just once, would not directly address whether his job was in jeopardy.“I’m not worried about that,” he said. “That will all take care of itself.”Perhaps only the Giants’ co-owners, John Mara and Steve Tisch, know the fates of Coughlin and General Manager Jerry Reese. But a decision is coming by early January, and Sunday’s game did nothing to make the Giants appear on the verge of prosperity.Without the star receiver Odell Beckham Jr., who was suspended for the game because of his reckless play a week ago, quarterback Eli Manning did not complete a pass until 4 minutes 10 seconds had elapsed in the second quarter. Midway through the third quarter, Manning had thrown three interceptions, although one was deflected. On another interception, Coughlin seemed to at least partly blame wide receiver Rueben Randle for not running his route properly.A grim-faced Manning took the blame for each turnover.“I made some bad decisions and bad throws,” said Manning, who completed 15 of 29 passes for 234 yards. “I never got into a great rhythm. Obviously, if you lose one of your top players, it’s going to affect things, but not as much as what happened out there.”The offense was far from the only problem. The Giants, who have lacked talent on defense since training camp, were powerless to stop the Vikings from the beginning. In a glaring example of the roster’s lack of depth, the Giants started a player they recently cut and dressed three players from their practice squad.The Vikings, like almost every other Giants opponent, also took advantage of weak pass coverage over the middle, attacking the safeties for big gains and scoring plays.It all went downhill very quickly for the Giants. Without Beckham, the Giants’ passing attack floundered as Manning looked downfield and saw nowhere to throw the ball. Sometimes, Manning could not see downfield at all. He was flat on his back as the offensive line was overwhelmed by the Minnesota pass rush.Manning, who was sacked four times in the game, finished the first quarter without a completion in four attempts. The Vikings, who grabbed a 3-0 lead, had possession of the ball for 10:39 in the quarter.On the Vikings’ first drive of the second quarter, quarterback Teddy Bridgewater mixed handoffs to Adrian Peterson, who gained 104 yards on 22 carries, and passes to a variety of receivers to move deep into Giants territory. The defense looked beleaguered, confused and overmatched. On a second-down play, Bridgewater, who generally had ample time to throw, waited in the pocket as tight end Kyle Rudolph deked safety Craig Dahl and burst open in the end zone. Bridgewater, who completed 15 of 25 passes for 168 yards, easily completed a 28-yard touchdown pass that put Minnesota ahead, 10-0.With Manning finally getting his first completion — an 8-yard pass to Randle — the Giants gathered some momentum offensively. Running back Rashad Jennings gained 50 yards on nine carries in the first half.After using four running backs almost equally for most of the season, a tactic that seemed to rob the Giants’ running game of continuity, Coughlin has recently let Jennings have most of the carries — with considerable success. On Sunday, he gained a respectable 74 yards on 14 carries, an average of 5.3 yards.But Jennings’s efforts in the second quarter led only to a 27-yard field goal by Josh Brown.After a Minnesota punt, Manning threw his second interception of the game. Under pressure and trying to force a pass into a narrow opening, Manning threw high to Randle. Coughlin later indicated that he had expected Randle to be closer to the line of the pass, which was picked off by safety Harrison Smith and returned 35 yards for a touchdown.With the Vikings leading by 22-3, Manning tried to throw to wide receiver Brad Edwards — one of the players elevated from the practice squad — but the pass was intercepted by Captain Munnerlyn, whose 32-yard return advanced the ball to the Giants’ 4-yard line. Two plays later, Peterson bulled into the end zone.There was a brief sign of life from the Giants’ offense in the closing minutes of the third quarter. On a second-and-2, Manning was protected in the pocket and had time to connect with Randle for a 72-yard touchdown pass.The Vikings, though, answered with 17 fourth-quarter points.In the end, Coughlin, a coach since 1969, kept his focus on what remained of the season, which could be his last in the only occupation he has known.“We have one week to go,” Coughlin said. “There is some soul-searching that has to be done for players, coaches and myself.”Advertisement