By JEFF SHAINOCT. 7, 2015
In any other year, Bubba Watson’s season might have generated a little attention.Golf’s mercurial marvel won twice during the P.G.A. Tour season, including a World Golf Championships stop. He finished second on three occasions and third on two others.That’s eight starts out of 19 in which Watson finished no worse than third. Who wouldn’t be thrilled with that kind of performance chart?“I was,” Watson said, “but Jason kept beating me.”That would be Jason Day, the Australian at the forefront of the International Team in the Presidents Cup, which starts Thursday in Incheon, South Korea. Day, 27, shot to No.1 in the world rankings with four victories since late July, including the P.G.A. Championship and two FedExCup playoff events.There’s also the American Jordan Spieth, 21, who put a halt to Day’s run at the top, adding the season finale, the FedExCup, to his Masters and United States Open titles. You might even bring up Rickie Fowler, 26, who with three victories since May is the golfer many think is most likely to expand the “Big Three” of Spieth, Day and Rory McIlroy.AdvertisementAll of which leaves Watson, 36, as something of a forgotten entity as he joins Spieth and Fowler on the American team for the biennial Presidents Cup, which is being played for the first time in Asia.Advertisement“It’s hard to predict what he’s going to do,” the NBC television analyst and Hall of Famer Johnny Miller said of Watson, “but he has the ability to beat anybody if he gets it going.”That’s the rub with Watson. Even coming off his best season, he hasn’t quite been able to shake his wild-card role.Asian fans might best remember his performance at the HSBC Champions tournament in Shanghai last year, when he holed a bunker blast for eagle on the final hole of regulation to force a playoff against Tim Clark. Replaying the par-5 18th, Watson then rolled home a 20-foot birdie to win.“You never know what he’s going to do,” said Fowler, who was paired with Watson and Clark that day.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Watson also had the touch at two other W.G.C. events, placing third at the W.G.C.-Cadillac Championship and second at the W.G.C.-Bridgestone Invitational. In between came his other title, at the Travelers Championship, and his finish as runner-up to Day at the R.B.C. Canadian Open.“I kept coming in second,” Watson said, adding in reference to Day, “I played great this summer, just haven’t had the victories like he has.”But three of Watson’s four worst finishes in 2015 came in majors — missed cuts at the United States Open and British Open, and 38th in his title defense at the Masters. The fourth? A share of 42nd at The Players Championship.AdvertisementIn 16 rounds at the majors and The Players, Watson broke 70 just twice.“Because those are tougher courses,” Watson said at The Barclays, where he went on to finish third behind Day. “I don’t know if you’ve ever played them…”Later, he noted that the United States Open site, Chambers Bay, had been “a tough venue,” and that “the very next week after a missed cut” he won the Travelers event. “So obviously that shows I was playing decent,” he said.While most golfers play better at venues where they are comfortable, there may be no one whose performance fluctuates as dramatically with his attitude toward the course as Watson’s. At times, microphones have caught him all but talking himself out of contention.This year, Watson has tried to take a more focused approach.“I get so anxious and excited,” he said. “Maybe it’s not going to change overnight, but I need to change my routine to certain golf courses and focus. Not just get in there and grab a club and hit it. Maybe going through some processes of elimination — ‘O.K., if I do this and it goes over the green, I need to miss over here.”’Call it a work in progress. Watson has more top-10 finishes in the past two years (18) than in his previous four seasons combined. Half of his eight career victories have come in the past two seasons.It remains to be seen whether better focus will also improve his record in team competition. He has a 6-10 record over three Ryder Cups and the 2011 Presidents Cup, including a 0-4 mark in singles.Last year in the Ryder Cup, the American captain, Tom Watson, used him only in four-ball play at Gleneagles, where he could freewheel in quest of birdies. He finished 0-3.A version of this special report appears in print on October 8, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »