AdvertisementSupported bySports BriefingBy The Associated PressDave Henderson, a former major league outfielder who played for five teams and hit one of the most memorable home runs in postseason history, died on Sunday in a Seattle hospital. He was 57.He had had a heart attack, according to a statement from the Mariners, who originally signed him in 1977.Henderson was best known for his home run for the Boston Red Sox in the 1986 American League Championship Series in Anaheim, Calif. With the Red Sox one strike from elimination in Game 5, Henderson hit a go-ahead two-run homer off Donnie Moore over the left center-field wall in the top of the ninth against the California Angels, who were trying to clinch their first pennant.Henderson had entered the game earlier to replace the injured centerfielder Tony Armas.The Angels came back to tie the game, but the Red Sox rallied and went on to win in extra innings when Henderson, again facing Moore, hit a sacrifice fly, scoring Don Baylor from third and sending the series back to Boston.Three years later, burdened by career and financial troubles, Moore shot and killed himself. “I think insanity set in,” Dave Pinter, Moore’s agent, said at the time. “He could not live with himself after Henderson hit the home run. He kept blaming himself.”The Red Sox went on to win Games 6 and 7 to advance to the World Series against the Mets, who defeated them in a memorable seven games, propelled by a famous error by Boston’s first baseman Bill Buckner.In 14 seasons in the majors, Henderson was a reliable contributor to four teams that reached the World Series. His greatest success came from 1988 to 1991 with the Oakland Athletics, who went to the World Series three times during that period. He was an All-Star in 1991.Henderson began his career in Seattle as the first draft pick of the new Mariners franchise. He made his debut in 1981 and was traded to Boston during the 1986 season. He later played for the San Francisco Giants and the Kansas City Royals.After his playing career, Henderson was a broadcaster for the Mariners.He was born on July 21, 1958, in Merced, Calif. He attended Dos Palos High School in Dos Palos, Calif. His first marriage ended in divorce. He is survived by his wife, Nancy, and two sons, Chase and Trent.The New York Times contributed reporting.Advertisement