By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSDEC. 27, 2015
Todd Gurley scored on a 2-yard run with 10 minutes 34 seconds left, Akeem Ayers returned a fumble 45 yards for a touchdown in the first quarter, and the visiting St. Louis Rams ended the Seattle Seahawks’ five-game winning streak with a 23-17 victory on Sunday.St. Louis swept the season series from the Seahawks (9-6), having won, 34-31, in overtime in Week 1. And the Rams (7-8) caused the same kinds of problems they did in the opener by flustering quarterback Russell Wilson and slowing down a Seattle offense that had not been stopped for the previous five weeks.Gurley rushed for 85 yards on 19 carries. Case Keenum won his third straight start for the Rams, completing 14 of 23 passes for 103 yards, with a 28-yard touchdown pass to Kenny Britt in the second quarter. St. Louis won in Seattle for the first time since the 2004 playoffs.Seattle failed to lead for the first time with Wilson under center since he became the starter in Week 1 of the 2012 season. The Seahawks’ streak of having 100 yards rushing as a team ended at 25 games, and Seattle lost at home for the third time this season.AdvertisementWilson was 25 of 41 for 289 yards and two touchdowns, including an 18-yard score to Jermaine Kearse with 17 seconds left. But the Rams recovered the onside kick and ran out the clock.AdvertisementRAVENS 20, STEELERS 17 Baltimore pulled off one of the biggest upsets in its contentious rivalry with Pittsburgh, winning at home.The Ravens (5-10) had lost three straight, the past two by a combined score of 69-20. In this one, they turned back the Steelers, a team that came in on a three-game winning streak.Although it has been a disappointing season for injury-plagued Baltimore, it managed to sweep the series with Pittsburgh (9-6) for the first time since 2011. The Steelers remained in playoff contention.Steelers quarterback Ben Roethlisberger threw two interceptions and was sacked three times.CHIEFS 17, BROWNS 13 Alex Smith threw two touchdown passes for Kansas City, and the game clock finally stopped Cleveland quarterback Johnny Manziel as the Chiefs held on to beat the visiting Browns and notch their ninth consecutive victory, tying a team record.Smith threw for 125 yards while running for 54, helping Kansas City (10-5) clinch a playoff berth when the Steelers lost to the Ravens.The Chiefs jumped out to a 17-3 halftime lead, but their offense became listless in the final two quarters, just as Manziel was pumping some life into the Browns (3-12).Manziel, a former Heisman Trophy winner, led Cleveland to 10 straight points, then took over at his 30-yard line with 1:52 left and no timeouts. The Browns picked up three first downs, and Manziel hit Darius Jennings on a fourth-and-10 from the Chiefs’ 32. But time expired before Manziel could get another play off.AdvertisementTEXANS 34, TITANS 6 Even by routing host Tennessee, Houston (8-7), which wraps up the regular season with a home game against Jacksonville, could not clinch the A.F.C. South title outright, with the Colts still in the mix.The Texans have won seven of the past eight against the Titans. Houston forced four turnovers and turned them into 17 points. Quintin Demps returned a fumble 33 yards for a touchdown less than two minutes into the game, putting the Texans ahead to stay.Tennessee (3-12) did nothing to hurt its chances for the No. 1 pick in the draft, turning the ball over twice in the first quarter.COLTS 18, DOLPHINS 12 Indianapolis made a last-minute defensive stand to keep its playoff hopes alive by knocking off host Miami.The Dolphins had a first-and-goal at the Colts’ 5-yard line with 40 seconds left, but after three straight incompletions, the Miami rookie center Jamil Douglas appeared to snap the ball prematurely, and quarterback Ryan Tannehill was sacked.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Indianapolis (7-8) would have been eliminated from the playoff race with a loss. Miami (5-10) was eliminated two weeks ago.BEARS 26, BUCCANEERS 21 Chicago ended a three-game losing streak with a victory in Tampa, Fla.The Bears (6-9) took the lead for good early in the fourth quarter. Matt Forte and Jeremy Langford helped spearhead a rushing attack that produced 174 yards and kept Tampa Bay quarterback Jameis Winston off the field for long periods.The victory was the second in the past six games for the Bears. Tampa Bay (6-9) has lost four of five, including three straight after rebounding from a slow start.Winston completed 15 of 29 passes for 295 yards, with two touchdowns and one interception. One of his scoring throws was a 43-yard Hail Mary to Austin Seferian-Jenkins with one second remaining.AdvertisementBILLS 16, COWBOYS 6 Karlos Williams scored on a 1-yard run as Buffalo overcame a banged-up offense playing without running back LeSean McCoy.The rookie linebacker A. J. Tarpley had an interception and sealed the win by forcing Lucky Whitehead to fumble on a kickoff return after a Bills touchdown.Buffalo (7-8) ended a two-game skid and won for the second time in six games.The Cowboys (4-11) lost in quarterback Kellen Moore’s first career start. Moore went 13 of 31 for 186 yards, with an interception.Dan Bailey kicked two field goals for Dallas.SAINTS 38, JAGUARS 27 Drew Brees passed for 412 yards and three touchdowns despite his injured right foot, and New Orleans triumphed over visiting Jacksonville.Brees, who tore his plantar fascia ligament during a loss to Detroit last Monday, showed no ill effects while completing 25 of 36 passes.Running back Tim Hightower, who missed the previous three seasons because of a knee injury and subsequent complications, finished with 122 rushing yards and two touchdowns for the Saints (6-9).Brandin Cooks caught a 71-yard touchdown pass and had 123 yards receiving. The newly reacquired running back Travaris Cadet had a 44-yard touchdown catch.Blake Bortles passed for 368 yards and four touchdowns for the Jaguars (5-10), who were eliminated from playoff contention with the Texans’ victory.AdvertisementBortles’s scoring strikes included a 90-yarder to Allen Robinson.LIONS 32, 49ERS 17 Matthew Stafford threw for two touchdowns, including one to Calvin Johnson early in the fourth quarter, and host Detroit knocked off San Francisco.The Lions (6-9) have won five of their past seven games, perhaps giving Coach Jim Caldwell a chance to hang on to his job for a third season.The 49ers (4-11) have lost three straight and five of six under their first-year coach, Jim Tomsula.Detroit took advantage of several mistakes by San Francisco’s defense and special teams.Stafford’s 1-yard touchdown pass to Johnson gave the Lions a 12-point lead one play after Tramaine Brock was called for pass interference in the end zone. During the drive, the 49ers were flagged for being offside or in the neutral zone for the seventh time to set a single-game high by an N.F.L. team this year, according to Stats L.L.C.A version of this article appears in print on December 28, 2015, on Page D4 of the New York edition with the headline: Rams Sweep the Season Series Against the Seahawks .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.