By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSDEC. 27, 2015
For years, the Toronto Maple Leafs played like a franchise without a plan.Now, in their first season under Coach Mike Babcock and General Manager Lou Lamoriello, the Leafs appear to have a blueprint for success.“We have different systems now,” said Tyler Bozak, who scored 1 minute 40 seconds after Michael Grabner in the second period to lead the Maple Leafs to a 3-1 road victory over the Islanders on Sunday night.After going 1-7-2 in October, the Leafs are 12-7-5 in November and December. Toronto has recorded at least 1 point in seven of its last eight games (5-1-2). Over all, the Leafs are 13-14-7.“Guys are buying in,” Bozak said.Jonathan Bernier stopped 25 shots, and James van Riemsdyk added an empty-net goal.Advertisement“It’s about his confidence, it’s not about my confidence,” Babcock said of Bernier. “If he’s confident, I’m confident. If he’s not confident, I’m not confident. If he’s not confident, his teammates aren’t confident."AdvertisementAfter an 0-9 start to the season, Bernier was sent to the Toronto Marlies of the American Hockey League for a conditioning stint on Dec. 2. In four games with them, he had a 3-0-1 mark with a 1.25 goals against average and a .948 save percentage.Thomas Greiss made 35 saves for the Islanders, who have lost four of five. The Islanders fell to 19-12-5.Nikolay Kulemin scored the Islanders’ goal, his third of the season and his first since Oct. 20.“We weren’t managing the puck well, starting with myself,” said John Tavares, the Islanders’ captain. “We have to be a lot better. You’re not going to dominate for 60 minutes in this league, but you have to make it tough on the opponent. We just made it a little too easy. They made some plays and put us behind the 8-ball.”After a scoreless first period, Bozak scored 1:33 into the second period, his ninth goal of the season. The sequence began with Greiss stopping a shot from the slot by Roman Polak, but Greiss could not control the rebound and was alone in the right circle.It did not take long for Toronto to build on its lead.Grabner haunted his former team as he made the score 2-0 with his fifth goal of the season by poking a rebound of a shot by Morgan Reilly into the net at 3:13.Toronto acquired Grabner from the Islanders during training camp. The Islanders received the prospects Taylor Beck, Matt Finn, Christopher Gibson, Tom Nilsson and Carter Verhaeghe in the trade.“I was open to it,” Grabner said of the trade. “And when I got traded, I was just trying to see it as a fresh start.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Kulemin’s goal 12:30 into the third period made the score 2-1. But that was as close as the Islanders would get. Van Riemsdyk’s empty-netter came with 45.3 seconds left.AdvertisementThe Islanders killed both of Toronto’s power plays. The Islanders entered the game having killed 29 straight power plays, and 33 of the last 34 man advantages against them.Toronto outshot the Islanders, 38-26.“We passed up some opportunities; their defense did a good job blocking shots,” Islanders Coach Jack Capuano said. “We want to shoot pucks. For whatever reason, tonight we passed up chances when we should have been shooting pucks.”Before the game, the Islanders announced that goaltender Jaroslav Halak had been placed on injured reserve, retroactive to Dec. 21, with an upper-body injury. Christopher Gibson was called up from Bridgeport of the A.H.L.STARS 3, BLUES 0 Kari Lehtonen made 22 saves in his 33rd career shutout, Jamie Benn scored his 23rd goal of the season — the most in the N.H.L. — and Dallas beat visiting St. Louis.Benn and Patrick Sharp each had a power-play goal and an assist. Cody Eakin scored into an empty net with 1:32 remaining.The victory avenged Dallas’ 3-2 shootout loss to the Blues in St. Louis on Saturday night. The Stars have a league-best 57 points.The Central Division rivalry game featured two fights in the first seven seconds of the second period and a total of 38 penalty minutes.PANTHERS 3, BLUE JACKETS 2 Aleksander Barkov had two goals as Florida took over the top spot in the Atlantic Division with a home victory over Columbus.SENATORS 3, BRUINS 1 Mark Stone scored twice, Craig Anderson stopped 38 shots, and Ottawa beat visiting Boston. The Senators ended a two-game losing streak.AdvertisementHURRICANES 2, BLACKHAWKS 1 Justin Faulk and Victor Rask scored, the backup goaltender Eddie Lack stopped 35 shots, and Carolina won at Chicago.A version of this article appears in print on December 28, 2015, on Page D8 of the New York edition with the headline: Leafs Keep Rolling With Win Over Islanders.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.