By ANDREW KEHDEC. 27, 2015
BOSTON —  At 5 feet 9 inches, Isaiah Thomas of the Boston Celtics has developed, when driving to the basket, a fail-safe method for scoring over bigger players — in other words, pretty much everyone else in the league.“Just get it higher than he can jump,” he said with a smile late Sunday night, after he scored a team-high 21 points to shepherd the Celtics to a 100-91 win over the Knicks on Sunday at TD Garden.Thomas, who added eight rebounds and six assists, victimized the Knicks and their big men throughout the game, charging to the rim, contorting his body and stretching his fingertips to their fullest to find ways to score.Thomas, 26, produced his most devastating work late in the fourth quarter, when the Knicks, who had trailed in the game by 15 points, had cut the deficit to 5. With 2 minutes 59 seconds left, Thomas swooped to the basket and flipped in a floater over the Knicks’ 7-foot-3 rookie Kristaps Porzingis. Nineteen seconds later, Thomas corralled a long rebound on Arron Afflalo’s errant 3-point attempt and took it all the way to the other end for a reverse finish that pushed Boston’s lead back to 9.AdvertisementThomas, who noted that he possessed a “pretty nice touch around the basket,” told reporters after the game that Celtics Coach Brad Stevens, just before the late sequence of baskets, had urged him to be more aggressive.Advertisement“It was like the last little gas I had left,” Thomas said of his consecutive layups. “I just kept trying to fight, and I saw some openings, and I capitalized on them.”The Celtics have won four in a row. The Knicks have lost four in a row, and they have six more games to go in a stretch of 11 against teams with winning records.Carmelo Anthony scored a game-high 29 points and added 10 rebounds. Porzingis had 16 points and 12 rebounds but shot just 4 for 13 from the field.“We just couldn’t make shots,” Porzingis said. “We were missing wide-open shots. We were missing shots we normally make.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Porzingis, who hurt a finger in the Knicks’ loss on Saturday to the Atlanta Hawks, said his hand felt fine after Sunday’s game. But he did take another knock against the Celtics.With 3:28 left in the first quarter, Porzingis crumpled to the ground in pain after taking a hit near his groin while trying to block Jae Crowder’s dunk attempt. After a few moments on the floor, Porzingis limped to the bench but later returned.The Knicks shot just 37.1 percent from the field and had just 15 assists. They looked plodding and predictable at times on offense. On defense, their shape often collapsed against the Celtics’ drives and movement.AdvertisementThomas was the catalyst for the Celtics, and besides his strong finish, his finest moments emerged in a sparkling sequence four minutes before halftime.First he finished consecutive, floating finishes at the rim, victimizing more Knicks big men, including Robin Lopez. He followed those baskets with two pretty assists: a floating, over-the-shoulder pass to Amir Johnson, who slammed in a breakaway dunk, then a crosscourt, behind-the-back bounce pass to Jonas Jerebko, who made a 3-pointer.“It’s a confidence builder,” Thomas said of the Celtics’ winning streak, which had not always been pretty. “Even though we haven’t played that well in these games, we somehow got the win. And that says a lot about this team.”Lou Amundson missed his second straight game for the Knicks with tightness in his back.David Lee was out for the Celtics with back spasms. but Boston got a boost with the return of guard Marcus Smart, who had missed 18 games with a left knee injury. Smart was averaging 9.8 points, 3.8 rebounds, 3.2 assists and 1.8 steals through nine games this season before getting hurt.Stevens said he expected Smart would hit some speed bumps over the coming days as he worked his way back into shape. Smart had not had an opportunity to play five-on-five — only two-on-two and three-on-three — before Sunday’s game.Smart made his presence felt, entering the game with 2:52 left in the first quarter. He rumbled into the lane, absorbed contact and a foul from Langston Galloway in midair and still drained his floater. He missed his next three attempts, though.“We understand that we still have stuff that we need to work on,” Smart said. “But the things we are good at we are trying to execute to perfection, especially late in games when we are trying to finish off games more.”That was on display as Smart, Thomas and the Celtics stanched the Knicks’ late charge.A version of this article appears in print on December 28, 2015, on Page D7 of the New York edition with the headline: Celtics’ Attack Leaves Overmatched Knicks Flailing.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.