By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSDEC. 27, 2015
DALLAS —  There has been little mystery with Alabama’s offense this season. The Crimson Tide have a 6-foot-3, 242-pound Heisman Trophy winner at tailback in Derrick Henry, and the plan has been to swing that sledgehammer as many times as it takes to break the defense.Michigan State is the next wall in the way.The third-ranked Spartans face No. 2 Alabama on Thursday in a College Football Playoff semifinal at the Cotton Bowl, and they are determined not to crack.“As the game progresses, people wear down,” the Michigan State co-defensive coordinator Harlon Barnett said Sunday. “You get tired of hitting that big back. Boom. Again. Here he comes again. Boom. Again and again and again. And so you have to have the mental toughness to be able to say: ‘Hold on. We’re going to hold up, and we’re going to keep smacking him. Keep hitting him.’“It’s a test of wills, and his will has won out a lot of times this season.”Michigan State linebackers Riley Bullough and Jon Reschke sent Twitter messages Henry’s way the night he won the Heisman, saying how much they were looking forward to the challenge.Advertisement“Can’t wait Derrick!!” was Reschke’s post to @KingHenry_2.Henry set Southeastern Conference records this season with 1,986 yards rushing, 521 of those coming in the fourth quarter. The only quarter in which Henry has had more yards is the first (550), which is remarkable considering Henry sat out much, if not all, of the fourth quarter in a few of Alabama’s blowout games. His 6.1 yards per rush in the fourth is almost a full yard better than what he does in the third (5.2).AdvertisementThe old football saying for a running back like Henry is that he gets stronger as the game progresses, but Tide quarterback Jake Coker has a little different perspective.“He stays the same, and everybody else changes,” Coker said.So how does Michigan State (12-1) plan to hammer Henry?It is not necessarily a matter of scheme. Alabama (12-1) has faced plenty of loaded boxes, with defenses crowding seven and eight players tight to the line of scrimmage.“We understand what we’re facing and that he’s a fall-forward back,” Barnett said. “He’s not getting knocked back too many times.”And when Henry gets into space, those long arms help keep defenders at bay.“He’s definitely a stiff-arm runner,” said Mike Tressel, Michigan State’s other co-defensive coordinator. “With a guy that big you talk about taking out his legs, but sometimes he doesn’t let you get in there.”The Spartans have used the freshmen linebackers Kenny Willekes (6-3, 223) and T. J. Harrell (6-1, 209) on the scout team as ball carriers to give its defense the feel of tackling a big target.Michigan State ranks ninth in the country in rushing yards allowed per game at 113.1 and 22nd in yards per carry at 3.55. The Spartans’ front seven is talented but not huge, with the 275-pound nose tackle Malik McDowell and no starting linebackers listed above 230 pounds. The Spartans keep it simple defensively, play fundamentally sound and commit plenty of bodies to stopping the run.Advertisement“Well, we’re just going to keep bullets flying,” Tressel said. “That’s the way we play defense. We fill with just about all 11 people on a run play.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Spartans run defense was at its best in its biggest games, holding Iowa and Ohio State to a total of 138 yards on 53 carries.Alabama center Ryan Kelly, a second-team All-American, said Michigan State’s defense was built “around the premise to make negative plays.”“That’s what we want to eliminate,” Kelly said. “We had a lot of negative plays early in the season. Those are drive killers.”Michigan State defensive tackle Joel Heath said the Spartans had to understand that just because they limit Henry once, twice or three times does not mean Alabama will stop running its go-to plays.“Alabama is great at running the inside zone, power, all those different things,” Heath said. “If you don’t take it seriously every play, that’s when he makes a big break. I’ve seen great teams play great against him. But he’s consistent. If you’re not consistent with him, he’s going to make a big run, make a big play.”Henry, who ran the ball 90 times (44 and 46) in Alabama’s last two games, said there was no difference between carry No. 20 and No. 40.“I think it’s really just all a mind-set,” he said. “Let it affect you, then it’s going to affect you.”With nearly a month since Henry last played, the Spartans figure he has had plenty of time to recharge.“The thing about the workload is I wished we played him the week right after he had consecutive 40-carry games,” Tressel said. “But with the break that he’s had right now he could carry the ball 80 times, and he’d be fine.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.