AdvertisementSupported byBy Karen CrouseGLENDALE, Ariz. — Less than three hours before Sunday’s kickoff, Arizona Cardinals quarterback Carson Palmer streaked across the field at University of Phoenix Stadium practically in his birthday suit. Wearing an improvised hula outfit, with kneepads strung together to form a bikini top and a white towel shredded to make a skirt, Palmer made good on a bet he had lost during a weekly postpractice throwing game. The pregame sprint was a prelude to a blissful 36th birthday for Palmer, who led the Cardinals to a 38-8 defeat of the Green Bay Packers.Palmer, whose future last December was shaky as he recuperated from a second operation on the anterior cruciate ligament in his left knee, continued his ageless season. He passed for 265 yards and two touchdowns as the Cardinals improved to 13-2, earned a first-round bye in the playoffs and positioned themselves for a run at the N.F.C.’s top spot. An Arizona victory coupled with a Carolina Panthers loss in the regular-season finales would deliver the No. 1 seed to the Cardinals, winners of their last nine. With some chipping away by reporters, the gruff exterior of Bruce Arians, the Cardinals’ coach, crumbled enough to reveal a compliment. “It’s probably as good of a complete game that we’ve had, against a quality opponent,” he said.After a scoreless first quarter, the Cardinals broke the game open with a 17-point second. Palmer had 238 yards passing and the two scores by halftime, which was not a huge surprise. In his 12th season, Carson is having his finest year statistically, with 34 touchdown passes and six games with at least three touchdowns through the air.The shock waves came courtesy of the defense, which was playing its first game without its leader, Tyrann Mathieu, who had five interceptions and one sack before he tore his A.C.L. last week and was lost for the season. It took a cabal to replace Mathieu, a third-year safety who is a hybrid of a cornerback, safety and linebacker. Enter cornerbacks Jerraud Powers and Justin Bethel and safety Tony Jefferson, who combined for 13 tackles. Bethel added an interception, and Powers returned a fumble 7 yards for a touchdown. Packers quarterback Aaron Rodgers passed for 151 yards while running from red jerseys. He was sacked eight times (the Cardinals finished with nine). Linebacker Dwight Freeney, who signed with the Cardinals in October to plug a hole created by injuries to Alex Okafor and Kenny Demens, had three of the sacks. “I’ve been on the other side of Dwight Freeney,” Palmer said, “and it’s no fun.”Palmer said the defense’s play as a unit was “phenomenal” and added, “With the loss of Ty, we just weren’t expecting that.” Neither, apparently, were the Packers. Wide receiver James Jones, who was held to three catches, said, “We didn’t plan on taking this long trip to play a game like that, but it happens.”How can my team make the N.F.L. playoffs? It’s a simple question, but answering it can be devilishly complicated. This interactive simulator walks you through the scenarios.It has been a long journey back to Super Bowl contention for Palmer and the Cardinals, who started 9-1 in 2014 to gain the league’s attention. After Palmer was sidelined with his knee injury, the team finished 2-4. The Cardinals faithful were hit by a sickening sense of déjà vu last Monday when the extent of Mathieu’s injury was revealed.But these Cardinals appear more determined than last year’s edition. “They’ve learned their lessons,” Arians said.The Cardinals are fortunate to have understudies like David Johnson, who opened his rookie season third on the running backs depth chart and became the starter after Andre Ellington and Chris Johnson went down with injuries.Against the Packers, Johnson, a third-round draft pick out of Northern Iowa, caught three passes for 88 yards and rushed for 39 yards, including a 14-yard score. He is as versatile as a reversible jacket, as is borne out by the breakdown of his 13 touchdowns: eight rushing, four receiving and one kick return.And the Cardinals still have Mathieu, who was an immediate success in his new role as a sideline talisman. “You miss the passion and the energy,” Arians said in the lead-up to the game, referring to Mathieu. “But footballwise, we’ve got enough capable hands to replace him.”The Cardinals’ good-hands people include receiver Larry Fitzgerald, who finished with four receptions, including a second-quarter score, to extend his season marks to 103 catches and eight touchdowns.And then there is the most capable Cardinal, Palmer, who never doubted that he would return to peak form after his injury. He came back with a stronger core as a result of a stepped-up weight room regimen and with renewed passion for the game. Now, a quarterback thought to have perhaps too many miles on the odometer and too much wear on his wheels to drive the Cardinals anywhere but into a ditch is a contender for the Comeback Player of the Year and Most Valuable Player Awards.Palmer experienced a rare off-day on Friday, during a weekly touch passing drill with his backups, Drew Stanton and Matt Barkley, and cornerback Patrick Peterson. Why does Peterson participate?“I don’t know,” Palmer said, grinning, “but the more the merrier.”For the first time this season, the other players threw touch passes into a trash can before Palmer could find his mark. As the drill’s “loser,” he had to wear a costume in pregame warm-ups. “I knew it was going to be bad,” Palmer said, adding, “It was worse than I expected.”Palmer put on the outfit that the team’s equipment manager put out for him. He ignored the cackling of his teammates, who arrived early for the show, and sprinted across the field as if being chased by the Packers’ Julius Peppers. He acted mortified. In truth, it was for such camaraderie-filled moments that Palmer worked so hard to get back.“I love playing the game, and with this group of guys, it’s special,” he said. “There’s a lot of meaning in everything we do.”Advertisement