AdvertisementSupported bySports of The TimesBy William C. RhodenEAST RUTHERFORD, N.J. — The Jets control their destiny.That is big news for a team that started fast, then faded, blowing leads like the Jets of old, mismanaging time and giving away precious opportunities.On Sunday, the Jets defeated New England, 26-20, in overtime. After the victory, they learned that the Pittsburgh Steelers had lost in Baltimore, putting the Jets in control of their playoff destiny. If they beat their former coach Rex Ryan and the Bills next Sunday at Buffalo, they will clinch their first playoff berth since 2010.In typical fashion, Coach Todd Bowles played down the significance of beating New England, a team that has been the source of decades of misery for Jets fans. His team entered Sunday having lost eight of nine games to the Patriots, including a 30-23 defeat in Foxborough, Mass., in October that turned on a couple of critical plays.“We knew we had to win a ballgame, regardless of who we were playing,” Bowles said. “It just happened to be the Patriots.”He added: “We knew from last time we didn’t make enough plays. This time we did.”The Jets made so many crucial plays Sunday that it’s difficult to pick out the two or three that tilted the game in their favor.Brandon Marshall, who dropped a potential game-changing touchdown pass in Foxborough in October, scored on Sunday on a 2-yard pass from Ryan Fitzpatrick that gave the Jets a 10-3 lead and on a 33-yard touchdown pass that stretched it to 17-3. “He played big,” Bowles said of Marshall. “He stepped up in a big game.”Eric Decker, who has been forced by coverage to bide his time in the Jets’ offense, caught three passes. But his 6-yard touchdown catch in overtime won the game.For all of the big-time plays from Marshall and Decker, and the runs (seven, for 56 yards) and catches (five, for 34) by Bilal Powell, the biggest play for the Jets may have been made by New England Coach Bill Belichick.The Patriots won the toss in overtime and elected to kick. It seems very likely that their intent was to choose which end of the field to defend, but in not initially making that clear to officials, they ended up with the worst of both worlds.Or perhaps Belichick was just being Belichick, staying true to form and figuring that the Jets would find a way to bungle the game away. New England would then either win on a Tom Brady touchdown pass or break the hearts of Jets fans once again on a Stephen Gostkowski field goal.“I thought that was the best thing to do,” Belichick said when asked about the decision to kick off.Bowles said simply, “They just told us we got the ball; that’s all I can ask for.”On the Jets’ first possession, Fitzpatrick looked a bit like Brady, hitting Quincy Enunwa with a pass that Enunwa turned into a 48-yard gain. Fitzpatrick then hit Marshall for 20 more yards and then Decker for the clincher.“The guys rallied behind him; they didn’t panic; they showed poise this time where in the past we hadn’t shown poise,” Bowles said.But before I delve deeper into what follows the Jets’ hip-hip-hurrah victory, I should make a slight detour.The Jets will travel to Buffalo for what may be a do-or-die game Sunday against the Bills. While I’m looking forward to a week of hype and multitiered story lines centered on Ryan and the Jets, I miss the substantial conversation about sportsmanship, sanctioned bad conduct and officiating that the N.F.L. was forced to have last week in the wake of Odell Beckham Jr.’s meltdown against the Carolina Panthers.It’s difficult to have sustained discussions because they are devoured by pro football Sundays. Indeed, the N.F.L. does distraction and diversion better than any other major sports league. This is its uncanny, unparalleled narcotic attraction. In the days leading up to Week 16, all anyone could write about, talk about — all fans were wringing their hands about — was the astounding display of bad sportsmanship from Beckham, the Giants’ meteoric wide receiver, against Josh Norman of the Panthers.From Monday through Thursday, the N.F.L., caught in yet another mini-tempest, was trying to explain baseball bats brought on the field by players, a slugfest between an out-of-control receiver and one of the league’s best defenders, not to mention apparently enough antigay slurs from Carolina defenders (in the name in getting inside Beckham’s head) to fill up a season. By Thursday, though, the boorish behavior had diminished to a mere distraction. By Sunday, with fans roaring for more, frothing for their football fix and adjusting their fantasy teams, the Beckham-Norman escapade was a very much a distant memory.Thank goodness for football Sunday, the gigantic suction cup that devours, distracts, diverts.No doubt the allegations raised Sunday in an Al Jazeera documentary that Peyton Manning may have used human growth hormone will have their run this week, too. But it’s just as certain they will be overtaken by the Week 17 kickoff. Do you really think there is genuine interest among fans over whether Manning may have gotten a little help from his friends? Or interest in whatever Norman and friends may have said about Beckham?I don’t.Not in downstate New York, where Jets fans will be in a frenzy over the prospect of facing Ryan. Not among Giants fans who will be speculating over Coach Tom Coughlin’s future. Not in Pittsburgh or Kansas City.Sunday is a magical day in pro football, one that makes troubles seem so far away. It devours scandals and controversies, makes it next to impossible to mount a sustained campaign to address issues like player safety, domestic violence and doping. Those story lines, no matter how compelling, are shunted aside by 1 p.m.As Fitzpatrick noted about next Sunday’s game in Buffalo, going against Ryan, “You guys will have plenty to write about.”“It’s a crazy circumstance,” he said. “That’s what it’s going to come down to on Buffalo.”Really crazy.The Jets control their destiny. Shout the news. Email: wcr@nytimes.com Advertisement