AdvertisementSupported byBy Peter MayWELLESLEY, Mass. — The provisions — beer, soda, water and munchies — will have been purchased and packed the day before. The folding table with the Jets insignia, the envy of his fellow tailgaters, will also be crammed into the back of Chris Harding’s 2010 silver Honda Pilot.Before sunrise on Sunday, Harding pulled out of his driveway in this west suburban Boston town, headed for MetLife Stadium. It is a drive he makes about five times a year — 420 miles round trip — to watch his favorite N.F.L. team, the Jets.On Sunday, for the game against the A.F.C. East champion Patriots, he made it to the stadium in 3 hours 10 minutes. He has the route, and the routine, down pat after all these years.“He’s a machine,” said Harding’s neighbor Erik Garpestad, a critical-care doctor and Jets fan who has accompanied Harding for one Jets game in each of the past four years. “He’s got the whole thing down to a science.”Harding’s love affair with the Jets began when his father took him to Shea Stadium to see Joe Namath. He bought his first season tickets in 1988, splitting four with his college roommate. When the new stadium was built, he moved to a club section, buying two $250 seats in Section 243, opposite the Jets’ bench.What makes this story of unconditional fealty so intriguing is that Harding has no other New York sporting allegiances. His family is from the Scranton, Pa., area. He went to Boston College. Before moving to Wellesley, he lived briefly in New Jersey and on Long Island, but never long enough to become a fan of other New York sports teams.Instead, he worships the Bruins. His N.B.A. team of choice is the Celtics. He buys Red Sox season tickets. He attends football, hockey and basketball games at his alma mater. Other than the N.F.L., his sporting interests are all things Boston.“This is God’s way of punishing me by living in New England in the golden age of Patriots football — and being a Jets fan,” Harding said.He added, “And it’s easy now to be a Patriots fan.”But, he said, “I could never give up on my Jets.”He recalled a time driving around the Boston area and listening to sports talk radio. The hosts wondered if there was anyone in the audience who could be so daft as to be a Red Sox and a Jets season-ticket holder. It was the fall of 2011. The Red Sox were imploding. The Jets had just lost their third straight game.“As soon as I got connected, the guy on the line said: ‘Hold on. I’ll put you right through,’ ” Harding said. “Then we went back and forth on the air for 10 minutes. It was fun. They couldn’t understand it. No one can. My wife thinks I’m crazy.”Harding, who turns 51 next month, travels frequently for his job as executive vice president for business development at a technology consulting firm, making sure to carve out time for those Sunday commutes to East Rutherford, N.J. He generally forgoes night games. He once turned around for home after arriving at the stadium parking lot in a blinding snowstorm; the trip back took nine hours.The 1 p.m. starts, like Sunday’s, are the preferred ones. Harding and his companion du jour — this week it was his college-age son, Tommy — arrive at their regular tailgating spot around 9:30 a.m. During the drive, he continuously flips between two New York radio stations that offer traffic reports, figuring out which bridge to take: the George Washington or the Tappan Zee.Even though his regular tailgate partners live much closer to the stadium, Harding is always the first to arrive, arranging his goods on the much-admired Jets folding table.“They all think I’m nuts,” he said of his tailgating friends, who usually number around four. “They all live 30 minutes away. I come from Boston, and I always beat them there.”The tailgating routine is every bit as programmed as the journey. It starts with chicken legs, moves on to ribs and then homemade sausage on fresh Portuguese rolls.The game-day routine also includes, unfortunately, not being there for the finish. Throughout the years, Harding has found that a departure at the end of the third quarter, or early in the fourth, saves him as much as two hours. He and his traveling companion listen to the game — on the Jets’ official station, of course — on the way back.They are usually home by 7 p.m., and that includes a delicatessen stop in Vernon, Conn. The ride back can be a little longer, Harding said, especially if the Jets lose. The upside to the long day, he said, is quality time with family and friends.Harding also generally finds a way to see the Jets at Gillette Stadium and will occasionally follow them on the road. He and his son flew to Dallas for the Cowboys game nine days ago. He attended the Titans game at MetLife Stadium on Dec. 13, so Sunday’s game against New England was his third straight week watching his favorite team.He is even thinking about a trip to Buffalo next Sunday for the regular-season finale, with the Jets in the playoff hunt. He added that if he does go, he will fly.Advertisement