AdvertisementSupported byBy Jonah Engel BromwichDo not write the Houston Rockets off just yet. Widely thought to be a contender after a strong showing in last season’s playoffs, Houston has had a mediocre season, struggling on both sides of the ball. The team was further destabilized by the departure of Coach Kevin McHale in November.But in the last few weeks, the Rockets have defeated two of the best teams in the N.B.A., the Los Angeles Clippers and the San Antonio Spurs, hinting at the same dangerous potential on display in the 1981 postseason. That year, the Rockets, despite a losing record in the regular season, upset the Los Angeles Lakers, the Spurs and the Kansas City (now Sacramento) Kings before losing in the finals to Larry Bird’s Boston Celtics. It can be difficult to evaluate a team whose roster may soon shift. The league’s unofficial trade season began in mid-December, but there has not been much player movement. Still, Houston’s Dwight Howard is one of several players being mentioned as quite likely to change jerseys.Howard’s 12.6 scoring average is the lowest since his rookie season in 2004-5, partly because he is not much in demand within the Rockets’ offense, and partly because of the deterioration of his 7-foot frame.Howard has said that he is perfectly happy in Houston, and he has denied rumors that he is in search of a new home. Whether or not he chooses to leave (or is pushed out), the Rockets will remain James Harden’s team, and Howard’s role will very likely continue to diminish.After a difficult start to the season, Harden returned to form in December, shooting about as well as he did last season. He has also been passing the ball more and turning it over less, changes that help to explain why the Rockets, after going 7-11 in October and November, have won nine of their 14 games this month.That success culminated in an 88-84 victory over the Spurs on Friday, when Harden scored 20 points, 18 in the second half, and dished out nine assists. The Rockets’ bench helped: Terrence Jones added 14 points, and the inexhaustible veteran Jason Terry, 38, had 12 points and 3 steals.The real star, though, was Houston’s defense. The Spurs’ 84 points were the fewest anyone had scored against Houston this season.San Antonio shot 40.9 percent from the field, well below its season average, and only made 5 of 19 3-point attempts.It was an unusually bad performance for San Antonio, which had been on a seven-game winning streak. (It could just be that Tim Duncan hates playing on Christmas. He has won only one of the six games he has played in on the holiday.) The Spurs remain undefeated at home, and only one of their six losses over all has come against another contender — they dropped their season opener to the Oklahoma City Thunder. Recently, Clippers Coach Doc Rivers suggested that the Spurs’ success was being overlooked as fans and commentators piled onto the Golden State Warriors’ bandwagon. San Antonio is, in fact, close behind Golden State by some statistical measures. The Warriors’ point differential — the amount of points they outscore opponents by per 100 possessions — is 14.9. The Spurs’ is 13.9. The next-best team, the Thunder, is at 9.0.The Warriors’ roster is set for the most part, and the Spurs are managing to play at a similarly high level while tinkering and experimenting for the future, trying to rebuild the ship while it is still sailing. Earlier in the season, LaMarcus Aldridge was still searching for his sea legs, but this month he has shot over 50 percent from the field and is averaging 16.2 points per game. The new addition David West has also provided ballast. On Saturday, the Spurs notched their third win this season with West starting, as Duncan rested.Even Boban Marjanovic, a rookie backup center, is starting to see some playing time. He was on the floor for 15 minutes during Saturday’s 101-86 victory over the Denver Nuggets and managed to do some impressive work, scoring 10 points, most of them on free throws, and adding seven rebounds and four blocks. The Spurs on Saturday looked entirely unfazed by their defeat on Christmas, but the Rockets lost to the lesser New Orleans Pelicans, 110-108, on Saturday, and their coach, J. B. Bickerstaff, complained of the team’s selfishness. On Christmas Day, the Rockets had looked like their old selves. But if they cannot compete with San Antonio again next Saturday (8:30 p.m. Eastern, NBA TV), fans should feel comfortable thinking of the victory as a holiday miracle.Advertisement