By BEN SHPIGELDEC. 27, 2015
EAST RUTHERFORD, N.J. —  The Jets’ captains strode to midfield, listened to the rules of overtime and waited for the vagaries of a flipped coin to determine their season.Of course, the Jets wanted the ball first. If they got the ball and scored a touchdown, they would win. They would topple mighty New England, and could you imagine the bedlam at MetLife Stadium then?The Patriots, as the road team, had the option of calling. Heads, they wanted.The coin was heads.In the split-second that elapsed before New England’s emissary, Matthew Slater, announced the team’s preference, Jets safety Calvin Pryor began mentally preparing himself. Their defense would have to foil Patriots quarterback Tom Brady once more.As Slater spoke, Jets cornerback Buster Skrine flinched. There must have been some sort of mistake. Skrine must not have heard him correctly: Did the Patriots opt to kick away?Advertisement“I didn’t know if it was just a brave call on their side or a mistake,” Skrine said. “I was like, ‘Thanks.’ ”AdvertisementNew England ceded possession to the Jets, who never gave the ball back. They won, 26-20, after quarterback Ryan Fitzpatrick connected with Eric Decker on a 6-yard touchdown pass that positioned the Jets for their first postseason berth since 2010.Back when their postseason hopes seemed dim — a week ago, in other words — Jets Coach Todd Bowles appealed to the football gods.These deities have seemed to take a disproportionate delight in mocking the Jets — especially in this rivalry.Against New England, the Jets (10-5) absorbed the butt fumble and 1-point misery and 2-point anguish. Then there was that time a star Jets linebacker, Mo Lewis, walloped Drew Bledsoe, ushering in the Brady era and an A.F.C. East dynasty and those four Super Bowls.Those moments defined the Jets’ ineptitude. No longer.Their fifth consecutive win, coupled with Pittsburgh’s loss at Baltimore, escorted them to the cusp of the playoffs.The simplest possible entry will also be the most daunting: winning at Buffalo to extend Rex Ryan’s miserable debut season as coach of the Bills.“He is in the way now,” Jets defensive end Sheldon Richardson said, “and we have to get past him.”The 48-yard catch-and-run by the Jets’ Quincy Enunwa, on the second play of overtime, to set up Eric Decker’s winning touchdown. Lined up in the slot, Enunwa ran an outside slant. Kenbrell Thompkins, who was lined up on the outside, cut inside to jam two defenders and create space for Enunwa, who caught the pass and sprinted past Leonard Johnson to the Patriots’ 30-yard line. 
		That is how many receptions Brandon Marshall has made this season, including eight on Sunday. He shattered the franchise record, set in 1988 by Al Toon. Marshall is the first player in N.F.L. history to have six seasons with at least 100 catches each. The last game of the regular season, at Buffalo. The Jets can ensure that it will not be the last game over all if they beat the Bills to clinch a playoff berth. By BEN SHPIGELDEC. 27, 2015
Two Denver losses or a Pittsburgh defeat would also secure passage to the playoffs.“I think it’s meant to happen — I do,” Jets linebacker Calvin Pace said.AdvertisementThat feeling permeated the Jets’ locker room afterward. Not the certainty of Pace’s words but rather the sense of inevitability: that a team that bungled four of five games at midseason, that crumbled twice in late situations, would rise from mediocrity to seize control of its playoff future.The Jets praised the mettle of Fitzpatrick, who completed 26 of 41 passes for 296 yards and three touchdowns. And the resilience of wide receiver Quincy Enunwa, who failed to catch a long pass late in regulation that would have given the Jets the ball deep in New England territory but who in overtime turned a short flip from Fitzpatrick into a 48-yard gain. And the consistency of Brandon Marshall, who continued his superlative season by catching eight passes for 115 yards and two touchdowns.The Jets — and their official Twitter feed — also commended Patriots Coach Bill Belichick’s decision on the coin toss.“No, I don’t think it’s an insult,” Bowles said.On a coin toss, a team has four options: defer, elect to kick, elect to receive or defend a goal. It can choose one, and only one, and that decision is irreversible. Slater, as captured by the CBS broadcast, said that the Patriots wanted to kick off “that way.” Because he said “kick off” first, Slater was not permitted to choose which goal New England would defend.“My face lit up,” Pryor said. “Like, do you really want to kick the ball?”After the Jets were asked where they wanted to receive, Slater’s head swiveled toward the sideline. He looked mystified. Skrine thought Slater had misspoken. He had not. Slater had confirmed the decision with Belichick.“I double-checked three or four times,” Slater said. “I think he was looking at me like, ‘Are you concussed?’ because I kept asking him. But that’s what he wanted to do. You never question Coach’s decision-making. He’s the best in the business, and we trust him fully. So that’s what we did.”In the interview room afterward, Belichick looked furious. He said he did not regret his call. Asked why he had chosen to kick, he said, “I thought that was the best thing to do.”AdvertisementWas there any confusion?“There wasn’t any confusion,” he said. “I just answered that question.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.This strategy had worked before for Belichick, at home against Denver in 2013, when the strong winds at Gillette Stadium influenced his decision. The Patriots went on to win that night.Marshall surmised that Belichick had hoped for a defensive stop that would have established favorable field position for New England, which did not score an offensive touchdown Sunday until Brady’s 9-yard pass to James White with 1 minute 55 seconds remaining.To that point, the game unfurled the way it had to for the Jets, the way it needed to for a team that had crowed all week about how different it was since it last played New England. That defeat, after a late lead blown back in October, sent the Jets careening into a tailspin.They lost three of their next four, and after they bumbled in Houston to fall to 5-5, Bowles blasted his team. Pace distilled his coach’s message into one question: Are we going to do this or not?The Jets thrashed Miami and edged the Giants and trounced Tennessee and overcame Dallas, their confidence building every week. They exuded a conviction expressed by Pryor: If last time the Jets felt they could compete with New England, he said, now they felt they could dominate.Want proof of that maturation? Of that spirit?Here came the fourth quarter Sunday. The Jets were winning again, 20-13, and here came New England. “We’ve seen this story before,” Pace said.So many times the Jets had endured cruel losses via the right arm of Brady, who on the Patriots’ final possession completed two passes to Rob Gronkowski on fourth down to set up White’s tying touchdown. And perhaps they might have again, had New England assumed possession at the beginning of overtime.Instead, the Jets’ offense mobilized.“I had a ton of confidence,” Fitzpatrick said. The drive covered 80 yards in five plays. It ended with Decker catching a nifty fade in the back corner and leaping into the stands to celebrate.AdvertisementDecker has played in three postseasons, all with Denver, but many of his teammates await their first trip. Fitzpatrick, an 11-year veteran, for one. Also Marshall, who came closest three years ago, with Chicago. He felt helpless depending on other teams. On Sunday, the Jets rectified the harsh lesson Marshall had learned. No longer must they rely on the charity of others. They rely on one another. They rely on themselves. One more victory, and they are in the playoffs.“It’s a wonderful thing,” Pace said, “to be playing meaningful football in December.”A version of this article appears in print on December 28, 2015, on Page D1 of the New York edition with the headline: Flip of Fortune for the Jets.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.