By ROB HUGHESDEC. 27, 2015
LONDON —  If uncertainty makes for compelling competition, nothing can rival the English Premier League.While every other major league in the world shut down for Christmas, all 20 English clubs played on Boxing Day. Not too many followed form, although Manchester City’s 4-1 crushing of Sunderland, which is haunted by the specter of relegation, was predictable enough. And Tottenham’s 3-0 win over Norwich City might also have been foreseen.The other teams in the top five or six positions faltered. Leicester City, still the surprise leader with half the season gone, came up against Liverpool, which did the one thing opponents have to do to stop the Leicester Foxes — match their tempo, tenacity and teamwork and strike when they take their eyes off the ball.A solitary goal, from substitute Christian Benteke, broke a stalemate that had lasted more than an hour, giving Liverpool a 1-0 victory at its Anfield stadium.AdvertisementThe only other team to have overcome Leicester this season was Arsenal. Indeed, with no one appearing to take ownership of title favorite, many experts were backing the Gunners to recapture the Premier League title it last won in 2004.AdvertisementBy late Saturday, after Arsenal was waylaid by a devastating margin, the uncertainty was back again. Arsenal suffered a 4-0 beating at Southampton on the south coast. The Saints had been publicly berated by the team’s coach, Ronald Koeman, after failing to win any of its previous five games.Koeman made changes, some because of injuries, some by choice. His big game winners Saturday were Shane Long, the Irishman who poached two goals and had chances to bag five, and a fellow called Cuco Martina, who was born in the Netherlands but represents the small Caribbean island of Curaçao at the national team level.Martina began the rout of Arsenal. A right back, making his first start in the Premier League, he did something that stunned himself as much as it did Arsenal. From outside the penalty area, he took a swing with his right foot at a careless clearance from Per Mertesacker.Martina let the ball bounce and then, with what looked like casual brilliance, he struck it with the outside of his foot. It arched to maybe three yards outside the far post but then, gradually and gracefully, the ball swerved inward and beat Petr Cech, one of the world’s outstanding goalkeepers.The element of surprise was shared by Martina who said afterward on TV: “What a feeling! It’s crazy, I know, but a good goal for me.”A good goal? He undersells himself. It was a great strike by any measure.But that happened in the first quarter of the game, and Arsenal had plenty of time to recover and to demonstrate the pedigree of its skills. It never happened. Either because Arsenal had fed too well over Christmas, or because of the complacency that visits its team far too regularly to justify its status as competition favorite, the team lost too many of the decisive tackles, did too little of the running compared with, say, Southampton’s Victor Wanyama in midfield, and took a mighty beating.But the real uncertainties of this English season so far has been the collapse of Chelsea, which led to the firing of its manager, Jose Mourinho, and the heat that now appears to be burning Manchester United from the inside.AdvertisementChelsea, of course, has no chance of retaining its English crown. It lies nearer the bottom than the top of the league standings, and despite axing Mourinho and replacing him until the end of the season with the 69-year-old Dutchman Guus Hiddink, it still hasn’t turned itself back into a winner.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.On Saturday, Chelsea was held to a  2-2 draw at home by Watford, another of those surprising clubs like Leicester and like Crystal Palace that are nestling comfortably high in this topsy-turvy season.It is no fluke. These are clubs that spend wisely and make the most out of their collective ability regardless of the huge discrepancy in their incomes and payrolls compared with the Manchester clubs, or with Chelsea, Arsenal, Liverpool and Tottenham.The smaller clubs are no longer paupers. They have rights to the television broadcasting income that makes the Premier League by far the wealthiest league on earth. Last season’s bottom team in the Premiership received $96 million in TV payments, and from next June that minimum sum will increase markedly.Yet money doesn’t guarantee success. If it did, Chelsea and Manchester City, backed by the Russian billionaire Roman Abramovich and by the ruling family of Abu Dhabi respectively, would be guaranteed to win the league every year.Managing that wealth is key. When Chelsea dismissed Mourinho less than six months after awarding him a new four-year contract last summer, it put the pressure on Manchester United to do the same to its underachieving team manager, Louis van Gaal.Van Gaal, 64, was once a kind of father figure to Mourinho. It was van Gaal who took on Mourinho as a protégé when he coached Barcelona in 1999, asking the younger Portuguese man to join him as an assistant.Over the years, the two coaches became rivals. Their styles are similar, putting winning above all else and basing that on methods that emphasize caution.When results started to go against van Gaal at United, the home crowd bayed for more of its traditional adventure. And Saturday, while losing 2-0 at Stoke City, the banners went up for van Gaal to be replaced.AdvertisementThose banners called for Mourinho instead, but some of them were held up by Stoke fans, mocking United’s problems.Van Gaal’s team has suffered four successive league defeats — the first time that has happened to United in a season since 1961.The upcoming games are intriguing. Manchester United is pitted against Chelsea on Monday, followed by Leicester versus Manchester City Tuesday.Asked in a news conference Saturday if he expected to still be in charge of United at the next game, van Gaal responded:“You have to wait and see, but I think so.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.