AdvertisementSupported byN.H.L. RoundupBy The Associated PressJames Neal scored twice, Mike Ribeiro had three assists and the Predators held off the Rangers, 5-3, in Nashville on Monday night.Filip Forsberg, Craig Smith and Ryan Ellis also scored for the Predators, who won for the third time in four games. Roman Josi added two assists, and Pekka Rinne had 26 saves.Jesper Fast, Rick Nash and J. T. Miller had goals for the Rangers, who lost for the fourth time in five games.Forsberg scored the first goal with 1 minute 4 seconds left in the first period. With Nashville on a power play, Josi sent a pass from the right boards to Forsberg on the left face-off dot, where he sent a one-timer by goaltender Henrik Lundqvist on the stick side.Fast tied the game at 6:59 of the second. Standing in the low slot, he deflected Dan Girardi’s shot from the right point between Rinne’s pads.Girardi returned to the Rangers’ lineup after missing five games with a small crack in his right kneecap.Nashville regained the lead at 13:48 of the second on Neal’s 14th of the season. From the high slot, he beat Lundqvist with a wrist shot that glanced off the left post.Smith gave Nashville a two-goal lead at 7:34 of the third when he tipped home Josi’s shot from the high slot. That goal came just 2:16 after Forsberg appeared to make it 3-1 at 5:18 with a shot from behind the Rangers’ net, but the goal was overturned when the Rangers challenged and it was ruled that Smith had interfered with Lundqvist.Ellis scored at 9:52 of the third on Nashville’s second power-play goal of the night. Neal scored his second of the game at 11:13.Lundqvist was relieved by Antti Raanta following Neal’s second goal. Lundqvist made 30 saves on 35 shots against.Nash scored an unassisted goal at 13:20, and Miller added a goal at 16:02.Rangers defenseman Kevin Klein, a former Predator, returned to the lineup after missing 11 games with an oblique injury.CAPITALS 2, SABRES 0 Braden Holtby made 31 saves, and Alex Ovechkin scored his 18th goal to lead visiting Washington over Buffalo for its eighth straight win.The Capitals, who lead the Eastern Conference, improved to 27-6-2, the best start in franchise history.Sabres forward Evander Kane played for the first time since The Buffalo News reported that the Buffalo police were investigating a sex-crime allegation against him.Kane spoke to reporters at a morning skate Monday for about 30 seconds, saying that he had done nothing wrong and was looking forward to having his name cleared. CANADIENS 4, LIGHTNING 3 Max Pacioretty delivered in the third round of a shootout as Montreal ended a six-game losing streak with a victory over host Tampa Bay.Brian Flynn also scored in the shootout for the Canadiens, who got goals from Tomas Plekanec, Alex Galchenyuk and Dale Weise.WILD 3, RED WINGS 1 Mikko Koivu scored twice, Devan Dubnyk made 28 saves in a surprise appearance, and Minnesota beat visiting Detroit.Dubnyk sustained a cut on his arm in practice Sunday and required stitches. He was expected to sit, but Darcy Kuemper was scratched with an upper-body injury about an hour before the game.Advertisement