By TOM SPOUSTADEC. 28, 2015
DALLAS —  Alabama’s defense led the Football Bowl Subdivision with 46 sacks this season, but the Crimson Tide seemed to try to surpass that total in compliments directed at Michigan State quarterback Connor Cook on Monday.A few players likened Cook to the Denver Broncos’ Peyton Manning for his ability to read defenses and adjust play calls. Alabama’s defensive coordinator, Kirby Smart, compared Cook to the Atlanta Falcons’ Matt Ryan (when Ryan played at Boston College) and called Cook “by far” the best quarterback the No. 2 Tide (12-1) would face this season.“We’re not going to put a defense out there now that Connor Cook hasn’t seen,” Smart said. “It’s not about tricking him. There is not a throw that he can’t make. He makes decisions so quick.”Cook sealed his legacy in East Lansing Mich., by leading the No. 3 Spartans (12-1) to their second Big Ten championship in three years and a berth in Thursday night’s College Football Playoff semifinal in Arlington, Tex., with the winner advancing to play Clemson or Oklahoma for the national title.AdvertisementHyperbole aside, the truth about Cook’s talents will be determined largely by Crimson Tide defenders who have treated most quarterbacks like human piñatas and forced opponents to pass at their peril.AdvertisementCook seemed slightly uncomfortable with all the praise, but his witty and engaging personality smoothly moved along the conversation. As a senior with a 34-4 record in three years as a starter, he certainly was not going to be rattled in a hotel ballroom.“I think he’s kind of playing it down a little bit,” Spartans center Jack Allen said. “He’s a perfectionist. At practice, you see guys, they make a mistake, it’s like they shrug it off as practice. But he’ll make a mistake, and it’s like it happened in the game.”Cook’s style has been broken down into contradictions: He is accurate but does not have a gunslinger’s arm strength; he seldom outmaneuvers defenders, yet his footwork and clutch runs fueled a 22-play drive to beat Iowa in the final seconds of the Big Ten title game.“I’m not a dual threat by any means,” Cook said. “But a quarterback that I admire a lot is Tom Brady, even though he went to Michigan.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Cook explained later that he was not comparing himself to Brady, a four-time champion with the New England Patriots. When Cook arrived at Michigan State as a freshman, though, he did want to fit the mold of Kirk Cousins, a former Spartans star now with the Washington Redskins.“There were times in practice where the ball wouldn’t touch the ground,” Cook said, recalling Cousins’s workouts. “Every single ball was just right here, in the catch radius for every receiver. He was always making the right read; he was always putting in extra time in the film room. I just saw the way he carried himself on the field, off the field.“I thought, ‘Man, if I ever want to start one game here, I’ve got a lot of improvement to do.’ My goal was just to get better every single year, and with the first opportunity I got, I was going to go out there and grasp it and never look back.”AdvertisementCook, who won the Johnny Unitas Golden Arm Award and tied for ninth in the Heisman Trophy voting, needs 148 passing yards to eclipse Cousins’s Michigan State career record, 9,131. Cook has also thrown for 24 touchdowns this season, one shy of Cousins’s record.“He wants to win more than anybody on the team,” wide receiver Aaron Burbridge said of Cook. “He’ll go out there, make a mistake, bounce right back and win the game for us.”Burbridge added: “I think he has the same competitive drive as Tom Brady. Those long drives in the fourth quarter, you know he’s going to get the job done. It’s not just the arm and legs; it’s the drive to win.”Like many Spartans, Cook was not highly rated as a recruit out of high school. Michigan State put Cook on its radar when he was a sophomore at Walsh Jesuit High in Cuyahoga Falls, Ohio, where Pat Narduzzi, a Spartans assistant who is now Pittsburgh’s head coach, went to recruit another player. Cook was asked to help by throwing passes in the basketball gym for five minutes.“I’m some skinny sophomore probably throwing lollipops,” Cook recalled. Soon, he was receiving letters from Michigan State every week. When Cook threw 14 interceptions and only nine touchdown passes as a high school junior, he figured that his hopes of playing in the Big Ten were finished.“But I still got these letters from Michigan State,” Cook said. “Week after week. I’m thinking, ‘Why do they keep sending me these?’ ”Cook marveled at how the Spartans had kept faith in a three-star recruit they found by happenstance.“We’ve got guys who aren’t super highly recruited,” he said. “The coaching staff here is just very good at evaluating talent and getting guys that want to come in and are good players with good character.”Cook took Alabama’s compliments in stride. Now he wants to avoid those Crimson Tide sacks.“I just go out there and play,” Cook said.A version of this article appears in print on December 29, 2015, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: Michigan State Passer Carves a Legacy With Pluck and Persistence .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.