By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSDEC. 28, 2015
DeMarcus Ware beat A. J. McCarron to a fumbled snap in overtime, sending the Broncos into the playoffs with a 20-17 win over the Cincinnati Bengals in Denver on Monday night.Ware’s recovery followed a 37-yard field goal by Brandon McManus, whose shanked 45-yarder at the end of regulation made the extra period necessary.The Broncos (11-4) overcame a 14-0 first-half deficit in clinching their fifth consecutive playoff berth and denying the Bengals (11-4) their first road win on a Monday night since 1990.Cincinnati also missed out on a chance to earn a bye in the playoffs.Denver can earn the top seed in the A.F.C. with a victory over San Diego and a loss by New England at Miami next weekend.AdvertisementSUPPORT FOR MANNING The founder of an Indianapolis medical clinic said that a former unpaid student intern who claimed that quarterback Peyton Manning used a banned substance in 2011 did not even work at the clinic until two years later, long after Manning had been treated.AdvertisementDr. Dale Guyer, who started the Guyer Institute, an anti-aging clinic, said the allegations against Manning were untrue.Manning angrily denied using performance-enhancing substances shortly after the report, by Al Jazeera, was made public Saturday. It was based on secret recordings of Charles Sly, who named other high-profile athletes and suggested Manning had obtained human growth hormone via mail addressed to his wife, Ashley.Sly has since recanted his account and told Al Jazeera the statements attributed to him “are absolutely false and incorrect.” Guyer used similar language.“I have no reason to believe these allegations are based in fact or have any truth,” Guyer said. “In fact, I can say with absolute certainty they are not. I would emphasize that Mr. Sly was never an employee of the Guyer Institute, and his brief three-month internship occurred in 2013, during which time Peyton was not even being treated or present in the office. I think it is obvious that Mr. Sly has fabricated this whole thing for reasons I cannot fathom.”Guyer said Sly had no patient responsibilities and had had no affiliation with the clinic since his unpaid internship from February to May 2013. Manning was treated at Guyer in 2011 after four neck operations.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Al Jazeera’s report says Manning received H.G.H. from the Indianapolis clinic in 2011 while he was still with the Colts. It said the drug, later banned by the N.F.L. in the 2011 collective bargaining agreement, was delivered to his wife so that the quarterback’s name was never attached to the shipments.The Al Jazeera reporter Deborah Davies told MSNBC that she stood by her report and said that Manning had not denied the allegation that he had H.G.H. shipped to his wife.Manning said he sought holistic treatments including hyperbaric oxygen and nutrient therapy at the Guyer Institute with the consent of the Colts’ training and medical staff. He called the report “complete trash, garbage,” and other players identified in the report, including Clay Matthews and Julius Peppers of the Green Bay Packers, also denied any wrongdoing.Advertisement“Every medication I have is prescribed by our team physician,” Matthews said Sunday. “There’s no merit to anything he said; it’s almost laughable. Those allegations are not true.”Added Peppers: “It’s completely erroneous, and I think it’s irresponsible journalism, in my opinion.”Another player named in the report, Pittsburgh Steelers linebacker James Harrison, the 2008 N.F.L. Defensive Player of the Year, said he had looked into legal action only to be told it would not be worth the cost. Harrison, who has five sacks this season, is not going to issue a denial like Manning.“There’s no need to because I know what I’ve done,” Harrison said.CHARGERS SAFETY FINED San Diego Chargers safety Eric Weddle was fined $10,000 by the team for remaining on the sideline at halftime of a Dec. 20 home game to watch his daughter dance in a program sponsored by the team’s cheerleaders, his agent David Canter said.Weddle was also placed on injured reserve Monday.A version of this article appears in print on December 29, 2015, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: Broncos Outlast Bengals and Lock Up a Playoff Spot .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.