By BEN SHPIGELDEC. 28, 2015
The Jets’ schedule was revealed, perused and then deconstructed, and what seemed predestined back in April — it had to, it had just had to — became undeniable on Sunday: that somehow, some way, a playoff berth would hinge on the outcome of their final game.At Buffalo.Against Rex Ryan.Except that the Bills have been eliminated. The Jets most certainly have not.After beating the New England Patriots in overtime, the Jets are 10-5 and aiming for their first six-game winning streak in 17 seasons.To secure their first postseason spot since 2010, when Ryan led them to their second consecutive A.F.C. championship game, they must win again Sunday. One result would guarantee the Jets passage — a loss by Pittsburgh — but it would not be as fulfilling, or delicious, as avenging November’s defeat and celebrating on the field at Ralph Wilson Stadium.AdvertisementPerhaps overstating matters, Jets linebacker Calvin Pace said he expected “a blood bath.” Lots of trick plays, too. Buffalo running back Boobie Dixon characterized the game as the Bills’ Super Bowl. “To send them home packing,” Dixon said Sunday, “that would be great.”AdvertisementRyan said Monday that he would not enjoy spoiling the Jets’ hopes, but he is a prideful man. He professed all week that beating the Jets in his return to MetLife Stadium in November had meant little to him, but nothing he did, or said, that night suggested that was true.Ryan jumped and pumped his fist, knocking off his hat and his headset, as he hollered expletives. He roamed the sideline hugging players and coaches and staff. He basked in the win, said how satisfying it was. Dang right, he said.The Bills overtook the Jets in the conference standings that night. The season held promise for Buffalo back then. It no longer does. And if Ryan’s current team cannot make the playoffs, the Bills feel, then neither should his former.“You admire where they are at,” Ryan said of his players’ perspective of the Jets. “You wish that was you.”Ryan presided over similar circumstances two years ago with the Jets, who entered their finale at Miami out of contention but knew they could ruin the Dolphins’ postseason plans with a victory. His answer then differed little from his response Monday.“No,” Ryan said two Decembers ago, when asked whether he would derive any joy from dashing Miami’s chances. “Because if you’re not in it, it really doesn’t matter.”That belief would not prevent him from using the Jets’ fortunes as a motivational ploy. Pace said Monday that he did not recall whether Ryan had seized on schadenfreude two years ago; the Jets, he said, had been more worried about potentially saving Ryan’s job than about knocking the Dolphins out of the playoffs.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Asked how constructive a tactic playing the spoiler could be, Jets Coach Todd Bowles demurred. “You’d have to ask a coach that would do that,” Bowles said in a teleconference. “That’s just not me.”AdvertisementNo, it is not Bowles. He has developed his own methods and refined them, and they have proved successful.In a raucous locker room Sunday, Bowles, a Chips Ahoy fanatic, was so overjoyed that he offered to give each player one — and only one — cookie from his personal stash. As he had all season, he implored players to worry about the next game, and only the next game — though winning that next game, he said, would clinch a playoff berth.Bowles said Monday that he did not think it was necessary to mention the playoffs again to his team.“The last couple of weeks have been playoff games,” Bowles said. “There really is no pressure. They just play together and we have fun, and we try to get better as a team. There is no pressure on us. We know we have to win. We’ve been having to win the past four weeks, five weeks, so it’s no different going into Sunday.”Across those five weeks, quarterback Ryan Fitzpatrick has soared, completing 64.5 percent of his throws with 13 touchdowns, one interception and a 106.5 passer rating, and now he prepares to play at Buffalo for the first time since being released in 2013 after four seasons with the Bills.It was there that Fitzpatrick emerged as a starter, forging an alliance with his coach, Chan Gailey, now the Jets’ offensive coordinator, that has fueled his resurgence. And so, Fitzpatrick said Monday, this game carries a little extra meaning for him.“But I don’t think there needs to be” any extra meaning, he said.That is because the Jets are one victory from ushering Fitzpatrick into his first playoffs; his 104 starts are the second-most for a quarterback (after Archie Manning, with 139) never to make the postseason since the 1970 merger, according to the Elias Sports Bureau.Should the Jets beat Buffalo, their first playoff opponent has been already decided — sort of. In that situation, there is no combination of results that would send the Jets to the A.F.C. West champion. They would travel to Cincinnati as the No. 6 seed or the A.F.C. South winner — Houston, most likely — as the No. 5.Bowles was asked Monday when he had come to see the Jets as a playoff-caliber team.“We’ve got to get to the playoffs for me to answer that,” Bowles said.In their way are Rex Ryan and the Buffalo Bills, in a game that — even if they didn’t know it — they have been awaiting for the last eight months.A version of this article appears in print on December 29, 2015, on Page B7 of the New York edition with the headline:  Just Another Game, Layered With Intrigue .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.