By BILL PENNINGTONDEC. 28, 2015
There was a new and palpable uneasiness in the Giants’ locker room late Sunday after the team’s humiliating rout in Minnesota. It was the recognition among the players that they might have sealed the fate of Coach Tom Coughlin.No one game will do that alone, not for a team that has been 19-28 in the last three seasons. But on Sunday night against the Vikings, less than 24 hours after being eliminated from the playoffs for a fourth consecutive year, the Giants were more than defeated. They were lost.It is true that this year’s Giants are undertalented and outgunned, but failing to be even remotely competitive will almost always doom the head coach.And by Monday afternoon, the understanding that the end of the Coughlin era could be just days away was hitting home powerfully.AdvertisementQuarterback Eli Manning, who uncharacteristically sidestepped questions about Coughlin’s future after Sunday’s 49-17 fiasco, tried as hard as he could on Monday to take the blame for putting Coughlin’s job in jeopardy.Advertisement“I wanted to do my job well, and get into the playoffs and have a big season, so he could continue to be the head coach,” Manning said in a conference call with reporters. “I have such respect for him, and he’s the only coach I’ve had in the N.F.L. And in that sense, I feel disappointed that I wasn’t able to play at a better level for him.”Coughlin, 69, and Manning, 35, joined the Giants in a package deal in 2004. If they have been like a pro football version of a father and son, it should be no surprise, then, that on Monday, Coughlin appeared both irritated and wounded that Manning, or any of his players, would feel the need to defend him. Coughlin said he did not want “these young men in a position where they feel badly about the circumstances that the head coach finds himself in.”Coughlin continued: “It’s a shame. Again, it’s not about me. I’m here for them. If you want to break it all down, blame it all on me. I’m the head coach. I’m responsible. We lose; I lose the game for our players. Put it that way, leave it that way.”It will not be left that way, and even Coughlin admitted as much Monday. As he tries to get the Giants ready for their season finale with the Philadelphia Eagles, he has yet to mention his job status to the team. But he plans to do so, since there is no real way to avoid it.“I will tell the team not to be distracted by it,” he said. “It’s not going to affect anything in terms of how I go about my business this week.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.It is about getting ready to coach and play another football game. Coughlin, after 46 years as a coach, knows no other way.“We’ll let whatever happens happen,” he said.Manning, still lobbying for Coughlin, made a point of saying that despite the Giants’ collapses in the final minutes of six games this season, the team had rebounded each week.“He always gets us ready, and we’ve had some tough, disappointing losses — situations that might have been tough for a team to handle,” Manning said of Coughlin. “He kept our spirits high, kept us focused and prepared to play every game.”AdvertisementBut the cavalcade of things that have gone wrong for the Giants this year will count against Coughlin. Certainly, there is plenty of blame to go around — the roster lacks any depth, and since Jason Pierre-Paul sustained a hand injury in the off-season, there has not been a single playmaker on the defense. But N.F.L. owners, even patient ones like the Giants owners John Mara and Steve Tisch, most often penalize the on-the-field leader first. Later, they might work their way up the ladder.In every corner of the Giants’ locker room on Sunday, players seemed very cognizant of these basic football facts, especially with the team sinking fast.“If I was running a company and things weren’t going the way that I wanted it to go, of course I would have to make changes,” cornerback Prince Amukamara said. “Whatever those changes are, I don’t know.”But acknowledging what might be inevitable and being happy about it are two entirely different things. And Sunday night in Minnesota, the latter was beginning to overwhelm the Giants as they gloomily grasped the former.“I know one day I’m going to look back and say I played for a Hall of Famer,” left guard Justin Pugh said of Coughlin. “I played for one of the best coaches to ever do it. So who are they going to get to come in and top what he does?”A version of this article appears in print on December 29, 2015, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: Queries on Coughlin’s Future After a Slide .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.