AdvertisementSupported byBy John BranchSTOWE, Vt. — About 10 times a day, Jake Burton Carpenter reaches for a note card and jots down thoughts and reminders. The index cards he uses are five inches by eight inches, made with brown recycled paper, and have 15 lines. They are stamped with the logo of Burton Snowboards, the company that Carpenter founded in 1977 and christened with his middle name.There is always a stack within his reach.“I don’t trust people who don’t write stuff down,” Carpenter said.So it was a speck of good luck that when Carpenter was paralyzed for several weeks earlier this year with a rare disorder called Miller Fisher syndrome, strapped to breathing machines and fed through tubes, one part of his body that he could move were his hands.He could write.And write he did, mostly on plain white copy paper attached to a clipboard during six weeks in intensive care and six more in a rehabilitation center. His mind active but his body virtually frozen, Carpenter scribbled commands and thoughts on reams of paper.There were requests for more oxygen and louder music. There were dirty jokes and apologies. There were thank yous and wisecracks. There was talk of suicide.It is all there, an unorganized diary of a man who thought he might die, and who thought he might want to die, before the illness slowly loosened its grip and gave him back movement and hope and perspective.In the middle of two recent nights, six months after he came home to continue his slow recovery, Carpenter, 61, leafed through the sheets, one by one, front and back, for the first time. Some notes are barely legible because Carpenter could not open his eyes for weeks. Some are nonsensical, a mash-up of dreams and reality.Sharing them the next day, with a stack on his lap, he stopped several times and silently dropped his face into his hands.“Life is not about having a pulse,” Carpenter said. “It’s about having friends and experiences and living. When all that ceases to exist, it’s not life anymore. And I did not see light at the end of the tunnel.”He does now. He is largely recovered from the nervous disorder, a type of Guillain-Barré syndrome that often causes temporary but complete paralysis over weeks or months before reversing, in slow motion and not always completely, over months or years.Carpenter is walking, and even snowboarding a little, but he still struggles with balance and strength. He is improving, and expects a full recovery, but it is not complete. Before the illness, he could do 40 push-ups; now he works to do one. Once a tireless swimmer, he struggles to go two laps.He is working again at Burton’s single-story headquarters in Burlington, Vt., about a 45-minute drive from home, where he has a corner office with no desk, an enormous coffee table surrounded by three couches and plenty of note cards.Carpenter is Burton’s founder, chairman and, along with Donna Carpenter, his wife of nearly 33 years, its co-owner. She has had several leading roles with Burton over the years, currently as president, and will become chief executive on Feb. 1.Carpenter — most know him as Jake Burton — is sort of a godfather of snowboarding and the youth movement toward action sports.“He’s like the cool dad of the sport,” said Shaun White, the world’s most famous snowboarder, who has been sponsored by Burton since he was about 7.Inspired in the 1970s by a sporting goods item called the Snurfer, a single ski with a rope attached to the tip, Carpenter spent years tinkering with snowboard shapes, materials and bindings, building an equipment and clothing company in Vermont that still leads the industry.Burton tightropes that precarious divide between mainstream acceptance and outsider cachet, managing to have both without sacrificing one for the other. White, along with other top athletes like the Olympians Mark McMorris and Kelly Clark and the former snowboard champion Kevin Pearce, was part of a procession of guests who called on Carpenter in the hospital.“Jake is a pioneer of snowboarding,” McMorris said. “He created the best snowboard company in the world when snowboarding wasn’t even a thing. He’s done everything for snowboarding, keeping it core and cool, but also growing it to huge levels.”Few people outside Carpenter’s immediate family knew the details or depths of his ordeal. It began in early March. Three weeks after a knee replacement surgery, Carpenter attended the Burton U.S. Open in Vail, one of the year’s major snowboarding competitions, and even snowboarded with friends.Back home in Vermont a few days later, during a workout, he experienced double vision. When it had not diminished the next morning, and he was slurring words, he went to the hospital. Tests ruled out a stroke, a heart attack or a brain injury. He was driven by ambulance to Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical Center in Lebanon, N.H.Doctors diagnosed Miller Fisher syndrome, a type of Guillain-Barré syndrome, in which a body’s immune system attacks its nerves. The cause is not known, but it may be triggered by recent surgeries or infections.Guillain-Barré usually begins with the feet. The Miller Fisher strain begins in the eyes.“The neurologist said, ‘If this is what we think it is, tomorrow you won’t be able to open your eyes, the next day you won’t be able to swallow and the day after that you won’t be able to breathe,’ ” Donna Carpenter said.That is what happened. Jake Carpenter walked into the hospital at Dartmouth and felt his body slowly lock into nearly complete paralysis. Within days, he could hear and think but could not open his eyes. He heard doctors say that he would recover, but he felt only decline. He thought of a friend who succumbed to A.L.S.“Jake said, ‘What happened to Paul in six years just happened to me in three days,’ ” Donna Carpenter said. “To Jake, how could it not be death?”His wife was the optimist, echoing the doctors who were increasingly firm in their prognosis. For weeks, Carpenter could not imagine a positive outcome. His body still, thoughts of suicide occupied the corners of his mind.“I didn’t believe the getting-better part,” he said. “I didn’t buy it at all. Even before I started getting better, she insisted I would have a full recovery. I love her and I trust her, but I had a hard time reconciling it with how I felt.”He soon was writing notes, blindly at first, mostly to Donna; their three sons, George, 26, Taylor, 22, and Timi, 19; an assortment of guests; and the caregivers who paraded through his room. From the vantage point of hindsight, they are funny, terse, mundane, sad and reflective.“When will it get easier to breathe?”“You should take a break this weekend and plant your garden.”“Let her do the talking.”“Tim you stay and shave me. Victoria you come back and brush my teeth.”“Can you please crank up my Bose volume a bit?”“Did you think I was a goner? I haven’t walked, talked or eaten since March 14.”“We are in the snowboard business in Burlington.”“All these dudes are stressing me out.” “I’ll go in and out. But great to have you by my side.”“No oxy.”“I hate the Yankees.”“The next time somebody comes into my room in a hazmat outfit can someone tell the patient?” “And don’t forget to kiss me once in a while.”“My head has been tilting to the left.”“I had a nightmare about not even tasting a bite from Jill’s cake and telling her how good it was.” “I’m almost glad this happened because we have learned to love and appreciate each other more.”“I slept 0 last night.”“Sorry but I pooped a little bit.”“How is it I feel 10 times stronger when you guys are here?”“I am really unhappy right now. Really, my day starts when you get here.”“I talked to my kids about suicide. Not proud of that.” “Sedate now please.”“I was sure you were trying to kill me.”“Thank you for coming and encouraging. I’m so sorry I need so much.”Many memories of writing the notes are lost in a fog of never-ending days, filled with sleep, anxiety, discomfort and medications.“I’m so glad I did these on paper, and so glad I saved them,” Carpenter said. “I wish we would have dated them or stamped them or something. “He plans to keep them, maybe even frame a few. For now, they are in stacks at home, several feet high. Some of the more meaningful ones are kept safe in a large Ziploc bag.The effects of Miller Fisher syndrome slowly faded after a couple of months. Carpenter had a tracheotomy in mid-April and was moved to the rehabilitation center in Boston on April 22, still mostly paralyzed and being fed through a tube. (The feeding tube was removed on Aug. 19.)In May, Donna Carpenter addressed the employees of Burton. The company has 400 at the Burlington headquarters and nearly 1,000 worldwide. Few knew what Jake Carpenter was going through.“I need to tell you upfront, each and every one of you, this story has a happy ending,” she said in a 15-minute speech.Soon, there was a poster-size photograph of employees at the foot of Carpenter’s bed, plus six others from the company’s global offices. In them, most of the employees are smiling and playfully giving a middle-finger salute. We love you, the poster read, with a crude adjective before “love.”“My guiding light,” Carpenter called the pictures, which now hang near his office.The circle of visitors grew. Most were surprised by Carpenter’s appearance — a talkative man in perpetual motion suddenly rendered frail, immobile and unable to speak. They were photographed with a Polaroid camera, their snapshots filling a bulletin board not far from a stack of copy paper near Carpenter’s bed.“Jake was in good spirits, writing notes and stuff,” McMorris recalled. “I was psyched that he could communicate, and his humor and his mind was still there.”Carpenter started to regain feeling. Still in bed, he invited nurses to his hip-gyrating “dance parties” and made plans for an “ice-chip block party” with other patients whose diet consisted mostly of ice chips. (It never happened.) He took his first steps with a walker. He was slowly weaned off the tracheotomy, allowing him to speak, a few minutes more each day.When Shaun White came to visit, Carpenter insisted on a stroll.“He’s like, ‘There’s so many kids you’ve got to meet,’ ” White said. “We went floor to floor together. He wasn’t supposed to be walking around, really, but he was like, ‘No, no, no, it’s cool, it’s cool.’ He knew everyone in the hospital by name. He was getting better and making friends in that kind of spirit that he’s got.”In early June, finally convinced that he would recover, Carpenter persuaded doctors to let him take a trip with friends, his sons, a nurse and a physical therapist to the Belmont Stakes to see American Pharoah win the Triple Crown. They took a private jet — Carpenter wore a hat and scarf to disguise the hole in his neck from the tracheotomy — and were gone for only a few hours.By June 15, he was home for good, with his wife serving as his primary nurse. For six months since, he has been rebuilding his strength, finding his balance, both literally and figuratively.“He changed, but he’s not the type who needed a wake-up call on how to live,” Donna Carpenter said. “Nobody needed this less than Jake.”The change, she said, is spiritual.“He’s lighter than ever,” she said.In a separate interview, Jake Carpenter agreed that emotional good came from being physically incapacitated, particularly in tightening his relationships with Donna and their boys.“I wouldn’t say we were growing apart, but we were so busy, keeping the business afloat, keeping our family afloat,” Carpenter said. “And this — everything stopped. Everything froze. It was like a rebirth. I don’t worry about things that are out of my control as much. I’m really happy. And I have so much more respect for my kids. I was always the dad. But to be reduced to nothing, and then to sort of grow back together, that is special.”He sat on a couch, showing photos from his phone and holding a pile of notes. He tried to read his own writing and make sense of what he was trying to communicate at the time.The crying was over. The worst memories had softened, giving way to that happy ending that his wife had promised.His experience, he was told, sounded a bit like the one portrayed in “The Diving Bell and the Butterfly,” the 2007 movie about a man paralyzed everywhere but one eye.Carpenter thought that was interesting. With a stack of white papers on his lap, he reached for a brown Burton note card and wrote it down.Advertisement