By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSDEC. 28, 2015
Arsenal moved to the top of the Premier League with a 2-0 win against Bournemouth on Monday, while Manchester United Manager Louis van Gaal said there was “not any reason” for him to resign despite a 0-0 draw with Chelsea that extended his team’s winless run to eight matches.Gabriel Paulista and Mesut Ozil led Arsenal to the top — for 24 hours, at least — with goals in each half, while goalkeeper Petr Cech set a Premier League record with his 170th shutout.The victory was an authoritative response from Arsenal after a 4-0 loss to Southampton on Saturday. Arsenal is a point clear of second-place Leicester and 4 points above Tottenham and Manchester City. Leicester can replace Arsenal at the top by beating City on Tuesday.“We were focused from the start,” Arsenal Manager Arsène Wenger said. Although he said it took a while for his team to get going, it was “in control of the game and did very well.”AdvertisementAt Old Trafford, United produced an attacking display against Chelsea to end its four-match skid but missed good chances for a first league win since Nov. 21 against Watford.AdvertisementJuan Mata and Anthony Martial hit the crossbar and the post, while Thibaut Courtois denied Ander Herrera from point-blank range and Wayne Rooney missed from six yards late in the game.Chelsea also had chances to score, with David De Gea turning John Terry’s header over the bar before making an impressive double save against Pedro and Cesar Azpilicueta early in the second half.The draw left United 5 points behind the Champions League positions, but van Gaal, who said he could resign as manager after a defeat at Stoke two days ago, was encouraged by his team’s display.“When the players can give such a performance, when there is a lot of pressure, then it is not any reason to resign for me,” Van Gaal told BT Sport. “I shall not do that. It is not a question of staying; it is a question of fulfilling my contract.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Elsewhere, Tottenham won its third straight league match to provisionally move into third with a late 2-1 victory over 10-man Watford, while Stoke beat Everton, 4-3, with a last-minute penalty from Marko Arnautovic.Erik Lamela put Tottenham ahead with a low effort in the 17th minute before Odion Ighalo tied the score for host Watford with his 14th goal of the season.Ighalo’s goal ushered in a period of dominance by Watford, but it had Nathan Ake sent off after 63 minutes before the substitute Son Heung-min hit Tottenham’s winner in the 89th.“It was a crazy atmosphere and a really important goal for the team,” Son said. “We are so happy.”AdvertisementTottenham will be dislodged from third if City earns at least a draw against Leicester.At Goodison Park, Stoke edged Everton in an entertaining match.Stoke held a 2-1 halftime lead thanks to two goals from Xherdan Shaqiri, but Romelu Lukaku tied the score for Everton with his second of the match.Gerard Deulofeu tapped in to put host Everton ahead, but Joselu scored his first Premier League goal for Stoke with a volley.Stoke then snatched the win through Arnautovic’s penalty after he was fouled by John Stones.A version of this article appears in print on December 29, 2015, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: Sports Briefing | Soccer; Arsenal Moves Into First.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.