AdvertisementSupported byBy Billy WitzWhen the Yankees acquired the Cincinnati Reds’ All-Star closer, Aroldis Chapman, on Monday, the cost was rock bottom in baseball terms: four minor leaguers, none of them top prospects. But there are peripheral costs, and those are still to be calculated as law enforcement officials and Major League Baseball continue to investigate a domestic violence case involving Chapman, who the police say fired eight gunshots into a garage after arguing with his girlfriend on Oct. 30 at their Davie, Fla., home.Chapman could face legal trouble, a suspension under M.L.B.’s new domestic violence policy, and scrutiny from fans and anti-domestic-violence organizations.Those factors were enough to scare off some teams, including the Los Angeles Dodgers and the Boston Red Sox, but the Yankees saw a chance to add a player they had long coveted, and at a reduced cost. “Given the circumstances that exist, the price point on the acquisition has been modified,” General Manager Brian Cashman said in a conference call on Monday. “We felt this was an opportunity to add a big arm to our bullpen.”The Yankees now have one of baseball’s most formidable bullpens, teaming Chapman, a four-time All-Star, with Andrew Miller and Dellin Betances. Those players ranked first, second and third in strikeouts per nine innings among pitchers who threw at least 40 innings last season. It is uncertain, though, whether Chapman — whose fastball has been routinely clocked at 103 miles per hour, the fastest in the majors — will be part of that group to begin the season. He is one of three players, along with the Dodgers’ Yasiel Puig and the Colorado Rockies’ Jose Reyes, who are being investigated under M.L.B.’s new domestic violence policy, which was negotiated with the players’ union. The policy gives Commissioner Rob Manfred broad authority to hand out discipline, but it also calls for counseling and psychological evaluation. Kim Gandy, the president of the National Network to End Domestic Violence, said in a telephone interview that the presence of a gun in the Chapman case “certainly adds to the seriousness of the situation, the fact that a handgun was fired multiple times.”Gandy added, “The presence of a handgun makes it five times more likely that an abuse victim becomes a homicide victim.”After details of the police report were published by Yahoo Sports on Dec. 7, Florida state prosecutors said they would consider criminal charges, even though no arrests had been made and the Davie Police Department had considered the case closed.The Red Sox, who were interested in acquiring Chapman, learned of the episode weeks before it was revealed and dropped their pursuit, according to The Boston Globe. The Red Sox instead traded for Craig Kimbrel.Cashman said the Yankees had done their due diligence on Chapman’s case, but he acknowledged that teams did not have the same investigative clout that law enforcement officials or M.L.B. investigators might have. He declined to answer specifically whether the Yankees had asked M.L.B. for information on the case.“Certainly, there is some serious issues here that are in play,” Cashman said. “That’s why it’s going to play out. And I acknowledge that it’s an area of concern. There’s risk, and I understand that.”He added, “The results will be whatever they will be.”To acquire Chapman, who struck out 15.7 hitters per nine innings in 2015, the Yankees did not have to part with any of their most prized prospects: pitcher Luis Severino, first baseman Greg Bird, catcher Gary Sanchez and outfielder Aaron Judge. Instead, they gave up third baseman Eric Jagielo, a 2013 first-round draft pick who made the All-Star team at Class AA Trenton this year; second baseman Tony Renda, whom they acquired from Washington last season for pitcher David Carpenter; and pitchers Caleb Cotham, who was 1-0 with a 6.52 E.R.A. in 12 appearances for the Yankees, and Rookie Davis, who was added to the team’s 40-man roster last month.Chapman, who made a little more than $8 million last season, is due for a raise through arbitration to approximately $13 million, but Cashman said that Hal Steinbrenner, the team’s principal owner, had not required him to trim additional payroll with the deal. According to Baseball-Reference.com, the Yankees are projected to have a $229.8 million payroll, the highest in baseball, next season.The Yankees have made several moves in the past two years to acquire young but experienced talent. Chapman, 27, joins two recent acquisitions — second baseman Starlin Castro, 25, and outfielder Aaron Hicks, 26 — in that category. The Yankees are expected to avoid major moves in free agency until the big contracts of Mark Teixeira, Carlos Beltran, C. C. Sabathia and Alex Rodriguez come off the books in the next two years.The acquisition of Chapman, whom Cashman had inquired about before the July 31 nonwaiver trade deadline and again in November, is a rare recent example of a decision by the Yankees to add a player with off-the-field troubles. But during the 1990s, when the Yankees were becoming perennial World Series contenders, they regularly took chances on such players — including Darryl Strawberry, Dwight Gooden and Steve Howe.They invited Howe, a reliever, to spring training in 1991 after he had been suspended for substance abuse six times and been out of baseball for several seasons. Gene Michael, the general manager at the time, said, “If it was my son or your son, you’d want to give him another chance.” Howe was permanently barred from baseball the next season by Commissioner Fay Vincent after pleading guilty to a federal charge of attempted possession of cocaine. When an arbitrator overturned the ban, the Yankees, who opposed Vincent’s decision, brought back Howe for three and a half more seasons. When the Yankees signed Strawberry, he had been punished by baseball for substance abuse, pleaded guilty to tax evasion and been cited in two domestic abuse cases.Times have changed greatly since then, and there is a greater awareness of social issues. But Gandy, the anti-domestic-violence advocate, said she was not surprised that the Yankees had made such a calculated decision to trade for Chapman.“I think they are all calculated business decisions,” Gandy said. “It doesn’t surprise me at all, but at some point, it will become bad business.”Advertisement