AdvertisementSupported byGlobal SoccerBy Rob HughesLONDON — The English clubs’ malaise in the Champions League continues, and everyone is looking for excuses and scapegoats.When Chelsea lost to F.C. Porto and Arsenal to Olympiakos on Tuesday — making it five defeats in the first six group games for Premier League teams — the critics rebuked the coaches.In the case of Chelsea, people are blaming Manager José Mourinho for the way age and uncertainty are catching up with his captain, John Terry, and because the team has not acquired a replacement. In fact, Mourinho tried — and tried again — to buy the Everton central defender John Stones, going so far that his efforts almost constituted a breach of league rules.Everton refused to sell its prime defender, and Chelsea has started the season uncharacteristically weak on defense. But Terry could not be blamed on Tuesday, as he was watching from the bench. And it was his replacement at captain, the right back Branislav Ivanovic, who looked like the weak link on Chelsea, as he failed to handle the swift runs by Porto’s Yacine Brahimi.Chelsea lost, 2-1, as Porto was galvanized by 46,000 passionate fans at its stronghold in northern Portugal. Anyone who doubts how tough it can be to play there can look at how soundly Bayern Munich was beaten in the first leg of its quarterfinal matchup with Porto last season, along with the way Mourinho made his reputation by coaching Porto to the Champions League title in 2004.Mourinho complained that “two ridiculous mistakes from corners, which we study and study and study before the games” cost his team. Any neutral observer would say that Porto at times moved the ball better and at times mesmerized the supposedly superior Chelsea players — proving once again that money alone does not buy success.Porto is a club that specializes in buying and selling, and it is estimated to have reaped a billion dollars in player sales since Mourinho left. Chelsea has spent that much, and more, over the same time span. The result Tuesday, as Porto Coach Julen Lopetegui told reporters after the game, came “down to attitude and mentality.”He might have added the word hunger — hunger to be first to every ball, and hunger to overturn a visiting side crammed with big-name players.Curiously enough, English teams’ failing in the Champions League is commonly put down to the intensity of the Premier League and to the way the huge shared television revenues allow even lowly clubs to go out and recruit top players.Older fans will recall that this intensity, with an emphasis on fast and physical running, was just as prevalent in the days when Liverpool and Manchester United were conquerors in Europe 40 and 50 years ago.But there are coaches who put an emphasis on something other than overrunning opponents, coaches who instead emphasize passing and ball movement, like the Arsenal manager, Arsène Wenger.His achievement in guiding the Gunners past the group phase of the Champions League in each of the past 15 seasons ought to be hailed as something extraordinary. There have been times when Wenger’s Arsenal has had to perform miraculous escapes to maintain that record.But after his team lost in Zagreb last month and to Olympiakos on Tuesday, Wenger has his work cut out if Arsenal is to make the knockout stage this year. Arsenal’s next two games in the Champions League are home and away with Bayern Munich — and Bayern is flying after Tuesday’s 5-0 thrashing of Dinamo Zagreb in which Robert Lewandowski added a hat trick to the seven goals he scored in his previous two games in the Bundesliga.One thing is for sure: Arsenal cannot, dare not, defend with the naïveté and lack of concentration that it showed Tuesday as it lost, 3-2, to the Greek champion.Olympiakos had lost all 12 of its previous games on English soil. It had scored just three goals and conceded 37 in that run. On Tuesday, the Greek club scored as many goals in one game as it had in its entire history in England.Twice Olympiakos shocked Arsenal by taking the lead, and twice Arsenal equalized quickly. But the third goal, from an Olympiakos substitute, the Icelander Alfred Finnbogason, proved the game winner.“They had four shots on goal and we conceded three goals,” said Wenger.“My players showed endurance and determination,” said Olympiakos Coach Marco Silva.Critics put it all down to Wenger’s decision to rest his top goalkeeper, Petr Cech and instead select David Ospina who, calamitously, dropped a corner kick across his own goal line for Olympiakos’s second goal.Ospina, and therefore Wenger, were the obvious scapegoats. But it is common for clubs to give backup goalkeepers game time in the cup competitions. Wenger reasoned that Ospina was his most reliable goalkeeper last season, and suggested that Cech had a slight (and unspecified) injury Tuesday.It is fair to point out that Barcelona went through all of last season’s Champions League with Marc-André ter Stegen in goal. Ter Stegen won the tournament, and the Spanish Cup, without playing one game in La Liga. And keep in mind that Ospina, Colombia’s goalkeeper at the 2014 World Cup, is a far more experienced player than Ter Stegen, who is four years younger at 23.“I do not have to explain every decision to everyone,” Wenger told reporters on Tuesday. “We did not lose because of one mistake.”Advertisement