DEC. 28, 2015
Christmas has come and gone, but Louis van Gaal’s torment continues unabated.Britain binges on soccer in the week between Christmas and New Year’s like a couple with a new Netflix subscription, often to its detriment. Monday’s games start at 10 a.m., but the biggest matchup, at lunchtime in New York, is essentially a 90-minute, slow-motion train wreck: Manchester United-Chelsea (12:30 p.m. Eastern, NBCSN). Chelsea’s problems this season have been identified, documented and (the Blues hope) solved with a coaching change, but at Manchester United, the struggle is continuing and real. The Red Devils have lost four in a row and are winless in seven, and they have not scored two goals in a league game in more than a month. They also have been eliminated from the Champions League during the current dry spell, which is not exactly what fans were promised when Louis van Gaal was hired as manager after the 2014 World Cup. Now, a tired team on a day’s rest against a rival that would be delighted to embarrass it anew is probably not what the fans expected, either, but sometimes you do not get to pick your poisons. Sometimes you just get all of them at once.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.One other game of note Monday: Arsenal hosts Bournemouth (12:30 p.m., NBC Sports Extra) with a second chance to go past Leicester City atop the league. It surely cannot go worse than the Gunners’ first try did — a 4-0 loss at Southampton on Saturday. Of course, even if Arsenal does slide into first temporarily, Leicester can knock it right back down when it hosts Manchester City on Tuesday (2:45 p.m., NBCSN).La Liga returns from its break on Wednesday, offering Real Madrid (vs. Real Sociedad, 10 a.m.) for breakfast and Barcelona (vs. Real Betis, 2:45 p.m.) after lunch. Both games are on beIN Sports.England and Spain continue league play on the weekend while the rest of the continent’s leagues continue to sleep off the holidays. The highlights: United, perhaps under a new manager, hosts Swansea City (10 a.m., Saturday), and Espanyol and Barcelona meet in their lopsided but underappreciated city derby. Sam Borden of The Times wrote about the dynamics of that rivalry in 2013.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.