AdvertisementSupported byBy Tyler KepnerMike Napoli returned in August to the Texas Rangers, who open their American League division series against the Toronto Blue Jays at Rogers Centre on Thursday. In his two full years away, Napoli won a World Series championship ring with the Boston Red Sox. But he still thinks about the one that got away, when he played for Texas.“It doesn’t hurt as much because I did win a ring, but it still hurts,” Napoli said last month. “We came that close to winning the Series. I mean, that’s the closest you can possibly come, twice, and it would be the first championship. I still have that drive to be a part of that. It would make it feel so much better.”Napoli — who was a Blue Jay for four days in January 2011, before a trade to Texas — was behind the plate for the Rangers in the fateful sixth game of the 2011 World Series. With two outs and two strikes in the ninth inning at St. Louis, he saw David Freese rip a Neftali Feliz fastball to right field for a game-tying triple. The next inning, again with two outs and two strikes, Napoli watched Lance Berkman punch a Scott Feldman cutter into center for a game-tying single.The Rangers, who could have won their first title with a victory, lost in the 11th inning. They lost Game 7 the next night, lost the wild-card game the next fall and are just now returning to the postseason.“I can still picture both of them,” Napoli said of those pitches. “Feldman threw a cutter; he threw so many cutters that year that got in on guys, and it was in there on Berkman. It jammed him, but it didn’t have that late, extra cut on it. It was an executed pitch in there. We got what we wanted — we didn’t let him get extended, and he broke his bat. And then Freese, he was just locked in. A heater away, and he hit it the other way.”Napoli, who now plays as a first baseman, left fielder and designated hitter, will team with Adrian Beltre, Prince Fielder and others to help the Rangers match the thump of the Blue Jays, who outscored opponents by 221 runs this season. The Blue Jays got 120 home runs from Jose Bautista, Josh Donaldson and Edwin Encarnacion, and Russell Martin and Troy Tulowitzki also provide power from the right-handed side.The Rangers’ top starter, Cole Hamels, is left-handed, but his best pitch is a devastating changeup that can neutralize righties. Hamels could start Game 2 and then return for Game 5 on normal rest, and he has company in this series among left-handed aces who changed teams in July.Hamels was 7-1 for the Rangers, and David Price was 9-1 for the Blue Jays. Their arrivals were part of shrewd trading deadline moves that also sent relievers Jake Diekman and Sam Dyson to Texas and Tulowitzki, a star shortstop, to Toronto.Price, who could soon win his second A.L. Cy Young Award, will start the opener for the Blue Jays, who are hosting their first postseason game since Joe Carter clinched the 1993 World Series with a home run. The teams have never met in the playoffs.6 FOR STROMAN Toronto starter Marcus Stroman, who recovered from a torn anterior cruciate ligament sustained in spring training to dominate down the stretch, is one of few pitchers in the majors who have worn a single-digit uniform number. Stroman wears No. 6 to honor his grandmother, whose birthday was March 6.MONEY PLAYER Shin-Soo Choo’s seven-year, $130 million contract, signed after the 2013 season, surprised many in the industry. He underperformed for a year and a half, but Choo, the Rangers’ right fielder, sizzled down the stretch. His average after the All-Star break was .343, with a .455 on-base percentage and a .560 slugging percentage. Fun fact about Choo: He is one of the few nonswitch hitters in the majors to wear a helmet with two earflaps. Choo has said he simply feels more comfortable that way.HOT CORNER COLLECTOR The Blue Jays’ Josh Donaldson was born in 1985, but he has deep respect for the players who came before him — especially in their cardboard form. While some players care little about baseball’s past, Donaldson takes pride in owning complete sets of Topps baseball cards from 1972 through 1979.BRIEF BUT MEMORABLE If you take away minimum requirements, these are facts: Rangers Manager Jeff Banister is tied for the best batting average in major league history, and Blue Jays Manager John Gibbons was the leading hitter for the celebrated 1986 Mets. Banister beat out an infield single in his only plate appearance, for the 1991 Pirates, giving him a 1.000 average. Gibbons played eight games for the Mets’ last championship team, going 9 for 19 for a .474 average that led all hitters.TURNING BACK TIME When you watch the Rangers’ Ross Ohlendorf pitch from the windup, your television screen might as well be in grainy black-and-white. Ohlendorf, a 33-year-old right-hander, pitches like an old-timer. He begins his windup by stepping back with his left foot as he leans forward at the belt — while swinging both arms far behind his back. He says the exaggerated motion — suggested by Joe Kerrigan, then Pittsburgh’s pitching coach, in 2009 — helps him feel loose and keeps his mind focused on results, not mechanics. By creating more movement at the start of his delivery, he believes, his arms, legs and torso will do what comes naturally.OLDEST AND YOUNGEST The Blue Jays’ bullpen includes the majors’ oldest and youngest players. LaTroy Hawkins (born in December 1972) and Roberto Osuna (born in February 1995) bookend all other major leaguers. Osuna is the Blue Jays’ closer, but in a show of respect, it was Hawkins who got the call to close out Toronto’s division clincher.SHARING MORE THAN A TEAM Rougned Odor, the Texas second baseman, has a brother who plays for a Rangers minor league team and is also named Rougned. They have an uncle named Rouglas who coaches in the Cleveland farm system and two cousins named Rouglas.COMMON ALUMNI The Rangers got their franchise hits leader, Michael Young, in a trade with Toronto for Esteban Loaiza in 2000, when Young was still in the minors. Tom Henke, a closer on four Blue Jays playoff teams, came from Texas as a free-agent compensation choice in 1985. When Henke re-signed with Texas after eight seasons, the Blue Jays chose Chris Carpenter, who went on to stardom with St. Louis, as their compensation pick. Others to play for both teams include Jose Canseco, Rico Carty, Dave Stewart and a current pitcher for each team: R. A. Dickey of the Blue Jays and Sam Dyson of the Rangers.Advertisement