AdvertisementSupported byBy Julie RobenhymerHELSINKI, Finland — Forty years ago, Anders Carlsson was believed to be the first Swede to play college hockey in the United States when he suited up for Yale. Since then, there have been 111 Swedish hockey players in the N.C.A.A., and about 20 percent of them — 23 — are currently enrolled.It is not just the quantity of Swedish players taking the college route that has increased, but also the quality.At the world junior championship tournament taking place in Helsinki, Finland, Sweden’s team includes two college players:- Jakob Forsbacka-Karlsson, a Boston University freshman, and William Lagesson, a freshman at Massachusetts. A third Swede, Fredrik Olofsson (Nebraska-Omaha), was one of the final two players cut from the team.Before this year, there had been only three college hockey players to don Tre Kronor — the three-crown Swedish national emblem — for the country’s junior team at this annual tournament: Carl Hagelin (Michigan) in 2008, Gustav Olofsson (Colorado College) in 2014 and Leon Bristedt (Minnesota) last year.In the past, American college hockey was for Swedish players whose professional prospects had faded but who wanted to pursue a quality education and continue playing competitively.That was until Douglas Murray became the first Swedish college player to reach the N.H.L. Murray spent four years at Cornell, where he was a two-time all-American, before making his N.H.L. debut for the San Jose Sharks in 2005. He also played on the Swedish Olympic team in 2010.The more traditional route to the N.H.L. for a Swedish player begins with his local team. If he is good enough, he works his way up through the age groups to a junior team and then a professional team in the Swedish Hockey League. Many young elite players face a developmental quandary when they are too good for the junior team but not good enough to earn a lot of ice time on the professional team.Murray’s success opened the eyes of elite youth hockey players in Sweden, who began to view the N.C.A.A. as an option to obtain a quality education while pursuing a professional hockey career, something that is nearly impossible to do in their native country.“You can do it, but it’s a lot tougher,” said Rikard Gronborg, coach of Sweden’s national junior team. “Most guys that we have on our team here go up to the pros, and the schedule is a lot more difficult to fit in time for an education, go to class and study. It’s possible to do both in Sweden, but it requires a lot more commitment, and most just choose to focus on hockey and worry about getting an education later.”Gronborg went to the United States to pursue a degree and play hockey at St. Cloud State from 1989 to 1992. In his three years as a Huskie, he earned a bachelor’s degree in public relations and a master’s in technology management.“I did it myself, so I think it’s “It’s a pretty good path for some guys to take,” said Gronborg, whose team is 2-0 in group play, including a victory over the United States. “I definitely think college hockey is a good way to develop your on-ice skills, but also — as a person — to be able to get an education at the same time.”“There are a lot of different paths to take to the N.H.L. and choosing a route that allows you to get an education at the same time is never a bad idea. It’s always good to have a backup plan. You never know what could happen and when you’re hockey career could end,” he continued.Players like Hagelin, now with the Anaheim Ducks, and the Detroit Red Wings’ Gustav Nyquist, who starred at Maine, took a risk choosing the N.C.A.A. route, but they reached the N.H.L. in their first professional season and played on the 2014 Olympic team that won the silver medal. They have inspired more players in Sweden to take the same path.“When you see guys going through college hockey and becoming top players in the N.H.L., it helps convince your parents, but also helps convince yourself that this is a good way to go,” said Forsbacka-Karlsson, a second-round draft pick by the Boston Bruins last summer.Lagesson, a fourth-round pick by the Edmonton Oilers in 2014, said: “Players like Hagelin and Nyquist have shown that it’s a good way to get to the N.H.L. More and more players are doing this, and it’s been a great experience — learning a new language, seeing a new country, experiencing a new culture — all while getting a great education and playing hockey at a high level. It was an easy decision for me to make.”Advertisement