By TOM SPOUSTADEC. 29, 2015
ARLINGTON, Tex. —  Alabama’s offensive strategy is not exactly classified, but if its Cotton Bowl opponent, Michigan State, needed a reminder, the Crimson Tide’s table positions at the game’s media day on Tuesday seemed fitting.The all-American center Ryan Kelly, who makes the offensive line calls, sat near the goal post. Next to him was quarterback Jake Coker, a consummate game manager.But the seating chart at AT&T Stadium, like the Crimson Tide’s back-to-basics offense, was anchored by Derrick Henry, seated in the corner of the end zone between his two big prizes of the season so far: the Doak Walker Award, given to the top running back in the Football Bowl Subdivision, and the Heisman Trophy.Henry — who, over Alabama’s past two games, has been handed the football on 90 of his team’s 160 plays, recording 460 of his team’s 902 offensive yards — will surely get another heavy helping of carries in Thursday night’s game against the third-ranked Spartans, the second semifinal of the College Football Playoff.Advertisement“I’m sure he gets exhausted eventually,” Kelly — the winner of the Rimington Trophy, awarded to the F.B.S.’s top center — said as he glanced toward Henry. “But he never complains about it.”Henry, a junior, is the key piece in a system that flies in the face of this era of spread offenses and zone reads.Advertisement“Maybe that’s sort of not the prettiest way to do it,” Alabama Coach Nick Saban said. “But it works. And it has been effective for us.”The No. 2 Crimson Tide had to rely almost exclusively on Henry out of necessity after the injury-plagued running back Kenyan Drake was hurt again in November. With Coker struggling in the passing game and the offense searching for an identity, Saban reverted to an old-school philosophy, one that in part took root, oddly enough, at Michigan State, where he was a young assistant under George Perles in the mid-1980s.“Derrick sort of convinced us that we could trust him and he would get stronger as the game went on, and that’s pretty much what he’s done,” Saban said. “So it’s not a philosophy as much as it’s sort of a circumstance that created a situation this year, especially at the end of the season, that made him a real workhorse for us.”On Nov. 28, Henry ran for 271 yards on a team-record 46 carries as the Crimson Tide locked up the Southeastern Conference West title with a 29-13 victory over Auburn. Henry followed that performance with 189 yards on 44 rushes in a 29-15 victory over Florida in the conference championship game, which sealed Alabama’s place in the Playoff.Alabama’s offensive line came together, too, once it became clear the Crimson Tide were depending on Henry.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“We’re a really young offense,” Kelly said. “So at the beginning of the year, we didn’t really know which way we were going to go. Once we saw Derrick continue to just keep running, it’s kind of hard not to give the guy the ball when he’s got all those 100-yard games.”AdvertisementCoker said of Henry: “He doesn’t change. It seems like he just wears everybody out and everybody else changes.”Coker, a transfer from Florida State, was among those who embraced the shift in offensive strategy as Alabama rebounded from an early loss to Mississippi and climbed back into the Playoff picture.“Not once has he ever complained about how much we’ve thrown the ball or don’t throw it,” Saban said of Coker. “But when Jake has needed to make plays for us, whether it’s on third downs or with big plays down the field because teams have loaded up for the run, he’s been able to do that.”Henry, who has run for an SEC-record 1,986 yards this season, now faces a Spartans defense that has allowed 113 rushing yards per game — the ninth-best mark in the F.B.S. (Alabama, for what it is worth, is No. 1 in that category.)“It’s really important to do what your team is capable of doing,” said Saban, who prefers a two-running-back attack and has often had a talented tandem, dating to his coaching stops at Louisiana State and Michigan State. “We have done a really good job of taking the players we have on offense and developing an identity with that group that gives them the best chance to be successful.”A version of this article appears in print on December 30, 2015, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: With Offense in Need, Alabama Star Has Taken the Ball and Run With It .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.