By BRUCE WEBERDEC. 29, 2015
Stein Eriksen, an Olympic ski champion whose competitive triumphs, elegant style and innovative acrobatics made him one of the sport’s first superstars, died on Sunday at his home in Park City, Utah. He was 88.His death was confirmed by the Deer Valley ski resort in Utah, where Eriksen had been director of skiing for more than three decades.A Norwegian who had lived in the United States for 60 years, Eriksen was “the most famous skier of his generation,” as Skiing History magazine described him on its website after his death.He was skiing for his home country when he won a gold medal in the giant slalom and a silver in the slalom in the 1952 Olympics in Oslo. And in 1954, he won three gold medals for Norway — in slalom, giant slalom and Alpine combined — in the world championships at Are, Sweden.AdvertisementEriksen moved to the United States in the mid-1950s after he was offered a job as ski school director at Boyne Mountain, Mich.As the American ski industry grew, he helped it, moving from resort to resort, bringing discipline to instructor staffs and credibility, prestige and design and marketing savvy to developing resorts in California, Vermont, Colorado and elsewhere in Utah before landing at Deer Valley in 1981.There he helped develop Stein Eriksen Lodge, often cited as among the most opulent ski hotels in the world. It was a favorite destination of former Gov. Mitt Romney, the 2012 Republican presidential nominee and the president and chief executive of the Salt Lake Organizing Committee for the 2002 Winter Olympics. Last spring, Romney was the host of an event there, bringing together donors to his campaign and several of his party’s 2016 presidential hopefuls.An artful skier with a singular style, Eriksen was admired for his swooping grace. He skied with his knees seemingly glued together and helped popularize the so-called reverse shoulder technique — in advance of a turn, tucking his inside shoulder in opposition to the angle of his skis — that propelled his change of direction with great power and efficiency and allowed him to cut slalom gates with time-slicing closeness. He was also a showman on the slopes, a pioneer of flamboyant maneuvers prefiguring freestyle skiing; he was famous for an airborne somersault featuring a swan-dive-like pose at the height of his jump.In 1990, a ski writer and former skier, Nicholas Howe, writing in Skiing magazine, recalled watching Eriksen for the first time on Bald Mountain at Sun Valley, Idaho, in 1953, and compared his athletic grace to that of Joe DiMaggio and Fred Astaire.Advertisement“For most of us, even the great ones, skiing seemed to be a muscular, difficult thing,” Howe wrote. “What Stein did was something else. It was all the curves and delicate balances; it was the floating grace of a ballet dancer. Where gravity was concerned, Stein seemed to have choices not open to the rest of us.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“As Michelangelo found a way to infuse the eternal rest of sculpture with motion,” he added, “so Stein could make the most extravagant moves seem restful. Watching him on Baldy that winter, we understood that nobody skied like Stein.”Eriksen was as gifted a promoter, both of the sport and of himself, as he was a skier, giving numerous interviews and appearing in advertisements, on posters and in ski films, including some by the filmmaker Warren Miller that helped create the image of skiing as glamorously adventurous and sexy. It did not hurt that Eriksen was charismatic, well-spoken, impeccably groomed and movie-star handsome.“The dashing blond Norwegian,” Ski magazine called Eriksen in 1990, adding, “He made skiing a national obsession.”Stein Eriksen was born in Oslo on Dec. 11, 1927. His father, Marius, was a competitive cross-country skier and a ski designer who had been an Olympic gymnast. His mother, Birgit, was the first president of the Oslo Women’s Ski Club.His older brother, Marius Jr., served with the British as a fighter pilot during World War II before joining Stein on Norway’s 1948 Olympic team.A family friend, the German skier and skiwear and equipment designer Willy Bogner, who had competed against Marius Sr., was an early influence on Stein, though the relationship was complicated by history. During the war Bogner was a lieutenant in Hitler’s SS and had fought against the Russians in Finland, but according to a 1961 article in Sports Illustrated, after Marius Jr. was shot down and captured, Bogner sent him food.“He got more Norwegians out of prison than anyone, and was more help to us than any other person could have been,” Stein Eriksen said about Bogner in the same article. “I don’t know how he did it. But he was known and respected for it, and he was never accused of being a real Nazi. In the war he was just doing his duty like a Chinese or you or anybody. And when Marius came home, the first thing he did was go right back to Germany and shake hands with Willy and say, ‘Our friendship still stands.’ ”Eriksen’s first three marriages ended in divorce. He is survived by his wife of more than three decades, Francoise; a son, Bjorn; three daughters, Julianna, Ava and Anja; and five grandchildren.After his death, encomiums rained down from the royalty of the ski world, many of them echoing the words of the Olympic champion racer Lindsey Vonn, who wrote on Twitter, “Stein was a legend in skiing.”A version of this article appears in print on December 30, 2015, on Page A16 of the New York edition with the headline: Stein Eriksen, Olympic Ski Champion Who Heralded Freestyle, Dies at 88 .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.