By BILL PENNINGTONDEC. 29, 2015
Eagles Coach Chip Kelly, an offensive mastermind who was lured from the University of Oregon in January 2013 in a bid to see whether his innovative tactics would work in the N.F.L., was fired on Tuesday with the team assured of missing the playoffs for a second straight season.Kelly, whose quirky style and unconventional methods stood out in the mostly homogeneous, restrained fraternity of N.F.L. coaches, brought with him the fast-paced offense he had used at Oregon, which challenged opposing defenses to react quickly and without mass substitutions.Kelly had early success with the Eagles and also won a front-office power struggle. But this year, his offense sputtered, as did the team’s push for the playoffs. With Philadelphia’s record at 6-9 and one game remaining in the season — against the 6-9 Giants — the Eagles’ chief executive, Jeffrey Lurie, announced that he was releasing Kelly.“We appreciate all the contributions that Chip Kelly made and wish him every success going forward,” Lurie said in a statement.AdvertisementKelly will probably be a contender for another N.F.L. head coaching job, and there might be several openings by early next week.Kelly took over for the longtime Philadelphia coach Andy Reid after the 2012 season and turned a team that had been 4-12 into a 10-6 champion of the N.F.C. East. Philadelphia made the playoffs but lost in the first round.Last season, the Eagles again went 10-6 but missed the postseason. Shortly thereafter, almost exactly one year ago, Kelly received the kind of control that few N.F.L. coaches are granted when he was given the authority to make all his team’s major football decisions.He promptly remade the roster, trading his starting quarterback, Nick Foles, and two draft picks in exchange for St. Louis quarterback Sam Bradford and one Rams draft selection. Kelly also dealt the Eagles’ top running back, LeSean McCoy, to the Buffalo Bills and signed a high-priced free agent, running back DeMarco Murray.But Bradford and Murray have disappointed, and the Eagles’ offense has been both inept and predictable. And while it might not have been Kelly’s primary focus, Philadelphia’s defense ranks 30th in the N.F.L. in yards allowed.AdvertisementThe offensive coordinator Pat Shurmur will serve as the Eagles’ interim coach against the Giants in place of Kelly, who leaves Philadelphia with a 26-21 record as coach.“I spent the last three seasons evaluating the many factors involved in our performance as a team,” Lurie said in a letter posted on Twitter. “As I watched this season unfold, I determined that it was time to make a change.”Lurie also announced that Ed Marynowitz, Kelly’s handpicked vice president for player personnel, had been released. And Lurie said that Howie Roseman, an Eagles front-office executive whom Kelly had moved to a lesser role, would help select the new coach.At the end of Kelly’s final game with the Eagles, a lopsided home loss to the Washington Redskins on Saturday night, Kelly was asked how much of Philadelphia’s troubles this year were his responsibility.“One hundred percent,” he answered. “It’s all on my shoulders. It’s the same thing I said a year ago — it’s unacceptable.”But when asked if he was concerned about being fired, Kelly said: “I don’t think anybody in my situation will tell you they’re worried about it. If they’re worried about getting fired, then they probably should have already been fired.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.As Kelly was being grilled about his job status in a postgame news conference, the lights around him suddenly went out, leaving the room in darkness. After a second or two, they came back on, and without missing a beat, Kelly said, “That’s an omen.”ST. LOUIS SUBMITS PLAN  In an effort to keep the Rams from moving to Los Angeles, civic leaders from St. Louis submitted a formal proposal to build a $1.1 billion stadium on the banks of the Mississippi River.Their paperwork arrived at N.F.L. headquarters a day before the deadline for officials in Oakland, San Diego and St. Louis to give the league their plans for paying for new stadiums.AdvertisementThe proposal in St. Louis assumes that the league will contribute $300 million to the cost of the stadium even though Commissioner Roger Goodell has made it clear that the N.F.L. will provide no more than $200 million.The 32 owners could vote as early as Jan. 12 on proposals by the Chargers, the Raiders and the Rams to move to Los Angeles, and they will consider efforts by the host cities to keep their teams when making that decision. KEN BELSONCOLTS SIGN TWO QUARTERBACKS With their top three options injured or out altogether, the Indianapolis Colts signed the free-agent quarterbacks Josh Freeman and Ryan Lindley.Starter Andrew Luck remains out with a lacerated kidney. The backup Matt Hasselbeck is considered doubtful after hurting his throwing shoulder Sunday, and the third-stringer Charlie Whitehurst went on injured reserve Monday with a hamstring problem.That left Stephen Morris, who was signed Dec. 24, as the only healthy quarterback on the roster before Sunday’s game against Tennessee. The Colts (7-8) have long-shot playoff hopes.Freeman, a first-round pick in 2009 who has started 60 N.F.L. games, has not played in the league since 2013.Lindley, a sixth-round pick in 2012, started six games in his first three seasons, including two last season with the Cardinals.The Colts also promoted inside linebacker Amarlo Herrera to the active roster, signed guard Kitt O’Brien to the practice squad and put linebacker Josh McNary on injured reserve. (AP)AdvertisementTWO BILLS PUT ON I.R. Charles Clay, the Buffalo Bills’ starting tight end, and the backup cornerback Ron Brooks will miss the team’s season finale against the Jets on Sunday after being placed on the injured reserve list.Clay has an injured back, and Brooks hurt his neck in a win against Dallas on Sunday.The Bills (7-8) are out of playoff contention but have an opportunity to spoil the Jets’ chances of qualifying. (AP)JAGUARS RETAIN COACH Jacksonville Jaguars Coach Gus Bradley will return in 2016.The Jaguars owner Shad Khan released a statement confirming that Bradley would remain for the final year of his contract. Khan said he had spoken to Bradley and General Manager Dave Caldwell about his intentions. The Jaguars (5-10) are 12-35 in Bradley’s three seasons. (AP)A version of this article appears in print on December 30, 2015, on Page B7 of the New York edition with the headline: Eagles Fire Kelly After Roster Moves Flop .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.