AdvertisementSupported byBy Tim Rohan and Marc TracyIn early September last year, about 40 members of the news media, many of whom covered the Oklahoma Sooners football team regularly, crowded into a nondescript room at the Norman Police Department.Many had filed open-records requests seeking copies of a private surveillance tape that was said to show Oklahoma running back Joe Mixon striking another student, Amelia Molitor, breaking four bones in her face. As a result of those requests, the reporters had been invited to a viewing.The lights were turned off, the clip was projected onto a large screen, and the journalists started taking notes. Someone in the room asked to see it again — the encounter between Molitor and Mixon had lasted less than 30 seconds — and so the police replayed it, then again, and again, about 10 to 15 times in all. But the reporters could not record the images, and no copies would be made.The video, about three minutes long and with no sound, showed Molitor and Mixon briefly exchanging words inside a deli after 2 a.m. Molitor, about eight inches shorter and 80 pounds lighter, pushed Mixon. Mixon threateningly cocked his fist. Molitor struck Mixon near his face. Mixon responded with a punch, knocking Molitor into a table and to the ground, and left her lying there, motionless.“A lot of guys walked away that day aghast, talking about how bad it was,” said Berry Tramel, a columnist for The Oklahoman who saw the video that day. “And it is bad. But my point to them was: What exactly did you think you were going to see?”Prosecutors had already charged Mixon, a star recruit who had yet to play for the Sooners, with acts resulting in gross injury, a misdemeanor. The university had already suspended him for the 2014 season. Mixon soon reached a plea agreement, returned for spring practice and became a key contributor to this season’s No. 4 Sooners, who will face No. 1 Clemson in the Orange Bowl on Thursday for a chance to advance to the national championship game.The video, however, has never been seen by the wider public. And with each passing week this season, as Oklahoma rose in the rankings and eventually claimed a place in the season-ending College Football Playoff, the public seemed to lose interest in Mixon’s wrongdoing, and the clamor to view the video faded.Mixon has had nothing to say on the topic (Oklahoma has not made him available to the news media all season), and on Tuesday — facing reporters for the first time at Orange Bowl media day — he declined to respond to any questions about the encounter, his feelings about it, or his punishment.It is natural to wonder, though, whether Mixon’s case and career might have played out differently if the video had been widely disseminated. The former Baltimore Ravens running back Ray Rice was essentially ostracized from the N.F.L. last year after video emerged of him punching his fiancée and dragging her, unconscious, out of an elevator. After video emerged of quarterback De’Andre Johnson striking a woman at a bar this year, Florida State dismissed him. Like Mixon, Johnson was a promising freshman at a big-time college program.“Personally, I think that’s a tap on the wrist, to be suspended for the season, considering the severity of the attack,” said Vanessa Morrison, a women’s advocate at the Women’s Resource Center, a nonprofit in Norman, Okla. “That sends a message about how violence against women is viewed, considering the level and dangerousness of the crime he committed.”Richard Lapchick, a sports management professor at the University of Central Florida who has studied the issue of college athletes committing violent acts, said the inclination on many campuses was to protect athletes who get into trouble.“A video can make it impossible for them to do that,” he said.Mixon did not escape punishment, either from prosecutors or his university. But without the video, he was spared the kind of blackballing others have drawn.Still, local news media outlets clamored for access to the video. Coming out of high school, Mixon was ranked as the No. 8 player in the country by the recruiting website Rivals.com, a player frequently compared to the former Sooners all-American Adrian Peterson. He was a star before he arrived on campus in Norman.But well-timed legal maneuverings by Mixon, and an Oklahoma state law, prevented the clip from being released. The judge in the criminal case issued an ambiguous order in August 2014 preventing either party from disseminating the video, perhaps to avoid influencing the jury pool, yet seemingly permitting the video to be made available under public-records laws. And while the Norman Police Department most likely had the discretion to allow the video to be copied, according to a city attorney, it declined the news media’s requests, saying the law required it only to allow “inspection” of the tape. (The Police Department referred inquiries to the city attorney.)Many, including a city attorney in contact with the news media outlets, believed a change in the law scheduled to go into effect on Nov. 1, 2014, would have forced the police to make copies available. But on Oct. 30, Mixon entered an Alford plea, which allows the defendant to maintain his innocence while acknowledging that enough evidence exists for a jury to find him guilty. That effectively pre-empted any further discussion of the video.Instead, Mixon agreed to a one-year deferred sentence, 100 hours of community service and counseling. He has presumably completed his probation; the docket on his case has been expunged.Among those who had seen the video were Oklahoma’s coach, Bob Stoops, and its athletic director, Joe Castiglione, and after seeing it, they recommended that the university suspend Mixon for one season and bar him from all team activities (though he rejoined the team for 2015 spring practice, less than a year after the encounter). Mixon’s father also moved to Oklahoma for a few months to mentor him as he went through the rehabilitation under his plea agreement.David L. Boren, the president of the university, has lauded Mixon for maintaining his grades, having “exemplary” off-field behavior and accepting the university’s “substantial” punishment.“He has met all the requirements for reinstatement,” Castiglione said recently after the Sooners made the College Football Playoff. “He went through counseling. All the disciplinary conditions were met. He’s been a very positive member of our football program. He’s participated in community service. He’s trying to turn a very instantaneous, unfortunate situation into a path to grow and become a stronger person from it.”Castiglione added: “There’s no amount of excusing what happened. But we were faced with a choice to offer him an opportunity to improve his life and be a positive influence on everyone he’s around. The extensive evaluation process we went through ended with a question about the value of second chances.”Asked in July why the university had not distanced itself from Mixon, Stoops said, “We disciplined in a certain way depending on the circumstances.” (Oklahoma linebacker Frank Shannon, a redshirt senior, was suspended from the university last year after a Title IX investigation into a fellow student’s accusation of sexual assault. Prosecutors declined to charge Shannon.)For Nancy Hogshead-Makar, the chief executive of the advocacy group Champion Women, the operative question is not Mixon’s redemption but other students’ safety.“Has he changed himself so that he’s not a threat to women anymore?” she said. “That’s what you’re looking for. Not that he’s paid his dues.”Mixon would not answer that or any other questions on the case or its repercussions on Tuesday, smiling when an Oklahoma official interceded to remind reporters of a largely ignored directive to ask “football-related questions.” Still, the questions persisted. Asked if he was sorry for the episode, Mixon replied, “I won’t answer that.” Asked how he would describe himself, he said, “A great person.”His only public comments appear to have been several since-deleted messages on Twitter in July in which he implied he would use criticism of him as motivation.“This season dedicated to my haters,” he said then.Months later, and more than a year after the episode, it is unlikely that the video of Mixon punching Molitor will ever be released. A judge ruled this year that Norman officials did not have to release the video because it did not “depict an arrest or the cause of an arrest,” and because the city was not required to do so when the requests were originally made. That ruling is under appeal.Molitor was given a copy of the video, according to court documents. But she has not conducted public interviews recently, and attempts to reach her were unsuccessful.To Morrison, the women’s advocate, the decision on whether the video is shown publicly should be Molitor’s.“I think that it’s respectful of the woman who experienced that violence — that is, I’m sure, private to her,” Morrison said. “I think she should have total control over who should be allowed to see that.”The Norman Police Department is no longer in possession of the video, according to a spokeswoman. Once Mixon entered his plea agreement, the video was returned to the deli, whose owners destroyed it.“From a corporate standpoint, we felt that it wasn’t necessary to show the video to the public,” said Brandon Sterr, an official at the deli’s corporate parent. “It didn’t need to go public. It went through the court system.”Alain Delaquérière contributed research.Advertisement