AdvertisementSupported byBy Naila-Jean MeyersEvery Tuesday, The New York Times will look at the week ahead in the N.H.L., highlighting hot — or not so hot — teams and players. (All times Eastern.)Canadiens at Panthers, Tuesday, 7:30 p.m.Look who’s lurking at the top of the Atlantic Division: the Florida Panthers. They have won six games in a row, their longest winning streak in eight years, and are 10-3 in December. They have done it with a stark mix of youth and experience. Their leading point scorer, Jaromir Jagr, is 43. Behind him is Jonathan Huberdeau, 22. The Panthers (20-12-4, 44 points) briefly took the division lead from Montreal this week and now get a chance to measure themselves against the reeling Canadiens (21-14-3, 45 points), who led Florida by 15 points entering this month.Rangers at Lightning, Wednesday, 8 p.m., NBCSNLast season’s Eastern Conference finalists are getting healthy as they approach their second meeting. Rangers defensemen Dan Girardi and Kevin Klein returned in Monday’s 5-3 loss in Nashville, after center Derek Stepan’s comeback before the Christmas break. Tampa Bay forward Tyler Johnson, who gave the Rangers fits in the playoffs, is back in the lineup. Even better for the Lightning: Steven Stamkos is heating up. After a 10-game goalless streak, Stamkos has scored five goals in his last five games.Les Canadiennes at Boston Pride, Thursday, 2 p.m.After just weeks of negotiations, the N.H.L. announced Monday that a professional women’s game would be added to the schedule of Winter Classic festivities at Gillette Stadium this week. The abbreviated exhibition game, featuring Les Canadiennes of the Canadian Women’s Hockey League and the Boston Pride of the National Women’s Hockey League, is being called the Outdoor Women’s Classic, the first of its kind.Canadiens at Bruins, Friday, 1 p.m., NBCFriday’s game at Gillette Stadium will be the eighth Winter Classic and the second in the Boston area, after Fenway Park was the host in 2010. But this is the first time the Canadiens, the N.H.L.’s most storied franchise, have played in the event. Unfortunately, they may not want to be in the spotlight right now. Montreal stopped a six-game skid with a shootout victory against Tampa Bay on Monday — only its third win in December. The Canadiens are muddling through the absence of goalie Carey Price, so Montreal made a trade with Edmonton on Monday for the veteran Ben Scrivens to help the rookie Mike Condon. Will Condon, a Massachusetts native, start the outdoor game?Dallas Stars vs. New York/New JerseyHockey fans in the New York metropolitan area will have their only chance to see Dallas’s electrifying offense in the regular season when the N.H.L.-leading Stars visit for three games, beginning Saturday in Newark. The Stars (27-7-3) then play the Islanders in Brooklyn on Sunday before finishing the trip against the Rangers on Jan. 5.The relationship between Islanders fans and Barclays Center has not been a particularly smooth one in the team’s first year in Brooklyn. An altercation between fans and arena staff on Dec. 15 led to Barclays Center announcing focus groups for season-ticket holders to discuss the relationship. But one possible olive branch emerged last weekend: Sparky the Dragon. Sparky, the Islanders’ mascot, did not make the move from Nassau Coliseum, but there he was Sunday, entertaining the crowd during the Islanders’ game against the Maple Leafs. Sparky is expected to make a handful of appearances over the rest of the season.Capitals goalie Braden HoltbyIf you are reading this, you probably do not need to “get to know” Holtby. You are well aware of his prowess in the net for the Capitals in recent seasons. But the Capitals are the N.H.L.’s hottest team, and Holtby’s performance deserves a proper nod. Washington (27-6-2) has won eight in a row and 15 of 17 after Holtby’s 2-0 shutout at Buffalo on Monday night. Holtby (23-4-1), the leading candidate for the Vezina Trophy, has not lost in regulation since Nov. 10 and leads the league in goals-against average, at 1.86. Among his highlights during this stretch: a 44-save performance in a 4-1 victory over the Pittsburgh Penguins on Dec. 15; a 35-save gem on Dec. 12 against the Lightning that prompted a teammate to tell his father, “Thanks for making that child”; and this last-minute save against Buffalo’s Evander Kane to preserve Monday’s shutout.Advertisement