AdvertisementSupported byGlobal SoccerBy Rob HughesLONDON — Street vendors outside Manchester United’s Old Trafford Stadium hoped to capitalize on mischief and rumor. They asked 10 pounds, about $15, for scarves bearing the United crest and embossed with the image of José Mourinho.Mourinho was not in the vicinity. He was apparently on vacation in Brazil — an unemployed coach awaiting, by some reports, the call to manage either United, or his former team, Real Madrid.But Monday’s game between Manchester United and Chelsea ended without a winner or a loser, or a goal. Without consequence, then?Far from it. United dominated 70 percent of the contest, playing, at last, with the passion and attacking intent for which it is renowned. The crowd cheered the team. Many even applauded Coach Louis van Gaal, whose self-confidence has been drained by a run of eight games without a victory.And some observers on Monday must surely have looked at Chelsea, an inferior opponent for much of the evening, and thought that if this was the team he was responsible for at Chelsea, why should Mourinho be considered the man who can inspire a change for the better at United?Soccer history tells us that van Gaal and Mourinho were not just colleagues at Barcelona 20 years ago, but peas in a pod. Van Gaal tried to control players, however gifted, with his defense-minded mentality. Mourinho has similar designs, and similar notions that if a team wins, it is because the coach is a genius. And if it loses, shame on the players.If van Gaal is still in a job at Old Trafford, it might be because Monday showed he is beginning to understand that United’s crowd will tolerate its team’s going through an excruciating phase, provided the players show heart and spirit, and try to attack, attack, attack.On Monday, it did exactly that. Juan Mata rattled the Chelsea crossbar in the third minute; Anthony Martial struck the base of a post in the 16th minute. Ander Herrera had a shot from four yards miraculously beaten away by Chelsea’s giant keeper Thibaut Courtois.The energy and the pride — the indication that the players were willing to sweat blood for the Manchester United uniform — were all that the fans needed to get behind their team. That the ball wouldn’t go in was down to Courtois and his 6-foot-6 frame, and when Chelsea belatedly tried to strike back, United’s goalkeeper David De Gea was just as agile and just as alert.So it was goalless, yet not guileless. On another day, with the way that Wayne Rooney led the Red Devils from the front, this game could have ended 5-2 in Manchester’s favor.“When you have such a performance,” said van Gaal, “I think there is not any reason to resign. You can see that the players are fighting for me. We dominated 70 percent of the attacks, and we should have scored, but we did not.”Van Gaal’s eyes show his pain, but his shoulders are straight back as he walks the touchline. This is a coach who has won league titles in the Netherlands, Spain and Germany but is having to live game by game with the stories that he will be fired by Manchester.“I cannot influence that,” he said, “but with the fight you saw today, we could be back at the top after another month. You never know.”The question that United’s American owners, the Glazer family in Florida, must ponder is pressing. The team needs a striker, and Manchester has the money; the question is, does the board give van Gaal the authority to go ahead and buy a finisher in the January transfer window, or dismiss him and trust somebody else to spend the money?Would that be Mourinho? As Chelsea manager, he got rid of Romelu Lukaku, who has scored 13 goals in his last 13 games for Everton, and also sold Kevin De Bruyne, who is back in the Premier League with Manchester City.No one can be sure when or where strikers might hit a rich scoring vein. But England’s league is full of players proving other people wrong to doubt them.Indeed, the Premier League is a melting pot for players of all nationalities. Jamie Vardy and Riyad Mahrez, an Englishman and an Algerian, have shot Leicester City to the top.Lukaku, a Belgian, scored twice more Monday, yet finished on the losing team as Everton succumbed 4-3 against Stoke City, for whom the Swiss player Xherdan Shaqiri also hit two exquisite goals.In Monday’s eight games, 13 of the 18 goals were spread among players from 13 different countries. Tottenham Hotspur’s Korean winger Son Heung-min hit the winner in a 2-1 win at Watford.Watford’s Nigerian striker, Odion Ighalo, continued his hot scoring streak. Dieumerci Mbokani, from the Democratic Republic of the Congo, scored in Norwich City’s 2-0 win over bottom-placed Aston Villa.It is the money tree of English wealth that tempts the stars. And, no doubt, should United or Chelsea choose to spend their way out of their current inability to score, they have the means to plunder most players in their league.That might not sound fair or give much credit to coaching structures or the academies all of these big clubs run. It is, nevertheless, a well-worn track.Even at Arsenal, which regained the top spot on Monday by beating Bournemouth 2-0, buys when it needs. Arsenal’s standout player, Mesut Ozil, was purchased two years ago by Arsène Wenger, who has managed the club through two decades.Ozil cost more than $63 million from Real Madrid, and it was a shock to Cristiano Ronaldo when Madrid sold him because Ozil had provided so many passes for Ronaldo’s goals. Now Ozil’s uncanny ability to pick out a colleague with inch-perfect passes is working for the Gunners.If only he would score more, he would be the perfect player, Wenger said. On Monday, Ozil scored, though he made it look just like a pass into the goal. The perfect ending to his exceptional year.Advertisement