By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSDEC. 31, 2015
TAMPA, Fla. —  Dominic Moore broke a 2-2 tie early in the third period, Dan Boyle had a goal and an assist, and the Rangers beat the Tampa Bay Lightning, 5-2, on Wednesday night to end an eight-game road losing streak.Henrik Lundqvist made 20 saves for his 356th win, moving past Rogie Vachon for 17th place on the N.H.L.’s career list.“We had a lot of good talks the last 24 hours about coming back to the team we really are,” Lundqvist said. “Play to our strengths, and it starts really with hard work. We played really well tonight. We showed ourselves what we need to do to have success.”Boyle scored in the first period and Mats Zuccarello in the second for the Rangers (21-13-4), who were 0-6-2 during their road skid. Viktor Stalberg and Rick Nash added empty-net goals.AdvertisementJonathan Marchessault and Anton Stralman scored for the Lightning (18-16-4). Ben Bishop, who stopped 21 shots, lost for the first time in the regular season to the Rangers, having won his first nine games against them.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Lightning, the defending Eastern Conference champions, are 9-8-2 at home this season. They went 32-8-1 at Amalie Arena in 2014-15.Advertisement“If you really look at this game, we really didn’t give them anything,” Tampa Bay Coach Jon Cooper said. “And when we did, it was our blunders. You look at that winning goal, we turned the puck over three times in a harmless situation.”Moore gave the Rangers a 3-2 lead on a backhander 3 minutes 16 seconds into the third after a turnover by the Lightning in the defensive zone. Two of Moore’s four goals this season have come against the Lightning.“I just tried to stay poised,” Moore said.A version of this article appears in print on December 31, 2015, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Rangers Beat Lightning to End 8-Game Road Skid.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.