AdvertisementSupported byN.H.L. RoundupBy The Associated PressMike Cammalleri scored twice in the first period, Cory Schneider made 36 saves, and the Devils blanked host Ottawa, 3-0, on Wednesday night.The Devils, who now have 43 points, 1 more than the Senators, moved into the second wild-card spot in the Eastern Conference.“We got off to a good start, which is what we wanted to do,” Devils Coach John Hynes said. “We knew coming in this was one of the top-five offensive teams in the league in goals scored, so I thought our net-front defense was good.”Andrew Hammond made 18 saves for the Senators, who lost for the seventh time in 10 games despite outshooting the Devils, 28-11, over the final two periods.“It’s tough, but I thought we played a pretty decent game,” Senators forward Mark Stone said. “We got a lot of pucks to the net, but we didn’t get a lot of traffic to the net.”Lee Stempniak had a short-handed empty-net goal with 16 seconds left.The Senators started the second period on the power play for 45 seconds and had two additional power plays during the period, one after an embellishment penalty on Bobby Farnham, who flew through the air and then slid several feet while clutching his knee as he tried to draw a penalty on Erik Karlsson.“I don’t think that was a fair call to be honest, but you just have to take your medicine, and the team did a good job killing it off,” said Farnham, who also had a first-period fight with Max McCormick. “Any time you put your team down, it’s disappointing, but the ref saw it how he saw it. I know better than anyone what happened on that play and whether there was any penalty on the play; I was just trying to avoid contact.”Cammalleri scored during the second of three Devils power plays in the first 10 minutes 30 seconds of the game. He rushed down the right side and beat Hammond to the short side off the post at 9:11.Cammalleri got another goal from almost the same spot when he turned and one-timed a turnover just between the post and Hammond’s arm with 1:52 left.“I’ve got to make those saves, especially the way the game went,” Hammond said. “I’ve got to be better on those.”CAPITALS 5, SABRES 2 Alex Ovechkin scored twice in a four-goal rally in the third period, and Washington overcame visiting Buffalo to extend its winning streak to nine games and overtake the Dallas Stars for the N.H.L. points lead.The Capitals improved to 28-6-2 (58 points). Braden Holtby, who finished with 25 saves, is 16-0-1 in his last 17 games.Ovechkin scored a tying goal 1 minute 24 seconds into the third period. His second goal was an empty-netter.MAPLE LEAFS 3, PENGUINS 2 P. A. Parenteau and Peter Holland scored in a shootout as Toronto defeated host Pittsburgh.Advertisement