By MARC TRACYDEC. 30, 2015
DALLAS —  The Michigan State senior Aaron Burbridge caught 79 passes this season and was named the Big Ten’s receiver of the year. His teammate Trevon Pendleton, a fullback, pulled in only four, but even Burbridge might admit that they were some of the biggest ones of the Spartans’ season.“I call him TD Trev because every time there’s a big game, he always scores a touchdown,” Burbridge said.Even the co-offensive coordinator Jim Bollman, who understands the subtle intricacies of the role of the fullback, cannot help but think of the flashy stuff.“First thing you talk to me about Trevon Pendleton, I’ll think about his touchdown reception in the Rose Bowl,” Bollman said, referring to a 2-yard catch in Michigan State’s 24-20 win over Stanford nearly two years ago.AdvertisementBollman added, “It’s always nice when you have a little bit of a hidden weapon like that.”There have been other key contributions. From his game-breaking 74-yard reception in October against Michigan to his 12-yard touchdown reception in November against Ohio State to his blocking throughout an epic, 22-play drive at the end of the conference championship game against Iowa in December — a week after he partly tore the medial collateral ligament in his knee — Pendleton always seems to play a big part in Michigan State’s biggest games.AdvertisementWhen the No. 3 Spartans (12-1) take on No. 2 Alabama (12-1) in the Cotton Bowl on Thursday night, Pendleton’s primary role, as running back Gerald Holmes put it, will be as “a portable lineman,” lining up in the backfield and blocking for a ball-carrying tailback. But there is always the chance he will provide something more memorable.The Spartans’ other offensive coordinator, Dave Warner, compared the fullback position to a dinosaur. The growing emphasis on spread concepts and passing in the N.F.L. has made many teams loath to waste a draft pick or roster spot on a player who might seem a vestige from football’s ground-and-pound days.In college football, where the spread has taken over and five-receiver sets are routine for many teams, the fullback has disappeared, too — except among a few pro-style programs, typically in the Big Ten. (The top-rated fullback this season, according to many mock drafts, is Wisconsin’s Derek Watt, the younger brother of Houston Texans defensive end J. J. Watt.)At Michigan State, Coach Mark Dantonio’s offenses have frequently used fullbacks. Usually, they, like Pendleton, were converted from linebacker (one had been a 275-pound defensive end) and headed to East Lansing as preferred walk-ons, working up to scholarship status.“Speaks to toughness,” Dantonio said of the position this month.Pendleton played tailback and linebacker in high school in southeast Ohio, but most of his recruiting interest came from Mid-American Conference teams seeking a linebacker. The Spartans assistant Mike Tressel told Pendleton his highest ceiling was at fullback, partly because of his physique — he is now 6 feet and 250 pounds, and linebacker Riley Bullough compared him to a bowling ball — but mainly because of his mentality.“He was the type of guy you could tell was willing to do whatever was necessary to succeed and for the team to succeed,” Tressel said. “The ego wasn’t there, where, ‘I don’t want to be a fullback.’ Because sometimes there’s a stigma with the position.”For Spartans defenders, Pendleton’s trademark play is not the touchdown reception; rather, it is the cut block, in which the offensive player takes out the defender at the knees with a well-timed drop.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Everyone was always, ‘Watch out; he’s going to cut you!’ ” recalled safety Demetrious Cox, who is one year behind Pendleton. “He’s running at you, and at the last minute, boom!”AdvertisementWhile his nickname is Ginsu Knife, in reference to the seemingly gratuitous scissor-kick he made while catching that touchdown pass against Stanford, Pendleton is more of the Swiss Army variety: simple in design yet able to transform himself into widely varied tools.Most of the time, Pendleton is on the field in running situations, and the Spartans do indeed run. But the mere possibility that Pendleton could add to his 13 career receptions forces the defense to account for him or risk allowing another big play.“If you can get somebody in a coverage where you can maybe get a little bit of a mismatch,” said Warner, the co-offensive coordinator, “it can be a big factor.”Pendleton appears to conceive of himself more modestly, describing his role as “fixer.”“No play goes as planned, not every block happens, so you’re a cleanup guy,” he said.That requires Pendleton to know everyone else’s assignments, and running back Madre London singled Pendleton out as “one of the smartest on the team.” Sometimes, London and other backs said, Pendleton will interrupt them on their way to class and quiz them about a coming opponent’s defensive tendencies.“He’ll be irritating at times,” running back Delton Williams said, “but it’s all love.”A version of this article appears in print on December 31, 2015, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: A Body for Big Blocks, a Nose for Huge Plays.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.