By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSDEC. 30, 2015
Dak Prescott was determined to put an exclamation point on his impressive career at Mississippi State.He did just that Wednesday.Prescott threw for a Belk Bowl-record 380 yards and four touchdowns on a rain-soaked field in Mississippi State’s 51-28 victory over North Carolina State in Charlotte, N.C.“I wanted to make sure the last time I was wearing maroon and white that people remember me as a winner,” Prescott said.Named the game’s most valuable player, Prescott completed 25 of 42 passes and ran for 47 yards, joining Colin Kaepernick, Tim Tebow and Dan LeFevour as the only players in Football Bowl Subdivision history to throw for 9,000 yards and run for 2,500 yards in their careers.Advertisement“There aren’t words to describe what he has done for this program,” Mississippi State Coach Dan Mullen said. “He has taken a university and a football program and changed the way people think about it. That’s pretty unique. I’ve coached a lot of good football players, and I hate comparing guys, but he could very easily be the best guy I’ve ever coached.”AdvertisementThat is high praise from Mullen, who was Tebow’s offensive coordinator at Florida.Prescott threw two touchdown passes to Brandon Holloway in the second half to break the game open for the Bulldogs, who finished the season 9-4 after being picked to finish last in the Southeastern Conference West in the preseason poll.Wide receiver Fred Ross had seven catches for 74 yards and a touchdown and scored on a 33-yard reverse. De’Runnya Wilson added five catches for 96 yards and a touchdown to help the Bulldogs break the Belk Bowl scoring record.North Carolina State’s Jacoby Brissett threw for one score and ran for one but had two early interceptions that led to Mississippi State’s first 14 points. Brissett had thrown only four interceptions all season entering the game.The Bulldogs led, 31-14, at the half, and Prescott put the game away.He lobbed his third touchdown pass of the game to Holloway over a blitzing defense to put the Bulldogs up by 37-21 late in the third quarter. In the fourth quarter, Prescott hit Holloway in stride along the right sideline for a 55-yard touchdown.LOUISVILLE 27, TEXAS A&M 21 Lamar Jackson ran for two touchdowns and a Music City Bowl-record 226 yards, a career high, and he threw for two more scores to help Louisville beat Texas A&M in Nashville.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Jackson, a freshman making his first start since Oct. 30, finished with a game-record 453 total yards and set the Louisville career rushing mark before the end of the first quarter in giving the Cardinals a 20-7 lead they never lost. Jackson ran for 126 yards in the first 15 minutes, including a 61-yard scoring run.Louisville (8-5) won for the eighth time in 10 games and also earned its third bowl victory in its past four trips.Texas A&M (8-5), which made it interesting in the final minutes with their third-string quarterback making his first career start, became the first SEC team to lose a bowl this season.AdvertisementAUBURN 31, MEMPHIS 10 Jeremy Johnson came off the bench to run and pass for a touchdown, lifting Auburn to a victory over Memphis in the Birmingham Bowl in Alabama.Johnson spurred a sputtering offense, which scored three touchdowns in a five-minute span starting late in the third quarter. Auburn (7-6) avoided finishing with a losing record for the first time in Gus Malzahn’s 11-year college coaching career.An Auburn defense without a coordinator did not allow an offensive touchdown to Memphis (9-4) and its star quarterback, Paxton Lynch.Johnson gave Auburn a 17-10 lead with an 11-yard touchdown pass to Jason Smith. Johnson also ran 17 yards on his second play from scrimmage and opened the fourth quarter with a 5-yard touchdown run on his third.Lynch could never get untracked in what might have been his final game. He is a projected top-five N.F.L. draft pick.Jovon Robinson, the game’s most valuable player, effectively put away the game with a 4-yard touchdown set up by Marcus Davis’s 56-yard return. Robinson had 126 yards on 27 carries.A version of this article appears in print on December 31, 2015, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Big Game by Prescott Propels Bulldogs.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.