AdvertisementSupported byNotebookBy Bill PenningtonEAST RUTHERFORD, N.J. — Odell Beckham Jr. returned to Giants practice Wednesday for the first time since his one-game suspension and was once again apologetic for his reckless and dangerous play in a Dec. 20 game against the Carolina Panthers.“I put a lot of people in a lot of bad positions, and I won’t do it again,” Beckham said, referring to Coach Tom Coughlin and teammates who were compelled for several days after the game to discuss and interpret Beckham’s actions. “What happened was I wasn’t controlling myself,” he said. “It was a poor display of sportsmanship.”Asked if he was provoked into altercations with cornerback Josh Norman or threatened with a baseball bat on the field before the Carolina game — as his teammates have maintained — Beckham shook his head and answered, “It’s irrelevant now.”Beckham also sidestepped, in a way, a question about various reports that suggested that the Panthers had subjected Beckham to homophobic slurs.“Words are words,” Beckham replied.Beckham was welcomed back warmly by his teammates, although Coughlin observed that Beckham was “very quiet.”Beckham said that while he was away from the Giants, he was approached by two children who wanted to talk about the details of the Carolina game, which included Beckham initiating a helmet-to-helmet hit on Norman. Beckham said he told the children, “You’re always responsible for your own actions.”Beckham hopes to move past the incident and said it would not affect his play in the future.“I don’t think anything will change except learning from that experience,” he said. “I won’t do it again. You can’t do that kind of stuff. All I can do now is move forward.”PIERRE-PAUL TO HAVE SURGERY Defensive end Jason Pierre-Paul said he would have off-season surgery on his damaged right middle finger. The operation should improve his grip and allow him to remove the clublike wrapping that has enveloped his hand in games this season.Pierre-Paul, who will become a free agent after the season, lost his right index finger and parts of his thumb and middle finger in fireworks accident on Fourth of July weekend. Pierre-Paul said that he could not flex his middle finger but that he had been told by his doctors that he could regain that function through surgery. Pierre-Paul’s play has been severely hampered by his inability to grasp the jerseys of opposing blockers and running backs with his right hand.“I’ll be better without the club,” said Pierre-Paul, who would not specify what the operation would entail. “I’ve got more recovery to do and ways to improve the hand. It’s only been five months since my injury.”How much function Pierre-Paul has in a rebuilt hand could have a big impact on his value in free agency. But Pierre-Paul wants to return to the Giants.“They gave me a second chance, so yeah, I want to stay,” he said. “But there’s always the business side of football, too. Sunday might be my last game as a Giant.”Pierre-Paul also said he felt partly responsible for the team’s 6-9 record this year.“I feel like that’s half my fault,” Pierre-Paul said. “A lot of the games we lost we could have won if I had been there. But you can’t control everything in life.”COUGHLIN PLAYS DOWN STATUS Tom Coughlin said he addressed his players Wednesday about the potential distraction his uncertain job status may cause.“Basically I said, ‘Don’t worry about me or my situation,’ ” Coughlin said. “Let’s prepare ourselves to play an outstanding football game.”Coughlin said he had read some of the comments by various players who affirmed their support of him.“I appreciate the sentiments, but that’s not where I want them focused this week,” he said.Coughlin said he had not spoken this week with John Mara, a Giants co-owner.Advertisement