By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSDEC. 30, 2015
The next Eagles coach will need some people skills.A day after firing Chip Kelly, the team’s owner and chief executive, Jeffrey Lurie, made clear that he wanted a coach who could relate to his players and everyone else in the organization.“You’ve got to open your heart to players and everybody you want to achieve peak performance,” Lurie said Wednesday. “I would call it a style of leadership that values information and all of the resources that are provided and at the same time values emotional intelligence.”Kelly did not have close relationships with many of his players. He traded running back LeSean McCoy and cornerback Brandon Boykin, and afterward they were critical of his personality.Lurie said he wanted “someone who interacts and communicates very clearly with everyone he works with.”AdvertisementEagles right tackle Lane Johnson, who was Kelly’s first draft pick, said Kelly was considered “unapproachable” by many players.“I want to see a guy who really cares about his players and isn’t so set in his ways, so we can all go in the same direction,” Johnson said.Kelly was fired after missing the playoffs for the second straight season and failing in his first year in charge of personnel. The Eagles entered the season with Super Bowl expectations, but they are 6-9.Players prepared for the season finale at the Giants on Sunday with the offensive coordinator Pat Shurmur serving as interim coach, largely going about business as usual.Lurie said he had not offered to keep Kelly as the coach and strip him of personnel control.Howie Roseman, who was general manager before Kelly insisted on making all the decisions, will remain in his role as the executive vice president for football operations and oversee the personnel department headed by Tom Donahoe. Donahoe, a former Bills and Steelers general manager, is the new senior director of player personnel.AdvertisementLurie does not plan to hire a general manager. Roseman, Donahoe and the new head coach will manage the roster with a “collaborative” effort, Lurie said.Lurie acknowledged that giving Kelly full control of personnel decisions last January was a mistake. Lurie said for the first time that Kelly had demanded full control, so he gave it to him so he would be “accountable for his decisions.” Until this point, Kelly had said it was Lurie’s decision — not his — to oversee all player moves.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Kelly quickly tore apart a winning team and made several bold moves that backfired.Despite their poor play, the Eagles could have won the N.F.C. East by finishing 8-8. But they were eliminated Saturday with a loss at home to Washington.The Eagles were 7-12 in Kelly’s last 19 games.HOYER BACK AS STARTER  Houston quarterback Brian Hoyer is out of the N.F.L.’s concussion protocol and will start on Sunday against Jacksonville when the Texans try to clinch their first A.F.C. South title since 2012.Coach Bill O’Brien said that Hoyer, who missed the last two games after sustaining his second concussion in less than a month on Dec. 13, had been cleared to play by doctors.T. J. Yates started the first game after Hoyer was hurt, but Yates was injured and then replaced by Brandon Weeden, who led Houston to a win over Indianapolis in that game. Weeden then helped Houston beat Tennessee on Sunday.MANNING TO SUIT UP Peyton Manning will be back in uniform Sunday, but not as Denver’s starting quarterback, Coach Gary Kubiak said.Manning will serve as Brock Osweiler’s backup when the Broncos (11-4) play San Diego (4-11) with a fifth consecutive A.F.C. West title and fourth straight first-round bye on the line.BREES HAS A LAUGH The New Orleans Saints are about to conclude consecutive losing seasons for the first time since Sean Payton was hired as coach in 2006 and quickly brought in Drew Brees as his quarterback. But Brees said he saw no reason to portray the Saints’ season finale in Atlanta as the possible end of an era in New Orleans.AdvertisementBrees laughed when asked if he expected to be back next season. “I feel like we’re headed in the right direction,” he said.BRYANT WILL MISS FINALE The injury-plagued season of Dallas Cowboys wide receiver Dez Bryant is ending early, and Bryant faces the likelihood of more surgery on the right foot he broke in the team’s opener.Bryant will miss the finale against Washington on Sunday with the Cowboys eliminated from the playoffs and the Redskins already in as N.F.C. East champions.A version of this article appears in print on December 31, 2015, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: Eagles Seeking Coach Who Will Interact Well With Others, Owner Says.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.