By BEN SHPIGELDEC. 30, 2015
FLORHAM PARK, N.J. —  The voice over the phone rang familiar, and then it did not. The longer Rex Ryan talked — that is to say, beyond his opening answer — the more dispirited, defeated and deflated he sounded.Upon being hired as coach 11 months ago, Ryan vowed that the Buffalo Bills would make the playoffs for the first time since 1999. That promise, like several he made while coaching the Jets, went unfulfilled.Buffalo’s season, fraught with injuries and disappointment and, more recently, player unrest, has been reduced to one game, a chance to deny the Jets a berth in the postseason.“We failed miserably,” Ryan said. “That’s probably the truth.”Ryan felt like this last season. And the season before. And the season before that. And the season before that.AdvertisementFour consecutive years without leading the Jets to the playoffs hastened his dismissal, but it was only last year, when the Jets lost 11 of their first 13 games on their way to a 4-12 record, that his countenance reflected his squad’s misery.AdvertisementIn his teleconference Wednesday, Ryan emphasized that “the wheels are far from coming off” in Buffalo but said he was stung by mounting criticism from players expressing disenchantment with the defensive scheme and substitution practices.“Well, I think it’s safe to say that not all of them have,” Ryan said when asked whether his players were united behind him. “I think that’s safe to say that. But I think there’s a number of them that have.”Ryan told reporters in Buffalo that he would never muzzle his players. That was also what he said when he coached the Jets, whose players — only a few, actually — criticized him after his departure for not holding the team accountable enough.Ryan earned immediate credibility in the Jets’ locker room, not only because players welcomed his bravado after Eric Mangini’s departure but because they won, advancing to the A.F.C. championship game his first two seasons. He lacked that foundation in Buffalo, where the recent sniping, he said, bothered him.“I’ve never been looked at as a problem, you know,” Ryan said. “So yeah, that bothers me, no doubt about it.”But he added, “Doesn’t mean I’m going to change who I am or how I go about my business, I can promise you that.”That is Ryan personified — stubborn to the point of defiance. It is how he was when he barged into western New York in January with his Bills pickup truck, reviving fans yearning for success. Instead, as Ryan put it, they got miserable failure.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The immediate consequences are negligible. About an hour after Ryan’s teleconference ended, the Bills released a statement on behalf of the owner Terry Pegula. It said that Ryan and the general manager, Doug Whaley, would retain their jobs.AdvertisementWhich is nice for Ryan and Whaley. But it is never a positive development when an owner deems it necessary to release a statement announcing that his management team will return.Since defeating the Jets on Nov. 12, the Bills (7-8) have lost four of six games. The Bills’ victory at MetLife Stadium was the apex of their season, and another against the Jets would rival it.“You’d have two wins over a really good football team, so I think that would be big for us,” Ryan said. “But as far as — is there going to be a little more satisfaction that way? I can’t tell you that.”Unlike the Jets (10-5), who expect to have all their starters available, the Bills have been socked by injuries. They lost cornerback Ron Brooks and tight end Charles Clay to injured reserve, where they joined receiver Robert Woods, offensive lineman Seantrel Henderson and cornerback Stephon Gilmore. The star running back LeSean McCoy is also unlikely to play, Ryan said.The forecast for Sunday’s game at Buffalo calls for snow showers and a high of 32 degrees. Ryan, who must concoct a game plan to neutralize Jets quarterback Ryan Fitzpatrick and the dynamic receiving tandem of Eric Decker and Brandon Marshall, would not mind if conditions deteriorated.“I hope the wind blows, like, 50 miles an hour,” Ryan said. “So that’s what we’re hoping for.”A version of this article appears in print on December 31, 2015, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: Ryan Looks to End Failed Season on a High Note.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.