By JOE LEMIREDEC. 30, 2015
BELMONT, Mass. —  Hanging in the athletic director’s office at Belmont Hill School is a game-worn Montreal Canadiens sweater. There is also a red fold-down seat from the old Montreal Forum. Many students at this hockey-mad all-boys preparatory school, 10 miles northwest of Boston, now track every game played by the Canadiens, the Bruins’ north-of-the-border rival.The arena chair’s presence is a coincidence; the athletic director, George Tahan, is a collector of old stadium seats. But the rest of the buzz and the red home uniform donation are thanks to the school’s eighth and most recent alumnus to reach the N.H.L.: Mike Condon, who became an overnight sensation in relief of the Canadiens’ injured star goaltender, Carey Price.Condon, a 25-year-old rookie, was 9-2-3 with a .918 save percentage in his first 15 appearances. Although he has lost seven of his last eight decisions during a massive Montreal slump, high school students much too young to have overlapped with Condon take pride in the Belmont Hill sextant that appears on his goalie mask.“The kids at school are following him,” the retired Belmont Hill coach Ken Martin said, “and they don’t even know him.”AdvertisementCondon is expected to start Friday’s Winter Classic at Gillette Stadium in Foxborough, Mass., against the Bruins, who trail second-place Montreal by a point in the Atlantic Division standings.AdvertisementThere will be a vocal minority of Massachusetts residents supporting a hated foe.That extends even to the Massachusetts State Police, for whom Condon’s father, Ted, is a sergeant, in the Violent Fugitive Apprehension Section. The duty-oriented line of work made such an impression on his son that an image of state troopers standing at attention has also appeared on Condon’s Canadiens goalie mask. (Condon’s mask for the Winter Classic will feature Bill Belichick, Tom Brady and four Lombardi Trophies.)Now Ted Condon, who grew up cheering on Bobby Orr’s Bruins, backs the Habs.“Not just me; everybody on my job follows him,” he said. “I can’t believe we’re rooting for the Canadiens, but we’re rooting for him.”The bigger surprise is that Mike Condon arrived in the N.H.L. after an unconventional and circuitous path that included extensive bench time as an understudy; midcollege hip operations; a Princeton thesis written poolside in an eastern Los Angeles suburb; and a series of opportunistic performances as an injury substitute.“His route to where he is now is so different than what most of the guys have taken,” said Tahan, who is also an assistant hockey coach.He added, “He’s earned everything he’s gotten.”The genesis of Condon’s hockey career began in his driveway, where his older brother, Zach, started shooting tennis balls at him. Zach, now a harbor pilot in Panama City, Fla., is five years older; he and his friends would draft Mike to play goalie.“He couldn’t play out with the big guys, so they stuck him in the net,” Ted Condon said.That made Mike better and more competitive, his father reckoned. When he applied to Belmont Hill, his ninth-grade admissions essay likened his journey to one day play in the N.H.L. to Frodo’s quest in “The Lord of the Rings.” He made the varsity team as a sophomore but played a grand sum of about 20 minutes as the backup.“I would say it was a character-building year,” said Martin, who retired from coaching varsity hockey after the 2011 season with 707 wins, which, until February, was the highest total in prep school history. “He knew that his practices were his games.”AdvertisementCondon’s first start as a junior foreshadowed his opportunistic debuts. Playing a Noble and Greenough School team with a few future professionals, Condon made 44 saves, and Belmont Hill won, 5-2. That season’s team reached the New England playoffs despite not having a high scorer, which put further onus on Condon.Martin made his goalies keep a spiral-bound notebook of every goal they allowed with details on where it was shot and how it went in; those logs emphasized accountability. In his senior season, Condon was named the Independent School League’s most valuable player.Condon matriculated at Princeton, where he was a backup as a freshman, had labrum surgery on both hips as a sophomore and returned to full strength only by the midpoint of his junior season.The assistant coach for goaltenders, Greg Gardner, remembers that Condon discussed, somewhat seriously, a career on Wall Street.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Gardner, who was the first signed player in Columbus Blue Jackets history and whose 12 shutouts at Niagara in 2000 remain an N.C.A.A. Division I record, conducted voluntary extra practices a couple of mornings a week for Condon, who described workouts as going to “pay the man.” That was a mantra he learned from an assistant high school lacrosse coach, Eric Kapitulik, who served in the Marine Corps.“He doesn’t have an ego when it comes to his game,” Gardner, an assistant at Mercyhurst University, said of Condon. “He’s open to change.”In a midseason road game in Condon’s senior season in 2013, Cornell outshot Princeton by 39-12, including 16 shots on five power plays, yet Condon earned a shutout in a 1-0 victory. That was the game that convinced Gardner of Condon’s pro potential.Gardner called his former agent, Michael Wulkan, with a referral of Condon. Wulkan found an ECHL club, the Ontario Reign in California, that needed a goalie immediately. That meant leaving Princeton two months before graduation; Ted Condon worried his son might jeopardize his degree.“The Princeton education is priceless,” Ted Condon said. “It’s not some tryout in the middle of the California desert with a team that no one’s ever heard of.”AdvertisementMike Condon spoke to his professors and devised a plan to complete his final-semester courses, which assuaged his father. While his teammates spent mornings and off-days at the beach or the movie theater, Condon worked on his undergraduate thesis about post-Cold War arms transfers. He periodically texted pictures to Gardner of his laptop and his books — by the hotel pool.After an injury to the Reign’s starter, Condon excelled in four games. He impressed his coach, Jason Christie, with his grounded outlook and control.“He really calmed the games down for us, just because of his maturity,” Christie said.After the Reign, a Kings-affiliated team, wanted another goalie to see playing time, Condon was benched. He conferred with Wulkan on a Friday night in early April and decided to return to school.By the next morning, the Houston Aeros of the American Hockey League, a level higher, called to offer a professional tryout contract. Condon left his belongings in California and flew to Houston on a Saturday night. He sat on the bench to start a Sunday game — only to sub in after yet another goalie injury.In five appearances with the Aeros, Condon was 3-0-0 with a .919 save percentage, and he signed a contract with the Canadiens after a 39-save performance with a Montreal scout at the rink.In just three months, Condon went from undrafted college senior on Princeton’s campus to an Ivy League graduate with an N.H.L. contract and a spot on the Black Aces, Montreal’s postseason practice squad.This fall, Condon made the Canadiens’ roster with his preseason play, and he has held on to the starting job during Price’s two injury absences this season.“A lot of people get opportunities,” Gardner said, “but he’s made the most of them.”Condon has even made his hometown friends and family members into Montreal fans. There are limits, though.“I’m not paying to go see the Canadiens if Mike’s not playing,” Martin said with a smile.A version of this article appears in print on December 31, 2015, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: Goalie Converts Chances, and Fans of a Hated Rival.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.