
TV Sports By                     
 RICHARD SANDOMIR
 
DEC. 30, 2015
In an ESPN promotional ad for the College Football Playoff, a gaggle of partyers led by Jimmy Kimmel and Robin Thicke sings, “Yes, New Year’s Eve will be so awesome watching college football through confetti,” to the tune of “Auld Lang Syne.” The singing and new lyrics aren’t great, but the message is clear: The national semifinal games are designed to alter the American ritual of New Year’s Eve celebrations.Or, at least, delay them until after the final tick of the clock sometime around midnight.ESPN wants to dominate New Year’s Eve, much as the N.F.L. takes over Thanksgiving Day and the N.B.A. deploys five games in its bid to wrest control of Christmas from Santa Claus. But playing games on national holidays is one thing; seeking dominion on New Year’s Eve is another.Unless New Year’s Eve falls on a weekend, the first of the national semifinals in the foreseeable future will be played while some people are still at work. (This year, it’s the Orange Bowl, between Clemson and Oklahoma, at 4 p.m. Eastern.) And the second game (the Cotton Bowl, between Alabama and Michigan State, at 8 p.m.) will compete against New Year’s Eve parties, at home and elsewhere, and televised revels like “Dick Clark’s New Year’s Rockin’ Eve With Ryan Seacrest” on ABC, ESPN’s corporate sibling within the Walt Disney Company.All of this does not ruffle ESPN, which has a 12-year, $7.3 billion contract to carry the Playoff and other bowls. Its executives are secure in knowing how powerful college football is and how potent the Playoff is, even after only one go-round. Last season, the semifinal games were played on New Year’s Day and drew an average of just over 28 million viewers.AdvertisementIf this year’s numbers are down a bit because of the change in days, there will be no tears.“Last year was kind of a perfect storm,” said Ilan Ben-Hanan, vice president for college sports programming at ESPN. “Games on Jan. 1, in traditional venues, with Heisman Trophy winners facing off and Urban Meyer against Nick Saban. It was everything you could ask for in Year 1.”AdvertisementThis season, he said, “we have four blue-chip, brand-name programs and good geographical diversity.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.He added: “We realize that New Year’s Eve is not New Year’s Day. We know it’ll be different. But we think the notion of sports and a holiday can exist peacefully.”Andrew Billings, director of the sports communication program at the University of Alabama, said the Playoff games and New Year’s Eve shows were similar in that they were all communal events.“People often opt to consume megasports en masse, and New Year’s Eve may provide some natural synergy for doing so,” he said. “Perhaps the same party occurs, with the game unfolding in one room for those who wish to consume it.”ESPN has been hyping the New Year’s Eve games since the summer, trying to point fans to a date when eight of the next 11 semifinals will be played, including Thursday’s. The ad campaign plays with the idea that the Playoff and New Year’s Eve can live side by side or, really, should merge as one in the sports fan’s mind.One of the ads shows skyscrapers with highlights projected against them while a bejeweled football drops down like the Times Square ball and “What Are You Doing New Year’s Eve?” is sung by Ella Fitzgerald in the background.ESPN is not saying how many people will follow its promotional lead on New Year’s Eve — which is not fallow ground for bowl games at the network. Last season, the Orange Bowl drew 8.9 million viewers in prime time for a matchup with no meaning except to the teams and their fans; it’s hard to imagine ESPN being satisfied with anything less than a tripling of the audience for Georgia Tech’s victory over Mississippi State with slots in the Jan. 11 national championship game at stake.But ESPN knows that fewer people watch television on New Year’s Eve. According to Nielsen, 98 million people were tuned in during prime time last New Year’s Eve, but many more, 121.4 million, were tuned in across prime time when the semifinal was played the next night.AdvertisementAnd there is life in the genre of New Year’s Eve shows, especially the biggest one, the Clark-Seacrest program; last year, it averaged 12.8 million viewers in prime time; then, from 11:30 p.m. to 12:38 a.m., viewership rose to 22.7 million. To hedge its bets on Thursday, Disney has been promoting the Playoff and Seacrest’s show in a single ad — while probably hoping the Cotton Bowl ends early enough to send a big audience from ESPN to ABC to watch the ball drop.An executive with expertise in sports and New Year’s Eve programs said there might be enough competition to hurt both sides. “It’s not optimal for either one,” said Mark Shapiro, chief content officer at WME/IMG and a former top official at ESPN and Dick Clark Productions. “Both will take a bite out of each other, but there are still plenty of viewers to go around.”But Artie Bulgrin, ESPN’s senior vice president for global research and analytics, said the New Year’s celebration shows would have little impact on the audience tuned in to see Alabama play Michigan State in the Cotton Bowl.“College football fans will stay where they are,” he said. “They’ll treat it as a holiday.” He added that internal research was showing a quadrupling in fans’ “intent to view” the semifinals since midseason. “That’s very high,” he said. “People are making plans.”Bulgrin is sure fans will make ESPN happy on New Year’s Eve and in the years ahead.“This will change habits,” he said. “There’s no doubt that for true fans this will change behavior.”If he is right — and he probably is — ESPN’s plan to transform New Year’s Eve may have us sipping Champagne and singing “Auld Lang Saban.”Email: sandor@nytimes.comA version of this article appears in print on December 31, 2015, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: ESPN Seeks Birth of Tradition at Year’s End.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »