By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSJAN. 1, 2015
Trapped behind the line of scrimmage, Georgia Tech quarterback Justin Thomas escaped by veering sharply upfield, leaving a defender flailing and Yellow Jackets fans cheering another touchdown.Thomas and his teammates were tough to tackle Wednesday, rolling up 452 rushing yards to beat Mississippi State, 49-34, in the Orange Bowl in Miami Gardens, Fla.Thomas ran for 121 yards and three touchdowns and threw for 125 yards and a score. Synjyn Days ran for 171 yards and three scores, including a 69-yarder that defused Mississippi State’s comeback bid.No. 10 Georgia Tech (11-3) earned its first Orange Bowl victory in 63 years. The Yellow Jackets improved to 2-8 in bowl games in the past 10 seasons.AdvertisementNo. 8 Mississippi State (10-3), which was ranked No. 1 for five consecutive weeks, lost three of its final four games.AdvertisementMississippi State’s Dak Prescott threw for 453 yards, an Orange Bowl record and a career high. Mississippi State outgained Georgia Tech, 605 yards to 577, and the two-team total was an Orange Bowl record, but the Bulldogs twice lost the ball on downs in the second half, and two onside-kick attempts failed.Mississippi State scored on a 42-yard desperation heave on the final play of the first half to cut the gap to 21-20, but the Yellow Jackets were unfazed, bouncing back with touchdowns on their first four possessions of the second half to lead, 42-20.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Georgia Tech ran its triple option with uncharacteristic balance in the first half, when Thomas threw 10 times for 125 yards. But in the third quarter, the Yellow Jackets pulled away by gaining 208 yards, all on the ground. The Yellow Jackets set an Orange Bowl record with their 452 rushing yards.Thomas was chosen the game’s most outstanding player. The Georgia Tech senior Darren Waller had 114 yards on five catches, a career high that included a 41-yard score.After Georgia Tech scored a touchdown to take a 21-13 lead with 29 seconds left in the first half, the Bulldogs started at their own 28. Four plays advanced the ball to the Yellow Jackets’ 42 with five seconds left, and after a timeout, Prescott heaved a pass into the end zone. Two defenders and Mississippi State’s Joe Morrow got their hands on the ball, and it deflected to Fred Ross, who made a diving scoop for the improbable score.The Yellow Jackets responded by shifting their ground game into high gear. First, Days found a big hole on a dive play and broke two tackles en route to the end zone. Then Thomas scored on a 32-yard keeper to make it 35-20.After Jamal Golden forced a fumble at midfield, Thomas scored again, on a 15-yard run.Chris Milton intercepted a deflected pass from Prescott on the game’s first series to set up a touchdown that put the Yellow Jackets ahead to stay. They mounted an 88-yard touchdown drive late in the first quarter for a 14-0 lead.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.