By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSDEC. 31, 2014
The Rangers finished an impressive December in impressive fashion.Ryan McDonagh, Chris Kreider and Martin St. Louis each had a goal and an assist, and the visiting Rangers got back to their winning ways with a 5-2 victory over the Florida Panthers on Wednesday night.Derick Brassard and Dominic Moore also scored for the Rangers, and Derek Stepan had three assists. Henrik Lundqvist made 19 saves.The Rangers won their first game since an eight-game winning streak ended at Dallas on Monday. It was the longest run in 40 years for the Rangers, who went 9-3 in December.Tomas Fleischmann and Jimmy Hayes scored for Florida, which tied a franchise record for points in December, with 17.AdvertisementISLANDERS 5, JETS 2 Frans Nielsen scored two goals and added an assist, and the surging Islanders beat host Winnipeg.AdvertisementRyan Strome had a goal and three assists, and Anders Lee and Josh Bailey also scored for the Islanders, who are 6-1-1 in their last eight games. It was Strome’s first career four-point game.Winnipeg’s captain, Andrew Ladd, scored both goals for the Jets.PENGUINS 2, HURRICANES 1  Brandon Sutter scored the game-winning goal in the final two minutes, helping Pittsburgh beat visiting Carolina. Sutter scored his eighth goal of the season.LIGHTNING 5, SABRES 1  Ondrej Palat had a goal and three assists, and Tampa Bay reclaimed the Eastern Conference lead with a win at Buffalo.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Nikita Kucherov scored twice and added an assist, and his linemate Tyler Johnson set up three goals for Tampa Bay, which is 1 point ahead of the Islanders.RED WINGS 3, DEVILS 1  Darren Helm scored two goals, and host Detroit held off the Devils.Helm’s unassisted tally with 4 minutes 25 seconds left gave the Red Wings a two-goal lead.Cory Schneider made 25 saves for the Devils, whose lone goal was scored by Joe Whitney.BLUE JACKETS 3, WILD 1 Kevin Connauton had a goal and an assist, and Sergei Bobrovsky made 28 saves to lead host Columbus.With the game tied at 1-1 in the third, Columbus scored a power-play goal at 5:57. Ryan Johansen added an empty-net goal.MAPLE LEAFS 4, BRUINS 3 Nazem Kadri and Mike Santorelli each scored in a shootout, lifting visiting Toronto over Boston.Phil Kessel had a goal and his 200th career assist in his career with Toronto.A version of this article appears in print on January 1, 2015, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Rangers Romp to End Strong December; Nielsen’s 2 Goals Lead Isles.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.