By FRED BIERMANDEC. 31, 2014
SUGAR BOWL1 ALABAMA vs. 5 OHIO STATE8:30 p.m., ESPN, New OrleansThe most intriguing Rose Bowl matchups are on the field; the best in this game is a battle between coaches. Urban Meyer won two national titles at Florida (one with a 41-14 rout of Ohio State), and Nick Saban has won four titles — one with Louisiana State and three with Alabama. A fifth would pull Saban even with Bear Bryant for the most in the history of college football’s top tier.Ohio State (12-1) lost Bowl Championship Series title games to Southeastern Conference teams in 2007 and 2008, which began a run of SEC dominance and led people to question the Big Ten. A victory by Meyer would help restore the conference’s reputation.Alabama (12-1) lost to Mississippi on Oct. 4 but has won its last eight games, five against ranked teams, including Mississippi State, then No. 1. Quarterback Blake Sims has improved. Receiver Amari Cooper, a huge talent, will be matched against a young secondary that has played well down the stretch. Alabama’s running back combination of T. J. Yeldon and Derrick Henry has accounted for 20 touchdowns.Ohio State lost in the second week of the season, at home, to Virginia Tech, which finished the season 7-6. The Buckeyes also needed overtime to beat Penn State but had a huge victory over Michigan State (then No. 8) and rolled over Wisconsin (then No. 13), 59-0, in the Big Ten championship game. That victory vaulted them over Texas Christian and into the College Football Playoff.AdvertisementThe Buckeyes lost their starting quarterback, Braxton Miller, before the season. J. T. Barrett stepped in and put together a fantastic freshman season before he was injured, too. The third-stringer, Cardale Jones, made his first start in the Big Ten championship game and played nearly flawlessly. Jones is the biggest X factor. Alabama does not have much tape to study, and the Buckeyes may be able to use that to their advantage. Ohio State receiver Devin Smith is a big-play threat, with 11 touchdowns. Running back Ezekiel Elliott did not get much attention but rushed for just over 1,400 yards.Ohio State’s defensive line is among the best in the nation, and end Joey Bosa is the star with 13 ½ sacks. Alabama counters with a tough 3-4 defense, anchored by A’Shawn Robinson, that will try to expose Jones’s inexperience. Reggie Ragland leads a good linebacking corps, and Xzavier Dickson leads the team with eight sacks.AdvertisementAlabama is a big favorite, and it is hard to pick against the Tide, particularly with an inexperienced Buckeyes quarterback. Since the loss to Mississippi, Alabama seems to have put it all together.A version of this article appears in print on January 1, 2015, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: Today's Games to Watch.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.