By BEN SHPIGEL and BILL PENNINGTONDEC. 31, 2014
Doug Marrone opted out of his contract as coach of the Buffalo Bills on Wednesday, and he has drawn interest from the Jets, a person familiar with the team’s thinking said. The Jets are likely to schedule an interview with Marrone, a Bronx native who served as the team’s offensive line coach for four seasons under Herman Edwards.The Jets’ search for Rex Ryan’s replacement is in the early stages. But having interviewed their assistant head coach, Anthony Lynn, on Wednesday, the Jets can hire a coach whenever they want. That interview satisfied the so-called Rooney Rule, which mandates that teams interview at least one minority candidate for an opening.Marrone led the Bills to a 9-7 record this season and a 15-17 mark across two years. Three of those victories came against the Jets, who were outscored by 118-40.GIANTS REUNION One day after announcing that Danny Langsdorf, their quarterbacks coach, was leaving for the University of Nebraska, the Giants welcomed back Mike Sullivan, who was Eli Manning’s quarterbacks coach in the 2010 and 2011 seasons.AdvertisementSullivan left the Giants in 2012 to become the offensive coordinator of the Tampa Bay Buccaneers. After two years in that position, Sullivan spent the past year working as a consultant.AdvertisementManning thrived under Sullivan in the 2010 and 2011 seasons, completing 61.9 percent of his passes for 8,935 yards and 60 touchdowns while recording 41 interceptions and a passer rating of 89.2. Manning had one of his best years in 2011, the season he won a second Super Bowl with the Giants. BILL PENNINGTONPlease verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.GROPING ACCUSATION The Baltimore Ravens’ security director, Darren Sanders, has been accused of groping a woman at the team’s stadium after a game in December, according to police and court documents obtained by The Associated Press.Kevin Byrne, a Ravens senior vice president, said Sanders had been placed on paid leave. Sanders’s lawyers said he denied the allegations.Sanders launched the Ravens’ inquiry into the domestic violence case involving running back Ray Rice. (AP)A SPLIT FOR THE REDSKINS Jim Haslett, Washington’s defensive coordinator for five seasons, is leaving the Redskins, who said in a news release that he and the team “mutually agreed to part ways.” (AP)COLTS LOSE LINEMAN Indianapolis placed its starting right tackle, Gosder Cherilus, on injured reserve with a groin injury, four days before the team’s playoff opener against Cincinnati. (AP)A version of this article appears in print on January 1, 2015, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: Marrone Quits Bills and Is Said to Draw Jets’ Interest.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.