By MATT HIGGINSDEC. 31, 2014
MONTREAL —  Led by a line of Sam Reinhart, Max Domi and Anthony Duclair, Canada outlasted the United States, 5-3, on Wednesday in their final game of group play at the World Junior Championship at Bell Centre.The two teams, which had already qualified for the quarterfinals, combined for three goals in a wild final minute. The game was the 10th time the teams had met in the tournament on New Year’s Eve. Canada has won seven times, five by a single goal.The contest featured a showdown between Connor McDavid of Canada and Jack Eichel of the United States, who are expected to be the top two picks in the 2015 N.H.L. draft.The game was rancorous from the start. Duclair shoved the American left wing Tyler Motte before the puck was dropped at the opening face-off.Advertisement“It was hard fought,” said Canada’s Max Domi, who scored twice and was named the player of the game. “We were hitting them. They were hitting us.”AdvertisementEichel, the United States captain, was booed lustily by a partisan crowd every time he touched the puck. Eichel missed an open opportunity 29 seconds into the game as goalie Eric Comrie was caught out of position.Canada Coach Benoit Groulx elected to start Comrie in favor of Zach Fucale, who had given up Canada’s lone goal in a game against Finland, the defending champion. It was an inspired choice. Comrie was tested early and finished with 26 saves.After a scoreless first period, Canada seized the momentum when Domi, the son of the former N.H.L. player Tie Domi, scored with 12 minutes 53 seconds remaining in the second period. It was the third goal of the tournament for the 19-year-old Domi.Reinhart, the second overall pick in 2014 by the Buffalo Sabres, had a goal and assisted on both goals by Domi.“He’s probably been one of our best forwards in everything he does,” McDavid said. “He’s a complete two-way player. He’s been a great player on that line.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Canada grabbed a 2-0 lead on a power-play goal by Josh Morrissey at 9:49, after the American forward Dylan Larkin had been sent to the penalty box for high-sticking.The United States pulled to 2-1 on a power play with 6:38 left in the second period. Eichel curled near the blue line in the Canada zone and sent a pass to Sonny Milano, parked to the right of Comrie. Anthony DeAngelo converted Milano’s cross-crease feed.The third period produced a wild finish. At 10:01, Curtis Lazar, Canada’s captain, crashed goalie Thatcher Demko’s net and jammed in the rebound of a McDavid shot for a 3-1 lead.AdvertisementBut with 2:34 remaining, the United States pulled to 3-2 when its leading scorer, Larkin, converted a pass from Hudson Fasching after a turnover by Canada in its zone.The Americans pulled Demko (38 saves) to attempt to tie the score, but Reinhart scored into an empty net with 54 seconds remaining. Larkin cut the American deficit to 4-3 when he scored 12 seconds later on a wrist shot from the top of the right circle.“One thing we liked about our group was the resilience part of it,” United States Coach Mark Osiecki said. “In terms of the game, the ebbs and flows, and being able to stay with it.”But with the United States pressing, Domi and Reinhart came to the rescue. Reinhart gathered the puck in Canada’s zone and fed a streaking Domi for an empty net tally to seal the game with 4.7 seconds left.Canada will play Denmark in a quarterfinal Friday in Toronto. The United States will play Russia on Friday in Montreal.A version of this article appears in print on January 1, 2015, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: Canadian Juniors Top United States in Rancorous Preliminary-Round Game.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.