AdvertisementSupported byTexas Christian 42, Mississippi 3By The Associated PressATLANTA — Playing like a team determined to show it should have been included in the four-team College Football Playoff, No. 6 Texas Christian used three touchdown passes from Trevone Boykin and a dominant defense to beat No. 9 Mississippi, 42-3, in the Peach Bowl on Wednesday in Atlanta.Josh Doctson had two touchdown catches, and Aaron Green ran for a score and had a touchdown reception for the Horned Frogs (12-1).Ole Miss (9-4) lost four of its last six games. Bo Wallace threw three interceptions, including one caught in the Rebels’ end zone by defensive end James McFarland for a touchdown.Late in the third quarter, when the lead was 42-0, T.C.U. fans targeted the No. 1 seed in the playoff, chanting, “We want ‘Bama!”T.C.U. was ranked No. 3 by the playoff’s selection committee before crushing Iowa State, 55-3, to end the season as a Big 12 co-champion. But the Horned Frogs fell to No. 6 in the committee’s final rankings.On Wednesday, T.C.U. played like a championship contender, scoring two touchdowns in each of the first three quarters and finishing with 423 yards. The Rebels were held to 129 yards — 9 yards rushing — in a game that had the biggest margin of victory in Peach Bowl history.Mississippi avoided a shutout when Gary Wunderlich kicked a 27-yard field goal with 7 minutes 18 seconds remaining.We’ve published maps showing where fan support for one team begins and another ends for baseball and basketball. Now we’re pleased to offer another one: the United States according to college football fans.Ole Miss had allowed 13.8 points a game, the best mark in the Football Bowl Subdivision, but the Rebels’ turnovers and T.C.U.'s quick-strike offense were too much to overcome. Wallace completed only 10 of 23 passes.Boykin also had turnover problems, throwing three interceptions, but he completed 22 of 31 passes for 187 yards and three touchdowns and had 10 carries for 65 yards.There were a combined five turnovers in the first half, three by T.C.U. The Rebels could not take advantage. By contrast, the Horned Frogs turned two Ole Miss turnovers into 14 points.The Rebels staged a drive late in the third quarter that included a first down at the T.C.U. 8. But on a fourth down from the 7, a shotgun snap went past Wallace, and running back Jordan Wilkins fell on the ball at the 26.Attendance was announced at 65,706, ending the Peach Bowl’s streak of 17 consecutive sellouts.Advertisement