By BRENDAN PRUNTYDEC. 31, 2014
NEWARK —  Isaiah Whitehead spent Wednesday afternoon with a pink Under Armour shoe on his left foot and a walking boot on his right.Whitehead, a freshman guard and Seton Hall’s most talented player, was relegated to a spectator’s role for his team’s Big East men’s basketball opener against St. John’s because of a stress fracture. Without him, it appeared Seton Hall’s chances would be sidelined as well.That is what made the sight of Whitehead celebrating the final moments of his team’s head-turning 78-67 win over St. John’s, the No. 15 team in the country, at the Prudential Center that much more surprising.“I think everyone understands we’re deeper now,” Seton Hall Coach Kevin Willard said.Seton Hall (11-2 over all) had to begin its conference season without Whitehead, its second-leading scorer at 11.9 points a game. And it was facing St. John’s (11-2), which had won seven straight, was off to its best start since the 1985-86 season and entered the game with its highest ranking in the Associated Press top 25 poll since Feb. 28, 2011. Its only other loss this season was to Gonzaga, 73-66, on Nov. 28 at Madison Square Garden.AdvertisementBut as two of Seton Hall’s long-range shooters had their most complete games of the season, the Pirates made the upset look easy.The junior guard Sterling Gibbs scored a team-high 25 points on 7-of-13 shooting and made five 3-pointers. Jaren Sina, a sophomore guard, added 14 points on 5-of-9 shooting including four 3-pointers.Advertisement“We really wanted to attack them without them attacking us,” Gibbs said.That game plan put St. John’s on its heels, even though it shot almost 70 percent at one point. Seton Hall, whose two losses this season were at Wichita State and at Georgia, stretched its lead to 14 points with just over 10 minutes remaining, before St. John’s strung together some productive offensive sequences.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Red Storm trimmed the lead to 65-63 with 5 minutes 21 seconds left, but scored only 4 points the rest of the way.“In this league, in a tough environment, against a well-coached team, you’re going to get an ‘L,’ ” St. John’s Coach Steve Lavin said. “It’s a report card for us.”It’s also a result that will force one of the preseason favorites in the Big East to reassess itself.Aside from D’Angelo Harrison’s team-high 25 points, the Red Storm were able to muster little else on offense. Phil Greene IV added 15 points, but only one other player, the reserve Rysheed Jordan, scored in double figures.And defensively St. John’s allowed Seton Hall to make 10 of 23 3-point attempts.“I would come at us, too,” Harrison said. “We’re ranked 15th in the country — we’re going to deal with it the rest of the Big East. The Big East is way better this year. We have to come out ready to play or we’ll lose.”A version of this article appears in print on January 1, 2015, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: Missing Its Star Scorer, Seton Hall Upsets St. John’s.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.