By PAT PICKENSDEC. 31, 2014
Like much of the hockey world, Barry Trotz has watched Alex Ovechkin score a lot of goals over the last 10 years.Using his lethal wrist shot, firing slap shots from the point and embarrassing defensemen on the way to highlight-reel goals, Ovechkin has accumulated 439 goals in 715 games with the Washington Capitals.Yet when the Capitals host the Chicago Blackhawks on Thursday at Nationals Park in the 2015 Winter Classic, perhaps the hockey calendar’s biggest regular-season event, the national television audience will see an Ovechkin who has grown in his first season under Trotz.“I think you’re seeing a wiser, more detailed Alexander Ovechkin,” Trotz said before the Capitals played the Devils on Dec. 20.AdvertisementOvechkin endured a nightmarish 2013-14 season and had a bitterly disappointing performance at the Sochi Olympics. He scored 51 goals to lead the N.H.L. but was roundly criticized for failing to do enough to help the Capitals win. He finished minus-35, the third-worst mark in the N.H.L.AdvertisementWashington subsequently missed the playoffs for the first time since 2007, leading to the firing of Coach Adam Oates and George McPhee, the longtime general manager.Trotz, 52, had been the coach of the Nashville Predators since they entered the league in 1998, cultivating a defensive system that lifted the Predators to the playoffs in seven of eight seasons between 2003-4 and 2011-12.But Trotz’s system did not fit Nashville’s roster of young, offensive-minded stars, and he was fired in April after the team failed to make the playoffs for a second straight year. When he took over in Washington, many wondered if Ovechkin would buy in or be stymied by Trotz’s demands.Trotz is the Capitals’ fourth coach in four seasons, and his hiring came after reports that Ovechkin’s sulking had led to the departures of the previous coaches. Trotz returned Ovechkin to his customary left wing position; Oates had moved him to the right side for two seasons, a move that ultimately hastened Oates’s departure. But Trotz has struggled to find a right wing to complement Ovechkin and center Nicklas Backstrom, and Ovechkin’s goals are down: He has 17 in 36 games.“He creates a lot from left wing, and he can do a lot of things from there,” Backstrom said. “Alex has had a lot of chances. It’s going to come. He has such a great shot.”Ovechkin, 29, has renewed his defensive effort and helped the Capitals win games even when he is not scoring. He seems to have accepted the challenge to play a more complete game.“I think what you’re finding is a player that keeps growing,” said Trotz, who added, “What I’m trying to teach him is, if you can’t score, there are another 100 ways you can help and contribute to the hockey team and still be effective.”Ovechkin endured a lengthy scoring slump last March, in which he netted only six goals in 16 games, and it coincided with a 5-7-4 stretch that doomed any chance the Capitals had of making the playoffs. But when Ovechkin scored just five goals in 13 games in December, the Capitals were among the league’s hottest teams, going 8-2-3.Advertisement“When Ovi and Backy have not scored, our success rate has not been good over the last number of years,” Trotz said. “We’re trying to change that and get contributions from everybody.”Like Backstrom, Trotz maintained that Ovechkin had simply been unlucky.“He hasn’t scored, but if you look at the score sheet, he’s had like seven, eight shots and good looks,” Trotz said. “I’ve never seen a guy hit the post so much in this year.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Over the past two weeks, Ovechkin has shown that his skills have not diminished. Against the Devils, he snapped a four-game goal-less drought with a spectacular goal, dragging the puck through defenseman Jon Merrill and beating goalie Cory Schneider with a backhand while falling.On Monday night on Long Island, he tied the game in the third period. After Backstrom won a face-off, Ovechkin took the puck and ripped a classic wrist shot from the top of the circle with 2 minutes 41 seconds left in regulation. The score capped a three-goal rally and forced overtime, but the Capitals fell, 4-3.Even though he scored, assisted on Backstrom’s third-period goal, was plus-2 and helped Washington (18-11-7) get a much-needed point in the tight Metropolitan Division standings, Ovechkin was not satisfied with his team’s start, another sign of his growth as a leader.“We can’t start that kind of important game like that,” said Ovechkin, Washington’s captain since 2010. “They outplayed us, they outbattled us, and you can see the results.”A version of this article appears in print on January 1, 2015, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Capitals Are Looking for High-Scoring Ovechkin to Expand His Game.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.