AdvertisementSupported byBy Tim RohanCOLUMBUS, Ohio — Joe Burrow had never met Urban Meyer. They had only had a handful of casual conversations before Meyer, Ohio State’s football coach, called to offer Burrow a scholarship last spring.Burrow is from Athens, the home of Ohio University, about 75 miles southeast of Columbus. Being offered a scholarship to Ohio U., let alone Ohio State, is considered a big deal there. But Burrow was special, perhaps the best quarterback in the state. As a senior this year, he led his high school to its first appearance in the state title game and was named Mr. Football in Ohio.Meyer sold Burrow on his winning pedigree and his spread offense that has transformed quarterbacks into stars and has given most of them a shot at the N.F.L. He rattled off a list of names that included Heisman Trophy finalists and first-round picks. Tim Tebow. Chris Leak. Alex Smith. He could have mentioned his current star quarterback, Braxton Miller, too.When Meyer finished, Burrow called his parents as a courtesy to let them know of his decision. He called Meyer back five minutes later to commit.“It’s hard to turn that down,” Burrow said.This is how easy it is for Meyer to recruit quarterbacks — at least until Jim Harbaugh gets going at rival Michigan. Meyer’s system sells itself. And what he has done with his current crop of quarterbacks, in particular, will now only add to his legend.When Miller, widely considered a Heisman Trophy contender, sustained a shoulder injury just before the season, J. T. Barrett stepped in to steady the Buckeyes and grow into a Heisman candidate himself. Then, after Barrett broke his ankle against Michigan in the regular-season finale, the third-string quarterback, Cardale Jones, led the Buckeyes to a 59-0 victory against Wisconsin in the Big Ten championship game and into the semifinals of the inaugural College Football Playoff — in his first career start.For an encore, Meyer is now preparing Jones — reminder: his third-string quarterback — to topple one of college football’s premier programs when No. 4 Ohio State plays No. 1 Alabama in the Sugar Bowl on Thursday. And if Jones fails, well, Meyer was not expected to get this far without Miller or Barrett anyway.Barrett and Miller will be in New Orleans, watching Jones from the sideline. Speculation about next season — and what Ohio State will do with its surplus of quarterbacks — has already begun. All three could possibly be back, ready and healthy, and all three could make a case for why they should start. And, of course, Burrow will be waiting in the wings.A True StatesmanJ. T. Barrett had been on the Ohio State campus only a few weeks when one day he noticed the quarterbacks coach Tom Herman giving two high-profile recruits a tour of the weight room. Barrett stood in the back, listening, as Herman gave his pitch.Barrett was the first quarterback Herman and Meyer had handpicked at Ohio State. They had told him that he would redshirt his first year, while Miller started, and then he would have a chance to compete for the job. Still, he had enrolled at Ohio State early. At the time, he was supposed to be a senior in high school.After a few minutes, Barrett asked Herman if he could say something.“And he goes off on this 10-minute speech,” Herman said. “ ‘You come to Ohio State to play for the best, to play with the best, and play for championships. If you don’t want to win, if you’re about anything other than winning, don’t come here.’“We ended up signing both those kids.”Barrett, the middle child of three boys, whose full name is Joe Thomas Barrett IV, has been giving speeches like that since he was in fifth grade. Around that time, his youth football coach in Wichita Falls, Tex., moved him from running back to quarterback because, even then, Barrett was a natural leader: vocal, competitive, selfless. He made sure the other boys were lined up correctly for drills. He made sure they listened intently to the coaches.In most things Barrett did then, he stood out. Entering Rider High School, he was the best freshman trumpet player in the band. But the band needed someone to play the euphonium, a sort of baby tuba, so the band director asked Barrett if he would switch. Barrett obliged, no questions asked. He became a talented euphonium player, too, all while marching in a sling as he recovered from a broken collarbone he sustained in football. Barrett was so polished that as a sophomore he was chosen to be a spokesman for the school. He stood in front of hundreds of eighth graders and pitched why they should choose Rider instead of the other public schools in the area.“He would speak better than any adult we put in front of them,” said Loy Studer, the band director and music teacher who also helped organize the speaking events.Part of that disposition perhaps resulted from Barrett’s upbringing. His father, Joe Thomas Barrett III, has served in the Army and the Army Reserve for nearly three decades. During Barrett’s redshirt year at Ohio State, while he sat and Miller started, his father reminded him to stay positive and continue to be a leader. But Barrett responded, “It’s hard for me to lead people when I haven’t done anything.”Instead, he kept quiet and tried to improve himself. When Herman suggested he needed to strengthen his arm, Barrett trained with the quarterback guru Tom House, who has worked with Tom Brady and Drew Brees. Whenever the coaches pointed out weaknesses, Barrett viewed it as a challenge, not a slight.His family has stories to this effect. One day when Barrett was in middle school, his mother said in passing that her youngest son, Stephen, who was about two years younger than J. T., was the better basketball player. That did not sit well with Barrett.He spent the whole summer working on his game: his dribbling, footwork and shot. He spent all day at the Y.M.C.A., then took more shots at home until nightfall. If his coach would not trust him to take the final shot in a close game, he thought, he was not good enough. The summer culminated with a game of one-on-one with his brother.“I didn’t let him score,” Barrett said.Once Miller was ruled out for this season, that competitiveness helped Barrett beat out Jones to become the starter. No one would have blamed Barrett if he needed a year to gain his bearings and master Meyer’s system. He threw three interceptions in his second start, and the Buckeyes lost to Virginia Tech at home.As the season progressed, Meyer still harbored doubts. Barrett sprained his knee against Penn State, but played on and threw two interceptions in the second half, one of which was returned for a touchdown. The game went into overtime, and Barrett addressed his teammates on offense, looking each of them in the eye.“I’ll say what I feel is important to the moment,” Barrett said. “Just getting everybody focused on the moment, right now, to do whatever it takes to win the game. That’s what I’m about. Me, as a person, that’s how I go about my business. It’s about winning. And I want people around me that feel the same way.”He led Ohio State to a 31-24 victory in double overtime.“That’s when I was sold,” Meyer said.The rest of the season, Barrett directed the offense perhaps even better than Miller had, spreading the ball as if he had a quota for each receiver. He finished with 43 total touchdowns, breaking the Big Ten record Brees had set at Purdue. Barrett became an undisputed team leader, a central figure the Buckeyes could rally around.Barrett broke his ankle in the second half against Michigan, and instead of going to the hospital, he stayed for the end of the game. Afterward, he addressed the locker room in one of his signature speeches. He tried to reassure everyone that all was not lost, and he urged them to move on without him.Maturing Into a RoleWhen Meyer arrived at Ohio State, he had never heard of Cardale Jones. His first impression was that Jones had a big frame and a strong arm, but his mechanics were raw and his attitude was worse. Meyer said he could not count how many times he had had to meet with Jones for things like skipping classes and missing workouts.Multiple times Meyer threatened to kick Jones off the team.As time passed, Meyer found that the most effective discipline was to simply threaten to call Jones’s nonlegal guardian, Michelle Nash. She was one of the few people who could corral Jones. The story of how Jones came to live with Nash, and how she came to parent him, is akin to the film “The Blind Side.”Jones grew up in the Glenville neighborhood on the east side of Cleveland, the youngest of six children raised by a single mother, Florence Jones. He said he never knew his father. He remembered moving frequently and hand-washing his clothes because the family did not own a washing machine.Through all the instability, Jones was often left on his own.“Just a lot of sleepless and lonely nights,” he said.Then, during his sophomore year of high school, his football coach, Ted Ginn Sr., arranged for him to have a mentor. Nash had volunteered. She had run a day-care center for years and later worked in a juvenile court corrections office, but she was unable to have children of her own.At first, Nash would just bring Jones to her home after school. To him, it was a world of luxury. Nash bought him shoes that fit and a cellphone so she could reach him. One day, after a month or so, Jones called and asked to stay the night.Soon after, Jones moved in for good, and Nash provided structure. She made him perform chores, enforced a curfew and passed out her contact information to his teachers, in case he acted up. That did not stop Jones from acting up.Jim Tressel, the previous Ohio State coach, sent Jones to Fork Union Military Academy for one season — partly to create separation between him and Braxton Miller, who was in the same recruiting class, but also to discipline him. Students there wore uniforms, marched to class and had mandatory two-hour quiet study periods.When Jones arrived at Ohio State, the antics continued. “None of it was bad guy stuff,” Herman said. “He wasn’t robbing anybody. It was just being immature.”For instance, during his redshirt season, Jones posted a Twitter message that read in part, “We ain’t come to play SCHOOL, classes are POINTLESS.”Herman once made Jones wear a dunce cap after he received a poor review from a tutor. Herman also drew up a contract: If Jones missed too many classes or did not maintain a certain grade point average, he would lose his scholarship. At one point, Nash wanted Jones to transfer.“I never thought he’d be a quarterback,” Meyer said. “I thought he’d either get thrown out of here or go play another position, because you can’t have a knucklehead at quarterback. That’s not going to happen.”Instead, over time, as Miller’s tenure as the starter began to wind down and Jones saw his opportunity to play come into focus, he started to mature.Nash beams while talking about Jones’s progress. How he arranged for a Columbus apartment on his own. How he saved up his stipend money and bought a car, for a good deal, he told her.In November, Jones’s longtime girlfriend, Jeaney Durand, gave birth to a daughter, and he told Nash that, unlike him, the girl would always know her father.“He is more of a father figure now,” Durand said. “More responsible.”The week after Barrett went down against Michigan, Jones led Ohio State to the shutout victory over Wisconsin. The first thing he did the next morning was race to Cleveland to see his daughter. Her name is Chloe Michelle, after Nash.Three-Part IntrigueFor a moment after the Wisconsin victory, Jones, Barrett and Miller all sat in the corner of the locker room. Then Jones was whisked away for a news conference, and the news media descended on Barrett, and Miller scurried to another part of the room.Miller has twice been named the Big Ten offensive player of the year, he finished fifth in the 2012 Heisman voting, and he has appeared content staying in the background all season while the Buckeyes have charged on without him.How he truly feels about that remains largely unknown. Barrett and Jones have played so well in his absence that his future with the team has naturally been the subject of much debate and speculation. Like many coaches, Meyer may prefer to play his own recruit, Barrett, who finished fifth in this year’s Heisman voting.Miller appears to have three options. Because he has graduated, he could transfer and use his final year of eligibility at another program. He could forgo his final year and declare for the N.F.L. draft. Or he could stay at Ohio State.Miller did not respond to requests for a comment, and he was not made available at the Sugar Bowl’s media day. He told the athletic director, Gene Smith, in mid-December that he would return to Ohio State. His father, Kevin Miller, also told The Columbus Dispatch that “unless something drastic changes,” his son would stay for his final season. “He loves Ohio State,” Kevin Miller said.But Ohio State football goes on.Herman has been hired to coach at the University of Houston once the playoff ends, Jones is readying himself for the game against Alabama, and Barrett is resting his injured ankle.During a recent interview, Meyer frowned when asked about his potential quarterback situation next season. Alabama concerned him more.“Whoever is the best is going to play,” Barrett said of the possibility that all three quarterbacks return next season. “If it wasn’t the best player that was going to play, it wouldn’t be fair to the rest of the team. It wouldn’t be fair to Ohio State.”Elisa Cho contributed research.THURSDAY’S
OTHER GAMES: OUTBACK BOWL Noon, ESPN2
Auburn vs. Wisconsin
COTTON BOWL 12:30 p.m., ESPN
Michigan State vs. Baylor
CITRUS BOWL 1 p.m., ABC
Minnesota vs. MissouriAdvertisement