By TIM ROHANJAN. 2, 2015
NEW ORLEANS —  Nick Saban walked slowly down the sideline Thursday night, barely picking up his head as Ohio State running back Ezekiel Elliott sprinted toward the end zone with a trail of Alabama defenders helplessly chasing him.Elliott had made one cut and broken an arm tackle on his way to an 85-yard touchdown run, the longest play from scrimmage Alabama had allowed this season. After a 2-point conversion, the Buckeyes had a 14-point lead with 3 minutes 24 seconds remaining in the Sugar Bowl, the day’s second College Football Playoff semifinal.The No. 1 Crimson Tide still had a shot, but as Saban surely knew, it was a long shot. Quarterback Blake Sims led a quick touchdown drive, and the Alabama defense forced a Buckeyes punt, but Ohio State intercepted Sims’s desperation pass to seal a 42-35 victory.Somehow, the Buckeyes’ improbable season continued. Behind a third-string quarterback, a stout runner and timely defense, No. 4 Ohio State (13-1) earned a date with No. 2 Oregon (13-1) on Jan. 12 in Arlington, Tex., for the national championship.Advertisement“They’re good enough,” Ohio State Coach Urban Meyer said of his players afterward. “That was a sledgehammer game, that was a classic, so we are good enough.”AdvertisementElliott ran for 230 yards and two touchdowns on 20 carries. The Buckeyes’ defense intercepted Sims three times. And in his second career start, the third-string quarterback Cardale Jones passed for 243 yards and a touchdown, with one interception.All the while, Ohio State’s top two quarterbacks, the onetime Heisman Trophy contenders Braxton Miller and J. T. Barrett, watched from the sideline. Miller injured his right shoulder just before the season, and Barrett broke his ankle in the regular-season finale.Jones had stepped in, leading the Buckeyes to a 59-0 demolition of Wisconsin in the Big Ten championship game and becoming an overnight star featured on magazine covers. In the weeks, then hours, before Thursday’s game, he appeared loose, joking with his teammates, as if he were not about to play the biggest game of his life.
CreditStreeter Lecka/Getty Images        “I’m not going to change who I am for anything,” Jones said. “As long as me and my coaches understand I can be who I am and still have success in this offense, still have success as a quarterback, as a player and leader of this team, then we all good.”In the early stages of the game, it seemed as if Meyer and Saban were boxers, circling each other in the ring, feeling each other out. From the start, the Buckeyes’ offense gashed Alabama (12-2) for chunks of yards. But the Crimson Tide defense stiffened, stalling two Ohio State drives inside the 10-yard line. Elliott fumbled, and Jones threw a bad interception.The game had been billed as a matchup between two of college football’s best coaches: Saban, the defensive genius, versus Meyer, the offensive savant. Saban had won a combined four championships at two programs, Louisiana State and Alabama. Meyer had won two championships at Florida and had rebuilt Ohio State into a national power.Seeing them patrol the sidelines called to mind Bear Bryant and Woody Hayes. Combined, Saban and Meyer had won five of the last eight national championships.AdvertisementThey appear to have a cordial relationship. About 25 years ago, when Meyer was an Illinois State assistant and Saban was hired for his first head coaching job, at Toledo, Meyer called Saban, looking for a job, and left a message with Saban’s wife.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Saban never followed up, and he said this week that he regretted it.“I’m sure he does,” Meyer joked.Both coaches reached the national semifinals with unheralded quarterbacks: Meyer had Jones, and Saban had Sims, a first-year starter. The game ebbed and flowed as the quarterbacks alternated between moments of brilliance and occasional mental hiccups.“They did some things early we hadn’t seen on the tape, threw us on our heels,” Ohio State defensive lineman Chris Carter said.With Alabama leading, 21-20, Jones opened the second half with a high-arcing pass down the sideline. His nickname is 12 Gauge, in part because of his big arm. The Alabama defender fell, and Devin Smith hauled in the pass for a 47-yard touchdown. On the Buckeyes’ next four possessions, they gained just 25 yards and punted four times.Jones “has a tremendous arm, and they have some very good receivers, and those things became apparent the last two games,” Saban said.He added, “It wasn’t so obvious all season long that they had the great skill players.”After Alabama lost to Mississippi in October, Saban heard whispers that the season was over, that the dynasty was over, that, as Saban said, “the whole era of what we’ve been able to do at Alabama was done, gone, didn’t work anymore and all that.”Two years without a championship would be considered a drought for Alabama.What the pundits meant was that the defense was not as devastating, the offensive line was not as dominant, and Sims, perhaps, was too inconsistent. This was his first year starting, and he was a bit wild compared with traditional Alabama quarterbacks like his predecessor, A J McCarron, who was called a “game manager.”Just before kickoff of the season opener against West Virginia at the Georgia Dome, Sims approached Alabama’s new offensive coordinator, Lane Kiffin, with his eyes wide. Sims needed reassurance. He told Kiffin that he planned to look to him on the sideline between every play so that Kiffin could guide him.AdvertisementSims took control after that. Still, some believed that Alabama would go only as far as Sims could take them. And while the Alabama defense slowed Jones and Elliott at times on Thursday, Sims threw all three of his interceptions in the second half — one that was returned 41 yards for a touchdown by Steve Miller, a defensive end, and another that sealed the game.When Ohio State, leading by 6, needed a yard for a first down to continue to run down the clock in the fourth quarter, Jones lowered his head and barreled into the Alabama defense to get it. On the next play, Elliott made his run that silenced Saban.Ohio State, and the rest of the Big Ten, for that matter, had proven a point. Earlier in the day, Michigan State had beaten Baylor, and Wisconsin had topped Auburn.Afterward, Elliott was asked what he was thinking when he broke through the line, and he recalled a saying he often heard from his running backs coach, Stan Drayton: “Run through the smoke. There’s always something good at the end of it.”Marc Tracy contributed reporting.
 A version of this article appears in print on January 2, 2015, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: A No. 3 Quarterback Topples No. 1 Alabama.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.