AdvertisementSupported byBy Sam BordenSoccer’s hot stove league — the winter transfer window — fired up again Thursday, beginning a monthlong frenzy in which some of Europe’s best-known teams will buy and sell the rights to some of the world’s best players.But as teams around the world prepare for the semiannual flurry — there is a longer summer window — everyone involved does so with a new era looming: Third-party ownership, which for years drove the market by allowing outside investors to buy pieces of a player’s future to profit from his eventual sale, will soon be banned.At its core, third-party ownership, or T.P.O., is simple: An investor gives money to a club in exchange for a share of a player’s future transfer fees. Many clubs, particularly in South America and Eastern Europe, build their rosters around T.P.O., either as a hedge against a young player’s development prospects or to raise capital for more immediate needs. Notoriously cash-poor Brazilian and Argentine teams have come to rely on the income, and Portugal’s top teams have used the system for years to import players from South America and then flip them to richer clubs in countries like England, where T.P.O. has been banned since 2008.The system has been described as a combination of stock trading and gambling, but its most fervent supporters unapologetically call it the backbone of global soccer. It has been a key factor — for better or worse — in the recent career tracks of some of the world’s top players: Neymar and David Luiz of Brazil, Ángel Di María of Argentina, and Radamel Falcao and James Rodríguez of Colombia.But on Dec. 19, layered underneath a more publicized announcement regarding a report on potential World Cup bidding corruption, FIFA announced a worldwide ban on third-party ownership, effective May 1, 2015. So urgent was the need for the ban, FIFA said, that it included a stipulation that any contracts signed between now and May involving outside investors could last for only one season.Marcos Motta, a prominent sports lawyer in Brazil, is one of about 10 members of a FIFA working group that has been examining and debating T.P.O. He said in an interview that he was stunned by the announcement of the ban because his group was set to meet, at FIFA’s request, in late January.“This feels like a unilateral move,” Motta said. “Everyone was expecting a reasonable transition period. The clubs in Brazil are in shock, and the market has already been affected. The investors want to secure their investments, and right now nothing is secure.”FIFA’s general stance opposing T.P.O. was first made public in September and was related to concerns about the strong influence that investors — who can range from wealthy individuals to fully functional corporations and investment funds — have on players and teams.The debate over T.P.O. often divides regionally. Save for a few exceptions like Portugal (which is saturated with investor-backed players), most western European leagues and associations are in favor of outlawing T.P.O., which they contend drives up player prices and benefits people with little stake in the sport. The top leagues in England and France already have rules against T.P.O., and there have been several instances in which potential transfers involving English teams — Tottenham’s 2012 pursuit of João Moutinho, for example — fell apart because dissolving the various stakes held in the player proved impossible.In South America, though, and particularly in Brazil, supporters of the T.P.O. system say it has been critical to the professional game’s survival. From January 2011 to June 2014, according to FIFA transfer records, Brazilian clubs moved 2,311 players for fees totaling $579 million — staggering totals that come under a particularly sharp light when one considers that about 90 percent of players in the Brazilian league are co-owned by clubs and investors. Cruzeiro, the current Brazilian champion, recently used a starting lineup in which the rights to nine of its 11 players were partly owned by outside investors.The highest-profile transfer involving T.P.O. in recent years was Neymar’s 2013 move from his Brazilian club Santos to F.C. Barcelona in Spain. In that deal, Barcelona paid a transfer fee to Santos that was initially reported to be about $76 million — a figure that remains in dispute. But Santos did not receive the entire fee; several years earlier, it had sold shares in Neymar to a variety of investors as a way to reap a more immediate dividend on his projected value and to finance a richer contract for Neymar, thus enticing him to stay with Santos a bit longer.In the end, Santos was said to have paid out more than 40 percent of Neymar’s transfer fee to investors. To make things even murkier, it was revealed later that Barcelona actually paid much more than was initially thought, but sent some of the money to a company owned in part by Neymar’s father. The entire case wound up in court, with Barcelona making a “voluntary” payment of more than $18 million to cover unpaid taxes on the deal. The affair may have been the final straw for FIFA.“It is ridiculous to own 50 percent of a player, and from a moral point of view, it is crazy,” said Theo Van Seggelen, head of the international players’ union known as FIFPro. “But it is also bad for clubs. It causes financial problems. The consequence is that a lot of money is leaving football and is going into the hands of people who have no involvement at all.”Some investors had even gone as far as starting their own teams. Traffic Sports, a marketing company that has a variety of soccer businesses and that has long operated a player investment fund, owned a development club in Brazil, Desportivo Brasil, as well as a Portuguese team, Estoril, which it used as a way to bring talented players to Europe.In an interview last year, Frederico Pena, the chief executive of Traffic’s soccer division, described the path of one player, Ismaily Gonçalves dos Santos, who was discovered at a tryout in Brazil. Impressed with his potential, Traffic signed the teenage dos Santos and placed him in its Desportivo academy. In 2009, he went on loan to Estoril. Three years later, another Portuguese club, Braga, bought 60 percent of dos Santos’s rights from Traffic for about 200,000 euros, with Traffic keeping 32 percent and Gonçalves (and his agent) keeping 8 percent.“He played seven months for Braga and was sold to Shakhtar Donetsk for 4 million euros,” Pena said. “Everyone got paid out. In this business, that’s a big success story.”More recently, however, Traffic sensed that a change was in the offing and moved away from the T.P.O. model. The company sold its Brazilian academy and Desportivo to Chinese investors and, according to Jochen Loesch, its president for international business, began focusing more of its attention on developing players through Estoril.Still, Loesch expressed doubt that a ban of T.P.O. would actually keep teams from using investors, even if they had to be a bit more sly about how they did it. “T.P.O. exists because the market wants it,” he said. “We never pointed a gun at a club director and forced him to take our money.”The effect of the coming ban is not yet clear, though Motta said it was apparent that FIFA’s directive was designed to target larger players in the T.P.O. game, like Jorge Mendes, a powerful agent who has reportedly owned significant shares in his players, or Doyen Sports, a Malta-based fund that was recently at the heart of a much-publicized transfer controversy involving the Argentine defender Marcos Rojo.After his strong performance at last summer’s World Cup, Rojo essentially forced his way out of his Portuguese club, Sporting Lisbon, by refusing to practice unless the club sold him. Sporting eventually acceded, sending Rojo to Manchester United for about $25 million.Sporting’s president, though, accused Doyen Sports of masterminding the whole sequence because the fund had purchased 75 percent of Rojo’s future transfer earnings under a previous administration. Speaking at a soccer conference in England in the fall, the president, Bruno de Carvalho, accused Doyen Sports of pushing for a transfer that was not necessary (or even desired), crystallizing the fears that T.P.O.’s detractors had been harping on for years.“I am against funds where we don’t know where the money is coming from, and who try to manipulate football,” he said, adding later that the funds, simply put, were “a menace to sports.”Advertisement