By RICHARD SANDOMIRJAN. 1, 2015
1. “Raging Bull”: A brilliantly directed epic about misanthropy that is propelled by a great story, more-than-credible action and fascinating, doomed relationships. And Robert De Niro won an Oscar as best actor.2. “Hoosiers”: Understated prototype of the inspirational sports film — plucky teenage underdogs, a coach (Gene Hackman) with a subtly effective pregame speech and a cast that plunges you back into 1950s small-town Indiana.3. “Bull Durham”: An easygoing comedy and love triangle, this 1988 film offers a realistic picture of minor league baseball, terrific game action and intelligent screenwriting.4. “Million Dollar Baby”: A twist on the conventional boxing story — a woman at its center and a late-career Clint Eastwood as a nurturer — that makes you cheer and cry. It won four Academy Awards in 2005: for best picture, best director (Eastwood), best actress (Hilary Swank) and best supporting actor (Morgan Freeman).Advertisement5. “Rocky”: From 1976, a great underdog story that inspired many others; it makes moviegoers believe that a downtrodden pug can stand toe to toe with the Ali-like Apollo Creed.Advertisement6. “Field of Dreams”: I love the inventiveness and whimsy in this 1989 film. I love when the players enter and depart from the corn field. I love James Earl Jones’s speech and Burt Lancaster’s philosophical doctor. But I’ve never loved the plot device that sets up Ray Kinsella (Kevin Costner) playing catch at the end with his ghost father.7. “A League of Their Own”: An abundance of memorable characters (if nothing else, think of the maturation of homely Marla Hooch) and great relationships (Geena Davis and Lori Petty as the sisters at the heart of the story who are driven by different motivations) make for a compelling film from 1992. And Tom Hanks’s boozy Jimmy Dugan is one of the best portraits of a manager or coach in cinema.8. “The Natural”: Barry Levinson’s golden-hued 1984 film, where good (Robert Redford as Roy Hobbs) defeats evil (the gambler, the team owner and the columnist/cartoonist played by Robert Duvall) works as a fairy tale — but as you watch, you have to forget that Bernard Malamud’s novel ends in shame, not glory.9. “The Pride of the Yankees”: Some of it feels hokey, but it still has a good story, a loving portrait of a marriage and Lou Gehrig’s “luckiest man” speech, delivered by Gary Cooper. More than 70 years after its release, in 1942, it remains memorable despite its many liberties with the truth.10. “The Hustler”: A matchup of young and old pool sharks (Jackie Gleason, who was an underrated dramatic actor, and Paul Newman) is a dark and crackling story with the tension of a prizefight set amid a collection of indelible characters.To be honest, I struggled with No. 10. I thought of putting “Cinderella Man” into that slot, or the Academy Award-winning “Chariots of Fire,” with its ear worm theme music and slow-motion running. “Seabiscuit,” “Moneyball” and “Remember the Titans” were viable options, too. I wondered about “Brian’s Song,” a made-for-TV movie that has some of the makings of a classic — the emotional bromance between Gale Sayers and Brian Piccolo and Sayers’s speech that asked an audience to love Piccolo as he loves him. But for various reasons, such as “Titans” seeming to have had a checklist for every possible element that should be included in a sports film, these movies fail to make the cut.Had I included documentaries, “Hoop Dreams” would have supplanted one of the top 10. Finally, I also considered “Caddyshack,” but in a recent viewing I felt that the snobs versus snobs plot was not consistently funny (Rodney Dangerfield was better and more central in “Back to School”) and that the romantic subplot was tepid. More than anything, I wished for more of Bill Murray’s improvisations.A version of this list appears in print on January 4, 2015, on Page SP9 of the New York edition with the headline: Richard Sandomir’s Top 10 Sports Films.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.