AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressLeBron James’s homecoming season has hit a hurdle.James, the four-time most valuable player who returned to the Cleveland Cavaliers from the Miami Heat in the off-season, is expected to miss at least the next two weeks with injuries to his left knee and back. The news is another blow to the Cavaliers (18-14), who have been jarred by a rash of medical problems and have failed to live up to the big expectations that followed James’s re-signing as a free agent.The team said Thursday that James had knee and back strains and that he would be treated with “anti-inflammatories, rehabilitation, training room treatments and rest.” If he is out for just the predicted time, he will return for a Jan. 15 game in Los Angeles against the Lakers. In 11 professional seasons, James, who turned 30 on Dec. 30, has never missed more than five straight games, but this absence could reach 10 games or more. He missed his second straight game on Wednesday, a home loss to Milwaukee that followed a road loss to Atlanta.BULLS 106, NUGGETS 101 Derrick Rose scored 13 of his 17 points in the fourth quarter, and host Chicago rallied past Denver.Jimmy Butler led the Bulls (23-10) with 26 points, and Pau Gasol had 17 points, 9 rebounds and a career-high 9 blocks.The late surge by Rose lifted Chicago to its 11th win in 13 games. Rose, the 2011 most valuable player, missed his first eight shots, including seven while failing to score in the first half, but he dominated down the stretch, coming up with one big basket after another.Wilson Chandler led Denver (13-20) with 22 points, Ty Lawson added 20, and Arron Afflalo had 19 points. Kenneth Faried combined 18 points with 19 rebounds.KINGS 110, TIMBERWOLVES 107 Rudy Gay had 21 points, 6 rebounds and 5 assists, and struggling Sacramento handed visiting Minnesota its 10th straight loss.DeMarcus Cousins had 19 points and 7 rebounds after being ejected one night earlier, and each of the starters for the Kings scored in double figures. Darren Collison led them with 21 points.The rookie Andrew Wiggins had 27 points and 9 rebounds, and Gorgui Dieng added 15 points and 10 rebounds for the Timberwolves, but they could not take advantage when Cousins and Gay fouled out in the fourth quarter. CURRY STILL NO. 2 IN VOTING LeBron James and the Warriors’ Stephen Curry remain the leading N.B.A. All-Star vote-getters after the second tally of fan ballots. James leads all with 775,810 votes at the Eastern Conference frontcourt spot. Curry has 755,486, good for second in the league and tops among the Western Conference guards.The Bulls’ Pau Gasol and the Knicks’ Carmelo Anthony follow in the East frontcourt. The Wizards’ John Wall remains the East’s leading vote-getter in the backcourt, followed by the Heat’s Dwyane Wade.Kobe Bryant of the Lakers is second to Curry in the West backcourt. The frontcourt is led by the Pelicans’ Anthony Davis, the Clippers’ Blake Griffin and the Grizzlies’ Marc Gasol.Voting runs through Jan. 19, and starters for the Feb. 15 game at Madison Square Garden will be announced Jan. 22.Advertisement