By ANDREW DASJAN. 1, 2015
Frank Lampard came off the bench to score the winning goal in Manchester City’s 3-2 victory over Sunderland on Thursday. The goal highlighted Lampard’s value to City, which moved into a tie for the Premier League lead when Chelsea lost to Tottenham later in the day, but it also exposed a deep wedge between Lampard and American soccer fans who had expected to see him play in New York this spring.The goal came in Lampard’s first game since Manchester City announced in a one-sentence statement late Wednesday that he would remain with the club through the end of the Premier League season in May. That decision means he will not join New York City F.C. for the start of its inaugural season in Major League Soccer in March.New York City F.C. introduced Lampard as its marquee player in July, and the team has featured him prominently in its kickoff campaign. It heralds his accomplishments for City regularly on its Twitter feed, and has used his name and image to sell shirts, sponsorships and, most important, more than 11,000 season tickets.The news that he will stay in Manchester through May, rumored for weeks, caused a public break between the new team and its most prominent fan group, the Third Rail, which released a statement late Wednesday to “publicly denounce” the decisions of Manchester City and Lampard.Advertisement“Many fans, including our members, decided to support the team, committed to season tickets, and bought merchandise under the impression that Frank Lampard would be playing for New York City Football Club, not Manchester City,” the statement read. “Many of those fans are rightly outraged by this decision, and we support any course of action they take to voice their discontent over this decision.”AdvertisementThe team has said little about the move officially, merely confirming it in a short article posted on the team’s website. Even its Twitter post noting his goal on Wednesday, his seventh for City this season, seemed sheepish; it came more than an hour after he scored, and was greeted immediately with invective from some fans, who fear that Manchester City, despite its multimillion-dollar investment in M.L.S. and New York City F.C., considers the league and its team an afterthought to its business in Europe.Lampard’s decision to stay in England also confirmed that he was never technically an M.L.S. player, even though New York City F.C.’s news release announcing his signing said Lampard “had signed a two-year contract which starts Aug. 1.”But Lampard’s salary did not appear in a list distributed by the M.L.S. players union this fall — in Major League Soccer, the league owns all player contracts — even though several of his teammates’ did. And in announcing that Lampard would stay through the end of the Premier League season, Manchester City said that it had “extended” his deal.Lampard’s official arrival date in New York remains unclear. His contract extension is believed to include a clause that would allow him, at Manchester City’s discretion, to join New York City F.C. at an earlier date, but if such a clause were to be exercised, it would probably not be good news in Manchester. Lampard most likely would not become expendable to City unless the club no longer had a chance to win the Premier League or the Champions League.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.CHELSEA NO LONGER ALONE AT THE TOP Chelsea surrendered its Premier League lead with a frenzied 5-3 loss to Tottenham at White Hart Lane in London. Harry Kane scored twice for Spurs, which beat the Blues for the first time in almost five years and became the first team to score five goals against Chelsea in José Mourinho’s two spells as the team’s manager.With Chelsea and Manchester City tied on points (46), goal difference (plus 25) and goals scored (44), nothing separates them in the standings.Manchester United is in third place after a 1-1 draw at Stoke City, and Southampton is fourth after beating Arsenal, 2-0.Liverpool threw away a 2-0 lead and drew with last-place Leicester City, 2-2, on a day when all three teams in the relegation zone earned a point. Crystal Palace, which is on the verge of completing the signing of Manager Alan Pardew from Newcastle, played to a scoreless draw at Aston Villa, and Burnley drew with host Newcastle, 3-3.West Bromwich Albion confirmed that Tony Pulis would become its new manager earlier Thursday, and he was at Upton Park to watch his new team earn a 1-1 draw at sixth-place West Ham to stay a point above the relegation zone. (AP)A version of this article appears in print on January 2, 2015, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: Lampard Scores Winner for Manchester City.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.