AdvertisementSupported byBy Marc TracyBIRMINGHAM, Ala. — On Oct. 6, Phyllis Chapple-Perkins called in to Paul Finebaum’s daily radio show, the pre-eminent Southeastern Conference talkfest, and let loose.Alabama had lost to Mississippi two days earlier, a defeat that prompted Colin Cowherd of ESPN to reiterate on his radio show his belief that Alabama’s dynasty was finished. Cowherd also called out Chapple-Perkins, who is better known as Phyllis from Mulga and is familiar throughout the South for her intense loyalty to Alabama and her willingness, since 1993, to express this loyalty on Finebaum’s show with no shortage of bile.Cowherd’s comments did not sit well with Phyllis from Mulga.“How can you say, after the dynasty took all these years, all these decades, one game is going to mean Saban’s dynasty is over?” she said, referring to Alabama Coach Nick Saban.Her anger rose, and she called Cowherd a disparaging name.“’Bama’s coming back,” she growled. “’Bama has not lost. The dynasty is not over. Do you hear me?”She added, “’Bama’s dynasty has just begun.” She paused and concluded, inevitably, “Roll, Tide!”In an interview a couple of months later, Chapple-Perkins, 66, said, “A lot of things I say I don’t remember.”Her rants are unscripted. They are also not for show.“I can’t just get on the radio and jump on someone who hasn’t insulted me,” she said.It was not the first time Chapple-Perkins had expressed herself forcefully on Finebaum’s show. But this time, her call went viral: The YouTube video has nearly 700,000 views. Finebaum lived for years in Birmingham, but with his bump to the new SEC Network, he moved to Charlotte, N.C.Nowadays, Finebaum’s show airs nationally on the SEC Network four hours each weekday, and Phyllis from Mulga is something of a household name.The show’s leap to the big time — and Phyllis from Mulga’s — can mostly be attributed to the fact that top-ranked Alabama, which is set to play Ohio State in the Sugar Bowl on Thursday in the first College Football Playoff semifinals, is indeed in the midst of a dynasty.“The program Coach Saban has set up here, it’s pretty realistic to shoot for a national championship every year,” offensive lineman Arie Kouandjio said. “I like a place like that — where we can realistically expect to be No. 1.”We’ve published maps showing where fan support for one team begins and another ends for baseball and basketball. Now we’re pleased to offer another one: the United States according to college football fans.When Saban became coach after the 2006 season, the once-great program had endured multiple coaching changes, had been penalized by the N.C.A.A. and had been having minimal success by its grand standards. Since then, the Crimson Tide have gone 91-16 and have won three national titles. A team that won the 1926 Rose Bowl and that for years under Bear Bryant expected to claim the national title every season again expects to win.Fans have responded to that scarcest of sports accomplishments, an honest-to-God dynasty, by buying into the team’s fortunes — literally. Last year, AL.com reported that the Crimson Tide Foundation, Alabama’s main booster organization, had bought the Sabans’ home for them.“Yeah, we own it,” Aaron Vold, Alabama’s associate athletic director for development, said, noting that Saban, who is the highest paid coach in college football, with $7.16 million in annual total compensation, was not the first coach to receive this perk. “It’s just one of those things. Somebody decided it’s a good thing, and I would stand by it.”But while such expectations drive fan interest, leading to resources that perhaps fulfill those expectations, they can also cut the other way.After a close victory at Arkansas this season, Saban acknowledged that he grew angry “when I talk to people that have this expectation like they’re disappointed that we only won the game, 14-13.”Athletic Director Bill Battle added: “It’s tough when you go 11-2, and everyone thinks that’s a disaster. That’s not very realistic and not very polite.”Chapple-Perkins’s relationship with Alabama football started while she was growing up on Cotton Avenue in the West End neighborhood of Birmingham. She and her five siblings would sit with their father, Fred, and listen to Crimson Tide games on his RCA radio. Sitting in the den of her house in north Birmingham — she moved out of Mulga in 1998 — a few days before Christmas, she spoke of her devotion to Alabama football while wearing Alabama earrings with a peace sign and a white Alabama sweater. Nearby was a plastic Santa Claus statue wearing a hat with “TIDE” on it.Chapple-Perkins, who twice received a cancer diagnosis and is now caring for her ill husband, smiled often — a stark contrast to her angry radio persona, which on television is frequently accompanied by a photograph of her grimacing at the camera.In Alabama, a state that struggled to adjust to the civil rights movement and an industrial decline, success on the football field is considered something to be proud of.“Alabama has put us on the map,” Chapple-Perkins said, referring to the team. “Alabama has made us proud. Because there’s not a whole lot this state has been able to call proud because of the stereotyping.”The team also put Finebaum on the map. He gained notoriety for nudging Alabama fans over the N.C.A.A. discipline, coaches’ personal scandals and on-field failures.During the buttoned-up, successful Saban years, though, Finebaum has practically become an Alabama fan. He even published a best-selling book that proclaims the SEC’s — and Alabama’s — superiority.Finebaum acknowledged that he owed no small part of his career’s rise to Alabama’s accomplishments.“The arrival of Saban and his ascension to college football’s Mount Everest has been the most fascinating and important story of my time in Alabama,” he said. “Personally, it put me on a much larger stage.”In Birmingham and Tuscaloosa, several others are similarly situated. Ken Rosenberger, owner of the luggage store Birmingham Trunk, noted that his grandfather J. D. Rosenberger was part of the crowd that gathered at the Birmingham train station to see the Crimson Tide off on their journey to Pasadena, Calif., for the 1926 Rose Bowl. J. D. Rosenberger gave each player a small red token depicting the store’s logo, an elephant with one foot on a suitcase, to demonstrate durability. So, the story goes, an elephant became Alabama’s mascot.Walt Maddox, the third-term Tuscaloosa mayor, said the town and his administration were inspired by Alabama football when a tornado swept through in 2011, causing severe property damage and killing 53. The aftermath provided a stark illustration of the town’s “symbiotic relationship” with the team, he said, especially when President Obama, on the ride back to the airport after touring the town, struck up a conversation with Maddox about where Crimson Tide players had gone in the N.F.L. draft the night before.“When the president of the United States can tell you about Mark Ingram and all the other football players drafted in the first round,” Maddox said, “that gives you a sense of just how pre-eminent the program is.”The chancellor of the University of Alabama System, Robert E. Witt, once described Nick Saban on “60 Minutes” as “the best financial investment this university has ever made.” In an email, he pointed to the team’s success as “a perfect platform to tell the university’s academic story to a broader national audience.”Perhaps most unabashed in marketing his connection to Alabama football is Gary Lewis, the owner of Rama Jama’s, a diner across the street from Bryant-Denny Stadium named for an Alabama cheer. His previous restaurant in Tuscaloosa, which he sold in 1993, is called the Houndstooth, after the pattern of hat Bryant was known for wearing.Lewis estimated that half of Rama Jama’s business on any given day was “not local,” and he has proved particularly adept at marketing the bizarre, undeniable fact that he himself bears a striking resemblance to Saban.“I’ve been accused of riding the team’s coattails,” Lewis said. “Well, look around.”In 2013, rumors swirled that Saban could take the job at Texas, which Mack Brown was soon to vacate. In his book, Finebaum claimed that Texas was prepared to offer Saban $100 million, as well as performance bonuses. Instead, Saban agreed to a contract extension through 2022.Still — and no matter what happens Thursday night in New Orleans — Saban, 63, will retire one day, which will not prompt an angry call from Phyllis from Mulga, a great-grandmother.“I don’t think Coach Saban is going to be at ’Bama much longer, but I fully understand if he’s not,” she said. “His daughters are giving him grandbabies. I think he wants to spend some time to get to know those grandbabies.”Advertisement