By DANIEL E. SLOTNIKJAN. 1, 2015
Bob Hall, a key showman for the Harlem Globetrotters, basketball’s barnstorming comedy troupe, from the late 1940s until the mid-1970s, died on Dec. 24 near his home in Detroit. He was 87.His wife, Kittie Barksdale-Hall, said the cause was complications of cancer.Hall joined the Globetrotters in 1949, one year before Chuck Cooper, Nat Clifton and Earl Lloyd integrated the National Basketball Association. At the time, the team was one of the few on which a talented black basketball player could earn a living.Hall started playing with Goose Tatum, who helped him become a master of “reams,” as the Globetrotters’ classic comedy routines are known. According to the Globetrotters’ website, Hall played more than 5,000 games in almost 90 countries with teammates like Connie Hawkins, Marques Haynes and Wilt Chamberlain. (Hawkins and Chamberlain went on to play in the N.B.A.)Hall was small by Globetrotter standards, “only six-foot-two but built like a Sherman tank,” Ben Green wrote in his history of the team, “Spinning the Globe: The Rise, Fall, and Return to Greatness of the Harlem Globetrotters.” Nicknamed Showboat, Hall took over as the on-court ringmaster when Tatum left the team in 1955.AdvertisementOne of Hall’s specialties was launching one-handed, no-look, behind-the-back passes with fearsome accuracy.“He was without a doubt the best one-handed ball handler that ever came to the Globetrotters,” Meadowlark Lemon, the famed Globetrotter showman who played with Hall, said in an interview on Tuesday. “He’d say, if you were a young rookie, ‘Don’t turn your back on me, young fellow, or you’ll get hit in the head.' ”Despite his size, Hall was also an artful rebounder, Lemon said.“One time some guy tried to block him out, and he ran up his back,” he said. “He was standing up on his shoulder rebounding.”Hall mainly played on the Globetrotters’ Western team. (There were multiple touring squads for much of the organization’s history; Lemon was the Eastern team’s showman for much of Hall’s career.) But he also accompanied the team abroad.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In 1959, he joined Lemon, Chamberlain and others on a trip to the Soviet Union, where they played a series of exhibition games under K.G.B. escort and met the Soviet leader Nikita S. Khrushchev. The tour was the subject of a short documentary by ESPN last April.“He just wowed them,” Lemon said of Hall’s effect on the Soviet crowds.Robert Alfred Hall was born in Detroit on Sept. 30, 1927. He grew up there playing ball at the Brewster Wheeler Recreation Center, Joe Louis’s old stamping ground. He dropped out of school after his mother was widowed so he could work to support their large family (he had eight siblings).AdvertisementHe traveled to Chicago to try out for the Globetrotters and was recruited on the spot.Hall married Kittie Barksdale in 1969. He is also survived by two sisters, Frances Myler and Leontine Person.Hall was a player and coach for the last few years of his career with the Globetrotters. He retired in 1974, and in 1998 the team named him a “Legend.”Like most Globetrotters of his era, Hall had to find work, in his case with youth programs and the Michigan prison system, after he retired. In a 2011 interview with a group called Pre-1960 Original Harlem Globetrotters Organization, he said that he and his teammates had little choice but to accept whatever compensation the team offered.“Wasn’t nothing else you could do — complain too much, they have somebody take your place,” he said. “And there wasn’t too many teams you could go to. If you leave the Globetrotters you’re going one place: home.”Asked what he would say to a modern-era N.B.A. star like Shaquille O’Neal or LeBron James, he said, “You came along at the right time.”An obituary on Friday about the basketball player Bob Hall, a longtime star of the Harlem Globetrotters, described the term “reams” incompletely. It refers to all of the Globetrotters’ comedy routines, not just their “ball-handling legerdemain.”A version of this article appears in print on January 2, 2015, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Bob Hall, 87, Top Showman With Harlem Globetrotters.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.