
TV Sports By                     
 RICHARD SANDOMIR
 
OCT. 8, 2015
Major League Baseball’s campaign this season to speed up the pace of the sport shaved six minutes off the average length of regular-season games, to 2 hours 56 minutes.Not bad. But in the postseason, that effort might come to a halt as the weight of the games takes precedence over warning or fining pitchers for not throwing pitches quickly enough, or hitters for dawdling outside the batter’s box. Thus a program that shortened games will be relaxed during the most important, most watched games of the year.“During the regular season, we monitored violations of all pace-of-game rules and issued warnings to players when appropriate,” said Chris Marinak, M.L.B.’s senior vice president for league economics and strategy. “We have elected not to warn players for any violations for the postseason.”This is not an entirely awful prospect if the eight remaining teams do not flout the rules they lived by all season. But postseason tension might induce them to dillydally now and then.AdvertisementA hopeful sign for a quickened pace was found in the Chicago Cubs’ 4-0 win over the Pittsburgh Pirates in Wednesday’s wild-card game. It lasted only 2:47, thanks largely to Jake Arrieta’s dominant complete game. Yet within that blessedly short game was a moment of excess: a nearly four-minute break that led to the top of the sixth inning.AdvertisementFour 30-second ads were followed by promos for “The Librarians,” a TNT series, and March Madness (arriving earlier than most Christmas commercials). Next came a look at the division series schedule. Then, with the break clock ticking beyond three minutes, Pirates reliever Antonio Bastardo held a lengthy conference with catcher Francisco Cervelli. Eventually, Bastardo threw his first pitch.Time of break: 3 minutes 58 seconds — nearly a half minute longer than Arrieta needed to retire the Pirates in the ninth inning.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Commercial breaks in the postseason — defined as the time from the last pitch of the previous inning to the first pitch of the next — have been set for quite a while at 2:55. But a grace period can elongate the break to 3:15. Yet even at that point, Bastardo was not ready to pitch.He and Cervelli should have had their heads and signals straight when TBS came back from commercials. But there they were, chatting away on camera for about 30 seconds. No one, not an umpire, not Commissioner Rob Manfred, was rushing out to the mound to tell them to go to work.Before Bastardo’s first pitch, TBS’s Ernie Johnson offered an observation that was understandable from someone in the ballpark’s booth, not sitting in front of a TV screen.“We’re zipping right along at PNC,” Johnson said. The overall game was zipping by, but that break was nothing but sluggish.Marinak offered official understanding — and no sanctions — for the procrastinating at PNC Park.“The Bastardo-Cervelli discussion on the mound is an example of one of the reasons why we chose not to pursue pace-of-play violations in the postseason,” he said. “That is a critical time in a do-or-die playoff game that is very different than a routine regular-season game. If it takes a few extra seconds to make sure a player is ready in a critical situation, I think our fans can live with that.”AdvertisementIn the ninth, a minute was required for a FanDuel-sponsored feature and for Mark Melancon, the Pirates’ closer and dawdler on the mound, to deliver his first pitch.The reality of paring the length of games is that M.L.B. can do only so much with the commercial load embedded in network contracts. If TBS, ESPN, Fox, Fox Sports 1 and MLB Network gave back one 30-second ad per inning and for each pitching change in the postseason, games would be shorter. But networks are not making any such offers, and M.L.B. does not expect them.“Our pace-of-play rules were never designed to take commercial inventory away from our broadcasters,” Marinak said. “They were designed to clean up some of the additional dead time that occurs after a broadcaster returns from break.”VIEWERSHIP RISES The Cubs-Pirates game generated an average audience of 8.3 million viewers on TBS, the most ever for a wild-card game. On Tuesday, the Astros-Yankees game on ESPN attracted 7.6 million viewers.Email: sandor@nytimes.com A version of this article appears in print on October 9, 2015, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: Expect Dawdling as M.L.B. Relaxes Game-Pace Rules.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »