By HUW RICHARDSJAN. 1, 2015
Mahendra Singh Dhoni, captain of India’s test cricket team, has retired from test cricket on the heels of his team’s third-match draw against Australia.Though he will be dearly missed, his departure is not quite the end of an era. That will come when he also steps down from the two shorter formats of the game.Although he has long been the team’s leader, Dhoni’s exit from the test game had been forecast some time ago. And he left with a successor in place — Virat Kohli, who will lead India in the fourth and final test of its series against Australia when it starts Tuesday in Sydney.But it still came as a surprise. “I spoke to him just yesterday. He didn’t say anything,” Dhoni’s manager, Arun Pandey, told the Indian Express newspaper.Advertisement“I was a bit taken aback by the suddenness of the statement,” Sanjay Patel, general secretary of the Board of Control for Cricket in India told the Press Trust of India.AdvertisementDhoni, 33, went out on a personal high. In dismissing nine Australian batsmen in the third test at Adelaide, he set an all-time record for Indian wicketkeepers. Then, at the end of the match, his defiant batting deprived Australia of victory and a shot at a sweep in the series, which it leads 2-0.He reportedly broke down when telling his teammates of his retirement. But his decision, due to “the strain of playing in all forms of cricket,” according to a B.C.C.I. press statement, was no sudden impulse.“We had spoken about it before the test,” Patel told the Press Trust of India. “I can tell you that it wasn’t a decision taken in haste. It was done after due deliberation.”And not many are arguing that it was the wrong decision.Over 55 percent of voters in an online poll in the Indian Express agreed that his departure was “not really” a blow to Indian test cricket.Ian Chappell, the former captain of Australia, wrote, after being impressed with Kohli’s play and leadership during the first test of the present series, that it was time for a change. Saurav Ganguly, one of Dhoni’s most successful predecessors as India’s captain, wrote in the Hindustan Times, “I feel the decision to give up captaincy was right, though I think the decision not to play test cricket is an incorrect one.”While he has quit midseries, Australia’s 2-0 lead with one to play makes the final test a moot point and gives Kohli and Wriddiman Saha, his stand-ins as captain and wicketkeeper respectively, an early shot at their roles.Few would disagree with Ganguly’s description of Dhoni as India’s greatest captain in one-day cricket. He is also a formidable player in the shorter formats, perhaps the best “finisher” in run chases the game has seen. As Ian Bishop, the former West Indian fast bowler who became a commentator, has said, “If 15 runs are needed off the last 6 balls, pressure is on the bowler and not on M.S. Dhoni.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Yet the remarkable calm that served him so well amid the frantic excitement of the shorter formats too often looked more like passive fatalism as India suffered defeat after defeat in test matches outside Asia.AdvertisementMichael Clarke, Australia’s captain, posted on Twitter that Dhoni was “not only a tremendous player, but one of the nicest guys I have played against.”Kohli, 26, will represent a change in style, much closer to the feisty combativeness of Ganguly than the calm, placid Dhoni. He has batted brilliantly in the first three tests, playing three innings of more than 100 runs, but he has also been embroiled in two on-field confrontations with Australian players.Dhoni’s wicketkeeping role will pass initially to Saha, his backup on the current tour, but the long-term successor may well be the 20-year-old Sanju Samson.Dhoni, though, is the definitive hard act to follow in any of his roles. The fame that landed him on Forbes’ list as the world’s fifth most valuable athlete in 2014, which with a brand value of $20 million put him ahead of such giants as Usain Bolt, Cristiano Ronaldo and Rafael Nadal, rests on his achievements in the shorter formats. He led India to world championships in Twenty20 cricket in 2007 — a triumph that paved the way for the game-transforming India Premier League — and in the World Cup in 2011. He will lead India’s World Cup defense, which starts at Adelaide on Feb. 15.Yet his record in the longer game should not be downplayed. His 90 tests are the most by any Indian wicketkeeper. His 60 tests and 27 wins as India’s captain are also records. Next on the list of wicketkeeper captains from any country is Mushfiqur Rahim of Bangladesh, with a mere 19 matches.He scored nearly 5,000 runs in tests at an average of more than 38 runs per dismissal, which rose to more than 40 during the matches when he was captain. He did all of this while coping with the enormous mental and physical strain imposed on all wicketkeepers.“One of the things I liked about M.S. was, what you saw was what you got. Very uncomplicated, always led by example,” Rahul Dravid, a former teammate of Dhoni who is considered one of the game’s greatest batsmen, told ESPN Cricinfo. “He never asked you to do anything that he himself didn’t do.”Australia recalls AgarAustralia has recalled Ashton Agar, a 21-year-old spin bowler, to its squad for the Sydney test that starts Tuesday, Reuters has reported.In 2012, as a teenager making his debut against England at Nottingham, Agar came within two runs of becoming the first ever No.11 batsman to score 100 runs in a test inning and shared a then world-record final wicket stand of 163 with Phillip Hughes, the Australian batsman who was killed after being struck in the head while playing in a match at Sydney in November.A version of this article appears in print on January 2, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.