AdvertisementSupported byN.L.D.S. NotebookBy Tim RohanLOS ANGELES — During his first postseason news conference as the Mets’ manager, Terry Collins became animated at times while telling stories about his past and his team for a national audience, using his hands to make a point and delivering punch lines on cue. He did not look worried about who his fourth starter would be. Collins had received word from the Mets’ spring training complex in Port St. Lucie, Fla., that Steven Matz had thrown about 90 pitches in a simulated game, kept his velocity consistent throughout and felt fine afterward. If Matz can play catch without pain Friday and if the National League division series against the Los Angeles Dodgers progresses to a Game 4 on Tuesday, he will probably be the Mets’ starter. Matz is 4-0 with a 2.27 E.R.A. in the first six starts of his career.“In the perfect world, that would be the plan,” Collins said. “Again, we’ll make adjustments as we go. But we certainly hope that he’s going to be part of the rotation.”The Mets have until 10 a.m. Pacific time on Friday to make the final call. If Matz is healthy enough to go, Collins said, the Mets will send him to New York to prepare for Game 4 instead of flying him across the country with a balky back. If Matz is not deemed healthy, Bartolo Colon will replace him in the rotation, and Sean Gilmartin will take his roster spot.That was the only decision left to be made about the Mets’ roster ahead of Game 1 on Friday. Although Wilmer Flores had been battling strep throat, his condition had improved. The Mets have already ruled Juan Uribe out of the series with a chest injury that bothered him down the stretch.With Uribe unavailable, Collins indicated that he would stick with his veteran left-handed hitters — Lucas Duda, Daniel Murphy and Curtis Granderson — against Clayton Kershaw in Game 1. For all the attention Kershaw and Zack Greinke have received, Collins again expressed deep faith in his top three starters: Jacob deGrom, Matt Harvey and Noah Syndergaard. “I’ve got all the confidence in the world our young guys will step up and get it done,” Collins said. “These three guys are really good. I mean, they’re really good. They’re not going to be intimidated.”  SCULLY TO MISS POSTSEASON The Hall of Fame broadcaster Vin Scully underwent a medical procedure Thursday that will prevent him from calling the Dodgers’ division series games and any subsequent series if the Dodgers advance. He was expected to call the first and last three innings of the games from Dodger Stadium. The Dodgers did not release any information about the procedure or why doctors had recommended it.Although Scully has reduced his travel from the West Coast over the years, he was planning to call the series when it moved to Citi Field. In 2006, he called the Mets-Dodgers division series from Shea Stadium. Scully, 87, just completed his 66th season with the Dodgers and has agreed to return next year. RICHARD SANDOMIRTRYING TO REVERSE A PLAYOFF CURSE On his way to the dugout after taking batting practice Thursday, the Dodgers ace Clayton Kershaw ran into Katy Feeney, Major League Baseball’s senior vice president for scheduling and club relations. Feeney asked Kershaw how he was doing. He smiled and said, “I’ll let you know tomorrow.”Kershaw, a three-time Cy Young Award winner who will face the Mets in Game 1, is coming off another spectacular season. He posted a 16-7 record with 301 strikeouts and a 2.13 E.R.A. But the postseason has been Kershaw’s kryptonite. Dating to 2008, he is 1-5 with a 5.12 E.R.A. His only victory in the playoffs came against the Atlanta Braves in the 2013 N.L.D.S.“I look at this year as this year, present tense,” Dodgers Manager Don Mattingly said in defense of Kershaw. “There’s actually very few people in the world who can talk about Kershaw; Sandy Koufax or Bob Gibson or someone like that. There’s really no one else that’s on his level. I don’t need to defend him.” Kershaw pitched against the Mets on July 3 and gave up one run on five hits, with seven strikeouts, in seven innings in a game the Dodgers lost, 2-1. He acknowledged that the lineup he will face Friday will be significantly different. “I don’t know if there’s going to be more than two or three guys who are going to be the same,” he said. “There’s a lot of guys I’ll be seeing for the first time this season.”Kershaw deflected questions about how much he was fueled by his Octobers past. “New team, new season and hopefully for me a new outcome,” he said.He added: “The goal’s always to win the whole thing. The way I look at it, 29 teams fail every year. Only one team succeeds.”Kershaw said his focus in the postseason would not be on his legacy. “My goal’s to win just for my teammates and the guys in the room,” he said. “That’s the most important thing to me. So you look at guys’ success, guys’ careers, I think you have to take everything into account.” KAREN CROUSE DON MATTINGLY FAN CLUB A month after making his major league debut, Corey Seager could end up starting for the Dodgers at shortstop against the Mets. In 27 games, Seager, a baby-faced 21, batted .337 with four home runs and 17 R.B.I.Seager, whose older brother Kyle is an All-Star for the Seattle Mariners, was the 18th overall pick in the 2012 amateur draft. He was born and raised in North Carolina. His father, Jeff, played college baseball at Fairleigh Dickinson and idolized Don Mattingly, which explains the awkward moment that occurred during Seager’s initial meeting with Mattingly, a Yankees star turned Dodgers manager.“The day I came here to sign, that was the first thing my dad said, was ‘Hey, I’m a huge Yankees fan,’ ” Seager said. “It kind of put him on the spot. He didn’t know what to say. It was pretty comical. It’s kind of hard to talk about it when you’re the manager for another team.”Asked what it was like to play for his father’s idol, Seager said: “It’s kind of hard to explain. It definitely hits home a little more. It’s been a blast so far.” KAREN CROUSE Advertisement