By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSJAN. 2, 2015
John Tavares scored twice to lead the visiting Islanders to their third straight win, a 2-1 victory over the Calgary Flames on Friday.Tavares opened the scoring eight minutes into the game. The score remained 1-0 until 12 minutes 16 seconds of the third period, when Tavares fended off Deryk Engelland and fired a shot through the pads of Flames goaltender Jonas Hiller for his team-leading 17th goal of the season.Johnny Gaudreau scored for the Flames with 3:25 left in the third period, but Calgary could not pull even against Jaroslav Halak, who had 22 saves and won his seventh straight game.The Islanders improved to 7-1-1 in their last nine games and kept pace with the Pittsburgh Penguins atop the Metropolitan Division.AdvertisementCANADIENS 4, DEVILS 2 Michael Bournival scored his first two goals of the season, and Carey Price made 22 saves as Montreal extended its winning streak to five games with a victory over the host Devils.AdvertisementIt was Price’s 200th victory in his 400th game as Montreal won for the eighth time in nine games. Max Pacioretty and Tomas Plekanec also scored for the Canadiens, and P. K. Subban had three assists.The Devils have just two wins in their last 12 games, going 2-7-3 in that span.The Devils’ rookie goaltender, Keith Kinkaid, made 22 saves against Montreal. Michael Ryder scored a goal in his return after missing three games with mumps. Mike Cammalleri also scored for the Devils.Montreal outshot the Devils, 7-6, in a scoreless first period, and applied pressure early and late in the period. The Canadiens opened the scoring at 6:31 of the second period when Bournival’s centering pass glanced off the right skate of Devils defenseman Jon Merrill and past Kinkaid.Pacioretty gave Montreal a 2-0 lead on a power-play goal with 51 seconds left in the period.Bournival struck again 2:47 into the third period, swiping home a rebound from the slot.Thirty-four seconds later, Ryder stole the puck from Alexei Emelin at the Montreal blue line and skated down the right wing, beating Price to the short side for his first goal since Nov. 6.The Devils’ Adam Larsson hit the post midway through the third period as Montreal maintained a 3-1 lead.The Devils narrowed the gap when Cammalleri scored at 14:11, but the Canadiens held on to their advantage, and Plekanec closed out the scoring with an empty-net goal in the final minute.AdvertisementPENGUINS 6, LIGHTNING 3 Steve Downie scored twice in his return after missing five games with mumps, and Pittsburgh built a three-goal first-period lead in a defeat of visiting Tampa Bay.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Chris Kunitz scored a power-play goal, his 12th goal of the year, and Evgeni Malkin netted his 17th. Sidney Crosby had four assists for the Penguins, who earlier in the day acquired left wing David Perron in a trade with the Edmonton Oilers.WILD 3, MAPLE LEAFS 1 Kyle Brodziak, Jared Spurgeon and Mikko Koivu scored, Darcy Kuemper made 34 saves, and Minnesota topped visiting Toronto.After Cody Franson’s five-on-three goal tied the score at 1-1 early in the third period, Spurgeon fired a slap shot from the right circle to beat goaltender Jonathan Bernier with 12:17 to play. Less than two minutes later, Koivu scored on a power play to give Minnesota a 3-1 lead and help ensure the team’s first home win in its last five games.AVALANCHE 2, OILERS 1 Alex Tanguay and Matt Duchene scored shootout goals, Semyon Varlamov made saves against both of the Oilers’ shooters, and Colorado beat visiting Edmonton.Varlamov had 27 saves in regulation and overtime, and Daniel Briere scored in regulation for the Avalanche.The Avalanche, who are 6-2-2 in their last 10, have won their last five shootouts.HURRICANES 2, FLYERS 1 Brad Malone scored his first goal of the season, Eric Staal had his 10th, and host Carolina held on for a win over Philadelphia.Cam Ward made 20 saves for the Hurricanes, who won for just the third time in a month.The Flyers, who got 24 saves from Steve Mason, were outshot, 26-21, over all. Claude Giroux, Philadelphia’s captain, left the game with 15:15 remaining. Replays showed that he might have sustained a cut to his left leg from a skate. Giroux has 13 goals and 30 assists this season.PANTHERS 2, SABRES 0 Roberto Luongo made 30 saves in his 68th career shutout to lead Florida past visiting Buffalo. Brad Boyes and Nick Bjugstad scored for Florida, which won for the first time in three games.Luongo has shutouts in his last three starts in Buffalo, and Friday’s shutout moved him into sole possession of 13th on the N.H.L.’s list of career leaders. Michal Neuvirth made 31 saves for the Sabres.A version of this article appears in print on January 3, 2015, on Page D2 of the New York edition with the headline: Devils Find Offense Against Montreal, Just Not Enough.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.