AdvertisementSupported byPistons 97, Knicks 81By Zach SchonbrunBefore the Knicks heard resounding boos in the second quarter, missed their first 11 shots in the third and fell behind by 30 points in the fourth, before all of this on Friday, Coach Derek Fisher’s pregame question-and-answer session veered into the absurd. “Inflammation,” Fisher said, “happens on flights.” He had just announced an injury list of five names, including Carmelo Anthony and Amar’e Stoudemire, the victims of swollen knees that had worsened during the team’s six-hour flight from Los Angeles on Thursday, meaning that even the time between games has become hazardous for the 5-30 Knicks. So there they sat — Anthony, Stoudemire, Iman Shumpert, Tim Hardaway Jr. and Sam Dalembert, all helpless in street clothes as the Knicks rang in the new calendar year with a similarly futile performance.In fact, Friday’s 97-81 loss to the Detroit Pistons at Madison Square Garden in front of a full and festive crowd eager to see the team after a long road trip could certainly qualify as a low point in a historically bad season. But then, at this point, who’s counting?Certainly not when the first possession of the game is turned over because a pass bounces off Jason Smith’s head. Or the Pistons shoot 57.5 percent in the first half, despite entering the game second-to-last in the N.B.A. in field-goal percentage. By the end, fans seemed to be rooting just to see the Knicks avoid setting a season-low for points (78), which they did, barely.“It’s obviously been a frustrating season these first 35 games,” Fisher said. “They’re frustrated as well.”The loss was their ninth in a row at home, extending a franchise record, and their 10th straight over all, the second time they have had such a skid in a six-week span this season.Fisher said he had been emphasizing coming out strong in the first quarter, playing with energy and executing the game plan, and it appeared, momentarily, as though his players were listening. While shooting only 39.1 percent, they trailed by only 4 points. That was as close as they would get the rest of the evening. By halftime, they were down, 57-38, after being outscored by 15-4 in the final four minutes and heading to the locker room to a resounding chorus of boos. The Pistons, it should be noted, held the fourth-worst record in the N.B.A. entering the game.Yet Detroit (9-23) looked offensively explosive, fundamentally sound and jittery with energy in comparison with the Knicks, who allowed the Pistons to hit 7 of their first 14 3-point attempts and were outscored by 28-12 in the lane in the first half.“There’s never one answer to why things aren’t happening the way we want them to,” Fisher said, adding, “For sure, not having some of your best guys that can help you on both ends of the floor has impacted it some as well.”The Knicks were certainly short-handed. Anthony sat for the third time in the last 12 games, and Stoudemire for the sixth time in the last seven. Dalembert (sprained right ankle) and Hardaway (concussion) remain day-to-day with their injuries.And then, less than two minutes after coming off the bench in the first quarter, the 7-foot center Andrea Bargnani left the game with a sore right calf, one of the injuries that kept him out the first 33 games of the season. Fisher’s blood pressure probably spiked at that point.Bargnani had just made his season debut on Wednesday against the Los Angeles Clippers, scoring 9 points in 20 minutes.“We’ll probably find out more tomorrow,” Fisher said of Bargnani’s injury. He added: “Frustration’s not for me. It’s for the players that get injured.”Detroit’s lead ballooned to 27 early in the third. The Knicks went more than seven minutes before hitting their first field goal. Detroit clanged a 3-point attempt off the side of the backboard and committed a backcourt violation, Andre Drummond missed an alley-oop, and the Pistons still soared into the fourth quarter ahead by 30. Some activity from J. R. Smith (22 points) in the fourth kept the fans a bit engaged down the stretch, as the Knicks trimmed the lead to 16 with three minutes remaining. “It shouldn’t affect our play,” Smith said of the injured players. “If anything, it should enhance our play. People should want to play harder and play better because guys are out, and you want to show what you got.”There was a small measure of good news: The first-round pick Cleanthony Early returned after a 24-game absence following arthroscopic surgery on his right knee. He scored 5 points in 15 minutes.At least he was a usable body. That is a luxury the Knicks might value more than anything at this point in the season.Advertisement