AdvertisementSupported byBy Peter MayBOSTON — Reunions represent the high point of the Celtics’ schedule these days. The team does not win much — it is 11-19 — but it has learned during the past few seasons how to pay tribute to its former players and coaches.Paul Pierce, Kevin Garnett and Doc Rivers got warm receptions last season, with Pierce’s return a teary affair. On Friday night, the Celtics welcomed back the last link to their 2008 title team, with Rajon Rondo’s first game in Boston as a member of the Dallas Mavericks.Rondo submitted a spectacular offensive display, scoring a season-high 29 points, including 15 in the first quarter, as the Mavericks trounced the Celtics, 119-101. Rondo scored the first 10 points for Dallas, knocking down two of his career-high five 3-pointers during that run. Not known as a shooter — he entered the game at 41.2 percent from the field this season — Rondo made his first seven shots and finished 12 of 19. His 29 points were the most he had scored in a game since the 30 he racked up on Jan. 18, 2013.“I took extra shooting after the shootaround,” Rondo said after the game, adding that Coach Rick Carlisle “wants me to be more aggressive.”“The shot was with me tonight,” he said.Traded to Dallas two weeks earlier, Rondo, an eclectic, eccentric point guard, was given a warm ovation and treated to what is now a staple for returning V.I.P.s: a two-minute video tribute at the end of the first quarter. Pierce had advised him earlier in the week to “keep blinking” during the tribute. Rondo seemed touched.“I tried to stay focused,” Rondo said of the tribute. “I caught glimpses of it. But no tears.”Rondo spent eight-plus seasons with the Celtics and was a big part of their title team. He was selected to four N.B.A. All-Star Games. But he was limited to 68 games in his final two full seasons in Boston because of injuries. He admitted Friday that he had not played much defense in those two years. In reality, he had not played much, period.Carlisle played with Dennis Johnson on the Celtics in the mid-1980s and said he thought Rondo, like Johnson, had “the ability to turn it up defensively; he has that same sixth sense.”Carlisle added that he was already impressed with Rondo’s intellect and desire to learn.“He can figure out any puzzle; that’s one thing I’m learning about him,” Carlisle said. “Rondo’s an original. That’s one reason why the people here are so fond of him.”The Celtics received three players, two draft picks and a trade exception for Rondo. While Carlisle said the trade had helped both teams, in the here and now, the clear beneficiaries are Rondo and the Mavericks. They showed why Friday night.Advertisement