AdvertisementSupported byN.F.L. RoundupBy The Associated PressThe injured right knee of Pittsburgh’s star running back, Le’Veon Bell, will not be ready in time for Saturday’s wild-card game against the Baltimore Ravens.Steelers Coach Mike Tomlin ruled Bell out of the first round of the playoffs on Friday after Bell missed a third straight day of practice.Bell hyperextended the knee in Sunday’s A.F.C. North-clinching win over Cincinnati. Tomiln said he would not play Bell unless he was certain Bell was healthy enough to protect himself.The rookies Josh Harris and Dri Archer along with the newly acquired Ben Tate will all get a chance at replacing Bell, who set a franchise record with 2,215 yards from scrimmage.BENGALS’ GREEN QUESTIONABLE Cincinnati Bengals receiver A. J. Green did not practice Friday because of a concussion and was listed as doubtful for a playoff game on Sunday at Indianapolis.Green sustained the concussion during the loss in Pittsburgh on Sunday night as the Bengals (10-5-1) fell to a wild card.The Colts will be without right guard Hugh Thornton, who was ruled out Friday. Thornton played 18 snaps in the regular-season finale before hurting his right shoulder.RODGERS HELD OUT Quarterback Aaron Rodgers was held out of practice as the Green Bay Packers returned to work. Rodgers, selected to the All-Pro team on Friday, is recovering from a calf injury.The Packers practiced after Coach Mike McCarthy gave the players most of the week off with having a bye in the first round of the playoffs.Rodgers injured his left calf late in the first half of Green Bay’s final regular-season game last Sunday.Rodgers, who spoke to reporters Friday, said the injured calf was slowly progressing. McCarthy said Rodgers probably would not be available to practice until next Thursday at the earliest.AROUND THE LEAGUE Chip Kelly has gained control of the Philadelphia Eagles’ player personnel department after Howie Roseman was promoted from general manager to executive vice president for football operations. ...Houston’s J. J. Watt and New England’s Rob Gronkowski were unanimous selections for the 2014 Associated Press N.F.L. All-Pro team. Dallas led all teams with four All-Pros, including guard Zach Martin, the only rookie on the squad. The league’s rushing leader, DeMarco Murray, made it, as did tackle Tyron Smith and wide receiver Dez Bryant.Advertisement