AdvertisementSupported byKeeping ScoreBy Benjamin HoffmanMany roads can lead to the N.F.L. playoffs. Some teams get there with offense, others with defense or special teams. Some have depth, while others ride a superstar through the regular season.At 7-8-1, the Carolina Panthers are just the second N.F.L. team with a losing record to qualify for postseason play in a nonstrike season. Vince Lombardi may have believed winning was the only thing, but for Carolina, the key to a playoff berth this season was geography.The defending champions of the N.F.C. South, the Panthers were able to defend their division title despite winning five fewer games than last season by virtue of the division collapsing on itself, going a combined 10-29-1 in nondivisional games. The A.F.C. North in particular brutalized the N.F.C. South, going 12-3-1.Yet through the quirks of the N.F.L. postseason format, Carolina, as a division winner, will have home-field advantage over the 11-5 Arizona Cardinals in Saturday’s wild-card matchup. The Philadelphia Eagles, however, at 10-6, will be sitting at home wondering what might have been if they played their home games a few states farther south.Still, the Panthers have won four consecutive games. They find themselves favored by 6 ½ points against a Cardinals team that two quarterbacks and nine weeks ago was considered a candidate to be the first N.F.L. team to play a Super Bowl in its home stadium. “It tells you that no matter what you do during the regular season, it just doesn’t matter,” Panthers running back Jonathan Stewart said this week. “Things amp up to a whole different notch in the playoffs.”Stewart’s team can take heart in knowing that the only other sub-.500 nonstrike-year N.F.L. playoff team, the 2010 Seattle Seahawks, won their first-round matchup, against the defending Super Bowl champion New Orleans Saints. They were eliminated the next week, but making the second round was a remarkable result for a team that lost five of its last seven regular-season games and was outscored by 97 points during the season.“The underdog role, I think we cherished it and kind of took it to heart,” Seattle’s Marcus Trufant said after the playoff win against New Orleans. “Nobody gave us a chance and we just kind of shrugged our shoulder.”There was plenty of hand-wringing and eye-rolling at the time as to whether a losing team had any business being in the playoffs, but there was precedent, of a sort.In the bizarre 1982 season, a 57-day player strike resulted in a nine-game season and a playoff format in which 16 of the league’s 28 teams qualified. That led to the Detroit Lions and the Cleveland Browns earning wild-card spots despite going 4-5.It was just as unpopular in those days for a losing team to be rewarded with a postseason spot, so when the Browns were eliminated by the 8-1 Los Angeles Raiders in the first round, The Cleveland Plain-Dealer’s article about the game led with “Justice was served.” The Lions were also sent packing, losing, 31-7, to the Washington Redskins.The year before, Major League Baseball had its only experience with a losing team in the playoffs, also as a result of a player strike. A work stoppage began on June 12, and play did not resume until Aug. 9. The decision was made to split the season in two and have first-half champions play second-half champions in an extra divisional playoff round. The Kansas City Royals were 50-53 overall, which easily qualifies as the worst record for a playoff team in M.L.B. history, but they had the excuse that in the season’s second half they were 30-23 and became the game’s only American League West Second Half Champions, a title that is unlikely to be resurrected anytime soon.Baseball purists were undoubtedly happy when the underwhelming Royals were swept out of the playoffs three games to none by the Oakland Athletics, who were 64-45 over all.Another strike in 1994 canceled the World Series but also saved baseball from some embarrassment as the Texas Rangers were leading the American League West with a record of 52-62 when the season was called off.Those circumstances are easy enough to write off as flukes, but what the N.F.L. will want to avoid is wading into the territory of the N.H.L. and the N.B.A., where winning is hardly a prerequisite for postseason play.In 1938 a 14-25-9 record could not stop the Chicago Black Hawks from winning the Stanley Cup finals. The Toronto Maple Leafs duplicated the feat in 1949, going 22-25-13 before winning the finals. In 2012, the Los Angeles Kings won the Stanley Cup after officially going 40-27-15. But the 15 represents overtime losses, not ties, so the team’s record could instead be viewed as 40-42.It is the N.B.A., however, that has made an art of celebrating regular-season futility.It began in 1947-48, the fledgling league’s second season, when the Boston Celtics were 20-28, earning a playoff spot. The competition was not fierce, as the Providence Steam Rollers were the only team that did not qualify for at least a tiebreaking playoff game. A few years from becoming an unstoppable dynasty, the Celtics of that season lost in the first round of the playoffs and were most notable for featuring Chuck Connors, a rare two-sport athlete who went on to play baseball for the Brooklyn Dodgers and the Chicago Cubs before starring in the television show “The Rifleman.” The next season three losing teams made the N.B.A. playoffs and by 1949-50, there were four. The Syracuse Nationals in 1950-51 became the first N.B.A. team with a losing record to win a playoff series when they beat the Philadelphia Warriors in a two-game sweep behind the Hall of Famer Dolph Schayes and the player-coach Al Cervi before falling to the Knicks in the Eastern Division finals. In all, 100 N.B.A. teams have qualified for at least a tiebreaking playoff game, with 1985-86 serving as either the high or low point, depending on your perspective, as six sub-.500 teams made the playoffs. Those teams have not found much success, though, as a losing team has advanced to the second round just 18 times with three making it to a conference final. The key to success, it seems, is to have a talented big man on the roster, as Elgin Baylor and Moses Malone each led a losing team to the N.B.A. finals, with Baylor’s 1958-59 Minneapolis Lakers and Malone’s 1980-81 Houston Rockets both just missing a shot at a championship as teams that had no business being there. The Panthers, despite being more talented than their record implies, are unlikely to join the Black Hawks, the Maple Leafs and the Kings as losing-teams-crowned-champions. But they are part of a long, if not proud, line of losing teams to make the playoffs. And if the Cardinals do not find some answers on offense, Carolina may begin the postseason with a win, which would give hope to losing teams everywhere.Advertisement