
TV Sports By                     
 RICHARD SANDOMIR
 
JAN. 2, 2015
For the $7.3 billion it is pouring into the new College Football Playoff over 12 years, ESPN surely wants a spectacular payoff. The return on investment was to begin with big viewership for the semifinal games on New Year’s Day, followed by even more viewers for the title game on Jan. 12.Part A seems to have worked quite well. Ohio State’s 42-35 upset of Alabama in the Sugar Bowl attracted 28.27 million viewers, making it the most watched event in cable TV history.Oregon’s 59-20 blowout of Florida State in the Rose Bowl had 28.16 million viewers — the most for that bowl since 35.6 million watched Texas beat Southern California in the 2006 national title game on ABC.It’s a wonder so many watched, not just because of the rout in Pasadena, Calif., but also because of the pretentious car ads starring Matthew McConaughey. I’ll watch him act, but I won’t buy a Lincoln from him.AdvertisementNow comes Part B for ESPN: Ohio State versus Oregon at AT&T Stadium in Arlington, Tex. Will the final’s viewership soar beyond 30 million, to a level akin to that of the N.F.L. conference championship games, which averaged 53.7 million viewers last year? Or will it fall below that aspirational level without a magnet team like Alabama as a draw? I’ll predict 45 million.ESPN has benefited in another way from the playoff system — which lets six bowls rotate into the semifinals — by getting a chance to build New Year’s Eve into a bigger night than it’s been in the past.The Orange and Fiesta Bowls shifted to Wednesday night, joining a third game, the Peach Bowl, that has been played on that date since 2007. Showing those three bowl games allowed ESPN to boast of a dramatic, fizzy boost in its New Year’s Eve audience. The games averaged 7.1 million viewers, up from 4.6 million on the comparable date in 2013. But the comparison is not actually fair.The 2013 tripleheader featured the less storied AdvoCare V100 Bowl (which drew two million viewers) and the Liberty Bowl (2.46 million), followed by the Peach (8.7 million).And while the jiggered New Year’s Eve slate produced better results for ESPN, the Fiesta’s audience of 7.4 million was its lowest in Nielsen’s records (down from 11.3 million when ESPN showed it on New Year’s Day 2014), and the Orange’s viewership (8.9 million) was one of its lowest on record. The Peach suffered in the move from prime time last year to this year’s afternoon kickoff, with five million viewers for Texas Christian’s defeat of Mississippi — a drop of 43 percent.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The smaller audiences for the Fiesta, the Orange and the Peach may demonstrate that the bowls that are not in the semifinals each year will suffer because they lack major importance.AdvertisementSome thoughts on the games:■ With Florida State about to fall behind, 59-20, against Oregon, the ESPN analyst Kirk Herbstreit declared unequivocally that the Seminoles had “quit” and had “shut down the operation.” That was a fairly strong accusation about the defending national champions. But in a telephone interview Friday, Herbstreit did not back off his criticism or say that he had been hyperbolic.“It was a combination of what they were facing — incredible tempo and confusion, and they had held up as long as they could,” he said. “Their offense self-destructed with four turnovers, and, being a fan and knowing these teams, I could see a different energy level in that team after those turnovers. You saw it in their body language, and a little less effort, and they shut down.”■ Brad Nessler and Todd Blackledge, ESPN’s Sugar Bowl announcers, were operating at different levels of speed and efficiency. Nessler was laid-back to the point of near-somnolence (or boredom), while Blackledge was quick with informed analysis that suggested he could have worked alone. Nessler’s performance led to a small campaign on Twitter from fans wishing Brent Musburger were there instead. I’ve never been a fan of Musburger’s, but he brings a big-game style and is entertaining enough to make people miss him now that he’s off the big-game roster. He called the Orange Bowl this week.Nessler also made mistakes. He mispronounced Ohio State quarterback Cardale Jones’s given name — it’s car-DALE, which sometimes sounds like car-DELL, but definitely not Kordell — until late in the first quarter, when a Buckeyes official informed ESPN otherwise. Nessler also declared a first down for Ohio State after a 12-yard gain on a third-and-20 play and seemed overly enamored of the phrase “off to the races.”Someone more eager and exciting in the ESPN stable — Sean McDonough? — should have such an important assignment.■ For the seven games on New Year’s Eve, Jan. 1 and Jan. 12, ESPN has split its corner score box into two parts: a box with the teams and the score on the bottom right side of the screen, and the name of the bowl and its major sponsor, and the ESPN logo, on the top left side. It would be better if ESPN reintegrated them into one, rather than have a near-constant presence in two corners. Also, I’d prefer that ESPN silence the mooing cow that accompanies the “impact players” graphic feature sponsored by the Peach Bowl’s sponsor, Chick-fil-A. I like cows. I like mooing. I liked Phil Rizzuto. I don’t like mooing cows in my playoffs.■ The WatchESPN app was inoperative for about an hour during the first half of the Rose Bowl — an awful time for a serious problem with its servers — but it still drew 816,000 unique streaming viewers, a figure that swelled to 912,000 for the Sugar Bowl.Email: sandor@nytimes.com A version of this article appears in print on January 3, 2015, on Page D5 of the New York edition with the headline: Win for ESPN, but Title Game Is the Real Test.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »