By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSJAN. 2, 2015
MONTREAL — The United States was eliminated from hockey’s world junior championship Friday with a 3-2 loss to Russia in the quarterfinals.Defensemen Anthony DeAngelo and Zach Werenski scored for the Americans, who finished out of the medals for the second straight year after winning two years ago in Ufa, Russia.“It’s tough to swallow,” said DeAngelo, a Tampa Bay first-round pick who plays for Sarnia in the Ontario Hockey League. “We thought we were just as good as their team in this tournament. I still do, but we’re not going to have a chance to show it. It is what it is now.”Russia advanced to a semifinal in Toronto against Sweden, a 6-3 winner over defending champion Finland in Toronto.AdvertisementIn the other quarterfinals Friday, Canada faced Denmark in Toronto, and the Czech Republic played Slovakia in Montreal.AdvertisementIvan Barbashev and Sergei Tolchinski had power-play goals and Alexander Sherov also scored for Russia. Igor Shestyorkin provided strong goaltending, with the Americans outshooting Russia 41-25.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Before the game everyone said we are underdogs,” Russian coach Valeri Bragin said. “I agree with that because the American team has a lot of skilled players and is well organized, but we capitalized on our chances in the beginning of the game, and we had solid goaltending. Our team showed real team spirit.”The game, a weekday matinee played before a sparse crowd at Bell Centre, was marked by 14 minor penalties. The U.S. was drawn into five of them in the opening period and fell behind 2-0.“If you have to kill off that many penalties in a row you spend a lot of energy,” U.S. coach Mark Osiecki said. “That caught up to us. We were very disciplined before and for some reason it didn’t work out today.”Sweden had three power-play goals against Finland to push its tournament total to 12.“Our power play is working really well,” said Maple Leafs draft pick William Nylander, who had two assists to tie teammate Oskar Lindblom for the tournament scoring lead with nine points. “We have a lot of confidence now. We beat Russia last time, so we just have to refresh the bodies and get ready.”Lucas Wallmark scored twice for Swden.In Game 1 of the best-of-three regulation series, Switzerland beat Germany 5-2.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.