By KEN BELSONJAN. 2, 2015
GLENDALE, Ariz. —  Two hours before the Cardinals played perhaps their biggest regular-season home game in their 27 years in Arizona, Michael Bidwill raced around University of Phoenix Stadium trying to pump up the crowd.Wearing red corduroy slacks, a red tie and a black jacket, he urged fans to “keep it loud” during the game, on Dec. 21 against the Seattle Seahawks. Bidwill high-fived and posed for selfies with people along the concourses and was mobbed by tailgaters on the Great Lawn, a grass field in the parking lot.“Great job,” someone yelled. Another screamed, “You’re the man.” An older fan said, “Thanks for turning around the franchise.”Louie Gonzalez, a longtime season-ticket holder, put it another way: “Mike changed the spirit of the team.”AdvertisementAn original N.F.L. franchise, the Cardinals have also been one of the league’s weakest. But since 2007, when Bidwill took over day-to-day operations of the club from his father, Bill, the Cardinals have grown into a consistent contender. They have finished .500 or better in six of eight seasons and have made the playoffs three times. The team has sold out every game in its current home after selling out only 12 in Tempe, where it played for its first 18 years in Arizona.AdvertisementFans of the New England Patriots or the Green Bay Packers might yawn at those numbers, but for a club that has won just two titles and lost over 700 games in 95 years in three markets, this is its heyday.The Cardinals had the best record in the league this season until two late losses forced them to open the playoffs on Saturday against the Carolina Panthers (7-8-1) in an N.F.C. wild-card game in Charlotte, N.C. Despite winning four more games than the Panthers, the Cardinals (11-5) are underdogs, as they have been for much of their surprising year.Bidwill, a ball boy when the Cardinals played in St. Louis, credits Coach Bruce Arians and his “next man up” mantra for the team’s pluck and good fortune. The 11 victories this season tied a franchise high and were far more than the 7.5 wins that Vegas bookmakers had predicted.Arians rebuilt the defense in the off-season and overcame a host of injuries, including those to quarterbacks Carson Palmer and Drew Stanton, who have been sidelined. Ryan Lindley, a little-used replacement, is expected to make his playoff debut against the Panthers. Although the offense has scored only 27 touchdowns, Arians has managed to go 7-1 in games decided by 10 or fewer points.“This ‘next man up’ is real,” Bidwill said, referring to the team’s roster depth and its ability to play well despite injuries. “And what we’ve done with a third-string quarterback is amazing.”If the Cardinals continue to defy the odds this month, they could become the first team to host a Super Bowl. The game will be played in Glendale on Feb. 1, a fact not lost on Bidwill, who pushed hard for its to return to Arizona despite logistical hiccups the last time it was here, in 2008.Whether the Cardinals make it to the Super Bowl for the second time in franchise history, Bidwill’s profile in the N.F.L. is sure to rise. Last month, Commissioner Roger Goodell appointed him to lead a committee of nine owners that will oversee the N.F.L.’s enhanced personal conduct policy, a prominent role given the scope of the domestic violence crisis that engulfed the league this season.AdvertisementGoodell needs Bidwill to help him dig out of the legal and public relations quagmire that followed his mishandling of the scandals involving Ray Rice, Adrian Peterson and even Jonathan Dwyer, a Cardinals running back who was charged with assaulting his wife and put on the team’s reserve list. Dwyer has not played since.Bidwill has a unique skill set. Before joining the Cardinals’ front office in 1996, he was a prosecutor in the United States attorney’s office in Phoenix, where he worked in the violent crimes unit. Goodell hopes Bidwill will help keep the league’s policies up to date.The committee will review the conduct policy annually and suggest revisions as needed. It will also work with the as yet unappointed disciplinary officer, who will penalize players for off-field violations, something Goodell used to do.“We really need to have someone with expertise who will take the commissioner out of the process” of meting out penalties, Bidwill said a day after the Cardinals lost at home to the Seahawks. “The personal conduct policy hadn’t been reviewed since 2007, so we’ll look at it so it won’t go unchanged for years.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Bidwill, who has the short hair and square jaw of a prosecutor out of studio casting, has been active in Phoenix political and sports circles for years. But his new role as committee chairman is perhaps his most conspicuous position at the league level.Unlike the league’s three other third-generation owners — John Mara of the Giants, George H. McCaskey of the Chicago Bears and Art Rooney II of the Pittsburgh Steelers — Bidwill, 50, has not been a member of the powerful finance, broadcasting and management committees. Instead, he has focused on his areas of expertise. He is chairman of the stadium security and fan behavior committee and sits on the stadium committee.Marc Ganis, a consultant to several N.F.L. teams, though not Arizona, said of the Cardinals: “They’re more of an up-and-comer. They are not there yet, but they are moving up on the field, as a business operation and Michael’s influence in the N.F.L.”It was the Cardinals’ search for a new stadium that led Bidwill to leave the United States attorney’s office and join the team. Bidwill’s father left for Arizona after the 1987 season because he could not find a way to build a new football-only stadium in St. Louis.In Arizona, the Cardinals initially played at Sun Devil Stadium on the Arizona State University campus in Tempe. The college stadium was supposed to be a temporary home, but the savings and loan crisis that rocked Arizona wrecked plans for a new stadium.AdvertisementAs a tenant, the Cardinals were unable to generate the same revenue that other teams that played in their own stadiums did. The Cardinals drew poorly, and games were sometimes blacked out on local television, in part because of the team’s lackluster performance — only one winning season in Tempe. Fans of the visiting teams were often louder than the Cardinals’ faithful.“A lot of fans come from somewhere else here,” said Albert Flores, a longtime season-ticket holder from Desert Hills, a Phoenix suburb. “It’s been embarrassing that opposing fans outnumber us.”To lay the groundwork for a new stadium, Bidwill hired lobbyists and worked for the Bob Dole presidential campaign in 1996, which put him in contact with the state’s Republican leadership. But voters shot down a half-penny sales tax increase for a stadium that would have been built in Mesa. Several years later, a bill that proposed using taxes from hotel stays and car rentals passed. The team kicked in $200 million.The Cardinals’ revival coincided with their arrival in Glendale. In their third year here, they made it to the Super Bowl, where they lost to the Steelers. Arizona followed up by winning its division the next year. Thanks to having control of their own stadium, the Cardinals have increased revenue 68 percent since 2006; operating income hit $43 million last season, according to Forbes.“The stadium was the cornerstone of our success,” Bidwill said. “You can really see that, having the revenue and the support of the fans. But we want to be great and have sustained success.”A victory against the Panthers in Charlotte on Saturday would be another step in that direction.A version of this article appears in print on January 3, 2015, on Page D1 of the New York edition with the headline: Next Men Up? Cardinals.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.