AdvertisementSupported byBy Andrew DasSteven Gerrard, the longtime Liverpool captain, announced Friday that he would leave the club that he has supported and played for since he was a boy when his contract expires at the end of the season.Gerrard, 34, a midfielder, could become a target for Major League Soccer. He ruled out joining another Premier League club, saying that lining up against Liverpool was “something I could never contemplate.” That statement would also seem to rule out Gerrard’s moving to another club in Europe, since Liverpool regularly qualifies for continental championships like the Champions League and the UEFA Cup.Gerrard has played in nearly 700 games and scored 180 goals for Liverpool since making his debut as an 18-year-old in November 1998. He led the Reds to the Champions League title in 2005, directing a stirring comeback from a 3-0 deficit against A.C. Milan in the final, and also has won the UEFA Cup and the F.A. Cup (twice). But he will leave Liverpool without the one title he coveted most — that of Premier League champion. Liverpool has won England’s national championship 18 times, but it has never finished first in the Premier League era. Liverpool’s last first-division crown came in 1990; it was clinched about a month before Gerrard’s 10th birthday.Gerrard said he “agonized” over the decision to leave the club, calling it “the toughest decision of my life.”“I am making the announcement now so that the manager and the team are not distracted by stories or speculation about my future,” he said, adding, “I’m going to carry on playing and although I can’t confirm at this stage where that will be, I can say it will be somewhere that means I won’t be playing for a competing club and will not therefore be lining up against Liverpool — that is something I could never contemplate.”If Gerrard does join M.L.S., it would almost certainly be to a team in a major market. Two intriguing potential destinations would be the Los Angeles Galaxy, which enters 2015 without the recently retired midfielder Landon Donovan, and the Red Bulls, who will be looking to replace their recently retired star Thierry Henry. The Frenchman Gérard Houllier, who gave Gerrard his Liverpool debut in 1998 and managed him there until 2004, oversees Red Bull’s global soccer operations.Another potential M.L.S. suitor is New York City F.C., but its close ties to Manchester City — right down to the clubs’ nearly identical jerseys — might be an obstacle for a player trying to keep Premier League rivals at arm’s length.Advertisement