AdvertisementSupported byOn College BasketballBy Harvey AratonThe game is a distant but shining beacon, its significance magnified across four decades of growth. But the first women’s college basketball game at Madison Square Garden was initially just a showdown between fierce rivals, producing a winner, a loser and acute memories of how the result came about.That was the whole point of the clash between Queens College and little Immaculata of Pennsylvania on Feb. 22, 1975: to demonstrate that women were ready — overdue, in fact — to compete anytime, anywhere, including on the country’s biggest basketball stage.It turned out that people would even pay to watch.Lucille Kyvallos of Queens and Cathy Rush of Immaculata were not exactly edgy coaching adversaries, the Geno Auriemma and Pat Summitt of the day.Kyvallos had coached Rush at what was then called West Chester State Teachers College, a few miles from Immaculata, an all-women’s college on the outskirts of Philadelphia. But Kyvallos, who grew up competing in schoolyards against boys and played in the old Madison Square Garden, between 49th and 50th Streets on Eighth Avenue, in a girls’ Police Athletic League game, was never the shy, retiring type.At 82, she remains a world-class senior tennis player.“I remember we were winning at the half,” she said. “But then I saw Cathy talking to the officials, probably about how aggressive we were playing, and the next thing we knew, one of our players, Nancy Rullo, got hit with a technical foul. I thought that was the turning point.”When informed of Kyvallos’s recollection, Rush laughed and said: “Sounds like Lucille. Great coaches remember all the details. And Lucille was a great coach, a visionary, ahead of her time.”Immaculata, the defending national champion, beat Queens, 65-61, in the first game of a doubleheader that Saturday afternoon, and most of the 11,969 spectators left the building before or during the second game, between the men’s teams from Fairfield and Massachusetts. To commemorate the coming 40th anniversary, Queens and Immaculata will meet again Sunday morning at the Garden to open the annual Maggie Dixon Classic before Auriemma’s Connecticut team plays St. John’s.If the sport has not passed by Queens, which is part of the City University of New York system, and the now coeducational Immaculata University, its evolution has relegated them to the lower tier. But those teams in the 1970s played a role in making it happen.“I don’t think everyone understood at the moment what that game meant,” Rush said.Still, the players began to suspect something was brewing over a three-season stretch that began with Queens hosting a 16-team national tournament in 1973 — one year after Title IX legislation became federal law to help level the gender playing field. Immaculata defeated Queens in the championship game inside a packed gymnasium that held about 3,000.Kyvallos and three of her former players recalled that the journalist Dick Schaap made an appearance at the tournament. Gail Marquis, a freshman forward in 1973, remembered Marv Albert’s devoting a few seconds of his local broadcast report to the event.The next season, Queens prevailed in a rematch, breaking the Mighty Macs’ 35-game winning streak.Kyvallos was then contacted by a Garden executive, asking if she would be interested in a game at the self-proclaimed World’s Most Famous Arena.“I was flabbergasted,” she said. Her program, while gaining in stature, operated on a budget of a few thousand dollars and the kindness of strangers. The Lady Knights rode old school buses to their games, and Kyvallos’s players sold candy to raise money for the occasional overnight trip.What she knew was this: Besides accepting the offer before it could be recanted, she needed an opponent to fit the occasion, not one she knew she would beat. She called Rush, whose team, as part of a private institution, may have had more operating expenses than Queens, but not by much.In 1972, when Immaculata won its first national tournament (governed by the old Association for Intercollegiate Athletics for Women), in Illinois, Rush said that she had to leave three of her 11 players home for lack of money.“We had a gym with no bleachers, so we played our games off campus, at high schools,” she said. “When we started winning, we could draw three or four thousand at Villanova, and every road game we played, that school would have its biggest crowd. But before 1973, no one ever paid. The games were all open. I do think the tournament at Queens opened some eyes. The year before, in Illinois, nobody was there.”A couple of days before the Garden game, Kyvallos was allowed to hold a practice there. Queens followed Al McGuire’s Marquette team onto the court.“I was a Marquette fan,” Marquis, by then a junior, said. “But even more I was a Knicks fan, grown up on Walt Frazier and Willis Reed, playing the same power forward position as Dave DeBusschere. So just being on the same court was the most amazing thing.”On game day, when the players ran out for warm-ups, the crowd — largely female, according to the next day’s article in The New York Times — erupted in cheers. Marianne Crawford (now Marianne Stanley, an assistant coach with the W.N.B.A.'s Washington Mystics) was Immaculata’s star guard. She tried to pretend it was just another game by sticking to her ritual of checking the floor for possible dead spots.“I got to midcourt, looked up, and then it set in,” she said. “We’re in Madison Square Garden. I’m from Philly, so I have a fondness for the Palestra. But it hit me that what was happening that day was groundbreaking.”During warm-ups, the Helen Reddy anthem “I Am Woman” began blasting through the arena’s sound system.Donna Orender (then Chait) was a freshman guard, struggling to contain her fears about having to face the more experienced Crawford.“I heard the music, and tears started streaming down my face,” Orender, a former W.N.B.A. president, said. She wound up leading Queens in scoring, doubling Crawford’s output, 14-7.Marquis had a different reaction.“I first thought, Wow, this is corny,” she said. “Then I figured, If there’s ever a time and place, this is it.”Upstairs, in the cheap blue seats, 16-year-old Nancy Lieberman pressed her chin against the front-row railing.“For a girl who’d grown up in New York being called a tomboy, that day changed my life, how I felt about myself,” she said. “I remember it like yesterday, thinking, I’m going to be recruited by Lucille Kyvallos, play for Queens and get to play right here in the Garden.”If Kyvallos did not know about Lieberman by then, she soon would. She had good reason to believe that Lieberman, a new-age talent and a member of the United States national team at 17, would choose to commute to Queens’s Flushing campus from her home in Far Rockaway, as many of the city’s best players had, based on Queens’s growing reputation.But neither Kyvallos nor Rush had yet measured the impact of their Garden game, how the rest of the country had taken notice. By 1975, Rush said, teams offering scholarships to women were allowed to play in the A.I.A.W. tournament for the first time. A year later, Lieberman was off to Norfolk, Va., to play for Old Dominion.“Players were going to places where they would get money, and the handwriting was on the wall,” said Rush, who left Immaculata in 1977 after three national titles and six consecutive final four appearances.Kyvallos stopped coaching Queens in 1979, although she returned for the 1980-81 season. The women’s tournament moved under the N.C.A.A. umbrella in 1982.Kyvallos said she planned to fly to New York from Florida for Sunday’s game, and reunite with several of her former players. Together, they would relive the dream, along with the pain.“I do think the refs took it from us, wouldn’t let us play our physical style,” said Marquis, backing the taskmaster coach she and her teammates used to address as Miss Lucille. “I mean, back then, it wasn’t like now. You weren’t supposed to be too aggressive. And we never talked back. I remember being hollered at by my teammates for not picking up the ball and handing it to the ref.”So how did Rullo get tagged with a technical?“Oh, I was told that she took the Lord’s name in vain,” Kyvallos said. “But you have to understand, in terms of women competing hard, most people were neophytes.”She paused. Then laughed. “The officials were, too.”Advertisement