AdvertisementSupported bySports of The TimesBy William C. RhodenPASADENA, Calif. — On a big day for college football, the national semifinal game between Oregon and Florida State was as much a morality play as a matchup of two of the country’s best teams.Thursday’s game was cast early on as a battle between good and evil. The undefeated Seminoles, shrouded in controversy, were cast as villains, while the Ducks, with an appealing Heisman Trophy winner in Marcus Mariota, were cast as heroes.By the time Mariota scored Oregon’s 51st point, on the way to a 59-20 victory, the hero-villain narrative had been replaced by plain and simple facts: Mariota had outdueled Jameis Winston; Oregon had routed Florida State, the defending national champion; and the Ducks had made a roaring statement: We belong.As the confetti rained down, the bands blared and the Oregon fans flooded the Rose Bowl in a sea of green and yellow to congratulate and hug one another, Ahmad Rashad stood on the sideline, soaking in the atmosphere.“Now you know what people who went to places like Michigan back in the day felt,” he said. “We didn’t feel like that when I was at Oregon. Now we do.”Now known as a broadcaster and television host, Rashad was an all-American running back at Oregon, where he played in the backfield with the Hall of Fame quarterback Dan Fouts. Rashad, who was known as Bobby Moore in college, before he changed his name, was born in Portland and raised in Tacoma, Wash. He said he chose Oregon over Notre Dame because “it was more important to build a program, and it’s pretty much built now.”Rashad went on to play in 10 N.F.L. seasons from 1972 to 1982. He was an honorary captain for Oregon in 2011 when it lost to Auburn, 22-19, in the Bowl Championship Series title game, and again last month in the Pacific-12 Conference championship game. The loss to Auburn was an eye-opener, he said.“They bullied us around,” he said. “I think we went down there and saw big, fast people, and we weren’t big and fast. Now we are. You realize what you’ve got to have.”Do the ends justify the means?In 2013, the N.C.A.A. issued Oregon a series of penalties, including three years of probation, for failing to monitor its football program during the Chip Kelly era. Kelly was the coach at Oregon from 2009 to 2012, before he left to become the Philadelphia Eagles’ coach. Oregon appeared in four straight B.C.S. bowl games under Kelly and found a way to bridge the talent gap through aggressive recruiting and the support of Phil Knight, who made Oregon a virtual billboard for Nike apparel.24 PhotosView Slide Show ›Streeter Lecka/Getty ImagesThe N.C.A.A. cut Oregon’s official paid visits by prospects to 37 from 56 for the next three academic years, reduced its spring and fall evaluation days in each of the next three seasons and banned the program from using recruiting services during the probation.Oregon did not receive a bowl ban, but Kelly received an 18-month show-cause penalty; if a university in the N.C.A.A. wanted to hire Kelly in an athletics role, the university and Kelly needed to appear before the infractions committee.While the N.C.A.A. penalties were a source of embarrassment, they have not put a dent in the Oregon machine, which is off to Arlington, Tex., for a Jan. 12 date with Ohio State in the national championship game.I asked Rashad if he was concerned about the program becoming bigger and bigger. He said he was not. “Whatever comes with getting bigger, you want that,” he said.Of the final four teams — including Florida State, Alabama and Ohio State — Oregon was regarded as the relative newcomer, the only one not to have won a B.C.S. national championship.“This gets the attention of everyone across the country that they’re real,” Rashad said of the Ducks. “They have great uniforms; now they have a great football team. They could be the best in the country.”Ohio State will have something to say about that, but the point is well taken: Oregon is in the conversation.Earlier in the week, the second-year Oregon coach Mark Helfrich said that while Oregon was comfortable in its own skin, a national title would send a message to the rest of the country.“A championship would validate things externally a lot more than I think internally,” he said.He also said that Oregon’s fashion statement with its uniforms might have been a necessary gimmick to put the program on the map. “The ascension probably started a little bit with the helmets and the uniforms and all that kind of stuff, but hopefully we’ve moved beyond that,” he said. “We talk constantly about the guys in the uniforms. The uniforms don’t give you points.” Oregon scored 59 of them Thursday. Who knows how many the Ducks will score under the perfect conditions at AT&T Stadium?We’ve published maps showing where fan support for one team begins and another ends for baseball and basketball. Now we’re pleased to offer another one: the United States according to college football fans.This is what we do know: In search of an angle to sustain itself until game day, the news media will be tempted to create a new narrative, one contrasting Ohio State quarterback Cardale Jones, who was recently a third-stringer, with Oregon’s Mariota.Long before Jones’s phenomenal performance against Alabama, he became notorious for an unfortunate message on Twitter that questioned the need to go to class when he was at college to play football. Mariota is a smooth three-year starter who bypassed the N.F.L. draft to play another magical season at Oregon.The temptation will be to cast Jones as a symbol of everything wrong with big-time college sports and Mariota as an example of everything that is right.If the last 10 years have taught us anything, it is how little we know about the men and women we cover.What we do know is that on Thursday, Mariota and Jones, and Oregon and Ohio State, turned in amazing performances.There are no saints and no sinners, just two big-time football programs trying to win a championship.Let’s leave it at that.Email: wcr@nytimes.com Advertisement