By ROB HUGHESJAN. 2, 2015
LONDON — In the modern era, when players switch allegiance to teams or even to nations more often than many of us move house in our lifetime, Steven Gerrard has always been different.Until now.He wore Liverpool red in his infancy. He trained at the Liverpool FC academy at age 9. He has played for the club’s team 695 times over 17 seasons and has been its captain for more than a decade.But age is more brutal on sports players than anyone else, and this new year will be Stevie G’s last at Anfield stadium. He made the announcement Friday morning, committing himself to the rest of this season, after which he will be a free agent.He turns 35 in May, after which he, and his family, will experience something new, quite possibly in the United States where the Major League Soccer can prolong his earning capacity without putting the same stress and strain as the full blooded Premier League does in England.AdvertisementGerrard is in midlife, but he knows nothing outside of Liverpool.He wants to play on, but he says he cannot contemplate ever lining up competitively against the Reds. America, most likely the Los Angles Galaxy or possibly the Red Bulls in New York, is the most likely destination, though there are offers from the Middle East.Advertisement“This has been the toughest decision of my life,” Gerrard said Friday. “One which both me and my family have agonized over for a good deal of time. Liverpool Football Club has been such a huge part of our lives for so long and saying goodbye is going to be difficult, but I feel it’s something that’s in the best interests of all involved — including my family and the club itself.”We are not discussing a normal departure here. This is not even akin to what the actress Katharine Hepburn once called the process of “selling one’s deteriorating self.”Gerrard has to go before he spoils his legacy at the club, and in the city, where soccer is a compulsion. Had he been a year older, he would doubtless have stood alongside his cousin Jon-Paul Gilhooley at Hillsborough Stadium in April 1989.On the horrible day, 96 Liverpool fans were crushed to death in an overcrowded section of the ground behind one goal. Jon-Paul, then aged 10, was the youngest of the victims.Gerrard progressed to play for, and to become a legend in, the team the family followed. In fact, he many times transcended it.His imprint will forever be on the greatest night in Champions League history because Gerrard led Liverpool from three goals down at halftime to finish level at 3-3 against AC Milan, and Liverpool then won the penalty shootout at the final at Istanbul in 2005.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Gerrard scored his team’s first goal. He ran — no, he rampaged — through that second half, urging, directing, demanding his colleagues to fight with him. He covered every blade of grass on that field, and he eclipsed opponents who included immense figures in the sport — Paolo Maldini, Cafu, Clarence Seedorf, Kaká and Andrea Pirlo among them.That hunger, that example, was seen hundreds of times in Gerrard’s relentless Liverpool career. At times, he carried a relatively poor Liverpool team through his own performances, running the midfield, striking imperious passes of 30 yards or more, and shooting goals from a similar distance.AdvertisementFate, however, never rewarded him with the one thing he craved the most. Gerrard wanted to lead Liverpool to the Premier League title, but last April, when it was close thanks in no small measure to him and to the goals of Luis Suárez, he erred.He lost his footing on a sodden pitch, and from that small slip, Chelsea broke away to score the first goal in a 2-0 defeat. A month later, Manchester City was the champion, Liverpool the runner-up by two points.Gerrard never recovered. He was again devastated when, as captain of England, his country failed as it did throughout his 114 games for the nation, to make any impression at the World Cup.A generation of England players — Gerrard, John Terry, Frank Lampard — has ended without at any time succeeding in the national side as each has done for their clubs. That is not new because, aside from 1966, when England won the World Cup on English soil, the country has never been as good as its reputation suggested it should have been.At the club level, however, joined by a multitude of players from other nations, the power and sheer determination of English players has been right up there. Gerrard is the personification of that yet. Yet apart from the day England overpowered Germany, 5-1, at Munich’s Olympic Stadium, he rarely managed to translate his Liverpool form to the national cause.That night in 2001, Michael Owen scored a hat trick and took home the match ball. But Gerrard, also a scorer, was the heart and soul of the performance.In a word, you could describe him as indomitable. While he has not left Liverpool quite yet, the team’s coach, Brendan Rodgers, said Friday: “It is almost impossible to appropriately sum up Steven Gerrard and his importance to Liverpool. This is an era where the word legend is vastly overused, but in his case it actually doesn’t do him justice.“He wasn’t just true to his word, he vastly exceeded it.”A version of this article appears in print on January 3, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.