AdvertisementSupported byRavens 30, Steelers 17By Ben ShpigelPITTSBURGH — They tussled after whistles and slapped one another in the head and traded helmet-to-helmet hits, the nastiness ratcheted as skyscraper-high as it had been for every previous installment of this vicious rivalry, the border feud between the Baltimore Ravens and the Pittsburgh Steelers.The Ravens pummeled the quarterback and controlled the line of scrimmage and whooped along the sideline, and that is where the rivalry veered into unfamiliar territory for this time of year.For all the teams’ regular-season parity — they had split the last 14 games — the Ravens had never beaten the Steelers in the postseason. All three defeats had come at Heinz Field, where Baltimore flouted the Pittsburgh’s playoff superiority by administering a 30-17 mauling Saturday that — contrary to their own beliefs — shook up the A.F.C. playoffs.From their perspective, this was not an upset, nor is any victory, really, as long as Joe Flacco is firing touchdown passes, Terrell Suggs is intercepting passes with his legs, and the defense is forcing three turnovers and sacking Ben Roethlisberger five times and rendering a potent Steelers offense a one-dimensional calamity without its leading rusher, Le’Veon Bell. The sixth-seeded Ravens won the Super Bowl two seasons ago as a No. 4 seed — not that they needed reminding.“The situation may change,” Suggs said, “but we don’t.”Baltimore needed a confluence of results last Sunday just to reach the playoffs, but when it did, so began the transformation of Flacco. The playoffs grant him absolution from any regular-season misfortune, of which there had been plenty. Afterward, Ravens Coach John Harbaugh called Flacco, who completed 18 of 29 passes for 259 yards and two touchdowns, “the best quarterback in football,” a statement that certainly has its merits come playoff time. No quarterback — not Aaron Rodgers or Tom Brady, not Peyton Manning or Drew Brees — has won more postseason games since 2008, Flacco’s rookie season, than Flacco (10). Across his last five playoff games, a stretch of brilliance containing the Ravens’ Super Bowl run, Flacco has thrown for 13 touchdowns without an interception. He has won seven road playoff games and can add to that total next Saturday at top-seeded New England, where Flacco has already defeated the Patriots twice, once for the 2012 A.F.C. championship. “Bring it on,” Baltimore linebacker Pernell McPhee said. “We’re ready for any challenge.” On Saturday, that meant forcing Roethlisberger to throw — and throw, and throw, 45 times in all. The Steelers, who ran 19 times for 68 yards, missed the injured Bell in all facets: rushing, receiving, picking up blitzers. On one of the game’s pivotal plays, a backup running back, Ben Tate, who was signed this week, failed to account for a blitzing Darian Stewart and then could not catch a hurried short pass from Roethlisberger. The ball landed in Suggs’s hands, and after juggling it as he fell to the ground, he corralled it with his legs at the Pittsburgh 21. “Had I dropped it, there’s no telling what Ben would have done,” Suggs said, referring to Roethlisberger.At the time, with about eight minutes left in the game, Pittsburgh trailed by 23-15. The Ravens, though, had throttled a defense that had not allowed more than 21 points in the Steelers’ last four games, all victories. Excluding a Flacco kneel-down that constituted their final drive before halftime, the Ravens scored on six of seven possessions in one stretch. They surpassed the 21-point barrier with a flourish, exceeding the mark with a 52-yard field goal by Justin Tucker and then — after Suggs’s interception — adding a 21-yard touchdown pass from Flacco to Crockett Gilmore, who earlier in the game had been punched in the head by Pittsburgh linebacker Jason Worilds.The teams’ rivalry is a malicious one, forged by professional enmity enriched by 19 seasons of twice-a-year brawls — of broken noses and shoulders and spirits, of coaches interfering with kick returners and players vowing to kill each other and rugged, bloody victories. There is also a measure of deep respect, though, as reflected by a postgame visit by Pittsburgh’s chairman, Dan Rooney, to the Baltimore locker room, where he congratulated Harbaugh and his team. “I hope to be in the thick of it,” Ravens receiver Steve Smith said of the rivalry last week, and he was, catching five passes for 101 yards.One of those receptions was, at the time, the most critical play of the game. On the first snap after Baltimore forced the Steelers to punt on their opening possession of the second half, Flacco arced a 40-yard pass down the near sideline that Smith leapt to catch above cornerback Brice McCain. Five plays later, on a third-and-7, Flacco evaded pressure and, rolling to his left, found Torrey Smith in the back of the end zone for an 11-yard touchdown that extended the Ravens’ lead to 20-9 with 4 minutes 13 seconds remaining in the third quarter.Just as Baltimore seemed poised to seal the outcome, to run more time off the clock after converting on a fourth-and-1 near midfield, Justin Forsett fumbled. The ball bounced to Stephon Tuitt, who recovered at the Ravens’ 45, and Roethlisberger responded on the next play by launching a deep pass to Antonio Brown.After an initial call of a touchdown, Brown was ruled down at the 1, but that only delayed the inevitable, a 6-yard score to Martavis Bryant with 11:01 left that cut Pittsburgh’s gap to 20-15. If Flacco’s first series Saturday doubled as a blooper reel — he overthrew an open Torrey Smith and then tripped while dropping back to pass — his next two showcased the full Flacco. He evaded pressure in the pocket, rifled passes into narrow spaces for tight end Owen Daniels and engineered with poise two scoring drives — the first capped by a 5-yard burst by Bernard Pierce for the only touchdown of the first half — that gave the Ravens a 10-9 lead at halftime. Baltimore crammed in all of its early scoring as the Steelers dominated time of possession, leaning on Roethlisberger as Bell, who hyperextended his right knee in last weekend’s division-clinching win over Cincinnati, sat out.To the die-hards here — that is to say, everyone — Bell’s unavailability invited comparisons to an earlier postseason: Playing without the injured running back Willie Parker, the Steelers lost at home to Jacksonville in 2008. Optimists shared an alternate perspective: how, in their Week 9 victory over Baltimore, the Steelers compensated for Bell’s 20-yard rushing output with six touchdown passes from Roethlisberger. This time, Roethlisberger dissected the Ravens’ secondary between the 20-yard lines, completing 18 of 24 first-half passes for 183 yards, but failed to lead the Steelers past the goal line early. Their best chance was thwarted by Stewart, who prevented what would have been a 29-yard touchdown by shoving Brown out of the end zone before Brown could get both feet in bounds.It was fitting: After all these years, the Ravens finally pushed aside the Steelers in the playoffs.N.F.L. Playoffs: Wild-Card RoundAdvertisement