AdvertisementSupported byN.H.L. RoundupBy The Associated PressJaromir Jagr scored three times to fuel a rare offensive outburst by the Devils as they beat the Philadelphia Flyers, 5-2, in Newark on Saturday night.The line of Jagr, Adam Henrique and Scott Gomez combined for four goals and eight points, helping the Devils end a two-game skid with only their third victory in 13 games (3-7-3). The Devils had not scored more than three in a game since a 5-3 victory over the Maple Leafs on Dec. 4, a span of 14 games.Patrik Elias and Gomez also scored, and Cory Schneider made 18 saves.But it was Jagr’s night to shine. He notched his 15th career hat trick and his first since March 26, 2006, which also came against the Flyers, while Jagr was a member of the Rangers.Jagr, who turns 43 next month, became the oldest N.H.L. player to score three goals in a game. He has 714 goals and is only three behind Phil Esposito in fifth place.Andrew MacDonald and Vincent Lecavalier scored for the Flyers, who dropped their fifth straight.PREDATORS 7, KINGS 6 Nashville defenseman Roman Josi scored 18 seconds into overtime after Pekka Rinne gave up three goals in the final 121 seconds of regulation, and the Predators eked out a wild victory at Los Angeles.Mike Fisher and Colin Wilson scored goals 1 minute 22 seconds apart in the first period, Mattias Ekholm and Mark Acrobello scored 1:41 apart in the second, and the Predators also got goals from Ryan Ellis and Olli Jokinen. Rinna finished with 24 saves.Dwight King, Alec Martinez and Jeff Carter each scored in the late third-period burst to tie it.For Los Angeles, King and Martinez scored earlier in the game, as did Matt Greene.SENATORS 3, BRUINS 2 Mike Hoffman scored to send the game into overtime, and Bobby Ryan ended it 46 seconds into the extra period as Ottawa won at Boston.Craig Anderson made 26 saves for the Senators, who have won two in a row. Kyle Turris also scored for Ottawa.Brad Marchand and Torey Krug scored for the Bruins, and Tuukka Rask stopped 23 shots.Marchand gave Boston a 2-1 lead midway through the third period, but Gryba’s slap shot deflected off Hoffman’s skate and past Rask to tie it. CANADIENS 4, PENGUINS 1 Max Pacioretty and David Desharnais scored early in the first period, and Montreal never looked back en route to a win at Pittsburgh.Tom Gilbert and Alexei Emelin also scored for the Canadiens, and Carey Price stopped 30 shots for his 22nd win of the season. Montreal won its seventh straight over all and fifth in a row on the road to improve to 9-2 against Metropolitan Division clubs and move into first in the Eastern Conference.The Penguins’ David Perron, acquired from Edmonton on Friday, scored in his first game with the team, which had won two games in a row.COYOTES 6, BLUE JACKETS 3 Sam Gagner scored twice, Martin Hanzal had a goal and three assists, and Arizona rode a rare big night on the power play at home to defeat Columbus. In their first 19 home games, the Coyotes managed just 10 power-play goals. But they scored three against Columbus to grab their fourth win in five games. Hanzal’s work in front of the net set up power-play goals for Oliver Ekman-Larsson and Gagner before he knocked in his own rebound in a 12-minute span that put Arizona ahead, 4-2, entering the third period.JETS 5, MAPLE LEAFS 1 Bryan Little had a goal and two assists to stretch his point streak to six games, and Winnipeg grabbed a home victory over Toronto. Dustin Byfuglien and Ben Chariot each had a goal and an assist for the Jets, and T. J. Galiardi and Matt Halischuk also scored. Chariot’s goal was the first of his N.H.L. career, while Galiardi’s was his first of the season. Mike Santorelli scored for the Maple Leafs.STARS 7, WILD 1 Vernon Fiddler scored two goals to lead host Dallas, which netted six or more goals in consecutive games for the first time since 1997.Kari Lehtonen made 21 saves for Dallas after shutting out Arizona, 6-0, on Wednesday. The Stars have won four straight and eight of their last nine games. Advertisement