AdvertisementSupported bySouth Carolina 64, Iowa State 60By Seth BerkmanWhen Fred Hoiberg was in sixth grade, on winter nights he often walked the five blocks from his house in Ames, Iowa, to Hilton Coliseum to work as a ball boy for the Iowa State Cyclones. Over the course of his childhood, Hoiberg’s connection to the university grew. His father, Eric, was a sociology professor there and later became associate dean of the College of Agriculture. In the fall, Fred Hoiberg would volunteer with the Cyclones’ football team. The basketball coach Johnny Orr and players like Jeff Hornacek became his idols.“My dream was to someday play for Iowa State,” said Hoiberg, who eventually led the Cyclones to three N.C.A.A. tournaments between 1992 and 1995.The majority of Hoiberg’s roster never held similar aspirations to recreate Hilton Magic, the phrase that became synonymous with Iowa State’s program when Hoiberg was a ball boy and the Cyclones regularly upset top-25 teams at home. Seven of the 14 players on this season’s roster began their college careers elsewhere. In Hoiberg’s five seasons as coach, 19 transfer players have suited up for Iowa State, including four who made the team as walk-ons. In December, Deonte Burton of Marquette committed to Iowa State for next season.Hoiberg is in his fifth season as Iowa State’s coach, and the Cyclones (10-2) were ranked ninth entering their game on Saturday against South Carolina (9-3) at Barclays Center in Brooklyn. Iowa State’s transfers struggled, though, as Bryce Dejean-Jones was held to 3 points and the Cyclones shot 1 for 18 from 3-point range. The Gamecocks jumped out to an early lead and held on for a 64-60 upset.Iowa State has flourished for much of the season with a pro-style system relying heavily on outside shooting that Hoiberg cultivated during 14 seasons as an N.B.A. player and executive. Since Hoiberg was hired in 2010, with no coaching experience or recruiting ties, the Cyclones, rather than targeting blue-chip high school recruits, have taken chances on castoffs and unheralded junior college players who have transformed Ames into a destination for college basketball redemption.“Whatever you think of it, it’s the reality of college basketball,” Hoiberg said, pointing to the more than 400 Division I players who transferred between colleges last season. As Iowa State has built a roster that can challenge Big 12 powers like Kansas and Texas, Hoiberg’s willingness to accept players with checkered pasts has drawn its share of criticism. Last April, Abdel Nader, who had transferred from Northern Illinois, was arrested and charged with operating a vehicle while intoxicated. Nader was suspended for one exhibition game and two regular-season games. In December, Dejean-Jones, a transfer from Nevada-Las Vegas, was arrested and charged with three misdemeanors relating to a party, all of which were soon dropped. Dejean-Jones was suspended for one game. “As a coach, it’s awful to get a phone call in the middle of the night when something like that happens,” said Hoiberg, who is 100-49 as a coach. “When they do happen, now you got to talk to them about it being a learning experience and how you got to grow from it and not let anything like it happen again.”Two of Hoiberg’s earliest big-name transfers, Chris Allen and Korie Lucious, were dismissed from Michigan State; both had admitted to heavy marijuana use. When Hoiberg worked for the Minnesota Timberwolves, one of his duties was to conduct background checks before the draft, an experience that he said had helped him evaluate new players. “You talk to their high school coaches, they meet with our administration, they meet with all the coaches and players, and everybody’s got a say in whether they’re going to fit what we’re trying to do,” Hoiberg said.Most of the transfers at Iowa State have thrived. Allen and Lucious had career highs in points when they played for the Cyclones.In each of the last three years, a Cyclone has won the Big 12’s newcomer of the year award. This season, Dejean-Jones was averaging a career-high 15.2 points a game entering Saturday’s matchup.Hoiberg’s offense has enabled transfer players — like Dejean-Jones, and Royce White and DeAndre Kane before him — to shine. Hoiberg kept notes and playbooks from his time as a player under Orr and Tim Floyd at Iowa State, and under Larry Brown, Larry Bird, Kevin McHale and Flip Saunders in the N.B.A. As a result, the Cyclones have become experts at decision making and spacing the floor. Iowa State entered Saturday leading N.C.A.A. Division I with 19.9 assists a game.There was little doubt that Hoiberg would feel comfortable coaching at Iowa State. Hoiberg said that at games, he recognized fans who had been there when he was a ball boy and later a player. His parents and his in-laws live nearby.The transfer players who have elevated Iowa State back to prominence are also beginning to develop a fondness for life in central Iowa. Jameel McKay, a transfer from Marquette who, along with Dustin Hogue, led Iowa State with 15 points on Saturday, said he had been treated like a brother by his teammates since the first day he arrived in Ames. “That’s what we pitch to each transfer that comes in: It’s a family, and you’ll feel like you’re at home from Day 1,” he said.Advertisement