By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSJAN. 3, 2015
Bengals receiver A. J. Green will miss Cincinnati’s first-round playoff game at Indianapolis on Sunday because he is still recovering from a concussion.Green sustained the concussion at Pittsburgh last weekend during a loss that relegated the Bengals (10-5-1) to a wild-card berth. Green did not pass his concussion tests and was ruled out on Saturday.Green missed three games — including Cincinnati’s 27-0 loss at Indianapolis in October — and parts of two others with a toe injury. Mohamed Sanu, who has made three catches in his past three games, is set to become the Bengals’ top receiver in Green’s absence.REPORTS ON RAIDERS’ SEARCH The Oakland Raiders interviewed the Denver Broncos’ defensive coordinator, Jack Del Rio, for their head coaching vacancy on Saturday, according to multiple reports.AdvertisementThe Denver Post first reported the interview. The Raiders are not releasing details on interviews.Del Rio, who grew up in the Bay Area, has been Denver’s defensive coordinator for the past three seasons and has helped the Broncos win three straight A.F.C. West titles.AdvertisementDel Rio was Jacksonville’s coach for nine seasons, compiling a 68-71 regular-season record and leading the Jaguars to the playoffs in the 2005 and 2007 seasons. Del Rio, who helped the team win a playoff game in his second postseason trip, was fired with five games remaining in the 2011 season.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Del Rio, 51, has extensive N.F.L. experience, having played 12 seasons as a linebacker and having served as an assistant with New Orleans, Baltimore and Carolina before joining the Jaguars.The Raiders fired Coach Dennis Allen after four games this season. Tony Sparano, who took over as interim coach, is also a candidate for the full-time job. Oakland hired Allen in 2012 after he, like Del Rio, had served as Denver’s defensive coordinator.Oakland has had eight coaches since the start of the 2003 season. The Raiders have not finished with a winning record or earned a playoff berth in that span.The Raiders have already interviewed Philadelphia’s offensive coordinator, Pat Shurmur, according to multiple reports. And Seattle Coach Pete Carroll told SiriusXM NFL Radio last week that the Seahawks’ offensive coordinator, Darrell Bevell, had interviewed for the Raiders job.Oakland is also reportedly interested in interviewing the San Francisco assistant Eric Mangini, who has head coaching experience with the Cleveland Browns and the Jets, and Indianapolis’s offensive coordinator, Pep Hamilton.A version of this article appears in print on January 4, 2015, on Page SP4 of the New York edition with the headline: For Playoff Opener Against Colts, the Bengals Will Be Missing Their Top Receiver.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.