AdvertisementSupported byOn Pro BasketballBy Scott CacciolaCarmelo Anthony did not miss a shot against the Detroit Pistons on Friday night. He did not commit a turnover. He was neither outrebounded for putbacks nor caught flat-footed on backdoor cuts. Instead, he occupied a seat behind the bench and watched his teammates do everything wrong without him.Another night at Madison Square Garden was another exercise in abject dysfunction as the Knicks continued to barrel their way toward more records for futility. Double-digit deficits? Consecutive losses? Games below .500? No records are safe around this team, a point the Knicks hammered home by losing, 97-81, to the Pistons.But within the team’s dystopian season, Anthony’s absence counted as a victory. Excused from the proceedings with what the Knicks again described as a sore left knee, Anthony preserved his body, if not his sanity, for at least one game. At this point, though, what is preventing the team from exercising caution and keeping him out of the lineup even longer?The point is so obvious that it hardly needs to be written, but there is little — fine, nothing — to be gained from Anthony’s playing through an injury. Not with the Knicks scuffling toward a prime position in the draft lottery. Not with fans left praying for good fortune from the table tennis balls. And not with Anthony carrying a $124 million contract that runs through the 2018-19 season.The team’s rationale for keeping Anthony in uniform has been that he cannot do additional damage to his knee, even though the injury has not been publicly defined and even though Anthony has hedged about potentially needing surgery. But if he has a medical problem that requires treatment (and presumably he does), the Knicks ought to go about fixing it now.On Friday, Coach Derek Fisher seemed to be tiptoeing toward that conclusion.“I think there definitely will come a time at some point where there has to be a conversation about a longer space for him, possibly,” Fisher said. “But it’s just not there at this point.”Anthony, who has been dealing with knee soreness since the first week of the season, has missed three games because of the injury dating to Dec. 10, and he sat out the second half of last Sunday’s loss to the Portland Trail Blazers. Anthony has consistently said that he knows his body, that he wants to contribute and that he has a feel for his physical limitations.At the same time, and in his own way, he has charted the team’s sinking fortunes.So there he was on Dec. 9: “I don’t like to lose.”And Dec. 16: “It don’t sit well with me.”And Dec. 25: “We’re dying.”And Dec. 28: “Everything is crumbling.”And Dec. 31: “It’s tough to keep a smile on my face.”Anthony was unavailable to reporters after Friday’s loss and again after Saturday’s practice. But the season has become a macabre version of Mad Libs, and several of his favorite adjectives — crumbling, dying — could have applied.The Knicks (5-30) trailed by as many as 33 points against the Pistons, who took advantage of an opportunity to improve their record to 9-23. Andrea Bargnani, two games into his return after missing 11 months with health-related issues, injured his calf in the second quarter and limped to the locker room.Afterward, Fisher was drawn into offering his thoughts on whether his team’s play was “boo-worthy.”It has been that kind of season: a trash-bin fire wrapped in police tape. No quick fixes, no extinguishers are in sight. Hope lingers somewhere in the distance, through the draft, through free agency and through the aging Anthony, flaws and all, who signed on to be a part of the long-term solution.For weeks, Fisher has insisted that the team’s medical staff include Anthony, 30, in the “decision-making process” about his playing each game. On Saturday, the Knicks listed Anthony as doubtful for Sunday’s game against Milwaukee. Fisher reiterated that the team would continue to evaluate Anthony daily.“I don’t think ‘shutting him down’ is a conversation we’re having,” Fisher said Saturday. “Carmelo’s involved in all of the discussions because it’s his body and it’s his career.”But putting a player in that position is fraught with risk. Anthony is competitive by nature, and he clearly wants to play.“It’s a tough situation,” the Knicks’ J. R. Smith said. “It’s a thin line as to what you want to be labeled as a player: somebody who can play through pain and injury or somebody who played it safe. But he’s been doing what we’ve been asking him to do. He just physically can’t do it.”It is worth remembering that Anthony tried to play through a knee injury once before, during the 2012-13 season, coping with stiffness and soreness before finally relenting and having fluid drained with about a month left in the regular season.Anthony, who hates having surgery, returned to lead the Knicks into the playoffs. The circumstances are different now, the consequences no less serious.“As a friend, I’d tell him to take care of his body at this point,” said Smith, who recently missed 10 games with a plantar fascia tear. “We’re going to need him if we make a push in the long haul. And as a friend, I don’t want to see whatever he’s got going on get worse.”When J. R. Smith becomes the voice of reason, you know the season has taken a strange turn. Through the haze of so much losing, the question is whether anyone is listening.Advertisement