AdvertisementSupported bySoccer RoundupBy The Associated PressWest Bromwich Albion thrashed fifth-tier Gateshead, 7-0, in the third round of the English F.A. Cup on Saturday, while seventh-tier Blyth surrendered a two-goal lead to lose, 3-2, against second-division Birmingham.Saido Berahino fired four goals for host West Brom, which won in Tony Pulis’s first game as manager. Chris Brunt, Victor Anichebe and James Morrison also scored.There has been speculation that West Brom, which is faring poorly this season in the Premier League, might trade Berahino to raise money. But Reuters quoted Pulis as saying after the game: “Saido Berahino is a very talented boy. I look forward to working with him as a player for however long I am here as manager.”Blyth looked ready to overcome a five-tier difference and achieve the upset of the day against visiting Birmingham when Robbie Dale scored twice in six first-half minutes. But Birmingham replied with three goals in six minutes in the second half. Swansea routed its hosts, fourth-tier Tranmere, 6-2, and host Leicester beat a fellow Premier League team, Newcastle, 1-0, on a goal by Leonardo Ulloa.ATLÉTICO MADRID CLOSES IN Antoine Griezmann headed in two more goals to lead Atlético Madrid to a 3-1 win over Levante, as the defending champions pulled to within a point of the Spanish league lead.With a winter reinforcement, Fernando Torres, watching from the stands at Vicente Calderón Stadium, Griezmann added to his hat trick from the last round by scoring in the 18th and 47th minutes.Host Atlético pulled level on points with Barcelona before it visits Real Sociedad on Sunday. The leader, Real Madrid, is 1 point ahead of its main title rivals with two games in hand.SHUTOUT FOR NANTES The sixth-tier team Club Franciscain was brought to earth by Nantes in the French Cup as the three first top-flight teams to enter the tournament advanced.Nantes’s 4-0 victory ended the visitors’ ambition to become the first side from the Antilles to reach the round of 32. The small club traveled from the Caribbean island of Martinique to take on the 2000 champions in heavy rain at Stade de La Beaujoire.Évian-Thonon-Gaillard, the 2013 runner-up, also advanced, with a 3-0 win at sixth-tier Bobigny. Facing sixth-tier opposition at Lusitanos Saint-Maur, Reims won, 3-1.GERRARD TO PLAY IN M.L.S. Steven Gerrard will move to Major League Soccer. Liverpool said Gerrard, a midfielder and its longtime captain, would play in the United States when the Premier League season was over. Gerrard, 34, announced Friday that he would leave Liverpool when his contract expired this summer but that he would continue playing abroad. Liverpool said on its official Twitter account Saturday that Gerrard “confirms he will move to the USA this summer.” It is not known where Gerrard, a former England captain, will play. NEW CRYSTAL PALACE MANAGER Alan Pardew was appointed manager of Crystal Palace, leaving midtable Newcastle for a team fighting against Premier League relegation.Pardew, who played for Palace from 1987 to 1991, replaces Neil Warnock, who was fired last weekend.Pardew had been at Newcastle since 2010, and Palace had to buy him out of a contract that ran until 2020.Advertisement