AdvertisementSupported byBy Mike ChappellINDIANAPOLIS — Anthony Castonzo has been a rock on an ever-shifting beach.He has started 56 consecutive regular-season games at left tackle for the Indianapolis Colts and has missed just four of their 3,391 offensive snaps since the N.F.L. began charting individual participation in 2012. He was on the field for each of his unit’s 1,190 snaps this season, a league high.“I take pride in the fact you can count on me to be out there,” Castonzo said. “I’ve had bumps and bruises, things here and there.“Everybody pretty much plays hurt, but I take pride in being able to grit through a lot of things.”If only Castonzo’s durability were contagious.“You wish the other four spots were just like that,” Coach Chuck Pagano said. “We might not be talking about the O-line as much as we talk about the offensive line.”But the Colts’ injury-riddled offensive line will be a factor in Sunday’s A.F.C. wild-card playoff game against the visiting Cincinnati Bengals. Castonzo will be there, protecting the blind side of quarterback Andrew Luck, as part of the Colts’ 11th combination on the starting offensive line.The 10 combinations the Colts used during the regular season were the most among playoff teams. Carolina had eight, New England seven, Seattle six, Cincinnati five and Detroit four. Baltimore, Dallas, Pittsburgh and Denver each relied on three combinations. Green Bay and Arizona had two.As has been the case most of the season, injuries will force Joe Gilbert, the Colts’ offensive line coach, to mix and match.Right tackle Gosder Cherilus was placed on the season-ending injured reserve list Wednesday with a groin problem. Center A. Q. Shipley and guard Hugh Thornton, who combined for 13 starts, are doubtful because of injuries. The most likely alignment against the Bengals will place Castonzo at left tackle, the rookie Jack Mewhort at left guard, Khaled Holmes at center, Lance Louis at right guard and Joe Reitz at right tackle. Reitz missed the final three games of the regular season with an ankle injury.It has not been easy keeping track of who has played what position as the season unfolded. The Colts have started four left guards and right tackles, and three right guards and centers. Reitz has started at left guard, right guard and right tackle. The lack of continuity up front contributed to spotty protection for Luck and a hit-and-miss running game in the regular season.Luck was sacked 27 times and hit more than 90 times, according to N.F.L. game books. The Colts’ running game ranked 22nd in the league in yards per game (100.8) and 25th in yards per attempt (3.9). Running backs averaged 82.1 yards per game and 3.9 yards per attempt, but after Ahmad Bradshaw broke his leg on Nov. 16 against New England, those averages dipped to 55.5 a game and 3.6 an attempt.The past two weeks, the ground game has been virtually nonexistent. The Colts set a franchise record-low with 1 yard on 10 carries at Dallas and had 64 yards on 30 carries — 2.1 yards per attempt — in the regular-season finale against Tennessee’s 31st-ranked run defense. Many of those problems can be traced to the offensive line, although Luck argues otherwise.“I don’t think it’s held me back, anybody back,” Luck said. “It’s the nature of the N.F.L. Things happen; people have to step up.“You’d love to have the same five guys play every snap of every game for your whole career. But that’s not realistic.”The shuffling began early and has not abated.Donald Thomas, the projected starting left guard, missed the final 14 games last season with quadriceps and biceps injuries, then tore his right quad in training camp. The Colts anointed Holmes their “center of the future” during the off-season, only to see him sprain his left ankle on the first drive of the first preseason game. During the season, Reitz, Cherilus, Nixon, Mewhort and Thornton missed time with injuries.Pagano said: “Not going to say that’s the root of our issues, but it doesn’t help when you have to change week in and week out, plugging in new guys.”A potential problem, Castonzo said, is unfamiliarity. Since his rookie season, he has played alongside 11 starting left guards.Miscommunication frequently leads to a running back’s being smothered for a loss or Luck’s being pressured or sacked.“We all have been getting reps since training camp,” Castonzo said. “We trust everybody in here. It’s just about getting on the same page, communications-wise.”Although Castonzo has grown accustomed to adjusting his game from week to week, he had to be even more flexible last Sunday against the Titans. Shipley started at left guard but injured his ankle. He was replaced by Thornton, who injured his shoulder and was replaced by Jonotthan Harrison.Castonzo said: “It was: ‘O.K, A. Q., let’s do this. O.K., Hugh, let’s do this. All right, Jon, let’s do this.’ Whoever is there, you just have to have confidence in them, which I do.”Asked whether he paid attention to who was lining up at left guard against the Titans, Luck chuckled and said: “Probably not. At the time, you don’t think about it.“I know it wasn’t Mewhort.”Mewhort, a 13-game starter at left guard, was making his first start at right tackle.“It’s hard,” Pagano said of the adjustments along the line. “We make no excuses. It’s next man up.“You’d like to go 16 weeks and have the same five guys start, week in and week out, but that hasn’t been the case since we got here. We’ve dealt with it every single year.” Pagano is in his third season with the Colts. Injuries forced the Colts to use eight offensive line combinations last season.“We’re fortunate we have a lot of guys who have position flexibility, can play a lot of spots,” Pagano said. “We’ve got smart guys, tough guys who can fill in and play winning football.”Advertisement