AdvertisementSupported byEssayBy Bruce WeberDon Mattingly is the author of one of baseball’s most preposterous statistical anomalies. In 1987, he set the major league record (it has since been tied) for most grand slams in a season — six — and those were the only ones he ever hit. Two of them came during a streak in mid-July when he matched the record for most consecutive games with a home run — eight — actually hitting 10 in eight games. The last one, in Texas against the Rangers, just barely sailed over the wall in left-center field, not exactly the left-handed Mattingly’s power alley. “Holy cow, he did it!” Phil Rizzuto screamed, announcing the feat on TV. “Holy cow, Mattingly is unbelievable.”Rizzuto didn’t always get things right, but this time he was on the money. For Yankee fans, Mattingly was a hero in a dark time whose on-the-field derring-do, especially in the first half of his career, made it worth watching a team that was generally not much better or much worse than meh. And for those of us old enough for the long view, he was the greatest Yankee between Mantle and Jeter. (I give him the edge over Munson. We can argue that. You Reggie fans, just cool it.)Mattingly’s election to baseball’s Hall of Fame in this, his last year of eligibility, is probably not forthcoming (this year’s class of inductees will be announced Tuesday), a melancholy fact. But then, his playing days as a Yankee had something of a melancholy cast. He arrived for a cup of coffee in 1982, a year after the Yankees went to the World Series, and retired in 1995, a year before they returned. And in the last half of his career he was a diminished player, his skills attenuated by the persistent back problems that forced him to quit prematurely at 34, his spirit likely withered by the mortifying shenanigans of the Yankees’ principal owner, George Steinbrenner, and his minions (who once ordered Mattingly fined and benched for not getting a haircut), not to mention the ignominy of a last-place finish in 1990. The usual argument against Mattingly’s deserved (say I) place in the Hall of Fame is that he wasn’t good enough long enough, and that his abbreviated career didn’t allow for the aggregation of homers and hits and runs batted in that often serves as proof of a player’s immortality.But if you saw him play, especially through the eyes of a Yankees fan, it could make you forget his dreadful mustache. He had one of those stances that gets fixed in your mind — slightly pigeon-toed and tense, bent a bit forward from the waist, his left elbow held in close to his ribs — and a swing that was a perfect uncoiling, the bat lashing out like a spring sprung. In the field he won nine Gold Glove awards, and was terrific on sharp ground balls and exculpating scatter-armed infielders like Steve Sax and Alvaro Espinosa from God-knows-how-many throwing errors.You want numbers? That 1987 season with those home run records wasn’t nearly his best. He won the American League’s Most Valuable Player award in 1985, hitting .324 and leading the league in doubles (48), R.B.I. (145) and total bases (370). He hit as high as .352 and had as many as 35 home runs and 238 hits in a season. Over a six-year span, from 1984 to 1989, he hit .327, led the league once in hitting, twice in hits, three times in doubles, once in slugging, twice in total bases (and for good measure, once in sacrifice flies). For my money, during those seasons, more than a half decade, he was the most consistently dangerous hitter in the A.L. — better than Jim Rice or Kirby Puckett or Robin Yount or Paul Molitor or Cal Ripken, all Hall of Famers. And here’s a statistic to chew on: For his career Mattingly struck out 444 times in 7,722 plate appearances, or once every 17.4 times he came to the plate. Derek Jeter’s ratio was one in 6.8. After retiring as a player, Mattingly was successful as a coach for the Yankees. In 2004, when he was the hitting coach, the team belted 242 homers, the most of any Yankee team in history. Now, of course, he’s the manager of the Dodgers, which strikes me as ridiculous — wrong shade of blue. After Joe Torre stepped down as manager of the Yankees, I favored Mattingly over Joe Girardi to replace him. Girardi is like the new stadium — he’s fine, spiffy, a good face for the organization. But not for the fans who saw Mattingly in his prime.Maybe the saddest I ever was over a ballgame was the last one Mattingly played, the fifth and deciding game of the division series in Seattle against the Mariners on Oct. 8, 1995. Mattingly had declared he would retire at the end of the season, and the Yankees, as if to reward him at last, had sneaked into the playoffs as the first wild-card team. In his final season, Mattingly had his first chance at postseason play. He was brilliant, the old Mattingly, hitting for average (.417 for the series) and power. He had a home run in a Game 2 victory at Yankee Stadium (I was there — the crowd went berserk), smacked two doubles in Game 4 and put the Yankees ahead in the sixth inning of Game 5 with a ground-rule double that drove in two runs. It seemed that a righteous ending was in store. But David Cone, another Yankees war horse, walked in the tying run in the eighth, and the game went to extra innings. In the top of the 11th, the Yankees scored on a single by Randy Velarde, and all they had to do was hold the lead. They didn’t. In a play that seemed to unfold in slow motion so that you could see the heartbreak coming long before it arrived, Edgar Martinez doubled into the left-field corner off Jack McDowell, scoring two runs, including Ken Griffey Jr. on an all-out sprint from first base. So Mattingly didn’t get his playoff victory, and it’s the longest of long shots that he’ll enter the Hall of Fame. Sports may be fair, but life isn’t. Advertisement