AdvertisementSupported byAnalysisBy Beckley MasonIn the last few seasons, the Nets have developed a habit of making midseason turnarounds after making major personnel changes. Two seasons ago, they went 35-19 after Avery Johnson was fired as coach. Last season, they closed the season with a 34-17 record after adjusting to the loss of Brook Lopez. Having defeated the Magic in Orlando on Friday night, the Nets have won six of their last seven games.The hot streak coincides with an overhaul of the starting lineup. Benched are point guard Deron Williams and Lopez, who have struggled with nagging injuries. Mason Plumlee and Jarrett Jack have ascended in their place, and they provide a desperately needed athleticism and pop in the starting lineup. As a result, the Nets are suddenly scoring like a top-10 offense, after posting an offensive rating in the bottom 10 of the league.Coach Lionel Hollins has been noncommittal about when Lopez and Williams, both on max contracts, might return to their previous stations. Hollins even began with Lopez on the bench Friday night though the center was coming off his best game of the season: 29 points against the Chicago Bulls’ stout front line.The victory Tuesday over the Bulls — probably the Nets’ best win of the season — was the first time Lopez played more than 30 minutes since Dec. 3, and his fresh legs showed. He was quick and decisive with the ball, often attacking from the free-throw line area after catching a pass out of the pick-and-roll. Against the Magic’s weak interior defense on Friday, Lopez was predictably dominant. But he played only 20 minutes despite shooting 7 for 8 and hauling in 8 rebounds in his curtailed appearance. For now, Lopez off the bench is a winning stratagem, and Hollins seems reluctant to change it even if Lopez has returned to peak form.Williams’s future is even trickier to forecast. Hollins and the Nets have been unable to count on Williams, who is mired in his worst play since his rookie season. Hollins told reporters that Williams would have to earn his way back into the starting lineup.“Deron’s been out and we don’t know how long he’ll be able to play,” Hollins said. “So I’d rather stay with the right group, the first group, and then give him his time. If he struggles, then I don’t have to put him in the game.”At his best, before debilitating ankle injuries robbed him of his explosive first step, Williams was one of the top players in the league. Even in recent seasons, he has had runs of good health that have allowed him to be an effective point guard. But his inability to get into the paint and finish is a real problem, and in six games replacing Williams in the starting lineup, Jack has simply been better, more dynamic.Wielding a wicked crossover and a fearless attitude, Jack is a more threatening driver than Williams off the pick. In the last seven games, 51 percent of Jack’s shots have come in the paint, compared with just 37 percent of Williams’s attempts. The caveat here is that Jack is in the midst of a scorching, and unsustainable, stretch of midrange shooting. There is a reason Jack has been one of the highest-paid backup point guards in the league: He can often hang with starters and produce points, but he is not quite in that top tier of floor leaders.Jack’s play has generally improved since he joined the starting lineup. Throughout his career, Jack has earned a reputation as a gunner who will go long stretches looking only for his shot. The Nets’ previously weak second unit encouraged this habit. But stationed next to Joe Johnson and the rest of the Nets starters, Jack has been more responsible. And Williams is running the second unit in limited minutes to far better effect than Jack did.If his two lead guards continue to play well, Hollins will have tough decisions to make, because he cannot just play them together. The dual-point-guard lineups have been disastrous for the Nets so far.The other addition to the starting lineup, Plumlee, brings invaluable activity and athleticism, as evidenced by his five dunks Friday night. Plumlee cannot shoot a lick, but he stretches the court vertically as a devastating dunker. Defenders have to rotate all the way over to him to prevent a pass to the rim, creating more space on the perimeter.The ability of Jack and Plumlee to attack the basket gives the Nets’ offense more of the drive-and-kick dynamic that works so beautifully for teams like the San Antonio Spurs. Threatening the rim also clears out more room for 3-point shooters, and the Nets have attempted 3-pointers at a significantly higher rate in the last seven games.Their rate of 3-point attempts also skyrocketed when the Nets’ season took off last January. But the real shift came on the other end of the court, as the Nets suddenly and surprisingly became one of the league’s top defenses. So far during this winning streak, the Nets have remained average defenders. Even if the offensive uptick is all that is sustainable from this run, it will very likely be enough for the Nets to rise a few places in the playoff hunt. Unlike the Western Conference, the moribund Eastern Conference will welcome at least three mediocre teams into the playoffs. The new-look Nets appear worthy of the distinction.Advertisement