By RICHARD SANDOMIRJAN. 3, 2015
Milton and Anthony Tembelis, cousins from Queens, were eating pastrami and turkey sandwiches at a table for two Friday night in a concourse at Madison Square Garden.They had left their $180 seats as the Detroit Pistons were pulling away from the Knicks in what would be the Knicks’ 10th consecutive loss. The Tembelises were in no rush to finish and return to Section 9.“We said, ‘Let’s go in, watch the ceremonies and the first quarter, and come out here for the second,’ ” said Milton Tembelis, who lives in Astoria, Queens, and owns a trucking company. “I can’t see a TV, and I’m not concerned. They’re 5-29. It’s unfortunate. Normally, I wouldn’t leave my seat under normal conditions.”The Knicks would lose, 97-81, to the Pistons, who are just 9-23 but on a four-game winning streak. Yet the Garden announced a sellout of 19,812, the 177th in succession for the Knicks. There were some empty seats, though the number was not disclosed. The figure that matters at the Garden is tickets sold, not the number of fans who show up. The Knicks have the fourth-highest average attendance in the N.B.A., filling the Garden to capacity. The Pistons are last in the league, averaging 13,806 a game — 62.5 percent of capacity at the Palace of Auburn Hills.AdvertisementAlthough the Knicks could finish with a franchise-worst record — especially if Carmelo Anthony, who sat out Friday night, needs knee surgery — so much seemed normal Friday night. The public-address announcer, Mike Walczewski, called out Knicks 3-pointers with as much vocal verve as if Patrick Ewing were on the court and John Starks were rising for a jam. Fans cheered when the Knicks scored, at least early, and then later as the home team made a run after being down by more than 30.AdvertisementThe celebrity buzz continues, at least for now. Taylor Swift, Dustin Hoffman, Edie Falco, John McEnroe, Tom Hanks, Chris Rock, Emmy Rossum, Howard Stern, Cedric the Entertainer and Odell Beckham Jr. are among those who have shown up this season, a Garden spokesman said. An occasional presence on celebrity row who was there on Friday, the singer Phil Collins, said he was not frustrated by the Knicks’ poor first half.“I know what it’s like to have some good ones and bad ones,” Collins said. “Sometimes, a changeover takes some time to execute.”Despite the full house, the celebrities and a performance by cast members from the Broadway musical “Motown,” the fans had little to cheer about. The Knicks’ offense and defense were often inert. Fans erupted more for a marriage proposal shown on the video board and for a fan who sank four free throws for a $1,000 prize in a sponsor promotion than for anything the Knicks did.Rooting for the Knicks is becoming increasingly difficult for a season-ticket holder like Kenny, who gave only his first name, an engineer from Queens.“It’s like I come here for no reason,” he said. “It’s like donations.”After five years with season tickets, he said, he is ready to stop attending games and sell his tickets on StubHub. “Basically, I’m done — goodbye,” he said as he was buying a soda.The secondary market has not fully written off the Knicks, according to data compiled by TiqIQ.com, a search engine that scans the listings of online ticket resellers. With the $49 ticket in the 400 section of the Garden as an example, the data show that the tickets have resold, or are being priced to be resold, below the face price for 15 games. For the Feb. 22 game against the Cleveland Cavaliers, the resale price is $145, reflecting the demand to see LeBron James, but the price for the Jan. 26 game against the Milwaukee Bucks is $35, and the price for the March 23 visit of the Memphis Grizzlies is $33.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Knicks have also been working with online discounters like Living Social and Groupon to sell some tickets. Living Social is selling ticket packages for bridge-level and 200-level seats for $89 to $109, which includes a $10 food and beverage voucher and a Knicks cap. The offer says the packages are worth $151 to $236. The Garden spokesman would not comment on the arrangement.The Knicks still have enough fans to keep the Garden packed, even in a miserable season that looks as if it can only get worse.Advertisement“People want to be here,” Anthony Tembelis said as he ate his sandwich during the Knicks-Pistons game. “You’ve got more celebrities than you have at Citi Field — and it’s a beautiful place.”Mike Breen, the Knicks’ play-by-play announcer on MSG, said he could still hear fans in full throat during a close game — so much so that it sounded like a playoff game.“They’re still desperate for a competitive team,” Breen said by telephone. “There are nights when they boo, but fewer than usual when they’ve been bad in the past. I think it’s the hope they place in Phil Jackson. I think they believe better times are ahead.”Andrew Williams, a fan from the Bronx who attends several games each season, is one of those people. To be a Knicks fan, he said, is to look at the institution and beyond Carmelo Anthony or Jackson, the team president.“It’s loyalty,” he said during Friday night’s game. “I can’t be disingenuous.”He was with his friend Michael Blount, who said he would rather be at the Garden than watch the Knicks on television, where ratings on MSG have tumbled by 17 percent this season.“The environment is amazing,” Blount said. “There’s nothing like the Garden. No matter how bad we do, we stick by our team.”As for Jackson’s effect on the team, Williams said, “He’d offer a lot more hope if he came down and coached.”An article last Sunday about Knicks attendance, ticket sales and ratings during their poor season misstated, in some editions, the number of successive Knicks sellouts at Madison Square Garden at the time. It was 177, not 157. It also misstated, in some editions, the percentage of decline in the Knicks’ television ratings on MSG this season. It is 17 percent, not nearly 30 percent.A version of this article appears in print on January 4, 2015, on Page SP7 of the New York edition with the headline: Filling Garden With Misery and, at Least for Now, Fans.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.