By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSOCT. 8, 2015
Andre Johnson had two touchdown catches against his former team on Thursday night to help the Indianapolis Colts beat the Texans in Houston, 27-20.Johnson, who spent his first 12 N.F.L. seasons in Houston before he was released in March, pushed the lead to 27-17 with a 2-yard touchdown reception from Matt Hasselbeck in the fourth quarter. Johnson finished with six catches for 77 yards.The Colts (3-2) extended their winning streak in their division, the A.F.C. South, to 16 games, an N.F.L. record.Brian Hoyer, who replaced Ryan Mallett for Houston (1-4) in the second quarter, threw a pass up for grabs that was intercepted by Mike Adams with less than two minutes left.AdvertisementHasselbeck, 40, was filling in for Andrew Luck, who missed his second straight game with a shoulder injury. Hasselbeck may not have been fully healthy, either, having missed practice Tuesday because of an illness.AdvertisementMIAMI COORDINATOR FIRED The Dolphins’ interim coach, Dan Campbell, fired the defensive coordinator Kevin Coyle and promoted the defensive backs coach Lou Anarumo to replace him.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The changes came after the Dolphins fired Coach Joe Philbin on Monday and promoted Campbell, who had been the tight ends coach.Coyle had been widely criticized for the decline of the defense since he joined the Dolphins in 2012. They gave up 317 points that season, followed by 335 and 373, and after four games, they were on pace to allow 404 this season.Miami (1-3) ranks last in the N.F.L. in rushing defense, at 160.5 yards per game, and last in sacks, with one.NO TIMETABLE FOR CRUZ Victor Cruz said doctors were prohibiting him from testing his injured left calf for several more days, if not much longer. There is no timetable for Cruz’s return to the Giants’ lineup.Cruz aggravated the strain in his calf, which he first injured in mid-August, in practice last week. The next day, the area was injected with platelet-rich plasma, known as P.R.P., to promote healing and reduce inflammation.“I want to sprint, and I want to do the treadmill, but they continue to hold me back until there’s 10 full days for the P.R.P. to kind of set in,” Cruz said Thursday.Cruz said he did not injure his calf last week as severely as he did in August. Already, he said, he feels better. BILL PENNINGTONA version of this article appears in print on October 9, 2015, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Johnson Returns to Houston, and the Colts Leave Happy.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.