By ANDREW KEHJAN. 4, 2015
As the Knicks were bracing themselves Sunday to play another game in this nightmare season, Coach Derek Fisher was asked what a victory against the Milwaukee Bucks could mean to the team.“It would be better than a loss,” Fisher said after a short pause. “But I don’t know if it would change anything overnight for what we need to be doing day to day. We’re obviously searching for a win. But I think, more importantly, we’re searching for what winners do in order to win.”It was a stark assessment, an obvious and salient point. There was a time, much earlier in the season, when Fisher insisted that the Knicks were a few late-game plays away from winning games. Clearly, he could not make that argument now.“That’s the harder part of winning,” Fisher said before the game at Madison Square Garden. “We’re still in the early stages of developing those types of characteristics and habits from each guy, top to bottom.”AdvertisementThese are dark times for the Knicks, and there does not appear to be an end in sight. Several players are injured, including their star, Carmelo Anthony, and there has not been much indication, at least publicly, of how badly they are hurt or when they might be ready to return. In the meantime, apparently, individual game results are ceasing to matter.AdvertisementFor the record, the Knicks lost, 95-82, dropping them to 5-31. It was their 11th straight defeat. The last time they lost 11 games in a row in a single regular season was in 1984-85. The few fans in the sellout crowd remaining at the final buzzer booed the players off the Garden court.Tim Hardaway Jr., who led the Knicks with 17 points, looked incredulous when asked about the losing streak. “Eleven?” he said, raising his eyebrows.The misery has been difficult to believe. Amar’e Stoudemire called the team’s struggles “mind-boggling.” It did not help that for the second game in a row, the Knicks fielded what amounted to their junior varsity squad.Anthony missed his second consecutive game, and fourth over all, because of a sore left knee. Stoudemire missed his fifth straight with a sore right knee. Andrea Bargnani, who has played about 20 minutes this season, was sidelined with a strained right calf muscle. And Iman Shumpert, who went through a full workout on the court before the game, remained out of the lineup to continue rehabilitating his left shoulder, which he dislocated on Dec. 12.The Knicks did not offer a recovery timetable for any of their injured players.“I wish I could just give you guys a date or a time frame, but it’s really up to the body at this point,” said Stoudemire, who said that he would not be with the Knicks for their next two games on the road. “You’ve got to listen to your body when it tells you it’s been overused.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Jason Kidd, Fisher’s counterpart on the Bucks’ bench, played for the Knicks the last time they were competitive, finishing his playing career immediately after helping them to 54 victories in the 2012-13 regular season.Kidd, like Fisher, made a direct transition from point guard to professional head coach, taking over the Nets last season. After a 10-21 start in 2013, Kidd and the Nets engineered a striking turnaround, winning 33 of their next 46 games after Jan. 1.“There’s always time to change things around,” Kidd said. “In the East, everybody’s still eligible to make the playoffs. Anything can happen.”AdvertisementBut Fisher does not seem to be thinking that way. He, too, was asked if the Knicks could take any inspiration from how Kidd and the Nets were able to find their stride beginning last January.But making the playoffs would appear to be a pipe dream. A short run of good results would be a more realistic goal.“I think a better example is what the Detroit Pistons have done in the last four games — where you go from 5-23, and you win four games in a row, and the team starts feeling better about who they are and what they’re doing,” Fisher said. “Whether or not the Pistons make the playoffs, it doesn’t take forever to start to feel better about who your team is and what you’re trying to do.”There was little to feel good about Sunday.Seconds after winning the opening tip, the Knicks turned the ball over, a sign of what was to come. They committed their 12th turnover before the midway point of the second quarter. That they finished the game with 18 turnovers felt like a small victory.Any positive play by the Knicks was undercut by the fact that they shot 40.8 percent from the field.“Losing isn’t enjoyable in any way, shape or form,” Fisher said after the game.But how much would have changed if they won?A version of this article appears in print on January 5, 2015, on Page D3 of the New York edition with the headline: Seeking Better Play, if Not a Win, the Depleted Knicks Get Neither.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.