AdvertisementSupported byBy Matt HigginsTORONTO — One has a reputation for wagging his tongue, whether in celebration after a score or in defiance after a whistle. The other says little, content that his actions speak for him.Each is a first-round N.H.L. draft pick with impressive hockey bloodlines. Together, the two — left wing Max Domi and center Sam Reinhart — combined to lead a high-scoring Canadian team through the early games of the World Junior Championship, an annual tournament featuring the world’s top teenage players. Canada, the top seed, defeated Slovakia, 5-1, in a semifinal Sunday night at Air Canada Centre, led by a hat trick from Nic Petan, who was named player of the game.Domi and Reinhart — 19-year-old sons of N.H.L. players who have developed chemistry skating on Canada’s top line, alongside the Rangers’ Anthony Duclair — have combined to record eight goals and nine assists in Canada’s first six games.The team was scarcely challenged in those games, all victories. In a previous matchup against Slovakia, the opening game for both teams, Canada won, 8-0. The rematch had higher stakes: a berth in the final Monday against Russia, a 4-1 winner over Sweden in an earlier semifinal, and a chance to avenge a loss to Russia in the 2011 gold medal game.“We’ve been preparing for it all along,” said Reinhart, who had an assist on Duclair’s goal against Slovakia. “This is the day where we wanted to be. We have a lot of composure, leadership and experience throughout our lineup, and I know our team is ready for it.”Domi praised Reinhart, who was tied for second in team scoring with 10 points through Sunday, as a big part of the success of Canada, which has not won the tournament since 2009. “He’s extremely smart, and he makes everyone else around him better, which is a feature in every hockey player that you want to see,” Domi said.Reinhart, an assistant captain, was just as eager to compliment his teammate.“He’s an easy player to play with,” he said of Domi. “He’s smart. He’s in the right spot. He can move the puck, as well as the shot.”The Canadian fans have found it just as easy to cheer the exuberant Domi. During preliminary-round games at Bell Centre in Montreal, the partisan crowds chanted his name. When play moved to Toronto, the Maple Leafs’ home, Domi attracted even more attention: His father, Tie Domi, was a fan favorite who played in parts of 12 seasons for the Leafs, a fearsome enforcer who spent so much time in the penalty box that he could have had his mail forwarded there.Max Domi, who plays for the London Knights of the Ontario Hockey League, projects as more of a scorer than fighter. The 12th overall pick in the 2013 N.H.L. draft, selected by the Coyotes, he was tied for second on Canada’s team with four goals through Sunday.Still, Darcy Regier, Arizona’s assistant general manager, said he had been most impressed with Domi’s attitude, lauding the way Domi had played when he did not have the puck.“He’s willing to do things like block shots,” said Regier, who is at the tournament as a scout. He added that “a lot of offensive players don’t do those things.” Regier continued, “He’s attempting to play a complete game, and I think that’s important to his development and his progression into the pros.”Domi, who is listed at 5 feet 9 inches and 185 pounds, has failed to make the Coyotes squad out of training camp the past two years, and at the tournament in Canada, where he has often been in the midst of scrums, he has appeared to be playing with a chip on his shoulder.“It’s a bonus for our organization to have a guy that’s offensively talented and highly competitive,” Regier said. “Those things often, unfortunately, don’t come together. His dad was like that when he played. He was competitive.”So, too, was Reinhart’s father, Paul, a two-time All-Star defenseman who played 11 N.H.L. seasons, mainly for the Calgary Flames. Sam Reinhart’s older brothers are also N.H.L. draft picks — Max for the Flames, Griffin for the Islanders.Sam Reinhart, the second overall pick in the 2014 N.H.L. draft, selected by the Buffalo Sabres, struggled during a nine-game tryout this season, registering one assist. He was demoted to the Kootenay Ice of the Western Hockey League.But for Canada, he, like Domi, has been a revelation. Reinhart has frequently been Canada’s best two-way player, with a team-leading plus-minus differential of plus-10 entering Sunday’s game.Canada Coach Benoit Groulx said Reinhart’s quiet leadership had complemented the approach of the team’s garrulous captain, Curtis Lazar. On loan from the Ottawa Senators, Lazar registered three assists Sunday.“They’re both in control of this hockey club,” Groulx said. “They know what to do every day. When they come to the rink, it’s all business, and Sam has a different way to share his passion and competitiveness. But obviously he’s a very well-respected player in our dressing room.”In a tournament in which they had seldom been challenged, outscoring their opposition by 34-5, Canada’s players have been having fun and feeding off one another. On Sunday morning, before the semifinal against Slovakia, they could be heard laughing and hooting while playing soccer behind a black curtain.Asked what the ruckus was about, the usually voluble Domi suddenly channeled Reinhart. “That’s confidential,” he said.Advertisement