By BEN SHPIGELJAN. 4, 2015
The Arizona Cardinals’ exit from the postseason could be the Jets’ gain. Arizona’s loss Saturday to Carolina freed its defensive coordinator, Todd Bowles, to interview for the Jets’ head-coaching job this week.With the Chargers offensive coordinator Frank Reich also scheduled to meet with Jets officials this week, that leaves the Ravens offensive coordinator Gary Kubiak as the only confirmed candidate who has yet to meet with the Jets or consent to an interview. Kubiak is not likely to do so until the Ravens, who next play Saturday at New England in the A.F.C. divisional round of the playoffs, end their season.On Sunday, the Jets moved forward in their search for a general manager, speaking with Rick Mueller, the Eagles’ director of pro personnel, and scheduling interviews with two other candidates — Mike Maccagnan, the Texans’ director of college scouting, and Chris Grier, who serves in the same capacity for the Dolphins.ROOM FOR IMPROVEMENT Cam Newton said if the Panthers hope to make a deep playoff run, they will need to cut down on mistakes and make more plays on offense.AdvertisementCarolina turned over the ball three times on Saturday against Arizona but managed to escape with a 27-16 win, thanks to a defense that limited quarterback Ryan Lindley and the Cardinals to 78 yards, the fewest allowed in N.F.L. postseason history.Advertisement“Those things can’t happen, especially in playoff football,” Newton said after his first career playoff victory. “We can’t expect to win when we have three turnovers.”The Panthers will play top-seeded Seattle on Saturday night in the N.F.C. divisional playoffs.Newton praised his defense’s effort but did not appear to be thrilled with the overall performance of the team.The Panthers jumped to a 10-0 lead, but a muff by returner Brenton Bersin and an interception thrown by Newton — a play in which wide receiver Jerricho Cotchery ran the wrong route — led to two Arizona touchdowns, giving the Cardinals a 14-13 lead at halftime.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Without finger-pointing, it can’t happen,” Newton said.Carolina players said it was frustrating to be down by 1 point in the locker room, knowing they had outgained Arizona, 208 yards to 65.“We started out fast on both sides of the ball and on special teams, but it kind of fizzled,” Newton said of the middle part of the game. (AP)CANDIDATE FOR UNION DIRECTOR The Michigan-based attorney Jim Acho said he is running for executive director of the N.F.L. Players Association.Acho, 44, has represented retired players and has been an advocate for improving pension and medical benefits. He said he expected to have no trouble obtaining the support of at least three current player representatives on the board of directors, which is the requirement to become a final candidate for director.Acho acknowledged that he would be a long shot to win the election in March. DeMaurice Smith has been the N.F.L.P.A.’s executive director since 2009.Acho said his platform was based on improving long-term health care benefits. (AP)A version of this article appears in print on January 5, 2015, on Page D5 of the New York edition with the headline: With Cardinals’ Loss, Defensive Coordinator Is Free to Interview for Jets’ Vacancy.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.