By HARVEY ARATONJAN. 4, 2015
If ever there was a link between the formative past of women’s college basketball and its fanciful present, it was when the teams from Connecticut and Immaculata came together Sunday between games of the Maggie Dixon Classic at Madison Square Garden.Immaculata had just been defeated by Queens, 76-60, in a 40-years-later rematch between the teams that played the first women’s college game at the Garden in February 1975. Connecticut, the dominant team of its time and the holder of a record nine national championships, was about to run its record to 12-1 by handling stubborn St. John’s, 70-54.In a ceremony to honor Dixon, the former Army women’s coach who died of heart failure at 28 in April 2006, St. John’s and Queens lined up on one side of the court, with Connecticut and Immaculata facing them on the other.Immaculata, a 1970s power with three national titles, is a Division III team without a single player reaching six feet. Connecticut, a magnet for the high school elite, ranked second nationally, played the final stretch against St. John’s (12-2) with a 21st-century front line of the 6-foot-4 Breanna Stewart, the 6-foot-3 Kiah Stokes and the 6-foot-2 Morgan Tuck.AdvertisementIn particular, Stewart and Tuck ruined the Red Storm’s day by combining for 41 points, 17 rebounds, 6 assists and 4 steals. Stewart, the latest in a conga line of Connecticut superstars, also had six blocked shots, four of them as the Huskies began the second half with a 13-2 run that stretched a 38-31 lead to 51-33.Advertisement“With Morgan and Stewie together, it’s not like you have two players; it’s like you have four players,” said Geno Auriemma, the Connecticut coach and the patriarch of a program that has been the premier national power for two decades and counting.He was referring not just to their size but to their multiplicity of skills. Stewart is especially long and elastic, an athletic wonder who has made an impression on Lucille Kyvallos, the coach of Queens in the 1975 Garden game, which Immaculata won.At 82, Kyvallos flew in from Florida to reunite with several of her former players, who were introduced at halftime of the morning opener. She said she was avid viewer of the women’s game on television, especially of Connecticut and Stewart.“She’s so long,” Kyvallos said. “She does things we couldn’t imagine women doing when I was coaching.”When Queens and Immaculata played in the 1973 national title game — Immaculata won that one, too — the sport was not long removed from rules that limited two players to offense and two to defense. Stewart excels not only at both ends of the floor but in virtually all positions, out on the perimeter or inside the lane.Connecticut and Immaculata may occupy different physical universes, but they are separated by fewer than six degrees, as personified by Auriemma.Back when Immaculata was reaching six consecutive Final Fours, Auriemma was a 20-something hopeful, trying to climb the coaching ladder in the basketball hotbed of Philadelphia. He had been in the college women’s game as an assistant at St. Joseph’s before moving to Bishop Kenrick High School, his alma mater, to work for his friend Phil Martelli with the boys’ team.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Martelli helped Auriemma land a summer job at a girls’ camp run by Cathy Rush, the Immaculata coach.Advertisement“It was the biggest girls’ basketball camp in the country,” Auriemma said. “Every good player went there. Every college coach went there to recruit. It was 95 degrees, blacktop, got paid 110 bucks a week, but you owed Phil 120 because you wanted to go drink at night.”According to Auriemma, a call came in one day from Debbie Ryan, the coach at Virginia, offering Martelli a job as the team’s first full-time assistant. Martelli’s ambition was to coach in the men’s college game (he ended up as the longtime coach at St. Joseph’s). He asked Auriemma if he was interested. Rush made a call to put in a word. Auriemma was on his way to Charlottesville and, ultimately, to Connecticut.“I wouldn’t be coaching women’s basketball if that hadn’t happened,” he said. “It was something that changed my life, obviously.”Auriemma acknowledged the professional lift he had received from Rush, who, in turn, is linked to Kyvallos, for whom she played college ball at what was then West Chester State Teachers College, also in the Philadelphia area; it is now West Chester University.As a St. Joseph’s assistant, Auriemma was handed a $20 bill for transportation and sent to New York to scout a women’s doubleheader at the Garden. He recalled Montclair State, Queens, Immaculata and Louisiana State as the participants.“I really got an education of what women’s basketball was about in the Northeast,” he said.At Queens, the players receive similar tutoring from the fourth-year coach, Bet Naumovski, who struck up a friendship with Kyvallos upon taking the job and pitches the Division II program, in part, on its illustrious past. Gail Marquis, who played for Kyvallos on the 1975 team, fills in the blanks.Madison Rowland, whose 28 points and 11 rebounds helped Queens subdue scrappy Immaculata in the second half, said her sister, Mackenzie, had received the history lessons when she was recruited out of Albany one year before Madison, a sophomore, and had passed those lessons along to her.She described Sunday’s victory as “getting revenge for losing 40 years ago.” Asked if she knew the score of that historic game, she added, “65-61.”Correct answer. Quiz passed. Happy anniversary.A version of this article appears in print on January 5, 2015, on Page D2 of the New York edition with the headline: Game’s Present Yields Floor to Its Past Before a UConn Win.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.