By TOM SPOUSTAJAN. 4, 2015
ARLINGTON, Tex. —  It ended with Tony Romo taking a knee at midfield, perhaps leaving the impression that the Dallas Cowboys had been solidly in control against the Detroit Lions on Sunday.But to win, the Cowboys had needed a frantic rally. Romo, in a performance that contrasted with past playoff failures, delivered in the clutch, throwing an 8-yard touchdown pass to Terrance Williams with 2 minutes 32 seconds to play and propelling the Cowboys to a 24-20 victory in the first round of the N.F.L. playoffs.Before his game-winning throw, Romo had connected with tight end Jason Witten on a fourth-and-6 play from the Lions’ 41-yard line, a completion that saved the Cowboys’ season. Witten gained 21 yards to set up the score for Dallas (12-4 in the regular season), which will play the Green Bay Packers in the divisional round next Sunday at Lambeau Field.Romo, 34, who earned his second playoff victory in five tries as the Cowboys’ starting quarterback, said he did not see Sunday’s win as vindication.Advertisement“There is no sense of relief,” said Romo, who finished 19 of 31 for 293 yards, with two touchdown passes to Williams. “Our aspirations weren’t just winning the division, as great as that was, and it’s not just winning a playoff game. As great as this was, there are bigger things.”AdvertisementStill, at this point in his career, Romo’s legacy will hinge on whether he can reach and win a Super Bowl for the Cowboys.“I think he’s there,” the owner Jerry Jones said when asked whether the victory had elevated Romo. “I think people appreciate Tony and the skills he has. I hope they see he has made some pretty impressive plays and won some big games.“The only thing that will get people off his back totally will be to get that Super Bowl win. And I can tell him firsthand, you can have Super Bowl wins, and there still will be people on your back.”The Lions reached midfield on their final possession, but Matthew Stafford was sacked by defensive end DeMarcus Lawrence and lost the ball. Lawrence, who had fumbled earlier to give the ball back to Detroit on a crucial possession, recovered it to seal the Cowboys’ victory.Dallas began its rally late in the third quarter, scoring on a 1-yard run by DeMarco Murray on fourth down to narrow the Lions’ lead to 20-14. Dan Bailey’s 51-yard field goal moved the Cowboys closer, at 20-17, early in the fourth quarter.The Cowboys squandered a chance to seize control at the beginning of the third after linebacker Kyle Wilber intercepted a tipped pass, giving Dallas the ball at Detroit’s 19. After a sack of Romo, Bailey missed a 41-yard field-goal attempt, and the Cowboys appeared deflated at yet another key moment.But the Cowboys got a huge break with the disputed reversal of a pass-interference penalty midway through the fourth quarter. The Lions were leading by 20-17 when Stafford threw a third-down pass, and linebacker Anthony Hitchens was called for interfering with tight end Brandon Pettigrew. After conferring, the officials picked up the flag. The referee, Pete Morelli, said after the game that his crew had agreed that Hitchens was face-guarding, which is not a penalty.Advertisement“I did not get an explanation,” Pettigrew said. “I thought it was ridiculous. He ran through me, pretty much, trying to get back to the ball. To me, it was obvious. To them, they made whatever call and picked up the flag.”The reversed call wiped out a Lions first down, and Sam Martin’s punt went only 10 yards, putting the Cowboys in position for their final drive.“If we get those yards, then maybe we can score a touchdown and put the game out of reach,” Stafford said. “We made a lot of plays along the way here, and there that hurt us.”The Lions looked more in sync and focused from the start and methodically built a 17-7 halftime lead. Stafford was unflappable and outplayed Romo in the half, going 17 of 24 for 191 yards, including a 51-yard touchdown pass to Golden Tate. Reggie Bush carried only four times in the first half but averaged almost 7 yards per attempt and scored on an 18-yard run. The Lions also beat the clock on their last possession, scrambling downfield for a 39-yard field goal by Matt Prater with three seconds left before halftime.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Cowboys did not register much of a pulse until late in the second quarter, when Williams ran a quick turn-in pattern, caught a pass from Romo in stride and split the Lions’ defense for a 76-yard touchdown.Until then, Dallas looked as if it were taking this playoff exam without having studied. Romo was especially flat, completing 8 of 16 passes for 146 yards, about half of that coming on Williams’s reception. Romo was sacked three times in the first half — six times in all — and appeared under constant duress from clever Detroit stunts and blitzes, most of which were up the middle.The Lions had the league’s top rushing defense this season, and only the Packers and the Jets managed to gain more than 90 yards running the ball against them. The Cowboys figured to at least challenge Detroit’s defensive front behind an offensive line that had three players named to the All-Pro team last week, a unit that had paved the way for Murray to become the N.F.L.’s rushing champion.But Murray carried only seven times for 30 yards in the first half, accounting for all of the Cowboys’ rushing yardage to that point. The Lions held him to 75 yards total, and although the flow of the game might have kept the ball out of Murray’s hands, it seemed that Dallas was willing to put the outcome on Romo’s shoulders.Detroit (11-5 in the regular season) has not won a playoff game since a victory over the Cowboys in the 1991 season, and a distraught Ndamukong Suh reflected the raw emotion in the Lions’ locker room. At one point, Suh, in tears, left the room where his news conference was being held. He returned and said: “I apologize. I’m just speechless. I feel like we played as hard as we could. We put it all out there. I just didn’t expect this outcome. It’s sickening.”AdvertisementAn announced crowd of 91,410 at AT&T Stadium had been whipped into a raucous mood during festivities before the game, the Cowboys’ first playoff appearance since the 2009 season. But after Dallas punted on its first possession, the Lions subdued the fans into near silence on their fourth offensive play, scoring on a pass from Stafford to Tate, who caught the ball across the middle and outraced three defenders for a 51-yard touchdown.That sudden strike was followed by a Lions drive that came within inches of covering the entire length of the field. A 59-yard punt by Chris Jones had slowly rolled to a stop and was downed inside Detroit’s 1-yard line. As if that were not enough trouble, a penalty on the Lions then moved the ball back to about six inches from the goal line.Twice, the Cowboys appeared to stop the drive and seize control of field position. They stuffed the Lions on three consecutive plays, forcing a punt from the end zone, but Dekoda Watson was called for running into Martin, the punter, and the penalty gave Detroit a fresh set of downs.On third-and-8 from the 14, Stafford, seemingly trapped amid a rush of Cowboys, escaped to make another first down, and the Lions kept rolling from there.Statistically, it was a 99-yard drive that took 14 plays, ending with an artful juking and darting 18-yard run by Bush. But it also was an emphatic statement, giving the Lions a 14-0 lead and essentially telling the Cowboys they could be attacked from every angle at any point on the field.No matter. Win or lose, Romo has a penchant for dramatic finishes, and on Sunday, he and the Cowboys returned to the playoffs and delivered in the clutch.A version of this article appears in print on January 5, 2015, on Page D1 of the New York edition with the headline: At Clutch Moment, Romo Grabs Control.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.