AdvertisementSupported byRoundupBy The Associated PressManchester City avoided embarrassment at the hands of lower-league opposition in the F.A. Cup on Sunday, leaving third-tier Sheffield United to deliver the biggest shock of the third round.On the day England’s top teams joined the fray in soccer’s most well-known domestic tournament, there were a number of close calls for Premier League clubs, but only Queens Park Rangers fell.Q.P.R. lost, 3-0, to Sheffield United, which has recently made a habit of upsets in cup competitions. Last season, United reached the semifinals of the F.A. Cup. “I don’t think people will take us lightly,” United Coach Chris Morgan said. “In the last calendar year, we’ve beaten five Premier League clubs.”Manchester City appeared headed toward the same fate as Q.P.R. until James Milner — a midfielder filling in at striker — scored in the 66th minute and in injury time in a 2-1 win over second-tier Sheffield Wednesday. City, tied with Chelsea for the Premier League lead, beat Sheffield Wednesday, 7-0, in the League Cup earlier this season.“I am relieved,” City Manager Manuel Pellegrini said. “We play very badly, except the last 20 minutes.” Stoke avoided what would have been one of the biggest surprises in the tournament’s 144-year history, scoring three times in the final 10 minutes for a 3-1 win over nonleague Wrexham of Wales.Chelsea also needed a second-half comeback, scoring three goals in 14 minutes through Willian, Loic Remy and Kurt Zouma for a 3-0 win over Watford. Christian Benteke’s 88th-minute strike earned Aston Villa a 1-0 victory over Blackpool, which plays in the second tier.Arsenal, the defending champion, had it more comfortable, beating Hull, 2-0, in a repeat of last season’s final thanks to goals by Per Mertesacker and Alexis Sánchez.Southampton was held to a 1-1 draw by second-tier Ipswich. Crystal Palace — managed for the first time by Alan Pardew — thrashed the nonleague side Dover, 4-0, and Sunderland beat second-tier Leeds, 1-0.MADRID AND BARCELONA FALL Valencia ended Real Madrid’s 22-game winning streak with a 2-1 victory, but the blow was softened as Barcelona also stumbled to a 1-0 loss at Real Sociedad in the Spanish league.Cristiano Ronaldo scored his 26th league goal in the 14th minute on a penalty kick after Álvaro Negredo’s handball. But Valencia rallied with a goal by Antonio Barragan in the 52nd, and defender Nicolas Otamendi fended off Sergio Ramos to head home the winner in the 65th minute.Madrid’s loss meant Barcelona would become the provisional leader with a win, but Manager Luis Enrique left Lionel Messi and Neymar on the bench to start. Jordi Alba scored an own goal 2 minutes in, and Barcelona could not come back even with Messi and Neymar coming on in the second half.Madrid has a game in hand and leads Barcelona and the defending champion Atlético Madrid by 1 point.Advertisement