By JONAH BROMWICHJAN. 4, 2015
Every week, The New York Times will choose one essential game to watch, highlighting hot teams, winning and losing streaks and statistical intrigue in the N.B.A.Oklahoma City at Golden State, Monday, 10:30 p.m. Eastern, NBATVThe game was shaping up to be a regular-season classic.It was Dec. 18, and the Oklahoma City Thunder were paying a visit to the Golden State Warriors. Kevin Durant had reached 30 points in a game faster than any other player in modern N.B.A. history, having gone 10 of 13 from the field, but the Warriors had taken the lead with a strong second quarter.Then, with about two seconds to go in the first half and the score 65-63, Durant bumped into Golden State’s Marreese Speights during a drive to the hoop and fell awkwardly, spraining his ankle.AdvertisementDurant did not return, and although the game remained exciting — the Warriors held on for a 114-109 victory — some fans must have turned off their televisions feeling they had been robbed of a truly remarkable performance.AdvertisementThose fans will surely be tuning in on Monday when the Thunder return to Oracle Arena and Durant has the chance to fulfill the promise of that half in the new year.He certainly seems to have been preparing. In two games since returning from the ankle injury, he has averaged 39 points, 9 rebounds and 4.5 assists while shooting 61 percent from the field. Perhaps more important, he has led the Thunder to two victories, helping the team slip past the fast-paced Phoenix Suns in overtime and make mincemeat of the Washington Wizards’ tough defense.Durant’s return, which included a 44-point performance against Phoenix, may have stolen attention away from his partner in crime, Russell Westbrook, whose player efficiency rating (31.71, by ESPN’s calculation) led the league entering Sunday.Westbrook has helped the Thunder maintain a decent standing in the Western Conference while Durant, who had compiled the third-best player efficiency rating entering Sunday (31.42, per ESPN), has been out of commission. At 17-17, Oklahoma City is in second in the Northwest Division and in 10th in the conference, two places out of a playoff spot but only a game and a half behind Phoenix for eighth entering Sunday.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.If Durant, who also missed time with a foot fracture, and Westbrook, who sat out 14 games early this season with a broken hand, can stay healthy and maintain their high levels of play, the Thunder should make the playoffs. The bigger question is whether they will be able to overcome their injury-marred start to jump up the standings; if they are stuck as the seventh or eighth seed, their first-round opponent may wind up being the Warriors, who have the N.B.A.’s best record (26-5).It has to be odd to be on a team like Golden State (or Portland or Memphis) this season. On one hand, the Warriors are outperforming analysts’ predictions. On the other, even if they are able to maintain their standing, they can still look forward to opening the playoffs against a tough team (the San Antonio Spurs and the Los Angeles Clippers seem to be other candidates for that matchup). In such a competitive conference, even a top seed is not much of a reward.More than anything else, it is Golden State’s defense that has vaulted the team to first. The Warriors’ weaker individual defenders have either improved (like Stephen Curry) or had their minutes reduced (like David Lee, who will probably come off the bench going forward).Draymond Green, 24, who has replaced Lee in the starting lineup, is having a breakout season. His first career triple-double, which came Friday against the Toronto Raptors, was just the latest evidence that he is poised to become a star.AdvertisementGreen has roughly doubled his scoring average from last season (12.1 points a game, from 6.2) and has shown the ability to defend both wing players and big men. His versatility has contributed to the Warriors’ defensive flexibility, which mirrors the dynamism they show on offense. Accordingly, Golden State’s rookie coach, Steve Kerr, has called Green the “heartbeat” of his team.Still, even though the Warriors’ defense has performed admirably, their constant activity is not reminiscent of the kind of unit that has traditionally had success in the postseason. It is difficult to imagine them continuing to shift defensive matchups through the course of a grinding series, and Kerr’s ability to keep his team in shape may well become a compelling story line come the spring.In addition, while Golden State has repeatedly shown that it has the ability to shut down prolific scorers, it has yet to tangle with both Durant and Westbrook for an entire game. The half in which those two squared off against the Warriors was one of the most exciting in the N.B.A. this season. Monday’s rematch should feature two top squads at their best with, barring any bad luck, a more worthy conclusion.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.