AdvertisementSupported byGlobal SoccerBy Rob HughesLONDON — They say that the magic of the F.A. Cup is dead and buried beneath the hundreds of millions of dollars that separate the behemoths from the baby clubs in modern English soccer.But nobody told the Blyth Spartans that part-time players cannot have their hour in the limelight of the world’s oldest knockout competition. And nobody told Luís Figo, a winner of all manner of trophies when he played on the wing for Barcelona and Real Madrid, that folklore has lost its appeal.Figo was hooked on the action Saturday, when a local bartender, Robbie Dale, scored twice to put Blyth two goals up at halftime against Birmingham City, a team 120 places above Blyth in the league structures of England.Figo wasn’t among the 4,500 folks who squeezed into Blyth’s stadium on England’s northeast coastline. Instead, he was in Spain, for a while following Blyth via the Spartans’ Twitter account. The Cup has survived and embraced many things in its 144-year existence. Its allure is old-fashioned: a team of unknowns can, on any given day — and often on muddied, windswept fields like Blyth’s — go out and catch the pros napping and, as the saying goes, become giant killers for a day.The northeast of England has always had its romance with the Cup. Newcastle United won it six times, the last time being in 1955. Sunderland won it twice, in 1937 and 1973. And those clubs, the giants of their region, have been spectacular fall guys over the years in the Cup, with Newcastle once losing to nonleague Hereford United and Sunderland to nonleague Yeovil Town.Newcastle went tamely out of the F.A. Cup this past weekend, losing 1-0 to Leicester City despite the heroic defiance by its young goalkeeper, Jak Alnwick. The traveling Newcastle fans, dispirited by how the club owner has sold key players, causing the team manager to leave last week, turned angrily on their defeated team Saturday.The opposite happened at Blyth. Even though Birmingham scored three times inside of six minutes to take the lead in the second half, the crowd more than showed how much it appreciated the spirit of adventure that had carried the Spartans so far.That name, Spartans, was thought up by the man who formed the club 115 years ago when Blyth was a fishing village. Fred Stoker later left to become a doctor on London’s famed Harley Street, but he implanted the nickname Spartans to imbue in his lads the battle spirit of the ancient Greek army.But there was a nonchalance, as well as a fierceness, about the striker who made Blyth tick Saturday. Dale, 30, had his chances to join professional clubs earlier in his career, but he has said that he didn’t want to be bothered with the lifestyle or the ambition.He was, and still is, happy to play part-time, just as he is content to get up on a Sunday morning to open up his mother’s pub to serve customers from behind the bar.Some who watched Saturday could not understand that laid-back attitude. One who should, Chris Waddle, was commentating on the game for BBC radio. Waddle ranked somewhere between Robbie Dale and Luis Figo as a winger. He did not play full-time until he was well into his career, first working in a sausage-making factory while playing on the weekends for Tow Law Town, not far from Blyth.Waddle was a mesmerizing player, relatively untutored and therefore beguiling in what he might do with the ball. His skills took him on F.A. Cup runs with Tottenham Hotspur, and on World Cup runs with England, via a stint with Olympique de Marseille in France.Waddle’s love of wing play showed in his comments on Saturday. He rooted for the part-timers, and he noted how Dale was able to strike with either foot — the first goal was an instinctive strike from close range, the second from the edge of the penalty box against a retreating massed defense.Birmingham, as a professional opponent should, came on strong in the second half. Afterward, both team managers thanked the players of Blyth for manifesting the spirit of the competition, even though the “little” team’s adventure ended after a run of seven games in this season’s Cup. As Dale opened up his mother’s bar on Sunday, the club posted its own response on Twitter to Luis Figo: “It was brief and we have been unfollowed but it was nice while it lasted. If you ever fancy a trial @LuisFigo give us a call.” This wasn’t to be Blyth’s year. The manner in which the team was overtaken illustrated that while part-timers can live with pros for a time, ultimately the bigger team — and its greater skills — will endure.But the F.A. Cup, despite being overpowered by the big guns with their huge resources from the Premier League and the Champions League, has not lost its own global reach.In another of Saturday’s games, another small club from the northeast, Gateshead, suffered a crushing 7-0 defeat at the home stadium of the Premier League club West Bromwich Albion.The man of that match, Saido Berahino, scored four times, including a fantastic hat trick in the space of 11 minutes. Berahino will one day play for the England national team and is rumored to be a target of Liverpool at a price of about $35 million.He and his family arrived in England when he was 10 from a violence-torn Burundi. On World Refugees Day last year, hetaped a message for the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and others who faced the same situation: “Never give up.” A message that would ring true for a few clubs in the F.A. Cup, too. Advertisement