AdvertisementSupported byBy James MontagueELBASAN, Albania — In the end, the snipers stood down and the fans went home in silence.Serbia had just scored its second goal, a breakaway from Adem Ljajic with virtually the last kick of the match, to seal its 2-0 victory Thursday over Albania in their 2016 European Championship qualifier. A few moments later, the Italian referee blew his whistle and the stadium announcer gave the result as if announcing the passing of a beloved pet.In purely sporting terms, the game had meant nothing for Serbia. It had been eliminated from the competition months ago. But the match in this central Albanian city had been colored by history and politics, after the teams’ meeting in Belgrade last year was abandoned after a drone carrying an Albanian nationalist flag was flown over the field, inciting a riot., Fearing violence in the rematch, European soccer’s governing body deemed the game a high-risk affair and barred Serbian fans from attending. And as expected, the day began under a suffocating blanket of security.The main highway between the capital, Tirana, and Elbasan, about 35 miles away, was closed nine hours before kickoff. The highway itself was lined with checkpoints, and the stadium itself was surrounded by a ring of armed officers. Residents of the tower blocks surrounding the stadium were told to stay inside their apartments and warned not to let strangers into the building.More than 2,000 police and 500 special forces officers patrolled the streets, and snipers took positions on the rooftops surrounding the Elbasan Arena. Huge, Russian-made helicopters flew overhead as the police, equipped with water cannons and tear-gas canisters, tried out crowd-control maneuvers. “It is for practice,” a police officer explained over the deafening sound of the rotor blades overhead.Elbasan had been filled six hours before kickoff with celebrating home supporters hoping to see Albania qualify for its first major tournament. But there were no reports of violence.The Serbian national anthem had been loudly booed, but aside for a few chants eulogizing the Kosovo Liberation Army — considered a terrorist organization by many Serbs — the crowd of about 12,000 was largely subdued thanks, in part, to a torrential rain. Even the snipers on the roof of a building next to the stadium saw little danger, moving into a tent erected nearby to keep dry.The match looked headed for a scoreless tie as it entered second-half added time before Manchester City defender Aleksandar Kolorov skipped into the penalty box and gave Serbia the lead. Ljajic’s goal doubled the lead, and compounded the misery, only a few minutes later.Besmir Limani, a 28-year-old Albanian supporter who had traveled from Switzerland for the match shuffled out afterward with thousands of silenced fans. Limani’s face was painted red, with a black eagle over his eyes, nose and mouth. “It is my birthday tomorrow,” he said. “I don’t know if I will celebrate it.”Albania will have another chance of qualification; already assured at least a playoff spot, it can advance directly to next year’s tournament in France with a victory over Armenia in Yerevan Sunday.“We knew we could reach qualification, but we are young and wanted to do it tonight in our land, in front of our people,” Albania’s captain, Lorik Cana, said.For Serbia, the match was a rare victory in a disappointing campaign.“The players were an example in Belgrade, and the Albania players were a great example today,” said the Serbia captain Branislav Ivanovic, referring to the fact that Serbia’s players protected their Albanian opponents as they were attacked by the crowd in Belgrade a year ago.“I hope in the future it won’t be like the Belgrade game anymore,” he added.When he and Cana passed a few minutes later, they shared an embrace before heading to their separate buses.Advertisement