AdvertisementSupported byCanada 5, Russia 4By Matt HigginsTORONTO — With Canada’s prime minister on hand and fans clad in the red and white of the national flag rocking Air Canada Centre, Canada scored on its first two shots and held on to defeat Russia, 5-4, on Monday and win the gold medal at the World Junior Championship.“To end the streak of Canada not being the top, it’s finally — we can call this game ours,” said Canada’s captain, Curtis Lazar, who played on a team that finished fourth in 2014.Canada had not won gold at the tournament since 2009 and last made the finals in 2011, when it left with a wrenching 5-3 loss to Russia.In that game, Canada led by three goals in the third period before Russia rallied. And in a pretournament exhibition game on Dec. 19, the Russian goalie Igor Shestyorkin stopped 52 shots in a 2-1 overtime win for Russia.On Monday, Anthony Duclair scored 23 seconds into the game, one-timing a feed from Max Domi past the outstretched glove of Shestyorkin. It was the fourth goal of the tournament for Duclair, a Rangers prospect.Two minutes later, Nick Paul redirected a backhand pass from Brayden Point past Shestyorkin. With Canada up by 2-0 three minutes into the game, Russia Coach Valeri Bragin replaced Shestyorkin with Ilya Sorokin.Russia proved resilient, cutting its gap to 2-1 at 9 minutes 20 seconds of the first period when defenseman Dmitri Rudin blasted a slap shot from the top of the right face-off circle past Canada goalie Zach Fucale, who finished with 26 saves.Connor McDavid gave Canada a 3-1 lead on a breakaway 5:08 into the second period, and Domi scored on a screened shot two minutes later for his fifth goal of the tournament, which tied him for the team lead with Lazar. Later in the period, Domi, the son of the former N.H.L. player Tie Domi, threw a shot at the net that center Sam Reinhart deflected between Soyorkin’s pads. It was Reinhart’s team-leading 12th point of the tournament.Russia roared back with three goals in just over three minutes, two of the scores coming on power plays. Ivan Barbashyov scored off a scramble in front of Fucale while Jake Virtanen was serving a minor penalty for boarding, Sergei Tolchinski converted a two-on-one feed, and a Nikolai Goldobin shot pinballed past Fucale while Samuel Morin was off for tripping.With Canada’s lead trimmed to one goal, Coach Benoit Groulx called a timeout. But defenseman Josh Morrissey said the team did not panic during the second intermission. “Boys, we have a 5-4 lead in the gold medal game going into the third period,” he said of the message in the locker room. “At any point in this tournament, we would have taken that for sure.”In the final period, Canada, which had rolled to a 6-0 record and outscored opponents by 34-5 entering the final, showed again that it was the class of the tournament. Its players kept Russia’s forwards from getting close to the front of the net, and Fucale turned aside 11 Russian shots.Slovakia, which had lost to Canada by 5-1 on Sunday night, upset Sweden, 4-2, for the bronze medal. It was the first medal for Slovakia at the tournament since a bronze in 1999. Advertisement