By ANDREW KEHJAN. 5, 2015
Consider the Nets’ statistics in the first quarter of their game Monday night against the Dallas Mavericks: 35 points, 61.5 percent shooting, 13 team assists and no turnovers.And consider their numbers over the next three quarters combined: 47 points, 30.2 percent shooting, 7 assists and 14 turnovers.Put another way, the Nets made 16 shots in the first period and only 16 more in the rest of regulation.The discrepancy in numbers was enough to cause emotional whiplash inside Barclays Center, precipitating a tense end to regulation and, ultimately, helping produce a 96-88 overtime victory for the Mavericks.AdvertisementThe swing in sentiment in the arena was striking. At one point, the Nets were up by 14 points, and energetic vibes were coursing through the arena. With 34.8 seconds left in overtime, the stands were quiet and Nets were slinking to the bench, down 8 points after Dirk Nowitzki hit a clinching 3-pointer from the top of the arc.AdvertisementAfter the shot, Nowitzi held up three fingers on each hand, then dug his hands into his hips, as if returning weapons to their holsters. The shot improved Nowitzi’s career point total to 27,412, moving him into seventh place on the career list, ahead of Moses Malone, who finished his career with 27,409 points.“I think we let up — thought it’d be easier than it was,” Mason Plumlee said of the difference between the first quarter and the rest of the game. “Then we were fighting from behind in the fourth.”For all their struggles after the first quarter, the Nets (16-18) made things interesting with a late run. They were shooting 1 for 22 from 3-point range before Joe Johnson made two in quick succession to erase a 6-point deficit.With 2 minutes 37 seconds left, he drained one from the left side to bring the Nets to 3 points behind. After Rajon Rondo missed two free throws at the other end, causing the arena to burble with excitement, Johnson crept up the court, received a pass from Jarrett Jack at the top of the arc and made another 3-pointer, tying the game with 1:42 left.There were 26.6 seconds remaining when Jack hit a 17-foot pull-up jumper over Monta Ellis, giving the Nets an unexpected lead. With seven minutes left in the game, the Nets had been down 11 points, and Jack’s shot capped a 15-2 run.Ellis tied the game when he was fouled going to the rim and made both of his free throws. Johnson had a chance to win it with a shot attempt just inside the 3-point line, but it clanged off the rim at the buzzer.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“You make some and you miss some,” said Nets Coach Lionel Hollins, who pointed out that the team would not have been in that position without the superb play of Johnson. “The thing about Joe is he is not afraid to take them.”The Nets then withered away in overtime, shooting 1 for 4 from the field in the period, while the Mavericks shot 5 for 9.AdvertisementIt was always going to be a hard test for the Nets. The Mavericks improved to 15-3 against Eastern Conference teams. They have appeared even more imposing since acquiring Rondo in a trade last month. With him in the lineup, Dallas is 7-2.The Nets, at the same time, were depleted. They did not have the services of Deron Williams, who had a sore left side, according to the team, and Kevin Garnett, who was given a night of rest and recovery.Williams’s soreness seemed to be related to an injury he had sustained Sunday night on the left side of his rib cage. Williams said after that game that he had merely cramped up, and on Monday his official status was “probable” for the game against the Mavericks, so his absence Monday night was surprising.“He’s in pain, and he can’t play,” Hollins said when asked about Williams.After the game, Hollins said with a smile that the Nets’ hot start to the game had been “an aberration.”But he was not quite joking: “If you make shots and you execute and you don’t turn the ball over, you have the chance to score,” he said. “But lately, we’ve just struggled. We’ve struggled from the 3-point line, and we struggled, just period, making shots.”Brook Lopez personified the Nets’ midgame change of fortunes. He had 18 points and 6 rebounds in the first quarter as the Nets jumped out to a 35-21 lead. But he finished with 22 points and 13 rebounds.“We just went a different way,” Lopez said, adding that the team missed shots it could have made. “I didn’t want to really try to force anything. We have lots of guys that can contribute on this team, and you definitely don’t want to get in the way of that.”But the contributions were not quite there, so Lopez and the Nets faded away.A version of this article appears in print on January 6, 2015, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Nets Make It Interesting but Wither in Overtime.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.