AdvertisementSupported byBy Zach SchonbrunThe puzzling disappearance of the sophomore guard Rysheed Jordan from the St. John’s lineup this past weekend was resolved at least somewhat on Monday afternoon, when the program announced that Jordan would return for Tuesday’s crucial home contest against Villanova.The timeline and circumstances surrounding the sudden departure of Jordan, the Red Storm’s second-leading scorer, remain cloudy. On Friday night, the team deemed it an “indefinite leave of absence,” and Coach Steve Lavin danced around questions about Jordan’s long-term future with the program after Saturday’s game.Lavin then met with Jordan on Sunday and assessed his frame of mind, and before practice Monday, the team announced that Jordan had been away mourning the death of his grandmother Roslyn Walker.“Let me just put it this way,” Lavin said. “He had a very difficult week, where he lost a loved one. There’s going to be a funeral Thursday. We’re trying to show as much support as we can for him.”Lavin added: “When someone is dying, I don’t want to delve in and get details for a press release. I want to show respect.”Questions about Jordan’s commitment to the team arose because he had previous encounters with the coaching staff. In November 2013, Jordan was suspended for a game for violating team rules. Lavin has also shielded Jordan from speaking with the news media since he arrived on campus, a move Lavin has repeatedly said is designed to keep Jordan’s focus on his studies.The senior guard D’Angelo Harrison said Jordan had not notified his teammates that he was departing and had not responded to messages over the weekend.“He knows he let us down,” Harrison said, adding: “Our job is to play. I’m glad he’s playing tomorrow. This is a big game for us.”Guard Phil Greene said the players expected Jordan to address them before practice.“We’re a family,” Greene said. “Families stick together through tough times. We have each other’s back, and it’s going to stay like that.”The timing of Jordan’s return is, at the very least, convenient for No. 24 St. John’s. After beginning the season 11-1, the program’s best start since 1985-86, the Red Storm are coming off losses to Butler and Seton Hall to begin Big East play. Last year, the Red Storm began 0-5 in the league, and it probably cost them a spot in the N.C.A.A. tournament.St. John’s is already depleted inside without two of its top incoming frontcourt players, Keith Thomas and Adonis De La Rosa, who did not qualify academically at the start of the season. In Jordan’s absence, Harrison and Sir’Dominic Pointer played 40 minutes each on Saturday.Lavin said a six-man rotation enabled the team to get off to its great start, but he added, “If we lose any of those six, it’s a blow.”Discussing the Red Storm in a telephone interview, Austin Croshere, a Big East analyst for Fox Sports 1, said, “In the early part of the season, Lavin did a tremendous job getting them to buy in to an unselfish system.”But he said that in the Butler game Saturday he saw problems beyond the absence of Jordan that were evident in the previous loss, to Seton Hall.“Down 10 with maybe six minutes to go in that game, it kind of switched to a lot of things we saw last year,” Croshere said. “They weren’t making that extra pass; the ball wasn’t going side-to-side; settling for long 3-point shots early in the shot clock. That was uncharacteristic of the St. John’s we had seen all year and reminiscent of the one we had seen at times last year.”On the positive side, Croshere said, the surprising depth of the Big East this season gives the Red Storm a chance to remain in the hunt for an N.C.A.A. tournament bid even if they lose Tuesday’s game.But Greene did not mince his words when asked about the opportunity against the No. 8 Wildcats.“This is the biggest game of our career right here,” Greene said. “We don’t want to go 0-3, dig ourselves that big a hole. We need to bounce back and win.”Advertisement