By MICHAEL COHENJAN. 5, 2015
MEMPHIS —  As the Knicks were trying to complete a major three-team trade on Monday — a deal that sent J. R. Smith and Iman Shumpert to the Cleveland Cavaliers in exchange for several players with nonguaranteed contracts and a future draft pick — Jose Calderon was going through a pregame drill.He waited for a screener beyond the 3-point arc and then dribbled his way toward the right sideline, toward his partner in the pick-and-roll, setting up a quick and low crossover that finished with a jump shot from the free-throw line.The ball swished through the net, and Calderon retreated to the top of the arc for the next repetition. This was 84 minutes before tipoff, 84 minutes before the start of another loss, 105-83, by an undermanned Knicks team against a talent-rich opponent, the Memphis Grizzlies.But as Calderon worked through the nuances of the ball screen — the dribble handoff, the side pick-and-roll, the midrange jumpers from multiple angles — the subtle contradiction of this particular workout in this particular arena shone through.AdvertisementCalderon, a native of Spain, was practicing the very plays his countryman Marc Gasol has perfected as a center (and a screener) for the Memphis Grizzlies. The very plays that have made Gasol one of the best centers in the N.B.A. The very plays that, come this summer, will make Gasol a tantalizing free-agent prospect for the Knicks’ triangle offense.AdvertisementThe fans can dare to dream.“I think he’ll be good in any system,” Calderon, who scored 13 points Monday, said of Gasol before the game. “I’m going to leave it like that. I think he’s the kind of player every team in the league is going to look at.”That speculation lent an interesting subplot to the Knicks’ game at FedExForum. Yes, the team had lost 11 straight games and 21 of its last 22, but this game could be viewed through a different lens. This was a chance to watch Gasol do what he does and to wish he were doing it in a Knicks uniform, with Calderon, perhaps, as his point guard.The game began as so many others had for the Knicks this season, with a makeshift lineup falling into an early double-digit hole and a coach often retreating down the sideline in disgust.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.That coach, Derek Fisher, watched as Gasol, who entered Monday averaging a career-high 20 points per game, made two beautiful plays on offense and anchored a defense that held the Knicks to 26.1 percent shooting in the first quarter.Gasol first took advantage of a mismatch against the smaller Tim Hardaway Jr., spinning off the right block for a running one-hander that spun around the hoop and in. Later, he turned an entry pass into a one-handed assist, catching the ball and feeding it to Tony Allen in one fluid motion, the ball touching only his right palm. Gasol finished with 14 points and 8 rebounds.“Marc’s having a great year for this team, and I think their team over all is having a great year,” Fisher said before the game. “I think he’s just doing what guys need to do in this league. You get better every year; you add things to your game.”What Gasol has added this year stems from a rigorous off-season regimen in which he overhauled his diet and reshaped his body after sustaining a knee injury that cost him more than 20 games last season. Slimmer, more agile and more aggressive on offense, Gasol is in the midst of perhaps the best stretch of his career on a Grizzlies team many consider a legitimate contender in the Western Conference.The Knicks, meanwhile, are contenders only for the top pick in the N.B.A. draft. And when Hardaway ran a pick-and-roll with Jason Smith late in the second quarter, becoming trapped along the sideline and throwing the ball backward over his head in desperation, a playoff berth was the stuff of fairy tales — with Gasol setting the screens.REBOUNDSCarmelo Anthony, who has a sore right knee, missed a third consecutive game for the Knicks. Derek Fisher said he was not sure whether Anthony would play against Washington on Jan. 7. ... Andrea Bargnani (strained right calf) and Amar’e Stoudemire (knee) were sidelined as well.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.