AdvertisementSupported byBy Scott CacciolaThe Knicks, in their continuing quest to shed salaries and reshape the franchise, were involved in a major, three-team trade on Monday night, sending J. R. Smith and Iman Shumpert to the Cleveland Cavaliers in exchange for several players with nonguaranteed contracts and a future draft pick.As a part of the deal, the Cavaliers sent Dion Waiters to the Oklahoma City Thunder, the N.B.A. announced. The Knicks received Lance Thomas from the Thunder, along with Alex Kirk and Louis Amundson and a future second-round pick from the Cavaliers.In a separate move, the Knicks — 5-32 after losing Monday night to the Grizzlies in Memphis — waived Samuel Dalembert. By cutting Dalembert, their starting center, the Knicks will save $2 million for the remainder of the season.By dumping three rotation players, including the mercurial Smith, Phil Jackson, the Knicks’ president, appeared to be reinforcing his long-held view that the team’s best shot at viability will come through the draft (the Knicks are lottery-bound) and free agency.“As our journey moves through this season, we will search for the type of players that fit the style we hope to exhibit for our fans,” Jackson said in a statement. “Our desire is to improve our ability to compete. In addition, these transactions improve our flexibility to the current roster and the salary cap for future seasons.”The team that was left to take the court against the Grizzlies was a ragtag assemblage of journeymen and unproven prospects. Jason Smith, Cole Aldrich, Jose Calderon, Shane Larkin and Tim Hardaway Jr. made up the starting five. Carmelo Anthony, Amar’e Stoudemire and Andrea Bargnani sat with injuries as the Grizzlies handed the Knicks their 12th straight loss, 105-83.“This was an impactful night in terms of, first, the three guys that aren’t with us anymore,” Coach Derek Fisher said of Smith, Shumpert and Dalembert. “I spoke to each of them before the game, told them how much I, and we, appreciate the efforts made in this transition process to learn what we were offering, what we were teaching. All three guys made the effort to do so.”If nothing else, the Knicks will have even more money to spend over the summer after dealing Smith, who was to make $6.4 million next season through a player option. Anthony, Calderon, Hardaway and Cleanthony Early are believed to be the only incumbent Knicks players under contract for next season, which could put the team roughly $30 million under the salary cap.The Knicks also gained two trade exceptions via Monday’s deal, and Jackson could remain active before the Feb. 19 trade deadline.Jackson said recently that he had determined which players on the team were “learners” and which ones were not, and it became increasingly clear that he hoped to rid the roster of Smith, along with his big contract. Jackson was able to accomplish that only by pairing him with Shumpert, and the Cavaliers were willing takers.“I think, especially in this league now,” Fisher said, “guys with expiring contracts that don’t possibly have a long-term future, I think Phil is continuing to look at how we transition as we change the culture.”Smith, 29, has unique offensive talents — he was named the N.B.A.’s sixth man of the year for the 2012-13 season — but his skills seemed to erode after he re-signed with the Knicks in 2013, for three years and $18 million, and had knee surgery.He was also suspended and fined by the league on multiple occasions for offenses that included violating the league’s drug policy, untying an opponent’s shoelaces and threatening an opposing player via social media.Shumpert, 24, who was the 17th overall pick of the 2011 draft, had spent his entire career with the Knicks. Known as a defensive stopper, he tore a ligament in his left knee during his first season but regained enough of his rhythm to be a factor in the 2012-13 playoffs.Still, he was the subject of constant trade talks last season, and his confidence waned, along with his play. In 24 games this season, he averaged 9.3 points, 3.4 rebounds and 3.3 assists — respectable numbers for a member of an underperforming team. But he continued to labor with his outside touch, shooting 40.9 percent from the field.About an hour before Monday’s game, as the Knicks engaged in trade talks, Smith was pulled from the starting lineup. Larkin started in his place. Shumpert, who has been sidelined since Dec. 12 with a dislocated left shoulder, was unavailable to play.In Philadelphia, where the Cavaliers were preparing to play the 76ers, Coach David Blatt was asked whether Waiters might return to the starting lineup given the team’s injury problems. (Neither LeBron James nor Kyrie Irving was available.)“We’re down a few guys, and we’re going to have to shuffle a little bit more than usual; let’s put in that way,” Blatt said. “So we’ll have to step outside the box.”They certainly did. Waiters was not on the bench during pregame introductions, and Kirk and Amundson soon joined him in the locker room. The Cavaliers dressed nine players against the 76ers and lost, 95-92. Afterward, Blatt acknowledged that the team was engaged in trade talks but declined to elaborate.“I thought the guys played under some pretty adverse conditions,” he said, “and I thought they responded very well because it’s never easy to have that kind of thing happen at any time during the season and certainly not right before a game.”The Cavaliers, who fell to 19-16, are very much a work in progress this season and were in search of help. They turned to the struggling Knicks, of all teams, for reinforcements in Smith and Shumpert, two perimeter players who come with their own issues. Both teams, though, felt these were gambles worth taking.On Monday, as with so many other games, Fisher could only watch in disgust as the Knicks fell behind by 12 points early and then by 26.Fisher watched as Marc Gasol, who entered the game averaging a career-high 20 points per game, controlled the contest at both ends of the floor. For the Knicks, futility was the preferred replacement for fluidity, surfacing in plays defined by an almost inexplicable level of ineptitude. There was the instance when Hardaway, trapped along the sideline in a pick-and-roll gone wrong, flung the ball backward over his head as a pair of defenders closed in. Or the play in which miscommunication between Pablo Prigioni and Early led to a breakaway dunk for Tony Allen, who was fouled by Early from behind for no reason. Or the possession in which Gasol easily dribbled around Aldrich in the paint and rammed through the chest of Smith for a layup. “The nine guys that went out there, I thought they were trying their best,” Fisher said. “And I think for most of this season, guys have done that. We just haven’t come up on the winning end as much as we’d like to. On a tough night where you lose some guys, I still think we’re moving towards our future right now.” Michael Cohen contributed reporting from Memphis.Advertisement