AdvertisementSupported byN.F.L. RoundupBy Ken Belson and Ben ShpigelThe owner Stan Kroenke of the St. Louis Rams on Monday announced plans to build an 80,000-seat football stadium in Inglewood, Calif., about 10 miles from downtown Los Angeles.The proposed stadium would be part of a sports and entertainment district and would be built jointly with Stockbridge, a real estate investment firm. The plans envision no need for public funds. Sixty acres of land that Kroenke owns would be consolidated with 238 acres at Hollywood Park that are owned by Stockbridge.The groups said they would gather signatures with an aim of getting an initiative on the ballot this year for voters in Inglewood.The plan is the latest chapter in a continuing story about when, or whether, an N.F.L. team will return to Los Angeles.The Rams — along with the San Diego Chargers and the Oakland Raiders, two other teams once based in Los Angeles — are among the teams considered most likely to move to the city, which has not had an N.F.L. team for two decades.But any relocation of a team requires the approval of 24, or three-quarters, of the 32 N.F.L. clubs, and the owners could impose a fee on any team that moves. The N.F.L. said Monday that “no team has applied for relocation, and there will be no team relocations for the 2015 season.”The league’s relocation bylaws also say that teams cannot move unless they have exhausted good-faith efforts to negotiate with their host city. Kroenke’s push for renovations to Edward Jones Dome, where the Rams play, stalled last year.OTHERS TURN DOWN JETS The Jets’ general manager job is a desirable position. With it comes the No. 6 overall draft pick and at least $40 million in salary-cap space. What might not be guaranteed is autonomy over football operations, and it is possible that is one reason four of 10 confirmed candidates have dropped out of contention.Declining interview requests on Monday were Ryan Pace, the Saints’ director of pro personnel, and Chris Ballard, who serves in the same capacity for the Chiefs and is considered a favorite to land with the Bears. NFL Network reported that Ballard was concerned about not having full authority with the Jets. Two assistant general managers, George Paton of the Vikings and Eric DeCosta of the Ravens, who is considered the successor to Ozzie Newsome, passed last week. BEN SHPIGELCOACH’S HOME BURNS Carolina Panthers Coach Ron Rivera has more to worry about this week than his team’s coming N.F.C. playoff game against the Seattle Seahawks; an overnight fire at his home displaced his family on Monday.The Rivera family’s 7,000-square-foot, two-story home in Charlotte, N.C., sustained “significant” damage from an early-morning blaze, two days after Carolina’s 27-16 playoff victory over Arizona.No one was injured in the two-alarm fire, which took about an hour to extinguish.The Charlotte Fire Investigative Task Force determined the cause to be a fireplace and estimated the damage at $500,000.Rivera and his wife, Stephanie, along with his two brothers and their wives, were sleeping in the home at the time of the fire. All made it out safely, as did two family pets. Rivera said his family would stay at a friend’s home while they waited for theirs to be rebuilt. (AP)Advertisement