AdvertisementSupported byRangers 5, Blue Jays 3By David WaldsteinTORONTO — Twenty-two years of anticipation and excitement gathered like a brewing storm inside Rogers Centre, waiting to be unleashed in the first postseason game here since the 1993 World Series.With David Price on the mound carrying the hopes and expectations of essentially an entire country, Blue Jays fans expected this day to be a celebration of their long-awaited return to October baseball. But Price carried a drought of his own into the game.Although he had ample playoff experience with the Tampa Bay Rays and the Detroit Tigers, Price had not won a playoff game since a 2008 victory in relief and had never won a postseason start.Price’s streak continued on Thursday. He was not sharp, and the Texas Rangers took advantage to beat the Blue Jays, 5-3, in Game 1 of their American League division series, dampening the excitement that had been building for weeks.“I care a ton,” Price said. “I want to go out there and pitch well for my teammates and pitch well for my country, and I feel like I didn’t do it.”In a game that did not follow a typical script, the best pitcher lost, three of the best players on the field left with injuries, and the two players at the bottom of the Rangers’ batting order hit big home runs.Adrian Beltre, the Rangers’ No. 3 hitter and third baseman, left with what Manager Jeff Banister called back spasms. Beltre was injured sliding into second base in the first inning but remained in the game until he hit a run-scoring single in the third.He looked even more disconsolate than the Blue Jays fans when he had to be taken out of the game. With the athletic trainer at his side and teammates patting him on the chest to console him, Beltre appeared to wipe tears from his cheeks as he walked off.“Well, the availability as we know it right now is that I have no information on that,” Banister said. “What I do know is that Adrian, when he slid into second base, came up with some back spasms. Further evaluation, we’ll know more tonight and also in the morning where he’s at.”The Blue Jays also lost their third baseman, Josh Donaldson, to an injury. Donaldson, Toronto’s No. 2 hitter, struck his head against the knee of second baseman Rougned Odor while trying to break up a double play in the fourth and was removed an inning later, for what the Blue Jays called precautionary reasons.The team announced that Donaldson had concussion testing and was cleared. He will be evaluated Friday.“I think he got a little lightheaded,” Blue Jays Manager John Gibbons said. “Something wasn’t right. But he passed the test, so that’s a good sign.”In 2008, Ryan Church of the Mets sustained a concussion in similar fashion; it was his second that year. The Mets were slow to react to the injury, and Church endured complications later on.The final injury of the day was sustained by Jose Bautista, the Blue Jays’ No. 3 hitter in his first postseason game. Bautista hit a sixth-inning home run off Yovani Gallardo, the winning pitcher, but left the game after his final at-bat, in the eighth, with muscle spasms in his hamstring. He said he received treatment and felt a lot better after the game, and would be able to play Game 2 on Friday.“It made no sense to go out to right field and play defense and aggravate it,” he said. “I should be ready to go tomorrow.”Some of the injured players could come back Friday, but Price may not get another chance to pitch in this postseason if the Blue Jays do not rally.Price gave up home runs to the No. 9 hitter, Robinson Chirinos (a two-run shot in the fifth), and a solo drive in the seventh to Odor, the No. 8 hitter. Price also hit Odor twice with pitches, a clear sign that he was not himself.Price had not pitched since Sept. 26, and although he said rustiness was not his problem, it appeared to be. He did acknowledge nerves but said that was to be expected, and he worked his way through it.“If you’re out there and not nervous in the first couple of pitches, the first couple of innings, I don’t feel like you are human,” he said.Price’s last victory in the postseason came in his rookie year, in the American League Championship Series against Boston.Since then he has made eight appearances in the postseason, six of them starts, and he has not won. He is 1-6 in postseason play with a 4.78 E.R.A. His career regular season E.R.A. is 3.09, and this year it was 2.45.“It’s been seven years,” Price said. “I want that monkey off my back. I expect to have better results out on the field. I didn’t throw the ball the way I’m capable of throwing it today, and I’ll be ready when it’s my turn to pitch again.”Advertisement