By KEN BELSONJAN. 5, 2015
The Dallas Cowboys are set to head to Green Bay to play the Packers on Sunday in the divisional round of the N.F.L. playoffs, but the Cowboys’ victory over the Detroit Lions on Sunday is still being picked over.Dean Blandino, the vice president for officiating for the N.F.L., said Monday that the Cowboys should have been penalized at a key point in the fourth quarter.With the Lions leading, 20-17, and charging downfield, the officials initially ruled on a third-down play that Cowboys linebacker Anthony Hitchens had interfered with Lions tight end Brandon Pettigrew. Hitchens was not going for the ball and was draped around Pettigrew. Mike Pereira, Blandino’s predecessor, who is now an analyst for Fox Sports, said during the game that pass interference should have been called.But after the flag was thrown, the referees conferred and picked it up, ruling there would be no penalty on the play. The Lions punted on the next play, and the Cowboys later mounted a scoring drive and won, 24-20.AdvertisementBlandino told NBC Sports Radio’s Pro Football Talk that pass interference, which according to the N.F.L. rule book occurs when a defender is not playing the ball and “restricts the receiver’s opportunity to make the catch,” was questionable on the play. “I would have certainly supported the call had they left the flag down, but I do think it’s a very close judgment call that could have went either way,” he said.But Blandino said the Cowboys should have been called for defensive holding because Hitchens held Pettigrew’s jersey earlier in the play.“That’s holding,” he said. “There’s no two ways about it. That’s a jersey grab. That’s a foul for holding that could’ve been called.” Pass interference penalties result in an automatic first down and the ball spotted at the point of the foul. Defensive holding leads to a 5-yard penalty and an automatic first down.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Blandino said the referees should have conferred before initially calling pass interference.Throwing the flag and then reversing the call led to confusion, he acknowledged.AdvertisementPete Morelli, the head of the officiating crew in Sunday’s game, told reporters afterward that the back judge threw his flag for defensive pass interference. The head linesman, who had a different angle, thought “the contact was minimal and didn’t warrant pass interference,” Morelli said. After the officials spoke, Morelli reversed the call.Morelli, too, acknowledged that the officials should have spoken before he announced the penalty. “It would have probably been smoother if we got together,” he said.The call reversal led to several conspiracy theories by fans on social media. Fans have also questioned why Cowboys wide receiver Dez Bryant was not penalized for unsportsmanlike conduct after he ran onto the field without wearing his helmet to dispute the initial pass interference call. Had Bryant been flagged, the Cowboys would have been penalized 15 yards and the Lions would have had a first down.Blandino, however, said Bryant’s actions did not automatically warrant a penalty because the rule against players’ taking off their helmets applies only to those in the game. Blandino said he would have supported a penalty on Bryant, but the officials used their discretion.Some analysts said the confusion could have been avoided if the officials were more familiar with one another. In the playoffs, the N.F.L. assembles crews of officials who had the best performance during the regular season. Blandino said there are “pros and cons” to having “all-star” crews, but he said most officials “have worked together at some point in their career.”A version of this article appears in print on January 6, 2015, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: Official Says Crucial Call Was Missed by Referees.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.