AdvertisementSupported byBy John BranchYOSEMITE NATIONAL PARK, Calif. — The two men attempting to free climb the daunting 3,000-foot Dawn Wall route of El Capitan spent much of Monday morning in their tents, hanging 1,200 feet above the valley floor.When Tommy Caldwell and Kevin Jorgeson are not climbing, they are doing all the things that ground-bound people might do on their couch: resting, eating, drinking coffee, talking on cellphones and surfing the Internet. One difference is that they often sand their battered fingertips. Another is that they go to the bathroom in a bag.For people around the world following their ascent, the wonder of attempting what many consider the most difficult rock climb in the world is hard to comprehend. But to those who have never climbed so much as to their own roof, the logistics of spending weeks on a wall, in winter, thousands of feet above the ground, is something beyond the realm of imagination, too.Where’s Kevin? Zoom in to find Kevin Jorgeson perched on the face of El Capitan’s Dawn Wall.How do they charge cellphones? Where do they get the food? And bathroom in a bag?Quick answers: Solar power, deliveries every five days, and yes — though one of them was spotted urinating off the cliff.“If you could send a hot pizza up tomorrow,” Caldwell jokingly suggested in a phone interview Sunday. “And we’re almost out of coffee.”Caldwell and Jorgeson are attempting to become the first to free climb the Dawn Wall, something many thought might be impossible because of its enormousness and vertical, smooth surface. To free climb means to climb without aid — propelled only by hands and feet, attached to a rope merely to catch a fall. And fall they do, sometimes several times while trying to complete a crux, or difficult maneuver.In the valley below the climbers Monday morning, Erik Sloan prepared about 150 pounds of supplies, including five days’ worth of food, that he and another man would spend the day hauling up the sheer face.Sloan, a longtime friend of the climbers whose yosemitebigwall.com site is a key source for route maps, had “haul” bags filled with 12 gallons of water, pasta, chili, fresh vegetables and fruit, trail mix and a small bottle of Bulleit whiskey “to take the edge off.” Alas, no hot pizza.There are anchor points in the wall about every 150 feet. Sloan and his partner climb to the anchor points, then use a pulley system and their own body weight to drag each bag up, one section at a time. It takes about 10 trips, and several hours, to get the bags to the camp.A graphic tracks an attempt by Tommy Caldwell and Kevin Jorgeson to free-climb the 3,000-foot Dawn Wall, a vertical sheet of mostly smooth granite that many believe is the hardest climb in the world.The camp consists of three portaledges, basically 4-foot-by-6-foot hanging cots with aluminum frames and clips that connect to bolts in the mountain. There is one for Caldwell, one for Jorgeson and one for the rotating members of a film crew chronicling the attempt. (The photographers, who are not free climbing, go down every couple of days to charge batteries and download their images.)“Once we get most of the hardest pitches down, which is about 300 or 400 feet above us, we’ll move our whole camp up about 500 feet, and we’ll base out of there for a day or two,” Caldwell said Sunday. “Then it’ll be more traditional wall-style, where we’ll climb and haul each day with us for a couple of days until we get to the top.”Part of the climbers’ scouting work the past couple of years has been to insert bolts, where deemed necessary, to support the climb — to hold ropes and gear. It is a common practice, unless someone climbs without ropes at all, because there is nowhere else to fasten to a rock this size. But it pales in comparison to the hundreds of bolts used by Warren Harding and Dean Caldwell (no relation to Tommy) on the first ascent of the Dawn Wall, with aid, in 1970. Harding was widely criticized, and a rival, Royal Robbins, spent weeks cutting and removing much of the hardware.Caldwell and Jorgeson have spent years training for the climb, practicing individual pitches, or sections, again and again, memorizing and recording the best ways to move — this hand to this tiny nub, this foot splayed to this one, one move at a time. The quest now is to send, or complete, all 32 pitches, in sequence, to the summit without returning to the ground, whether chased off El Capitan by weather, injuries, fatigue or moral defeat.On Monday, Caldwell wrote on his Facebook page, he had navigated Pitch 16, the “dyno,” by circling around one portion that Jorgeson plans to tackle by leaping horizontally, body off the wall for a moment, and catching himself with his fingers and toes.Jorgeson is not there yet. After two days of struggle on the sideways traverse of Pitch 15, he took Monday to rest and let his split fingertips heal. The dry, cold conditions are good for gripping, but fingers take a beating. Between attempts, climbers sand their fingers to remove the dead skin, and they apply lotion to them several times a day. (Caldwell’s hands are missing half of an index finger, severed by a saw accident years ago.)Between climbs, they are captive in their camp. Each has a compact stove to heat meals and boil water. Making the climb in winter, where the temperatures have risen to 50 degrees during the day and fallen well below freezing at night, is ideal for more than climbing; it solves any refrigeration issues.A few days ago, Caldwell posted a photograph on Twitter of a sandwich he was eating: salami, cucumbers and avocado on a bagel.Each has a toilet — essentially a bag with deodorizers, placed inside another bag.Most of the climbing is done in the late afternoon and evening, when the temperatures are cool and the sun does not beat on the rock and cause sweaty hands and slippery soles. That leaves a lot of downtime for plotting the next advance, reading, texting, updating social media and talking on the phone. (The wall of El Capitan, inexplicably, might have the best cell reception in the Yosemite Valley.) Phones and electronic devices are charged by portable solar panels. The men usually put their phones in “airplane” mode to help save the battery.Being stuck on the side of El Capitan can be both freeing and confining — not unlike a lazy day on the couch, minus the cold, the occasionally brutal winds, the periodic chunks of ice that fall like meteors and the stress of preparing to continue one of the great climbing expeditions.That is why they do so-called ledge yoga, performing poses to stay limber. For as much exhilaration as the men get from climbing, and as much downtime they have between surges, there is one thing they desperately miss from the horizontal world that many might not imagine: a place to take a few steps and merely walk.Advertisement