AdvertisementSupported byKeeping ScoreBy Benjamin HoffmanAs debates rage about the Hall of Fame worthiness of players like Mike Mussina, Curt Schilling and John Smoltz ahead of Tuesday’s announcement of the class of 2015, no one is bothering to argue the case for Aaron Boone.Boone, who played for 12 seasons, hit one of the most memorable postseason home runs, a blast that sent the Yankees past the rival Boston Red Sox and into the World Series in 2003. But he now faces the possibility of failing to garner a single Hall of Fame vote, and more than a few Red Sox fans will experience an extreme case of schadenfreude should that happen.A shutout would also cost Boone bragging rights in his own family. His brother, Bret, received one vote in 2011, and their father, Bob, was on the ballot five times, receiving as many as 38 votes. (Their grandfather Ray, though, despite a 13-season career that included two All-Star selections, never made it onto a ballot.)The eligible Hall of Fame voters change over time, as do eligibility requirements, so an apples-to-apples comparison of nominated players should be limited to the last 20 years. Currently, anyone who played for more than 10 years can make the ballot if two writers on a six-member committee nominate him.Among the 34 players on this year’s ballot, the candidates for joining the likes of Mark Langston, Devon White and Andy Van Slyke in the zero-vote club include Boone, Eddie Guardado, Rich Aurilia and Tony Clark. Each stuck around long enough to qualify for nomination, and each undoubtedly holds a special place in the hearts of more than a few writers. But voters have held to strict standards for the Hall of Fame, and these former players will have to be happy just to have been nominated.Last year, Ray Durham, Mike Timlin, Paul Lo Duca, Richie Sexson, Sean Casey and Todd Jones received zero votes. Durham had cause for protest: According to the advanced statistic wins above replacement, he was worth four more wins than Lee Smith, who received 171 votes. Nonetheless, Durham faded into history as most of the zero-vote players will after this year.A rare exception was Jim Deshaies, a left-hander who was 84-95 with a 4.14 earned run average in 12 seasons. His top on-field accomplishments were modest: being the 1,000th player to take the field for the Yankees and setting a record by striking out eight consecutive batters to begin a game. But that did not stop him from campaigning to get at least one vote when he was eligible in 2001.Deshaies got his wish when John Lopez, a columnist for The Houston Chronicle, voted for him. For his trouble, Lopez found himself defending the decision to writers who did not see a Hall of Fame ballot as a place for humor.“I wasn’t trying to make fun of the process or demean the Hall of Fame,” Lopez told The Associated Press. “I was very serious. Someone put him on the ballot for a reason. He handled himself the right way, always signed autographs. I know he’s not a Hall of Famer in terms of numbers. It was a tip of the cap to a guy who was an Everyman ballplayer.”Even if Boone or other candidates on the bottom of the ballot get a vote, they will almost certainly be eliminated from future ballots; a player must receive at least 5 percent of the vote to be eligible for another year. Given that Lou Whitaker, by almost any measure one of the 10 greatest second basemen, received only 15 votes in his lone year of eligibility and was dropped from the ballot, very few players can be considered a safe bet to move on. In Boone’s case, that is probably for the best — by at least one measure, he is one of the least deserving players to be considered recently.The Hall of Fame monitor, or HOFm, a statistic created by Bill James, is a simple tool to compare eligible players. There are a number of ways to earn points, with Hall of Famers typically scoring higher than 100. Boone received a point for hitting 38 doubles in 2002 and 3 points for his All-Star selection in 2003, and that is it. Not only is his HOFm score, at 4, the lowest this year, but only two other players in the last 20 years have been considered with a score so low: Gary DiSarcina and Otis Nixon, neither of whom received a vote.Deshaies’s HOFm was 6. That and his 12.1 career WAR make him the worst player of the last 20 years to receive a vote. In contrast, Frank Tanana, a left-hander who pitched for 21 seasons, was the most accomplished player to be shut out. A three-time All-Star, he had 240 wins and a 3.66 E.R.A. that, adjusted for park and era, was 6 percent better than average. He also compiled a career 57.9 WAR. Despite that, not a single writer in 1999 threw a vote his way.The ace of the California Angels in the mid-1970s, Tanana also had to watch as his team’s No. 2 starter, Nolan Ryan, received 491 votes and was elected with one of the highest voting percentages on record.When this year’s results are announced, players like Boone will have to wait and see if anyone thought to include them with the names of their far more accomplished peers. At that point, everyone can go back to remembering what they did well instead of focusing on what made them unworthy.Advertisement