By JOHN BRANCH, BROOKS BARNES, JENNIFER STEINHAUER and KATHARINE Q. SEELYEJAN. 5, 2015
The United States Olympic Committee seems ready to bid for the 2024 Summer Games. But the hard part is deciding which of the four finalists — Boston, Washington, Los Angeles and San Francisco — has the best chance of being chosen by the International Olympic Committee. The U.S.O.C. could make its selection as soon as this week, so we asked New York Times reporters in each city to describe the view from each place.A couple of years ago, The Onion ran a satirical piece about Bostonians pretending to live in a big city. It said residents “buzz about their daily routines in a delightful hubbub of excitement as if they lived in a major American metropolis.”Some people laughed, some were defensive. But few disputed that Boston is wrapped up in an existential debate with itself about whether it is a “world-class” city.Despite its many obvious assets — world-renowned universities, top-flight medical centers, a thriving biotech-driven innovation economy and championship sports teams, not to mention Tom Brady and David Ortiz — Boston still has an inferiority complex. And as it makes its first serious bid to host the Olympics, it shows.AdvertisementSome seem to think that being picked to put on the 2024 Summer Games is entwined with mythic world-class status.Advertisement“Boston is a global leader in innovation, and in order to remain a global leader, we must be aspirational,” the pro-Olympic Boston2024 website says.To Boston’s mayor, Martin J. Walsh, an initial skeptic of the bid, hosting the Olympics “puts us on a scale not too many cities can claim.”Mike Ross, a former Boston city councilman, argued that the Olympics are a good idea “and not just for the reasons one might think, such as helping us get over our persistent ‘smaller than New York’ Napoleon complex.”Whether winning an Olympics confers world-class status, Boston’s bid contains an inherent paradox: Its dream to make it big is not that big.Boston’s modest $4.5 billion proposal envisions a new Olympic model: a walkable, bikeable, sustainable Games that uses mostly pre-existing structures. This compact city of 646,000 plans a downsized, compressed, antisprawl Olympics. No venue would be more than a 10-minute walk from a subway stop or a commuter rail line.The International Olympic Committee has been forced to encourage this kind of thinking. Interest in hosting has declined as potential hosts watched costs spiral out of control for recent Games in Beijing ($40 billion) and Sochi, Russia ($50 billion).Still, one might wonder if Boston’s proposal was actually made by The Onion: The athletes could live in college dormitories that are empty during the summer; the modular housing of an Olympic village could later become new dorms; and a proposed $700 million Olympic Stadium would be temporary, so it could be razed or relocated.AdvertisementDoes anyone think this might be carrying Yankee frugality too far? And are Olympic bigwigs serious about not wanting an extravaganza?Either way, the Boston promoters are trying to win over naysayers by promising tangible benefits like upgrades in roads, bridges and public transit. But many wonder why it would take the Olympics to get those much-needed improvements. The Boston Globe columnist Joan Vennochi wrote that the promoters were giving Bostonians an impossible choice: Buy in to their bid to get a modern transportation system, or “be labeled a small-minded, provincial party-pooper.”And there you have it: Without the Olympics, Boston cannot be world class. KATHARINE Q. SEELYEHave you been to Boston? It’s boring.Sorry, Washington: No nation wants to send athletes to the home of the National Security Agency.That leaves Los Angeles with one actual competitor, San Francisco. It’s up to you, International Olympic Committee, but the population of that peninsula city — already terribly full of its Apple-Google-Uber self — would very likely burst into a fireball of smugness if it was also given the 2024 Olympics. Think it over.Los Angeles, on the other hand, is the perfect choice.The Chinese will be running Hollywood by then (except for North Korea’s Democratic Republic of Sony Pictures), so their athletes will feel right at home. To save on housing costs, David Geffen can offer to host the men’s gymnastics team at his mansion. And also the men’s water polo team.Beach volleyball? Hello.True, there will be no water for the aquatic center. Perhaps the pools could be filled with San Pellegrino. Or perhaps the divers could simply be trained to land in one of those itty-bitty washtubs, the way they used to at the circus. We’ll work it out.Imagine the opening ceremony Los Angeles could put together: Meryl Streep riding sidesaddle on a dolphin. Magic Johnson and Mama Kardashian carrying the torch. Fireworks sponsored by “Star Wars: Episode Ad Nauseam: Does It Really Matter What We Subtitle These Anymore, Part 1.”Look, there are pros and cons for every potential host city. Pro: Los Angeles would become more health-conscious than it already is. Con: Los Angeles would become more health-conscious than it already is.AdvertisementBut the City of Angels, really and truly, is a terrific choice. Get under the hood, beyond its silly celebrity facade, and you will see how serious a contender it is:Los Angeles is bigger than Boston, Washington and San Francisco combined. More than 30 countries have their second largest population in Los Angeles, a region of roughly 19 million people, giving a home-field advantage to more than Americans.Naysayers will bray that Los Angeles has hosted the Summer Games, twice. True, and that experience could be critical. Besides, London has been an Olympic city three times, so get over it.Among subway construction, road improvements and a desperately needed modernization of the Los Angeles International Airport, $40 billion worth of infrastructure enhancements are underway.In other words, stuff is being built in Los Angeles — unlike in San Francisco, where something as seemingly simple as improving four grass soccer fields last year was met with litigation, protests and a ballot measure. (For real.)Speaking of roads, everyone worries about Southern California’s famous freeway gridlock, which can indeed be formidable. But in 2011 and 2012, when a particularly busy stretch of Interstate 405 was closed for days at a time to accommodate construction, the opposite of Carmageddon happened: the streets emptied, with residents foregoing unnecessary trips.Finally: Have you been to Boston? BROOKS BARNESUnlike other cities that hide their goodies far from the airport, the glories of your nation’s capital are breathtakingly beneath you in your final approach. There is Arlington National Cemetery! Hello, Jefferson Memorial! Wow, I can practically touch the Washington Monument from my seat! (Fun game: Listen to a passenger near you describe with great authority and total inaccuracy what they see. My personal favorite was the guy who called the United States Capitol a memorial to George Washington.)The thrills may ebb once you try to exit the airport.A lack of proper signage, the absence of left-turn lanes, terrifying traffic circles for which the right of way seems to go to the fastest driver and an unpredictable public transit system can vex the visitor.As such, the Washington Metropolitan Area Transit Authority, for which there is a Twitter handle devoted to its daily bad deeds, needs to step up the maintenance right quick if we are to host the 2024 Summer Olympics. Congress, fond of meddling in the district’s business, should help.AdvertisementBut, hey, you’re here to watch sports. The city recently approved the construction of a new soccer stadium, which would keep company with our lovely home to baseball’s Nationals, right in the heart of the city, as well as FedEx Field, Verizon Center, the Armory and various University of Maryland venues. At last, R.F.K. Stadium, which is, politely, an embarrassingly decrepit pit, would almost certainly be renovated, or, better yet, demolished, with a glorious new Olympic stadium in its place. So stadiums: We’ve got it more or less covered.The Potomac River is a world-class kayaking venue and a possible host for rowing, and the Anacostia is well on its way. Our topography is good for cycling, and we have a strong — even White House-centered — history with equestrian sports. The area has produced champions in swimming, running and triathlon. We host a pro tennis tournament every year, as well as pro golf tournaments. In short, the hypercompetitive neurosis that fuels our political culture has been good for athleticism.You will hear bad things about our summer weather. It’s true. But there is an upside: In late summer, locals empty the place out, which means plenty of housing will be available. (Anyone want first dibs on a well-situated house in the northwest quadrant? It currently comes with an 11-year-old who can walk you through the cable system and a teenager who will block you on Twitter.)Amid the obligatory debates of what will become of an Olympic village in a town in desperate need of affordable housing once revelers hit the road, we tend to keep the focus on tourists. The two-for-one thrills of monuments, free Smithsonian museums and the maligned but majestic center of government rival all the other cities for non-Olympic recreation.There is plenty to eat here now, and our crab cakes can edge out Los Angeles sushi any day. We have better pizza now, too. No, seriously, we do. JENNIFER STEINHAUERSecretly, and somewhat smugly, San Franciscans love that so many other people love their city. They see their home as one of the most beautiful and interesting cities in the world, too. Validation is nice.But with all due respect, many in San Francisco would rather you do your fawning from a distance. Traffic is bad enough without the double-decker tourist buses blocking the view atop Lombard Street or clogging the Golden Gate Bridge.So it is with some reluctance that the following suggestion is made: San Francisco would be quite a sensible place to hold the Summer Olympics.The Bay Area’s bid can promise cool summer weather (with virtually no rain), a decent mass-transit system (not cable cars) and a collection of well-suited venues spread (but not too far) across the landscape.AdvertisementSan Francisco has its cultural critics, but it would show the world a United States that is environmentally friendly, diverse in many ways and technologically advanced. And if we in the Bay Area were the type to brag, we would add that the scenery is incredible.But the key lies in the venues. In these post-Athens and Beijing days, no one wants to spend money on new ones, and San Francisco is not looking to use the Olympics as a means to a bigger, urban-renewal end.There are lots of colleges and two major universities (Stanford and the University of California, Berkeley) with huge stadiums, arenas and dormitories. There are plenty of places to house athletes and hold smaller events.Levi’s Stadium in Santa Clara is hosting the Super Bowl in 2016. A planned waterfront basketball arena for the Warriors should open in a few years. A Major League Soccer stadium is being built in San Jose. If baseball and softball return to the Olympic docket, well, there are plenty of places to play those, too, including two Major League Baseball stadiums.San Francisco organizers are not quite sure where to put track and field and the opening and closing ceremonies. One idea is to build a temporary stadium south of shuttered Candlestick Park. That sounds like something Athens would do.Until that is figured out, imagine sailing between the Golden Gate and Bay bridges in San Francisco Bay; the same course that was perfect for the summer-long America’s Cup in 2013 is good enough for a couple weeks of Olympics.Picture a hilly marathon tracing up the crooked block of Lombard Street. Or mountain biking in Marin County, the birthplace of the sport. Or the triathlon off Alcatraz, beach volleyball at City Hall, rowing in McCovey Cove. And if the Olympics still insist on golf, there is the Olympic Club or Pebble Beach.AdvertisementSupporters of Boston, Washington, Los Angeles might combat their disadvantages with snarky comparisons about summers in San Francisco and the coldest winters. Summer is fog season, and daytime temperatures in patches of the city can get stuck in the 50s. That is why armies of entrepreneurs sell cheap San Francisco jackets and sweatshirts to tourists who expected a July trip to Fisherman’s Wharf would include sunshine and warmth.But thanks to the Bay Area’s uniquely micro microclimates, temperatures predictably fluctuate 20 degrees or more in 20 miles or less. So while the sailing competition off Crissy Field could be shrouded by chilly fog, a soccer game at Stanford Stadium might be played in 80-degree sunshine. Athletes will love that they are not in the heat and humidity of, say, Boston.And you know what almost never happens in the summer in the Bay Area? Rain.So, go ahead: Choose San Francisco. We know you want to. JOHN BRANCHKatharine Q. Seelye is New England bureau chief for The Times.Brooks Barnes is a media reporter based in Los Angeles.Jennifer Steinhauer is a national correspondent based in Washington.John Branch is a sports reporter who lives in the Bay Area.A version of this article appears in print on January 6, 2015, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Pick Me! No, Me!.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.