AdvertisementSupported byVillanova 90, St. John's 72By Zach SchonbrunIt was a hole that St. John’s proved unable to dig itself out from: five straight losses to open Big East Conference play, a lesson that players said they never wanted to repeat. That was a year ago. Now, after their best start in nonconference play in decades, the Red Storm are echoing that empty feeling that haunted them last January and, ultimately, probably cost them an N.C.A.A. tournament bid. A loss to No. 8 Villanova, 90-72, at Madison Square Garden on Tuesday was their third in a row, casting St. John’s to the bottom of the conference yet again.“We’re playing great teams,” said St. John’s guard D’Angelo Harrison, who led all scorers with 25 points. “And they’re giving us their best shot.”Certainly, it is early, and the league has demonstrated itself to be better than last season, when four teams made the N.C.A.A. tournament. But parallels are hard to avoid, not when No. 24 St. John’s (11-4, 0-3 Big East) has yet to prove it can recover from a midseason slide well enough to play meaningful games in March.The Red Storm allowed Villanova (14-1, 2-1) to shoot 55.7 percent from the field while hampered by foul trouble, limitations the team’s thin roster could ill afford. St. John’s was off to its best start since 1985-86, winning 11 of its first 12 games, including impressive victories on the road against Syracuse and at home against Minnesota. Then, in the span of a week, the Red Storm lost to Seton Hall and Butler, and their second-leading scorer, Rysheed Jordan, left the team unexpectedly to deal with a personal matter.St. John’s Coach Steve Lavin said the schedule would be more favorable in February, but he cautioned that the Red Storm needed to avoid falling so far behind that taking advantage would not matter. "You don’t want to be so far in the rearview mirror that those games aren’t even meaningful,” Lavin said.Jordan, who missed the loss to Butler on Saturday, returned to the team on Monday, just in time for what guard Sir’Dominic Pointer called “the biggest game of our career.”A bit hyperbolic, perhaps, but St. John’s has been desperate to return to the tournament after a three-year absence, and a win over the Wildcats would go a long way toward that goal. Jordan came off the bench and missed his first five shots, but with him back in the rotation, St. John’s appeared much more at ease than it had on Saturday, when five players were forced to play at least 34 minutes. The starting guard tandem of Harrison and Phil Greene supplied 77 percent of the team’s offense in the first half, scoring 27 of 35 points, while shooting 11 of 17 from the field in a scorching display.The Red Storm scored just 12 points in the paint in the first half and did not receive a single point off the bench, compared with 10 for Villanova.Yet neither team managed to pull ahead by more than three scores through the first 20 minutes. A pull-up jumper by Greene tied the score at 29-29 with 4 minutes 37 seconds left in the half, and another Greene jumper a minute later gave St. John’s its first lead since the opening minutes. Harrison added two more baskets in the final minutes, and the Red Storm went to halftime ahead, 35-34.With 0.9 of a second on the clock, Harrison chased down Ryan Archidiacano from behind, slammed awkwardly into the basket stanchion and limped into the locker room with a right knee contusion. Harrison returned to start the second half but appeared to lack some of the lateral quickness he usually shows.Things appeared to get even more dire midway through the half when Chris Obekpa — the Red Storm’s only regular inside presence — had to leave the game after he went down awkwardly underneath the basket. He returned after a few minutes, only to quickly pick up his fourth foul, sending him right back to the bench.The Red Storm displayed moments of dazzling athleticism, with acrobatic blocked shots, blindingly quick steals and highlight-reel alley-oops — reasons they can be one of the most entertaining teams to watch in the country. But their lack of depth and size creates limitations, and Villanova exploited them, outrebounding St. John’s, 42-22. Pounding the ball inside, the Wildcats forced Pointer to foul out with 7:47 remaining, and two JayVaughn Pinkston layups on the next two possessions made the score 70-61. Villanova Coach Jay Wright said that Pointer’s fouling out was crucial. “I think that’s why the score got to where it was,” he said, adding: “The game was not what the score indicates. We couldn’t stop them in the first half.”Explaining his last foul, Pointer said he “tried to make a play” on the ball.“It was a bad foul,” he said.After Pinkston’s layups put Villanova up by 9, the Red Storm looked tired and seemed to expect their fate. There was no upset in the works this time, but St. John’s does get a chance to regroup because its next game isn’t until Jan. 14, at Providence.“It’s a daunting task when you’re 0-3,” Lavin said, referring to the Red Storm’s conference record. “The good news is we got off to the 11-1 start, so we’re ahead of schedule in overall wins.”Darrun Hilliard led Villanova with 21 points.Advertisement