AdvertisementSupported byN.F.L. RoundupBy The Associated PressThe former Jets general manager Mike Tannenbaum is returning to the A.F.C. East, this time with the Miami Dolphins, who have shaken up their power structure again.Tannenbaum will take over the Dolphins’ football operations beginning Feb. 1, the team said Tuesday. General Manager Dennis Hickey will report to Tannenbaum, while Coach Joe Philbin will continue reporting directly to the owner Stephen Ross.Tannenbaum was with the Jets from 1997 until 2012, when he was fired after seven seasons as general manager. He worked the past two years as a sports agent before accepting Ross’s offer.“My business is going really well, but football is in my blood,” Tannenbaum said. “I spent two years away from it and missed it dearly. I missed the competition. I missed getting in a foxhole with a bunch of people who are committed to a cause.”Tannenbaum began working as a consultant to Ross in August, specializing in sports science and analytics.Hickey became general manager a year ago, and the team has had seven coaches since 2004. Philbin’s job was in jeopardy after Miami finished this season 8-8, but he will return for a fourth year.PETERSON PETITION TO BE HEARD The players union’s petition to overturn the suspension of Minnesota Vikings running back Adrian Peterson will be heard in federal court next month.The office of United States District Judge David Doty posted a notice that a hearing on the case will be heard Feb. 6 at 2 p.m. in his courtroom in Minneapolis.The N.F.L. suspended Peterson without pay for the last six games of the 2014 season, through at least April 15, for a child-abuse case he was involved in. Peterson’s appeal was denied by a league-appointed arbitrator. After the arbitration decision was announced, the N.F.L. Players Association and Peterson filed their lawsuit Dec. 15 asking the court to dismiss the ruling.SEAHAWKS LOSE LINEMAN Seattle will be without defensive tackle Jordan Hill for the postseason after he was placed on injured reserve. He sustained a severe calf injury while working out last weekend.Hill sprained a knee in the season finale against St. Louis but was working toward a return when he injured his calf. Hill had been a late-season standout, with five and a half sacks and an interception in the final six games.Advertisement