By ALLAN KREDAJAN. 6, 2015
GREENBURGH, N.Y. —  Winners of 10 of their past 11 games, the Rangers are a confident group heading west to play in three arenas that haunted them last season.First up Wednesday are the league-leading Anaheim Ducks, who beat the Rangers last season, 6-0. The next night, the Rangers will face the Kings in their first visit to Los Angeles since losing in the Stanley Cup finals there in June. The Rangers finish the trip Saturday against the San Jose Sharks, who embarrassed them, 9-2, last season in a game in which Rick Nash sustained a concussion that caused him to miss nearly six weeks.For Nash, who is having a career season with a team-leading 24 goals, traveling to Southern California will always jog his memory, especially seeing the Kings, who beat the Rangers in five games to win the Cup.The Rangers lost three games at Staples Center in overtime, and Nash was unable to score against the Kings.Advertisement“I think, for the rest of your life, whenever you visit L. A., that memory will come up,” said Nash, who had a shot at an open net to win Game 5, but the puck was deflected. “All three could have gone either way — a puck goes in here or there — who knows?”AdvertisementNearing the midpoint of the season, the Rangers (21-11-4) are looking much like last season’s team, which found its collective game after Christmas and played a strong second half to finish with 96 points, second in the Metropolitan Division.They have only one loss since Dec. 6 — a defeat at Dallas last Monday — and are playing the brand of strong defense that propelled them to the finals last spring. Entering Tuesday’s games, the Rangers had allowed the second-fewest goals (90) in the Eastern Conference.For goaltender Henrik Lundqvist, the surge is a welcome sign.“It took us a few weeks to get there, but I think we all feel like we are playing a game right now where everybody is helping out and we are all making smart moves,” he said. “We are really close to where we were last year.”This year’s division race is tight. The Islanders and the Pittsburgh Penguins have been vying for the lead, and the Rangers and the Washington Capitals have been alternating third and fourth place in recent weeks.Rangers Coach Alain Vigneault said his team’s focus should be limited to its next opponent, in this case the Ducks, who lead the league with 58 points.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“We will have to play a real strong fundamental attention-to-detail kind of game,” Vigneault said after practice Sunday.Vigneault is familiar with the styles of the next three opponents, since he coached the Vancouver Canucks for seven seasons before joining the Rangers in 2013. He knows trips West can be a measuring stick for a streaking team. Four of the last five Stanley Cup winners have come from the Western Conference, where teams are considered bigger, faster and more physical.“Last year, the West was destroying the East early, but in the second half, the East overcame that,” Vigneault said.AdvertisementThe Rangers were 14-13-1 against the West last season, going 1-5 against the Kings, the Sharks and the Ducks. This season the Rangers are 6-2-3 against Western Conference teams.Defenseman Kevin Klein, a key component for the Rangers at both ends of the ice this season, played down the significance of visiting the site of the Rangers’ near miss seven months ago.“Obviously, it was a huge disappointment coming up short,” said Klein, who leads Rangers defensemen with seven goals. “We just want to play strong games. We know exactly where we want to be and how we have to play.”Center Derick Brassard said maintaining focus would continue to be paramount for the Rangers, who play six of their next seven games on the road.“It doesn’t matter who we are playing — we play hard,” he said. “It’s going to be a big test for our team.”SLAP SHOTSThe Rangers assigned forward Anthony Duclair to the Quebec Remparts of the Quebec Major Junior Hockey League on Tuesday, meaning he cannot return to the N.H.L. team until after his junior season is over. Duclair, 19, was a surprise addition to the Rangers’ roster at the start of the season, and had one goal and six assists in 18 games. The Rangers recently lent Duclair to the Canadian national team for the World Junior Championship, where he had four goals and four assists in helping Canada win the gold medal. (NYT)A version of this article appears in print on January 7, 2015, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: Rangers Find Top Form, but a Tough Trip Looms.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.