By SCOTT CACCIOLAJAN. 6, 2015
On a Friday afternoon in late September, Phil Jackson sat on a dais at the Knicks’ training site in Greenburgh, N.Y. He wore a gray suit and a smile as he answered questions from reporters about the season ahead. It was a time for cautious optimism and quiet expectations.Jackson, still fairly new to his role as team president, went so far as to dangle a return to the playoffs as a possibility. The Knicks, after all, were coming off a calamitous 37-win season. So Jackson said something that sounded perfectly reasonable — that he expected an improved product for the hardworking enthusiasts who pack Madison Square Garden.“We believe that we’re going to be a playoff team, and then we don’t know how far we’ll be able to go,” he said at the time. “We’re hoping for the best.”Viewed through the prism of the past three-plus months, that statement was a misstep. The Knicks, at 5-32, had the worst record in basketball ahead of their game Wednesday night against the Washington Wizards. They are limping toward the draft lottery. And they just jettisoned three rotation players for the sake of salary-cap space and culture change.AdvertisementA season-long exercise in shedding parts from this rusty Winnebago was not Jackson’s plan at the outset. Instead, he had hoped to showcase the virtues of the triangle offense, with Carmelo Anthony operating as one of its vertices, to lure future free agents. The season, in other words, was supposed to be a glossy, full-page advertisement for a bright future.AdvertisementThe season, though, has imploded in spectacular fashion, and the moves that Jackson made Monday night — trading J. R. Smith and Iman Shumpert to the Cleveland Cavaliers, and waiving Samuel Dalembert — signaled his willingness to adapt. The Knicks are not good. They are awful. And their best chance to rebuild is through free agency and the draft.That ought to be the team’s mantra from now until June, with the Knicks projected to have a top-five pick in the draft and roughly $30 million to spend on fresh faces. That figure could increase if Jackson unearths willing partners before the Feb. 19 trade deadline. The Knicks gained two trade exceptions in Monday’s move, which could lubricate deals.So, yes, the Knicks appear to be staging a fire sale, as evidenced by their willingness to package Shumpert with Smith — if only to rid themselves of the remaining year (and $6.4 million) on Smith’s contract.It is all a huge gamble, of course, but then, what do they really have to lose besides more games? Still, free agency is a tricky business. Clearing cap space is comparatively easy. Getting top-flight players to buy into Jackson’s vision — and that is all it is right now, a vision — is an altogether different challenge.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Potential targets include A-listers like Cleveland’s Kevin Love, Memphis’s Marc Gasol and San Antonio’s Kawhi Leonard. But it is hard, if not impossible, to imagine the Knicks prying Gasol or Leonard loose from their current situations, and Love will have his share of suitors if he chooses to leave the Cavaliers.Then there are rising stars like Chicago’s Jimmy Butler, Phoenix’s Goran Dragic, Portland’s Wesley Matthews and Milwaukee’s Brandon Knight, who comes with the added obstacle of being a restricted free agent, meaning the Bucks can match any contract offer. Dragic recently told reporters that he would be open to hearing from the Knicks. Given the trajectory of their season, he might as well have been throwing glitter on a toxic spill. But it counted for something.If free agency is a maze, then there are no certainties in the draft, either, no matter how many losses the Knicks collect. For fans who are already clamoring for Duke’s Jahlil Okafor — the presumptive No. 1 pick — it is worth remembering that the team with the league’s worst record has only a 25 percent chance of winning the top overall pick. A potential consolation prize would be Emmanuel Mudiay, an 18-year-old point guard who plays for the Guangdong Southern Tigers of the Chinese Basketball Association.For now, the Knicks have few available means of improving their roster — not that they would necessarily want to. The rest of the season could mean providing opportunities to young players like Langston Galloway, who has been with the team’s N.B.A. Development League affiliate. On Tuesday, the Knicks were set to sign him to a 10-day contract.AdvertisementBack in September, before the team had lost a single game, Jackson predicted that it would take a month to six weeks for the team to jell. At the same news conference, Coach Derek Fisher said that he thought Andrea Bargnani would be “great” this season.So mistakes have been made — and, in fairness, many of the organization’s questionable decisions predate Jackson. The ghost of Bargnani, for example, will haunt the Knicks for years to come. As part of their deal for him with the Toronto Raptors in 2013, the Knicks gave up their 2016 first-round pick.But by dumping contracts and accumulating picks (instead of giving them away), Jackson has at least made up his mind to start with a clean canvas — even if Anthony gets to wear one of the smocks. Jackson made a decisive move this week. What he creates from here is up to him.A version of this news analysis appears in print on January 7, 2015, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: Knicks Bet Firmly on the Future, Which Is Anything but Firm.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.