AdvertisementSupported byBy Bruce WeberHank Peters, a longtime baseball executive who won two pennants and a World Series as general manager of the Baltimore Orioles before helping to rejuvenate the Cleveland Indians franchise, died on Sunday in Boca Raton, Fla. He was 90.His son, Steven, and daughter, Sharon, said the cause was complications of a recent stroke.Mr. Peters spent his career with relatively small-market teams — the St. Louis Browns and the Kansas City Athletics in addition to the Orioles and the Indians — and perhaps for that reason he believed that building a farm system and trading for young players were the keys to building a successful team.Baseball entered the era of free agency during his tenure with the Orioles, making forward thinking and shrewd player management essential for any franchise that hoped to keep up with profligate-spending opponents like the Yankees. And the Orioles often did, winning 90 or more games six times in Mr. Peters’s 12 seasons with the club. (One season, 1981, was shortened by a player strike.)Mr. Peters inherited a good Oriole team that featured two future Hall of Famers — the manager, Earl Weaver, and pitcher Jim Palmer — and a minor league system that included first baseman Eddie Murray, who also reached the Hall of Fame. But Mr. Peters made it better, drafting shortstop Cal Ripken Jr. and pitcher Mike Boddicker. In 1976, his first season with the Orioles, Mr. Peters was the engineer of a 10-player trade with the Yankees that bolstered both teams. The key players were three veteran Orioles pitchers — Doyle Alexander, Ken Holtzman and Grant Jackson — who helped propel the Yankees to the World Series that season. In exchange, the Orioles received five players, including catcher Rick Dempsey and pitchers Tippy Martinez and Scott McGregor, all of whom became fixtures on the team for years to come, including 1979, when the Orioles lost the World Series to Pittsburgh, and 1983, when they won the Series, defeating the Philadelphia Phillies. The Orioles have not won one since.Not all of Mr. Peters’s deals were golden; in 1976, he acquired Reggie Jackson in a trade with the A’s — the team had moved to Oakland — that cost the Orioles two valuable cogs, the slugger Don Baylor and pitcher Mike Torrez. But Jackson bolted for the Yankees as a free agent after only one season. The unflappable Mr. Peters reacted philosophically when Jackson departed. “I know I didn’t get smart overnight, and I didn’t get dumb overnight, either,” he said.Henry John Peters was born in St. Louis on Sept. 16, 1924. He was reared by his mother, Estelle, who cleaned houses to support Hank and his sister, Virginia. After high school he joined the Army and served in Europe during World War II. He briefly attended a business school until he answered a newspaper ad for a job with the St. Louis Browns organization and got it, working in the team’s minor league system. The Browns, precursor of the Orioles, moved to Baltimore before the 1954 season and Mr. Peters, not wanting to go east, went to work for the Athletics in Kansas City. He became director of their minor league system and was given the title general manager for the 1965 season. The next year he became director of player personnel for the Indians, but he resigned in 1971 when, against his advice, the team’s owner, Vernon Stouffer, who was facing financial difficulties, cut the budget for the farm system. From 1972 to 1975 Mr. Peters was president of the National Association of Professional Baseball Leagues, better known as minor league baseball. Twice in his tenure with the Orioles, Mr. Peters was named baseball executive of the year by The Sporting News, but he did not always see eye to eye with the team owner, Edward Bennett Williams, who fired him in October 1987 after two losing seasons. The Indians hired him almost immediately. In his four years with Cleveland, the team never finished above .500, but his impact was felt far into the future. Among the players he drafted were pitcher Charles Nagy and the power hitters Jim Thome and Manny Ramirez, and in 1989 he made perhaps the shrewdest move of his career. He traded the team’s best player, outfielder Joe Carter, to the San Diego Padres for three younger players, two of whom, catcher Sandy Alomar Jr. and the infielder Carlos Baerga, became All-Stars. In 1995, Nagy, Thome, Ramirez, Alomar and Baerga were important players on the first Indians team in more than 40 years to reach the World Series. The team opened a new ballpark, Jacobs Field (now known as Progressive Field), in downtown Cleveland in 1994, and starting in 1995 finished first in the American League Central division six times in seven seasons, reaching the World Series in 1995 as well as in 1997. (They lost both times.) “Hank was the foundation of the rebirth of baseball in Cleveland,” the Indians said in a statement after his death.Mr. Peters, who lived in Highland Beach, Fla., married Dorothy Kleimeier in 1950. She died in 2010. In addition to his son and daughter, he is survived by two grandchildren, Shannon Torrez and Christopher Peters, who was born an hour after the Orioles clinched the 1983 World Series.Advertisement