By RICHARD SANDOMIRJAN. 6, 2015
When writers elected Randy Johnson, Pedro Martinez, John Smoltz and Craig Biggio to the Baseball Hall of Fame on Tuesday, it was only the third time a four-man class was created.The last time it happened, in 1955, Dwight D. Eisenhower was president, and the Brooklyn Dodgers were on their way to their first World Series title.In Cooperstown, Joe DiMaggio led a quartet that also featured Ted Lyons, Dazzy Vance and Gabby Hartnett. In his induction speech, DiMaggio recalled “that time 20 years ago when I was riding to St. Petersburg with Frank Crosetti and Tony Lazzeri.” He continued: “They asked me to take the wheel, and I had to say, ‘I don’t drive.’ At that point, I thought I’d never be a big-leaguer.”Those elected by the Baseball Writers’ Association of America usually enter the Hall one, two or three at a time, and they are joined by players, managers, umpires and executives voted in by veterans committees. Last year, Greg Maddux, Tom Glavine and Frank Thomas were elected. In 2012, Barry Larkin was the writers’ only electee, and a year earlier, Roberto Alomar and Bert Blyleven joined the Hall.AdvertisementThe election of four players at once is the result of a new crop of stars who retired at the same time and a backlog of players rejected in prior years. Johnson, Martinez and Smoltz each presented powerful rationales for election on their first ballots — and Biggio, in his third bid for the Hall, was unlikely to have to wait much longer with credentials like 3,060 career hits and the most career doubles of any right-handed batter in major league history.AdvertisementThe only other four-member class was in 1947, when Carl Hubbell, Frankie Frisch, Mickey Cochrane and Lefty Grove were elected. The fifth-place finisher, Pie Traynor, was elected the next year.The largest group ever elected by the baseball writers was the inaugural five-member class of Ty Cobb, Honus Wagner, Babe Ruth, Christy Mathewson and Walter Johnson in 1936.Biggio’s odyssey suggests that some players spurned in the past should hold out hope that they will eventually be elected. Before falling two votes short of election last year, Biggio received 68.2 percent of the votes in 2013 and was the top vote-getter in a year when no one was elected.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mike Piazza finished fifth behind the new Hall members on Tuesday, with 69.9 percent of the vote, more than he had received in the previous two years. That makes him the leading candidate among the holdovers next year, when Ken Griffey Jr. is widely expected to be elected in his first year of eligibility.Before being elected in 2011, Blyleven was the runner-up in 2010, when Andre Dawson was the only player elected. Blyleven finished fourth behind Dawson, who was third, in 2008 and 2009.Tony Perez followed a jagged path before his 2000 election: four consecutive fourth-place finishes, followed by second-, third-, second-, second- and fifth-place finishes, all out of the money.Even DiMaggio, surprisingly, was not elected on the first ballot. After his retirement in 1951 — during an era when players were eligible for election after one year of retirement — writers rejected him in 1953 with 44.3 percent of the vote and again in 1954 with 69.4 percent. He finished fourth that year to a three-man class of Rabbit Maranville, Bill Dickey and Bill Terry.When DiMaggio was finally elected the next year with a stunningly low 88.8 percent of the vote, another superstar, Hank Greenberg, finished fifth with 62.5 percent.The next year, he and Joe Cronin were elected together.Nearly getting in, however, is an imperfect indicator of eventual election. Jack Morris, whose 15 years of Hall eligibility with the writers ended last year, finished second in 2012 to Larkin and again, to Biggio, in 2013.AdvertisementAnd Gil Hodges, a favorite son of the Brooklyn Dodgers and the Mets, finished fourth in the voting six times and third four times; since his eligibility expired, veterans committees have not embraced him.A version of this article appears in print on January 7, 2015, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: The New Class Is the Biggest in 60 Years.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.