AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressStu Miller, a former Giants pitcher who committed perhaps the most famous balk in All-Star Game history at windy Candlestick Park in San Francisco, died on Sunday at his home in Cameron Park, Calif. He was 87.The Giants confirmed his death.Miller entered the first of two 1961 All-Star Games (there were two a year at the time) for the National League in relief of Sandy Koufax, trying to protect a 3-2 lead with runners on first and second and one out in the ninth and Rocky Colavito at the plate.“Just as I was ready to pitch, an extra gust of wind came along and I waved like a tree,” he recalled. “My whole body went back and forth about two or three inches. The A.L. bench all hollered balk. I knew it was a balk, but the umpires didn’t call it at first. I went ahead and threw the pitch, and Colavito swung and missed. The umpire then took off his mask and motioned the runners to second and third.”An error by third baseman Ken Boyer allowed the tying run to score.Miller allowed an unearned run in the 10th inning, but he also struck out the side. He earned the victory when Willie Mays hit a run-scoring double and scored on Roberto Clemente’s single in the bottom of the 10th. Still, a headline the next day proclaimed, “Miller Blown Off Mound.”Stuart Leonard Miller was born on Dec. 26, 1927, in Northampton, Mass. He is survived by his wife, Jayne; his daughters, Lori and Kim; his sons, Scott, Marc, Gary and Matthew; and five grandchildren.Miller played 16 years in the majors for the Giants, both in New York and San Francisco, as well as for the St. Louis Cardinals, the Philadelphia Phillies, the Baltimore Orioles and the Atlanta Braves.He led the National League in earned run average in 1958, had the most saves in the National League in 1961 and the American League in 1963, and won a World Series title with Baltimore in 1966. He finished his career with a 105-103 record, 154 saves and a 3.24 E.R.A. in 704 appearances.But it was the balk that he became known for.“I guess that’s better than ‘Stu Who?’ ” Miller said.Advertisement