
On Pro Basketball By                     
 HARVEY ARATON
 
JAN. 6, 2015
When LeBron James was last in New York with the Cleveland Cavaliers, during an eight-game winning streak, he referred to his team as a work in progress. One month later, with the Cavaliers battered by injury and bloodied by six losses in eight games, the temptation is to call them a withering mess.The expectation of the Cavaliers as the next superteam took a double pummeling Monday night, when they blew a 17-point, third-quarter lead, lost to the tanking 76ers in Philadelphia and relieved the Knicks of babysitting for J. R. Smith. But the three-team trade that also brought Iman Shumpert and a 2015 first-round draft pick from Oklahoma City — we’ll get back to that — isn’t the core issue for the Cavaliers as much as their collective identity is.As midseason approaches, who are they? The suddenly soaring franchise to which James returned last summer while preaching competitive patience, or the sad, slumping team now pressed, if not panicked, into a roster remake to pump up a 19-16 record that has them closer to being out of a playoff position than to first place in the Eastern Conference?When the door to the visitors’ locker room opened after Monday night’s game, reporters found Kevin Love — last summer’s prize acquisition — sitting alone, wearing a tank top and speaking in a monotone more popular at funerals and Knicks games. Love might have been experiencing a Minnesota flashback, that’s how bad it has been for him.AdvertisementIn a recent victory, he was benched in the fourth quarter by David Blatt, the rookie N.B.A. coach and potential scapegoat. On a team with two clever playmakers in James and point guard Kyrie Irving, Love’s scoring average is off by about 8 points from last season. His big-man deficiencies on defense have been glaring, especially with Anderson Varejao, the team’s only quality rim protector, out for the season.AdvertisementLove’s body language has at times raised alarms that he might exercise free agency to escape Cleveland and what were destined to be championship expectations once the Cavs reluctantly parted with Andrew Wiggins, the No. 1 pick in last June’s draft, with the belief that all they needed (to contend) was Love.Yes, James returned heroically to northeast Ohio with a cautionary warning: The Cavs were not likely to become a microwaved contender, as Miami did in Year 1 of his partnership with Dwyane Wade and Chris Bosh. It was just hard to believe that was what James believed when he endorsed, or demanded, the deal for Love.In 2007, James led a less-heralded Cleveland cast to the N.B.A. finals. Could his call for patience have been a plea to merely allow the Cavs to get acquainted over the long and winding regular season?The best news for them is that there is still time to be physically and competitively healthy, because this is looking like the N.B.A.’s most uncertain season in years. Ask 10 fans which teams they would forecast for the finals from either conference and you might get 10 different answers.Cleveland’s failure to meaningfully coalesce is one reason the East has opened up for upstarts from Atlanta, Washington and Toronto. Having been spared the chore of stripping down its roster to shoehorn Carmelo Anthony into its salary-cap scheme, Chicago proceeded to construct what many nights has looked like the league’s best and most balanced roster, astutely designed to ease the burden on Derrick Rose.That is where James’s vision — particularly his depth perception — in ordaining Irving and Love may have been faulty. The whole Big 3 model already looks outdated. The most successful teams this season have more or less been the deeper ones, and those that have grown and maintained a stable core. Consider the San Antonio model mimicked.That is why Monday’s trade, desperate as it may seem, could be a good one. The draft pick might help land another big man. Smith might behave himself more in Cleveland than in New York because James, as a leading man, commands far more respect than Anthony does. If nothing else, on his good nights, Smith improves a shallow Cavs bench.Shumpert, when healthy, allows James, a newly turned 30 and currently sitting out with knee and back soreness, to not always have to guard the opponent’s best wing player. Shumpert has been lost offensively since early last season but is less than two years removed from nearly shooting the Knicks into Game 7 of the 2013 Eastern Conference semifinals against Indiana.AdvertisementWas Shumpert overrated, or another victim of a toxic environment? At Madison Square Garden, Coach Larry Brown once called the young, athletic Trevor Ariza “delusional” during a nightmare season before having him shipped off to Orlando for what was left (very little) of Steve Francis’ career. Ariza signed a $32 million contract with Houston last summer.In the process of clearing cap space and awaiting a free-agent savior to fall from the sky, the Knicks have banished others (Zach Randolph and Jamal Crawford come to mind) who were in need only of a stable workplace. But that leads us back to the crisis rooted in Cleveland’s identity.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.As an unwritten condition of his return, how much control was ceded to James, who has an opt-out clause next spring in his two-year contract? How stable is any franchise owned by Dan Gilbert, who embarrassed himself with his unhinged written ramblings after James’s 2010 departure?Monday night, David Griffin, the general manager, allowed players he was trading to take the court. Dion Waiters, a Philadelphia native, was supposed to start with Irving out. Minutes before the start of the game, he was waving to family and friends, and then, poof, he was gone on a strange night for a weird team.As the Knicks have formulaically shown, the sum of such little embarrassments is systemic dysfunction. When things went sideways early in his first season in Miami, James at least knew that Pat Riley, the Heat’s president, was in control. Riley had a system in place, a proven championship philosophy.It may be instructive to remember that nobody has seen one of those in Cleveland since 1964.Scott Cacciola contributed reporting.
 A version of this article appears in print on January 7, 2015, on Page B8 of the New York edition with the headline: Despite Expensive Imports, Cavs Are a Case of Missing Identity.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »