AdvertisementSupported byBy Tyler KepnerThree ace pitchers and one durable doubles machine achieved baseball’s highest honor on Tuesday. Randy Johnson, Pedro Martinez, John Smoltz and Craig Biggio were elected to the Hall of Fame. It was the first time in 60 years that the baseball writers chose four players in the same class.More than half the voters selected the maximum 10 players from a ballot that included stars with strong ties to steroids. Sending four new members to Cooperstown, N.Y., could help clear the logjam.“There’s so many guys on the ballot,” said Biggio, who made it on his third try after falling two votes short last winter. “I think the writers really did a nice job. We got four guys in this year, which frees up some space for next year.”Ken Griffey Jr. and Trevor Hoffman headline the newcomers on the next ballot, with Mike Piazza seeming to have an excellent chance to clear the 75 percent threshold. Piazza, the former Mets catcher, reached 69.9 percent Tuesday in his third year on the ballot.Johnson, Martinez and Smoltz were among the most dominant pitchers of their time, collecting nine Cy Young Awards (five by Johnson) from 1995 to 2002. Biggio amassed 3,060 hits across 20 seasons with the Houston Astros and ranks fifth on the career list in doubles, with 668.Johnson (97.3 percent of the vote), Martinez (91.1 percent) and Smoltz (82.9 percent) were making their debut on the ballot, having played their final games in 2009. Biggio, who retired after the 2007 season, drew 82.7 percent. The players will be honored in a ceremony in Cooperstown on July 26.All the pitchers had at least 3,000 strikeouts — a mark reached by only 13 others — but dominated in different ways. Smoltz thrived as a starter and a reliever and is the only pitcher with 200 victories and 150 saves. Johnson is the tallest Hall of Famer, at 6 feet 10 inches, while Martinez, at 5-11, is the shortest pitcher with 3,000 strikeouts.“I’ve never seen, at each person’s height, anybody come close to what they were able to do,” Smoltz said. He added that he was in awe of Johnson and spellbound by Martinez.“It was like a cartoon, what he was doing,” Smoltz said of Martinez, who followed him as the National League’s Cy Young Award winner in 1997. “It looked like the ball had a connection to his fingers.”Martinez said he was proud to be the first Dominican player to reach the Hall of Fame since Juan Marichal in 1983. He insisted he had played the game the right way, resisting the temptation of steroids, and explained his feisty mound presence in typically colorful terms.“I saw everybody as the enemy,” he said. “I saw everybody like the jungle. You’ve just got to kill to survive. That’s the intensity and the focus I had to keep.”Martinez was 219-100 with a 2.93 earned run average, but his true greatness was in comparison with his peers in an era of overwhelming offense. In 2000, when the American League’s E.R.A. was 4.91, Martinez’s was 1.74. His final game with Boston was a victory in the 2004 World Series, which the Red Sox won for their first title in 86 years.Johnson won three times in Arizona’s 2001 World Series triumph over the Yankees. He is the career strikeout leader for left-handers, with 4,875, but he joked that he was best known for killing a bird with a pitch in spring training and a comical All-Star Game duel with a breathless John Kruk.Johnson said he was most proud of his durability in lasting 22 seasons despite multiple knee and back operations.“I wasn’t out there smiling and laughing a lot,” he said. “But I enjoyed the competition, and I tried to make it last as long as I could.”Smoltz, 213-155 along with 154 saves, became the third Hall of Famer from an Atlanta Braves rotation that was an October fixture for more than a decade. (Greg Maddux and Tom Glavine were inducted last year.) The Braves won 14 division titles, five pennants and the 1995 World Series during Smoltz’s career.“It was the greatest run in sports,” said Smoltz, whose first three Braves teams combined for 300 losses. “And I know the end result is what we get known for, and the byproduct of winning rings, but at least we’ve got one. No doubt we should have had a few more.”Biggio’s Astros never won the World Series, but when they got there for the only time, in 2005, he was their first hitter. Now he becomes the first Hall of Famer to represent the Astros, a franchise in existence since 1962. Nolan Ryan, another longtime Astro, wears a Texas Rangers cap on his plaque.“It’s really, really special,” Biggio said. “A lot of this still is sinking in, and it seems very surreal. But to be able to finally get an Astro guy in there, I take a lot of pride in that.”Biggio said he hoped he would soon be joined by his longtime teammate Jeff Bagwell, who got 55.7 percent of the ballot. Others behind Bagwell included Tim Raines (55 percent) and Curt Schilling (39.2 percent). Don Mattingly fell off the ballot in his 15th try, with 9.1 percent.For the third year in a row, the voters — who all spent 10 consecutive years as members of the Baseball Writers’ Association of America — resoundingly rejected Barry Bonds (36.8 percent) and Roger Clemens (37.5 percent). Bonds, the career home run leader, and Clemens, the career leader in Cy Young Awards, have been strongly linked to steroid use, though neither ever served a suspension for it from Major League Baseball.Smoltz said he pushed for steroid testing during his career and was encouraged by the strong program the sport had adopted.“I was one of those skeptics way back when, that I just didn’t think we were going to get to this point,” he said, adding later, “This great game, and the game that I personally love, has found a way, for the time being, to make sure that it has gained back the integrity and the legitimacy that it needs so that fans — the great fans of baseball — do not sit there and wonder if what they’re watching is legitimate or not.”Advertisement