AdvertisementSupported byN.H.L. RoundupBy The Associated PressThe Toronto Maple Leafs fired Coach Randy Carlyle on Tuesday after a road trip in which the team lost five of seven games and showed little signs it would soon get better.The dismissal came after 40 games, with Toronto 21-16-3, fourth in the Atlantic Division and holding one of the two wild-card spots in the Eastern Conference. The Maple Leafs have struggled on defense and have played erratically.“I think we’d all agree we’ve had some good periods, good stretches, but I don’t think I can stand here in front of you and say that we’ve been consistent,” General Manager Dave Nonis said at a news conference. “We just felt, at this point, this was the right time to make the change and move ahead and try to get this team back playing like we have played for periods this season.”The assistants Steve Spott and Peter Horachek will be behind the bench for Wednesday’s home game against the Washington Capitals.Horachek ran the first practice after Carlyle’s firing. Nonis did not indicate if — or when — the Maple Leafs might hire a full-time head coach.Carlyle was 91-68-19 in parts of four seasons with Toronto. He won the Stanley Cup as coach of the Anaheim Ducks in 2007.He is the fourth N.H.L. coach to be fired this season, after Paul MacLean (Ottawa), Dallas Eakins (Edmonton) and Pete DeBoer (Devils).DEVILS 4, SABRES 1 Patrik Elias had a goal and two assists to reach 1,000 points in his N.H.L. career, and the host Devils defeated Buffalo.The goal was Elias’s 399th.Travis Zajac and Michael Cammalleri each had a goal and an assist. Jordin Tootoo also scored for the Devils, as they won a second consecutive game for the first time since Nov. 14.Cory Schneider made 20 saves.Mikhail Grigorenko netted his first goal of the season for the Sabres.LIGHTNING 4, CANADIENS 2 Tyler Johnson scored twice in Tampa Bay’s four-goal second period, and the visiting Lightning won the matchup for the top spot in the Eastern Conference against Montreal.Brett Connolly and J. T. Brown also scored for Tampa Bay, which moved 2 points ahead of the Canadiens atop both the Atlantic Division and the Eastern Conference.SHARKS 4, WILD 3 Marc-Edouard Vlasic scored his second game-winning goal in two nights 3 minutes 9 seconds into overtime, and visiting San Jose rallied to top Minnesota.Vlasic, who scored the winner with 4.5 seconds left in regulation on Monday night at Winnipeg, beat goalie Darcy Kuemper with a wrist shot from just outside the left circle.AVALANCHE 2, BLACKHAWKS 0 Nathan MacKinnon scored and set up a goal by Maxime Talbot in the opening 1:17, Semyon Varlamov finished with 54 saves for his third shutout of the season, and visiting Colorado blanked Chicago.The Avalanche were outshot by 30, but they held on for their third win in four games thanks to Varlamov’s 16th career shutout.PREDATORS 3, HURRICANES 2 Roman Josi scored the tiebreaking goal late in the third period to give host Nashville a win over Carolina.Ryan Ellis and Mike Fisher also scored, and Pekka Rinne stopped 23 shots for the Predators. Viktor Stalberg had two assists.BLUE JACKETS 4, STARS 2 Sergei Bobrovsky had 11 of his 24 saves in the third period, and Columbus won at Dallas.The Blue Jackets scored the first three goals, but the Stars pulled one behind before Bobrovsky shut them out in the third.FLYERS 2, SENATORS 1 Wayne Simmonds scored the tying goal in regulation and netted the winner in the shootout to lift host Philadelphia over Ottawa.The Senators’ Mika Zibanejad and the Flyers’ Jake Voracek each scored on the opening shots of the tiebreaker.Neither team scored in the next three rounds. Simmonds then punched in the winner against Craig Anderson.Advertisement