

 Michael Powell
 

SPORTS OF THE TIMES
JAN. 6, 2015
Swing that wrecking ball. Bring down the ceiling, tear down the walls, pull out the porticos. Jimmy Dolan, grab your chandelier, and be quick about it! Your Knicks franchise is going right down to the concrete floor.Again.Zen Phil, the Knicks’ president, has gone deconstructionist on New York’s brilliantly hapless basketball team. After Monday night’s deeply noncompetitive encounter with the Memphis Grizzlies, the Knicks’ record stood at 5 wins and 32 losses.Losing wasn’t bringing out the best in Phil Jackson, who had grown tetchy in his interactions with those reporters sentenced to cover his team. And truth be told, it wasn’t doing much for the disposition of the reporters.On Monday night, Jackson shipped J. R. Smith and Iman Shumpert off to the Cleveland Cavaliers, a supposed contender that has fallen into the chasm between expectation and dreary reality. Shumpert, a long and athletic perimeter defender, could fit in well on the Cavaliers.AdvertisementAs for Smith, our perpetual adolescent guard, who last week compared playing defense to protecting his beloved Xbox, vaya con Dios. If Cleveland views you as the cure for what ails it, it just might be dead already. We are told that LeBron James signed off on your acquisition, which demonstrates he has a rich sense of humor.AdvertisementThe Knicks have decided to make a virtue of what they demonstrably do very well, which is to collect bushels of losses. Stripped clean of almost anyone who can dribble, shoot, rebound and defend, led by a coach possessed of a monk’s pacific demeanor, the Knicks have traveled well down the road toward compiling the worst record in the N.B.A. The Knicks have now moved “ahead” of even the Philadelphia 76ers, that built-to-lose franchise by the Delaware River.If the Ping-Pong balls cooperate in the N.B.A. lottery before next summer’s draft, the Knicks could claim the likes of Jahlil Okafor, a 6-foot-11 man-child and possible franchise center from Duke.Then Jackson can set about trying to renovate this team on the rubble of its wrecked past. He will have plenty of cap space, as he has traded or let walk away almost all but his multimillion-dollar, sore-kneed forward, Carmelo Anthony. (Smith alone would have cost the Knicks more than $6 million next season, and Shumpert was eligible for a large raise.)Perhaps Jackson can attract a true star or two, but that could prove a fool’s errand. He might reasonably question the sanity of a player like Marc Gasol if, after many seasons with a fine Grizzlies team, he elected to join the N.B.A.’s certifiably worst team.Another path beckons. In 2013, the Atlanta Hawks picked up a Grade B, underachieving free-agent forward, Paul Millsap, who had spent seven seasons with the Utah Jazz. He has become a fine power forward. A year ago, the general manager of the Nets constructed a preposterously gilded team. No contract was too great, no star too aged, no coach too green.That team lurched through a middling successful season before spinning into a ditch in the second round of the N.B.A. playoffs.This year, the Nets — staggering still beneath vast salaries — rooted about in bargain bins. They found a fine and feisty point guard, Jarrett Jack, and gave free rein to their pell-mell center, Mason Plumlee. They also hired a congenitally plain-spoken coaching master in Lionel Hollins.AdvertisementWhat resulted is a competitive, sometimes entertaining team.Team chemistry, as the Detroit Pistons, too, have demonstrated, by unloading the gilt-laden forward Josh Smith and going on to win six straight games, is not to be underestimated.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Jackson has grander dreams, and he exudes a pleasing confidence. His I-have-more-championship-rings-than-fingers talk is great shtick. But team building is an uncertain art, mastered by very few. A couple of months ago, Jackson offered ESPN his assessment of his fine young guard Shumpert.“He’s one of my favorites because he’s simply our best on-ball defender,” Jackson said. “Once he learns the intricacies of the offense, Iman will be able to create scoring opportunities for his teammates.”This week, Shumpert starts looking for short-term rentals along Lake Erie.More primal worries haunt the sleep of Knicks fans, none more so than this: How long will their very own Mount Vesuvius — the owner James L. Dolan — remain dormant?Six years ago, Dolan finally grew tired of losing and imported the then-team president Donnie Walsh to swing a wrecking ball. Walsh traded untradable contracts and ditched troublesome stars.The Knicks descended into a dark valley. Then, after seasons of 32 and 29 wins, the Knicks signed a free-agent prize — Amar’e Stoudemire — and surrounded him with eager young players. That team won 42 games and Madison Square Garden sparked to life.And ... just ... like ... that ... Dolan rumbled and belched smoke and insisted that Walsh trade off all of his crown jewels for this gunslinger of a forward with the Denver Nuggets by the name of Carmelo Anthony. Walsh lasted another year or so before exiting feet first.On Monday night, Jackson chose to frame his task as an epic quest, Bilbo Baggins set out in search of N.B.A. wins.“As our journey moves through this season, we will search for the type of players that fit the style we hope to exhibit to our fans,” Jackson said in a prepared statement. “Our desire is to improve our ability to compete.”AdvertisementThe other night, I talked my son Aidan into accompanying me to the Knicks’ game against the Milwaukee Bucks. He listened to the introductions and tugged at my sleeve. “Wait. I haven’t been paying attention. This is our starting Knicks lineup?”The Knicks hung around for a couple of quarters. Then a mediocre Bucks team pulled away and we departed. Just before we stepped out onto Eighth Avenue, we walked under a Garden sign: All Exits Final.Jackson’s task is to convince tens of thousands of fans that this door is worth entering again. Good luck with that, Bilbo.Email: powellm@nytimes.com A version of this article appears in print on January 7, 2015, on Page B7 of the New York edition with the headline: Everything Must Go! Knicks Start Over, Again.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »