By JACK KERROCT. 8, 2015
DILI, East Timor —  East Timor, the team jokingly dubbed “Little Samba Nation” for all the Brazilians on its roster, fielded seven naturalized players against Palestine in a 2018 World Cup qualifier on Thursday but managed only a 1-1 tie.East Timor took the lead in the 54th minute on a headed goal from Ramon Saro, a center back born in Minas Gerais, one of Brazil’s most populous states. Saro made his debut for the East Timor national team in 2012, the same year that saw him move from a club in Brazil’s second division to one in the Timorese capital of Dili.Saro is still listed as playing at a Timorese club, though the small former Portuguese colony north of Australia no longer has a national league, so it is unclear how much game time he has been getting.The seven Brazilian-born players who played Thursday for East Timor displayed none of the necessary familial or residential ties required under FIFA eligibility rules. To represent a new country, players either must continuously live there for five years after their 18th birthday, or their parents or grandparents must come from there.AdvertisementWithout a familial connection to East Timor — and none have been given for any of the Brazilians on the team — Saro would need to live in East Timor for another two years before being eligible to pull on the red and black jersey of his adopted nation.AdvertisementSuch questionable recruiting has proved unpopular with some Timorese, who have filed complaints with the prime minister, the prosecutor general and the minister for justice. But the critics have been unable to draw attention from officials at FIFA, the ruling body for global soccer. Earlier this week, the coach of Palestine, Abdel Nasser Barakat, said he wanted to concentrate on beating East Timor, not questioning its roster.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.While there have been public demonstrations about the issue in the past in Dili, the mood in the stadium on Thursday was overwhelmingly positive, with plenty of cheers when Saro put the team ahead. The stadium, which seats a few thousand fans, was nearly full Thursday, helped by free admission.East Timor held on to the lead until the final minutes, when a Palestine substitute, Ahmed Nahyeh, tied the match to keep alive the team’s hopes of progressing to the next stage.Thursday’s game was the first time East Timor has played at home in the World Cup group stage. A previous home game against the United Arab Emirates was moved to Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, because the locker rooms of the national stadium in Dili were deemed to be in poor condition.While the locker rooms have since been upgraded, the stadium has little proper seating and few amenities, and parts of the field were threadbare. A 4 p.m. kickoff for a midweek match suggested the lighting could have been subpar, also.In addition to determining which countries will advance to the next stage of Asian World Cup qualifying, the current round of matches also will decide which teams will qualify for the 2019 Asian Cup. A place at the continental competition is the best the Timorese can now hope to achieve, but that in itself would be a remarkable achievement for a team that has won only a few games since the country gained independence from Indonesia in 2002.A version of this article appears in print on October 9, 2015, on Page B15 of the New York edition with the headline: Draw for East Timor.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.