AdvertisementSupported byN.F.L. RoundupBy The Associated Press and Tom PedullaThe Carolina Panthers will be without the starting defensive tackle Star Lotulelei for their N.F.C. divisional-round playoff game against Seattle on Saturday after he had surgery Wednesday to repair a broken foot bone.Coach Ron Rivera said Lotulelei injured his foot in Tuesday’s practice. Rivera also said that Lotulelei would be unavailable for the N.F.C. championship game but might be ready to play if the Panthers were to reach the Super Bowl. Carolina would need two road wins to get there.Rivera said he expected Colin Cole to start alongside Kawann Short. HEADING TO GEORGIA Brian Schottenheimer, the former offensive coordinator of the St. Louis Rams and the Jets, was named the University of Georgia’s offensive coordinator.Georgia Coach Mark Richt said Schottenheimer would also coach quarterbacks.Schottenheimer, 41, who led the Jets’ offense from 2006 to 2011, was the Rams’ offensive coordinator the past three seasons. Before moving to the N.F.L., Schottenheimer was an assistant coach with Southern California and Syracuse. KAEPERNICK CHANGES TRAINING San Francisco quarterback Colin Kaepernick will travel to Arizona to work with Kurt Warner this off-season.Kaepernick will begin his training and study with Warner, as well as the quarterbacks coaches Dennis Gile and Mike Giovando, on Monday in Phoenix. Gile said they had created a program for the next 12 weeks, until Kaepernick joins the 49ers again in April.Kaepernick will maintain his regular weight-training and running routine, but this will be a change because he has never had a designated quarterback coach. Gile said they would focus on film study, chalk-talk sessions and drills. The Sacramento Bee first reported the plan.JETS KEEP SEARCHING Woody Johnson, the Jets’ owner, made one of his many harshly criticized decisions two years ago when he hired John Idzik as the team’s general manager but presented him with the incumbent Rex Ryan instead of allowing Idzik to choose a coach. The team may be taking a similarly unorthodox path again.Charley Casserly, who is working with Ron Wolf to advise Johnson on the Jets’ search for a new coach and general manager, laid out the possibility that the team could take a coach-first approach in an interview with WDAE, a radio station in Tampa, Fla.Casserly cited the Seattle Seahawks as an example of a franchise that was richly rewarded for such a choice. The Seahawks signed Pete Carroll as their coach after his successful run at Southern California and later added John Schneider as general manager. But none of the coaching candidates the Jets are interviewing have a résumé to compare to Carroll’s.The Jets’ search for a successor to Idzik does not appear to be going well, with four candidates asking to have their names removed from consideration. They added one prospect to the list by scheduling Jon Robinson, the Tampa Bay Buccaneers’ director of player personnel, for an interview. TOM PEDULLAAdvertisement