By ANDREW KEHJAN. 7, 2015
WASHINGTON —  The Knicks have 44 games left.The next three months, therefore, may feel like an eternity, and it would be safe along the way to expect many more games like the one that took place Wednesday at Verizon Center: an anonymous Knicks lineup, ragged play and, eventually, a 101-91 loss to the Washington Wizards.The Knicks’ only noteworthy markers of progress henceforth may be benchmarks of futility. They notched a big one: Their losing streak bloated to 13 games, a franchise record. The team is now 5-33.The Wizards, who improved to 24-11, were back home after a rigorous five-game trip, and they looked slow at times. Midway through the fourth quarter, they let the Knicks creep back to a 5-point deficit. But the Knicks bungled their brief momentum and faded away.Coming into the game, the Knicks, who last won on Dec. 12, had lost their previous five games by an average of 18.8 points. In that context, perhaps, a 10-point defeat was a step forward.AdvertisementOver the coming weeks of inevitable misery, new faces are likely to cycle through the team. On Wednesday, it was Langston Galloway, a 23-year-old guard from Baton Rouge, La., who was signed to a 10-day contract after a good run on the Knicks’ Development League team. Galloway scored 7 points, shooting 2 for 8 from the field.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Jose Calderon — part of a lineup that also included Pablo Prigioni, Tim Hardaway, Jr., Quincy Acy and Cole Aldrich — led the Knicks with 17 points.On defense, the Knicks showed little resistance. Nene had a team-high 20 points for the Wizards, who scored 48 points in the paint with relative ease.  AdvertisementThe Knicks’ last game is April 15. Onward toward that day they go.A version of this article appears in print on January 8, 2015, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: A Small Sign of Progress? The Knicks Lose by Only 10.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.