By TOM PEDULLAJAN. 7, 2015
As Kaleena Mosqueda-Lewis took aim at one of the most significant scoring records in women’s basketball at Connecticut, perhaps the most meaningful assist had nothing to do with any teammate.Mosqueda-Lewis, a senior forward, hit three 3-pointers in a 98-60 win over Tulsa at the XL Center in Hartford on Wednesday night to match Diana Taurasi’s team career record of 318. In a recent interview, Mosqueda-Lewis recalled her stepfather’s devotion as they laid the foundation for her success, shot by twisting shot.“Repetition is what works for me,” she said, “constantly getting shots up.”Her stepfather, Khairi Ali, entered Mosqueda-Lewis’s life when she was 3 and saw her potential even as she was left off an All-Star team in the third grade. “You need to make it happen by putting in the work,’ ” he said.They learned the sport together. He read whatever books he could find. As Mosqueda-Lewis grew older, they would watch tape of sharpshooters such as Kobe Bryant and Reggie Miller, taking note of their balance and focus on the basket as they spun off screens.AdvertisementBy the time Mosqueda-Lewis reached seventh grade, Ali was waking her at 5 a.m. to take her to a 24-hour fitness center in her hometown, Anaheim Hills, Calif., so she could shoot as much as possible before school. The exhausting goal was 500 shots per day. If that meant returning to the gym once her homework was done, so be it. Ali never tired of running down rebounds and snapping off passes, and the two of them delighted in a bond that grew ever stronger.Advertisement“God put a beautiful child in my life,” Ali said. “Once Kaleena and her mom came into my life, that was the most important thing.”Mosqueda-Lewis’s mother, Sundy, said: “He always wants to be her biggest champion. He’ll do anything he can to make her happy.”Sundy’s maiden name is Mosqueda, and her daughter continues to carry the surname of her biological father, Lewis. Sundy and Khairi, who married in 2000, also have a 4-year-old son, Xander.Sundy said that one element that drew her to Khairi, who was a family friend, was his devotion to her daughter.“They hit it off right away,” she said. “It was strange in the beginning for me, but I saw how much he enjoyed being around her and how much she enjoyed being around him.”Khairi, a firefighter, does not do anything halfway. “He’s 100 percent go, go, go, very passionate about everything he does,” Sundy said.Mosqueda-Lewis fed off her stepfather’s commitment to do everything possible to help her excel on the court. By eighth grade, she was the one knocking at the bedroom door at 5 a.m. so they could hurry off to begin their 500-shot regimen. She learned to fight through mental fatigue; she stayed strong even as her leg muscles burned.AdvertisementMosqueda-Lewis set records at Mater Dei High School in Santa Ana for points (2,744), 3-point field goals (337) and rebounds (876). She committed to play for Connecticut as a sophomore. After being honored as the high school player of the year in 2011, she asked to keep her uniform number, 23, even though that number was fraught with pressure. Maya Moore, the top pick in the 2011 W.N.B.A. draft, had worn it for the Huskies.“I wanted to be great,” Mosqueda-Lewis said. “I wanted to embrace as much of UConn as I could.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Undoubtedly, she accomplished that.“There have been very few players who shoot the ball the way Kaleena does,” Coach Geno Auriemma said. “It’s God-given, and she’s worked hard at it.”She is a mainstay for UConn, the two-time defending national champion. She averages a team-leading 31.4 minutes a game and ranks third in scoring at 14 points a game as part of a lineup that has every starter averaging at least 12.Taurasi shot 39.2 percent from 3-point range and needed 144 games to sink 318 3-pointers from 2000 to 2004. Mosqueda-Lewis needed 117 games to bury 318 3-pointers and shot 43.7 percent (318 of 728), including a blistering 47.7 percent from beyond the arc this season.“In a span of maybe four possessions, she can blow the game wide open,” Auriemma said. “Not a lot of players have the ability to do that.”Despite missing 12 games last season to injury and illness, Mosqueda-Lewis became a force during the Huskies’ run to their ninth national championship, averaging 17 points, 8.3 rebounds and 3.9 assists a game in the N.C.A.A. tournament.Breanna Stewart, a junior forward, said Mosqueda-Lewis’s value exceeded momentum-swinging 3-pointers.“The way defenses have to guard her because she’s such a perimeter threat, it allows a lot of people to get open,” Stewart said, “and she’s such a great passer, she can find other people.”Mosqueda-Lewis, chosen for The Associated Press’s preseason all-American team, is not concerned about individual accolades or what her stepfather calls stat counting. She is intent on helping second-ranked Connecticut to a third consecutive national title.Advertisement“That’s the only way you feel good about the end of every year at UConn,” she said. “That’s what we’re all about. I’m not going to be happy with anything less than that.”A version of this article appears in print on January 8, 2015, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Years of Repetition Help Sharpshooter Equal a Record.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.