By BEN SHPIGELJAN. 7, 2015
RENTON, Wash. —  The night before a recent Seahawks game, about 90 minutes after the team’s final meeting, defensive end Cliff Avril walked past a room he presumed was empty.It was not.Inside sat a solitary man, in front of a screen, reviewing video of the next day’s opponent.“That late?” Avril said. “I’ve never seen that from a coach before.”That coach, Dan Quinn, is the mastermind of the Seahawks’ smothering defense. After concocting the plan that thwarted Peyton Manning and the Denver Broncos in the Super Bowl, Quinn has, for an encore, molded Seattle’s imposing collection of talent into one of the stingiest units in N.F.L. history.He is adored by his players, who call him “my man” and “my guy,” who say he “keeps it real,” who describe his approach by spouting words like “love” and “trust” and “faith.” They have enhanced Quinn’s reputation, much as he has theirs, and he is the most coveted assistant coach in the league.AdvertisementOf the six teams with head coaching vacancies, only Oakland has not met with him. Quinn would not discuss any interviews during a 10-minute session with the news media Wednesday, deferring to the individual teams, and he spoke in vague terms about the process while trying to deflect the focus to Saturday’s playoff game against Carolina. He did manage a laugh when asked how it felt to be more popular than a Kardashian.Advertisement“I would have no idea,” he said.Under league rules, Quinn cannot accept an offer — or receive one — until after the Seahawks’ season, which means that prospective employers, like the Jets, could be waiting until after the Super Bowl. Faced with that possibility last season, the Browns passed up a second interview with Quinn, a decision that their chief executive at the time, Joe Banner, called “probably the toughest” of the process.“He’s been a guy that, wherever he goes, people rave about,” Seahawks Coach Pete Carroll said. “We feel the same way.”Judging by Quinn’s recent past, it seems time for him to leave Seattle — after his second year as the defensive coordinator. Quinn, 44, a former Division III lineman, has worked precisely two seasons at each of his last six jobs. That stretch spanned positions in San Francisco, where he worked for Steve Mariucci and Dennis Erickson; in Miami, where he coached the Dolphins’ defensive line for Nick Saban; with the Jets under Eric Mangini; and at the University of Florida, where he called defensive plays for the Gators. Quinn, who had also spent two years as the Seahawks’ defensive line coach, returned to Seattle to replace Gus Bradley, who left to coach the Jacksonville Jaguars.“After we lost Gus, we didn’t have an identity,” linebacker Bruce Irvin said. “I think D. Q. came and gave us that identity.”That identity is spelled out, in bright green letters, on the blue bracelet that encircles Quinn’s right wrist: fast and physical.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Fellas,” Quinn reminds his players, “they’re going to have to deal with us.”To help his players perform, Quinn does not bog them down with too many checks or calls at the line of scrimmage. When he came back to Seattle before the 2013 season, he elevated an already dynamic group by asking the cornerbacks to play more man-to-man coverage. That, in turn, created more opportunities for pass rushers like Avril, Michael Bennett and Irvin.“He doesn’t expose guys like you see some other coordinators do,” linebacker K. J. Wright said. “He puts us in positions to be good. It’s just easy football.”Easy for the Seahawks, perhaps, but not for their opponents, who over Seattle’s last six games have scored three touchdowns and 39 points — none in the fourth quarter. Not since the 1985-86 Chicago Bears had a team allowed the fewest points and yards in the league for two consecutive seasons.Advertisement“The little things are what he’s made us really, really good at,” the linebackers coach Ken Norton Jr. said. “You want to be really good tacklers — guys catch balls, you punish them. You want to knock people back; you want to intimidate. It shows in our style. It shows in our effort.”From his players, Quinn demands fearlessness and ingenuity. When the Seahawks do not have the ball, they are scheming to get it back. Drills in practice are geared toward dislodging the ball from all angles, using helmets, shoulders and fists.Videos reinforce the emphasis. Ninja films evince a karate-chop technique. For further inspiration, coaches plumb the animal kingdom. Head-butting rams and punching kangaroos demonstrate the effectiveness, and power, of a close-range strike. The Seahawks have forced 20 fumbles, fifth most in the league.“We get up in your face; we challenge everything,” safety Earl Thomas said. “With the athletes that we have, and all the talent that we have, we’ve got to play that way.”This style has become so ingrained that as much as the defensive players want Quinn to stay, his departure would not affect them much. Their only request is that he does not leave for another three weeks — until after the Seahawks and their stifling defense claim another Super Bowl title.A version of this article appears in print on January 8, 2015, on Page B16 of the New York edition with the headline: Other Teams Have Designs on Seahawks’ Defensive Wizard.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.