AdvertisementSupported byOn BaseballBy Tyler KepnerFew people know the feeling of a baseball thrown 95 miles an hour thumping into their flesh. Few understand the panic of unleashing such a pitch and watching it veer toward a head, instead of a glove or a bat. In that way, we are lucky.Athletes like Craig Biggio and Randy Johnson are best observed from a distance. Nobody alive has been hit by more major league pitches than Biggio. Nobody alive has hit more major league batters than Johnson. It was a necessary, but brutal, part of their jobs.Biggio and Johnson were at the Waldorf-Astoria in Midtown Manhattan on Wednesday, with Pedro Martinez and John Smoltz, a day after the four gained election to the Baseball Hall of Fame. They were a jovial bunch. Smoltz hopped onto his chair to place a Hall of Fame cap on Johnson, who is 6 feet 10 inches. Martinez tweaked Mets fans — “They settle for what they have,” he said — and called himself an old goat.Biggio reflected fondly on his youth in Kings Park, a community on Long Island, and his unlikely path to glory with the Houston Astros. But he knows his career could have been snuffed in his prime.Pitchers hit Biggio 285 times, from Tim Birtsas in 1989 to Joe Smith in 2007. None of those pitches sent Biggio to the disabled list, and he never charged the mound. But one pitch came close to seriously injuring him, from the Chicago Cubs’ Geremi Gonzalez in 1997.“I’ll never forget laying on the ground; I was thinking about Dickie Thon because Dickie Thon got hit in the eye,” Biggio said. “I was kind of like, ‘Oh, my God.’ I didn’t have time to assess it.“I remember Baggie ran over because he was hitting behind me,” Biggio said, referring to his teammate Jeff Bagwell, “and I was able to get up. But I was lucky. The ball just barely hit the ear flap enough and then my cheekbone. I was lucky.”Thon was another Astros infielder, an All-Star in 1983 when he was 25. He was hit in the face by the Mets’ Mike Torrez the next April, missed the rest of the season and never made it back to the All-Star Game.Only Hughie Jennings, who played mostly in the 19th century, was hit by more pitches than Biggio. Biggio guessed that he scored about 100 more runs in his career — a full season’s worth — by reaching base from all the plunking. It was an easy trade-off.“Facing those guys, I was never intimidated by them,” said Biggio, who was hit once by Smoltz and once by Martinez but never by Johnson. “If they hit me, they hit me. It was just part of the game. You’ve got to pitch inside.”Smoltz struggled early with his control, leading his league in wild pitches three times, but he hit only 57 batters across 21 seasons. Martinez hit 141 batters in 18 seasons and enraged hitters by fearlessly working inside. In just his fifth career start, in 1994, Martinez lost a perfect game in the eighth inning when he hit Reggie Sanders of the Cincinnati Reds. Sanders was so incensed that he charged the mound.Martinez said his 5-foot-11 frame gave hitters no reason to fear him, but he added that his size made it easier to perfect his mechanics. Once he did, he could deliver a message with accuracy.“I was able to pretty much harness everything that I had and get this pinpoint control, so later on, every time I hit someone, it seems like it was on purpose,” Martinez said. “But early in my career, the intimidation factor wasn’t really with me. I just was wild, like every young pitcher.”Few were as wild as the young, gangly Johnson. It took him years to streamline his mechanics, and he was so frustrated he sometimes wanted to quit.“I was like Nuke LaLoosh, in ‘Bull Durham,’ that hit the mascot,” Johnson said.In 1992, his third full season with the Seattle Mariners, Johnson led the league in strikeouts, walks and hit batters. Over all, he hit 190 batters, fifth on the career list and the most of anybody born in the 20th century.But while Martinez and Roger Clemens seemed, at times, to enjoy drilling batters, Johnson hated it. For all his snarling and gesturing on the mound, he played clean.“No one wanted to face me because they were afraid I was going to hit them, and it wasn’t on purpose,” Johnson said. “I just didn’t know where it was going. Eventually, when I could harness my ability at 6-foot-10 and I knew where a 95-to-100-mile-an-hour fastball was going, then I had fun.”Even at his best, though, a ball could slip — a devastating prospect for left-handers facing Johnson’s slingshot delivery. In 1993, before the Red Sox stopped selling the seats in straightaway center for day games, Johnson hit Mike Greenwell in the helmet at Fenway Park. Greenwell later said he did not see the pitch until it was two feet from his head. Johnson rushed off the mound to check on Greenwell, who was motionless for five minutes but recovered.Another incident, when he beaned J. T. Snow in spring training in 1997, has also stuck with Johnson. He called it the scariest moment of his career.“It glanced off his wrist and then hit him up in the face, and it broke his eye orbit and his nose,” Johnson said. “I sprinted off the mound, and by the time I got to home plate, he was laying there. I called him at the hospital and talked to his fiancée. Those are moments that you don’t want to see.“Intimidating someone is completely different — putting a little fear in them and brushing them back but not hitting anybody. And protecting your players, obviously, that’s part of the game, too. But I never tried to hurt anybody.”The deadly weapon in Johnson’s left hand took points off many batting averages but never ruined a career. Biggio, likewise, came through it all just fine. In the end, it was just another part of the theater of a hard game. Biggio, in fact, did not even know who had hit him most often (seven times), and he held no grudges.“Pedro Astacio!” he said, smiling, when told the answer. “He was a teammate. Good guy.”Advertisement