By PAT BORZIJAN. 7, 2015
GREEN BAY, Wis. —  The man with the most famous red beard in Wisconsin was three bites into his chicken sandwich Tuesday night when someone approached his table at Kroll’s West, a bar and restaurant across the street from Lambeau Field, with a small placard and a Sharpie.Brian Rittich, a game-day parking attendant at the restaurant, asked the beard’s owner, Jeremy Wilcox, to write something to post on the Kroll’s wall of fame, where luminaries like the Packers great Bart Starr, former Vice President Al Gore and the television personality Regis Philbin had left greetings.After some thought, Wilcox wrote in elegant script: “Stay Strong! Never Shave! Lucky Beard Guy!” Then he signed his name, boldly and legibly, as if he had given autographs all his life.“Everyone in my family has good handwriting,” Wilcox said.Wilcox, a 39-year-old bear of a man at 6 feet 5 inches and more than 300 pounds, cannot go anywhere in Wisconsin without being recognized as the guy with the nine-inch-long beard tugged by Aaron Rodgers on national television during Green Bay’s regular-season finale, against Detroit on Dec. 28.AdvertisementIt happened in the third quarter, just before Rodgers, who had been carted off to the locker room with a strained left calf, returned to the field.AdvertisementWilcox, a communications technician for a company that provides television-related services at Lambeau Field, stands near the Packers’ bench, not a bad gig for a lifelong fan and a 1993 all-state offensive lineman at Wausau West High School.By the end of the game — a 30-20 Packers victory that clinched the N.F.C. North title and allowed the team to finish 8-0 at home — Wilcox said he had 40 text messages from people who saw Rodgers tug on his beard. Dozens more followed. Then came numerous interview requests.A few days later, a Milwaukee company began selling Fear the Beard T-shirts online. Last Tuesday, a bearded impostor tried talking his way into Lambeau. He never got past the guard shack.Wilcox laughs at all the attention. His co-workers call him Hollywood, and his relatives act as if he is a rock star.“It’s just nice to see people smile about something that’s fun,” Wilcox said. The beard, he said, took two years to grow.Wilcox’s mother, Wendy, said her home DVR would be rolling Sunday when the Packers host the Dallas Cowboys in an N.F.C. divisional-round game.“It’s actually hilarious,” she said. “He’s been doing this for a long time. I told him, ‘If this ever gets caught on camera, something is going to happen.’ I’ll be darned if it didn’t happen.”All because of one playful gesture.Wilcox lives near Wausau, Wis., about 90 miles west of Green Bay, in a log cabin built by his grandfather. During the Packers’ home opener against the Jets, Rodgers, ever the jokester, spied Wilcox and tugged his beard.Advertisement“I was just standing there, doing my thing, and he came over,” Wilcox said. “He was just staring at it at first. Then he started doing this thing, stroking his chin, like he had his own beard. He laughed. Then he came over and gave it a few yanks.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“It was crazy. Here I was, standing on the sideline with one of the most recognizable people in the whole world. I told my friends, and they got a good chuckle out of it.”If any others noticed, they did not say anything to Wilcox.Rodgers tugged the beard again during many, but not all, of the Packers’ remaining home games, Wilcox said. They never talked. He doubted Rodgers even knew his name.“It wasn’t like any kind of ritual,” he said. “It’s not like he did it before the start of every game or every half. It was completely random. There was no rhyme or reason. It was just a goofy moment.”Rodgers learned Wilcox’s identity two days after the Detroit game when he spoke about him on his weekly radio show.“I just noticed this huge dude with a sweet ginger beard,” Rodgers said on 540 ESPN Milwaukee. “I think it’s good luck when you have a beard like that. I think Jeremy would agree.”Luck may play a part in Sunday’s game, just the third in N.F.L. playoff history in which a team unbeaten at home in the regular season is facing one unbeaten on the road. It will also be Dallas’s first playoff game at Green Bay since the legendary Ice Bowl in 1967, a 21-17 game with the temperature below zero that sent the Starr-led Packers to the Super Bowl.It also may bring together two unusual talismans — Wilcox for the Packers, and Gov. Chris Christie of New Jersey for Dallas.AdvertisementChristie, a Cowboys fan, watched the second half of Dallas’s 24-20 victory over Detroit on Sunday from the suite of the owner Jerry Jones. TV cameras showed Christie hugging Jones and Steve Jones, another club executive, late in the game. Jerry Jones told Dallas radio station 103.5 the Fan on Tuesday that he wanted Christie at the rest of the Cowboys’ playoffs games. “He’s part of our mojo,” Jones said.On Wednesday, Rodgers, who missed practice to rest his sore left calf, discounted Wilcox’s potential influence.“I wouldn’t say that’s my good luck charm,” Rodgers said. “I pulled his beard a couple of times, and it led to seven or eight interviews for him. The good luck charms are on the field. It’s the guys and the work they put in, and we’re excited about the opportunity.”Packers receiver Randall Cobb, however, eagerly accepts all favorable signs. He said Wilcox’s beard trumped whatever Christie might bring.“The beard, I mean, is legendary,” Cobb said, smiling. “Lambeau; cold weather; a nice, thick beard? Of course.”A version of this article appears in print on January 8, 2015, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: A Lifelong Packers Fan Chuckles as Fame Tugs.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.