AdvertisementSupported byBy Tom SpoustaQuarterback Jameis Winston on Wednesday announced that he would make himself available for the N.F.L. draft, the same day that Florida State was sued by the woman who accused him of rape. The lawsuit, filed in United States District Court in Orlando, Fla., seeks a jury trial and damages while alleging that the woman’s Title IX rights were violated, a lawyer for the woman said. The lawsuit says the university created a “hostile educational environment.” A former Florida State student, the woman had accused Winston of raping her at his apartment in December 2012, an encounter Winston has said was consensual.Winston was not arrested or charged in the case, and in December he was cleared of violating the university’s student code of conduct after a two-day hearing.Winston, the winner of the 2013 Heisman Trophy, had two years of eligibility remaining at Florida State. He is projected by most draft analysts to be either the first or second quarterback chosen — the other being this season’s Heisman winner, Oregon quarterback Marcus Mariota — and he could be picked No. 1 or No. 2 over all. “I reached this very difficult decision after careful consideration and long thought, realizing how difficult it would be to say goodbye to my family at Florida State,” Winston said in a statement released through his representative, the Legacy Agency. “I am eternally grateful for the opportunity to wear the garnet and gold and have greatly enjoyed my time as a Seminole, both as an athlete and a student in the classroom.” Winston had a stellar two-year career for the Seminoles. He won the Heisman as a redshirt freshman, becoming the youngest player to do so, and led Florida State to an undefeated season and the Football Bowl Subdivision title. He was 26-1 as the team’s starting quarterback, his only loss coming last week in a College Football Playoff semifinal, a 59-20 trouncing by Oregon in the Rose Bowl. Winston slumped somewhat this season, throwing for 3,907 yards and 25 touchdowns, with 18 interceptions, but his draft status is not expected to be affected much. Gil Brandt, a vice president for player personnel for the Dallas Cowboys from 1960 to 1988, who is now an analyst for NFL.com and Sirius XM radio, said he thought Winston had “a very bright football mind” and would be the first or second player drafted. “F.S.U. coaches have been friends of mine for a long time,” Brandt said. “I think they feel that he is a good person but lacks maturity. I know personally that the head coach, who I have a great deal of faith in, thinks he’s a great person.”That coach, Jimbo Fisher, elaborated Wednesday.“It was a blessing to be able to coach him,” Fisher said in a statement. “He’s one of the unique players that I’ve ever had the privilege to coach. He embodies what you as a coach want as a person, a student and a player. He’s a genuine and honest guy.” Florida State’s president, John Thrasher, said in a statement that the university had not yet been served notice of the lawsuit and that Winston’s accuser did not have her civil rights violated. “After a year of selective news leaks and distorted coverage, Florida State looks forward to addressing these meritless allegations in court,” Thrasher said. “Evidence will show that through its confidential victim advocate program, F.S.U. did everything the plaintiff asked for, and that the assertions F.S.U. shirked its Title IX obligations are false.”He added, “F.S.U.’s handling of this matter was driven by the plaintiff’s deliberate and informed choice on how to proceed, not by athletics.”Winston’s off-the-field behavior raised eyebrows, and it is expected to give some N.F.L. executives pause. Last spring, he was caught shoplifting $32.72 worth of crab legs and crawfish from a grocery store. He was given a citation and was required to complete 20 hours of community service. This season, he was suspended for a game for shouting a crude phrase in the student union.Now Winston is leaving the university as it is hit with a lawsuit and will head to the N.F.L., which has faced a number of its own image problems of late. Where Winston will be chosen in the draft will be hotly debated until the teams begin making picks on April 30.“The first thing we did is we put a player in order of his ability of what we saw,” Brandt said about his time with the Cowboys. “After we put him in order, then we’ll go into his background.” He added: “N.F.L. security does a great job — they can tell how many parking tickets a guy got. Some of these things, sometimes we hear a lot that such-and-such did this, and it’s not quite the complete story.” In the case of the rape accusation, the Tallahassee Police Department took two weeks to contact Winston after learning of the allegation, and prosecutors declined to file charges. The accusation became public in late 2013, and the university tried — unsuccessfully — to interview Winston the following January after the Seminoles won the title.According to a letter issued by the Education Department’s Office for Civil Rights, “if a school knows or reasonably should know about student-on-student harassment that creates a hostile environment, Title IX requires the school to take immediate action to eliminate the harassment, prevent its recurrence and address its effects.”Additionally, the letter says that “schools need to ensure that their employees are trained so that they know to report harassment to appropriate school officials and so that employees with the authority to address harassment know how to respond properly.”Jim Ryan, a Title IX compliance expert and a partner with the law firm Cullen and Dykman, said penalties for Title IX violations were usually monetary. He also said the university could settle the lawsuit out of court. “Her case and F.S.U.’s defense is going to come down to, did F.S.U. comply with Title IX?” Ryan said. “If it did, the case is over.” Marc Tracy contributed reporting.Advertisement