AdvertisementSupported byBy Andrew KehWASHINGTON — Carmelo Anthony said his decision to sign a new, five-year deal with the Knicks last summer was based partly on his trust that Phil Jackson, the team’s new president, would know how to turn the club’s fortunes around.“Here’s an opportunity, with the trust,” Anthony said Wednesday. “Everything starts now.”The leap of faith continued for Anthony this week when the Knicks gave up two key rotation players, J. R. Smith and Iman Shumpert, in a trade with the Cleveland Cavaliers and waived Samuel Dalembert. The moves signaled an earnest start to the franchise’s rebuilding project under Jackson.The Knicks were in Memphis preparing to play the Grizzlies on Monday when details of the three-way trade with the Cavaliers and Oklahoma City (the Thunder got Dion Waiters from the Cavaliers) began to emerge. Anthony recalled being called to the locker room from the gym at FedEx Forum and finding a “state of confusion, not really knowing what was going on, what was going to happen.”“Shock,” Anthony said.Acknowledging multiple times that trades were commonplace in professional sports, Anthony said it was nevertheless difficult for him to part with Smith, whom he called “my brother,” and Shumpert, whom he referred to as “my rookie when he came into this league, a guy that I kind of put under my wing.”Anthony said the two players had difficulty processing the trade at first, too.“I had to really try to calm them down and just kind of let them know that everything was going to be all right: ‘You have to move on, you have to get past this,’ ” Anthony said. “It was more upsetting from a friendship standpoint for both of those guys than it was a basketball standpoint. They understood the business of basketball.”With their 101-91 loss to the Washington Wizards on Wednesday, the Knicks have dropped 13 straight games and 23 of 24.Coach Derek Fisher did not shy away from the concept that the team was in a state of changeover. “We have to be honest with our guys about what just happened and what it symbolized and what it means for us,” he said.Fisher hoped the players understood that management was not giving up on them, despite the recent transactions. Still, he said, it was obvious that the moves had a long-term scope.“It almost solidifies the fact that we’re trying to build something that’s going to last and not just squeeze out a win here or there,” Fisher said. “Hopefully our guys can continue to focus on that message and bring the right mind-set to the game.”The Knicks on Wednesday waived forwards Lou Amundson and Lance Thomas and center Alex Kirk — the three players they acquired in the three-team trade. And as expected, they signed guard Langston Galloway, of the Westchester Knicks in the Development League, to a 10-day contract.“A lot of these guys now have an opportunity that they wished for and wanted,” Fisher said. “It’s here now. You have to make the most of it and own it.”Fisher said other 10-day contract additions were possible.On a basic level, the Knicks need bodies: They are moving forward for now without Anthony, who missed his fourth consecutive game with a sore left knee, as well as Amar’e Stoudemire (knee) and Andrea Bargnani (calf).The team has not revealed the diagnosis of Anthony’s injury, and he evaded a request for specifics about the injury. He said only that he had undergone multiple scans and that the team’s medical staff was still trying to figure out the best approach to rehabilitation.“It’s kind of like having a little rock or pebble in your shoe,” he said. “Some days it comes around.”Anthony said he was not sure when he would play again, but he expected he would be ready at least by Jan. 15, when the Knicks are scheduled to play the Milwaukee Bucks in London. Anthony and the Knicks would presumably like for him to still be playing when the All-Star Game takes place Feb. 15 at Madison Square Garden.The confluence of injuries, trades and generally poor play has left the team in a bad state.And although Anthony knew last summer that the current season would be a transitional one, he said he was still surprised at how much things had crumbled.“I kind of knew that it was going to be kind of a rebuilding kind of situation,” Anthony said. “But to be in a situation we’re in, from a record situation, I couldn’t imagine this in a long time, a lot of years.”Advertisement