AdvertisementSupported byBy Allan KredaTwo subway stops from Barclays Center, where the Islanders will play a regular-season home game for the first time Friday, are remnants of the Americans, the hockey team that almost played N.H.L. games in Brooklyn.An exhibition at the Brooklyn Historical Society recounts the story of the team known as the Amerks, a colorful yet downtrodden franchise that existed from 1925 to 1942, preceding the Rangers by a season and then skating as their co-tenant at Madison Square Garden.The Americans practiced at the Brooklyn Ice Palace, about a mile from the nexus of Atlantic and Flatbush Avenues, where Barclays Center now stands. The former Americans defenseman Red Dutton, who also coached the team, tried unsuccessfully as the team’s league-appointed manager in the 1940s to escape the Garden and move the franchise to Brooklyn. A decade later, the Dodgers departed for Los Angeles, and Brooklyn was left without a major professional sports franchise until the Nets moved there in 2012.The exhibition refers to the Americans as “Hockey’s Forgotten Promise.” The Islanders will fulfill that promise of seven decades ago when they host the Chicago Blackhawks, the first regular-season N.H.L. game to be played in Brooklyn.The Islanders’ odyssey from Nassau County to the Borough of Kings has been a work in progress since October 2012, when the team announced  the move, which coincided with the end of its lease at 43-year-old Nassau Coliseum.In addition to persuading fans from Long Island to stay with the team, a major challenge will be carving out a fresh fan base in Brooklyn.“There’s so much more happening there than a hockey team getting here to Flatbush Avenue,” said Eric L. Adams, the Brooklyn borough president, who said he became hooked on hockey when a friend invited him to a Rangers game in the 1970s. “This is a chance for children of color who have never explored hockey — haven’t explored much outside of life on their blocks — to experience something new.”This week, Adams announced an outreach program to provide vouchers to Brooklyn community groups that would be redeemable for $10 tickets. Fifty to 500 vouchers will be available per game, he said.“We can make Friday night at the rink hip, cool and attractive,” said Adams, 55, who became borough president last year after serving Brooklyn in the state senate and working for 22 years as a New York City police officer. “We need to make hockey sexy to the urban kid.”Barclays Center initiated a six-week program with City Parks Foundation at three Brooklyn parks to hold clinics introducing street hockey to children ages 8 to12. The plan is to have Islanders players, current and perhaps former ones, join the sessions this fall.The effort to broaden the Islanders fan base after four-plus decades on Long Island is daunting for Brett Yormark, chief executive of Barclays Center, who presided over a similar transition when the Nets moved to Brooklyn.“This is one of those Harvard Business School case studies: How do you not alienate the core fan while at the same time engaging with the new fan?” said Yormark, whose attempt last week to introduce a new subway goal horn at Barclays was so heavily criticized on social media that he scrapped the experiment after one game. “You’ve got to do both.”At the historical society, hockey or history fans can read about and even watch grainy footage of the Americans, who managed to beat the Rangers in the 1938 playoffs. They were led by the captain and top scorer David Schriner, who was known as Sweeney, goaltender Earl Robertson and right wing Lorne Carr, who scored in the fourth overtime to win the best-of-three, first-round series.The Americans were generally not so successful. They made the playoffs five times in 17 seasons and had a losing record 14 times.The Americans wore sweaters resembling the stars and stripes of the United States flag and were called the New York Americans for all but one of their N.H.L. seasons. They became the Brooklyn Americans for the 1941-42 season, when they were still playing in Manhattan but practicing in Brooklyn with hopes that a new home arena would soon follow. Because of financial constraints and World War II, Dutton’s dream was not meant to be.For the same reasons, the Amerks suspended operations after that season. Dutton became N.H.L. president in 1943, but eventually resigned from the post with hopes of restoring the Americans franchise after the war and having them play in Brooklyn. The league did not reinstate the Amerks, though, and a furious Dutton blamed the Rangers and Madison Square Garden, proclaiming they would never again win the Stanley Cup for as long as he lived.Dutton died in 1987, seven years before the Rangers captured their first — and only — Stanley Cup since 1940.“The Americans are a quintessential Brooklyn sports story — the loss that Brooklyn always feels as a borough with sports,” said Marcia Ely, the vice president for programs and external affairs at the Brooklyn Historical Society, where the exhibition runs until March 27.The hockey historian and Brooklynite Stan Fischler started following the sport in the late 1930s when the Rangers-Americans rivalry was fierce. For him, having an N.H.L. team play in his home borough is gratifying.“The Americans were the ice version of the Brooklyn Dodgers; they were a lovable team that couldn’t win,” Fischler said.He added that Adams’s initiatives took a page from the Dodgers too.“What he’s doing is a hockey version of what the Dodgers did with the Knothole Gang — getting kids in for a bargain so they would become baseball fans,” Fischler said.Whether the Islanders can inspire similar adulation from new fans in Brooklyn remains to be determined, the same way it is hard to predict how many dedicated followers of the team from Nassau and Suffolk Counties will commit to new travel routines and higher prices at Barclays.But hockey has a way of drawing in fans when they see the sport played in person. Adams is counting on that type of reaction from youngsters witnessing the game for the first time.There is hope they will become followers of the Islanders stars John Tavares and Kyle Okposo the same way earlier generations of Long Islanders were mesmerized by Mike Bossy and Bryan Trottier. “We can start this process,” Adams said. “We have to teach kids that it’s good to be different and explore new things outside their neighborhoods. I will try to help as many kids as I can to root for the Islanders.”Advertisement