By ANDREW DASJAN. 7, 2015
Don Garber, the Major League Soccer commissioner, let out a quiet laugh Wednesday as he admitted that even he was having trouble catching up with the news from around his league.The Red Bulls announced that they had fired their popular coach, Mike Petke. The Los Angeles Galaxy confirmed the signing of midfielder Steven Gerrard. And at least one United States national team player — and as many as three — had entered discussions about returning to M.L.S. in time for next season, which opens in March.The flurry of transactions and potential transactions capped an up-and-down week of news for M.L.S.  that began with the embarrassing announcement that one of the league’s biggest recent signings, Frank Lampard, had elected to delay his arrival for at least six months.“This was certainly one of the more difficult weeks,” Garber, the league’s commissioner since 1999, said of the period that began with the Lampard news on New Year’s Eve. “But I attribute that to more scrutiny and interest in M.L.S. Fans are more engaged.”AdvertisementMore news could be coming soon. New York City F.C. was “very close” to signing Mix Diskerud, a United States national team midfielder, in time for its debut season, according to two people familiar with the negotiations. And talks were reportedly taking place with representatives of two other national team players: striker Jozy Altidore, who has become a little-used reserve at Sunderland in England, and midfielder Sacha Kljestan, who almost left Belgium’s Anderlecht to sign with the Galaxy last year. Multiple news reports linked both players to the Red Bulls, but neither is close to an agreement.Garber declined to comment on the United States players other than to say that “in my opinion, it would be very good for Jozy’s career to come back to Major League Soccer.”Diskerud, 24, has played his entire career in Norway, where he was born, but has yet to sign a new contract offered by Rosenborg, his club there. He came close to joining M.L.S. twice in recent months, but talks with the Portland Timbers and the Columbus Crew ended without a deal.AdvertisementPetke’s firing was the day’s most surprising development, probably even to him, given that he had written of his excitement about the new season on Twitter as recently as Sunday and that he had made the playoffs in his only two seasons as coach. The Red Bulls announced his departure in a brief statement Wednesday morning. His replacement, Jesse Marsch, told reporters in a conference call that he had been contacted about taking the job “10 days, two weeks ago.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.That would have been only a day or two after the former M.L.S. executive Ali Curtis took over as the Red Bulls’ sporting director. Curtis said Wednesday that his planning for the change dated back far longer — seven and a half years, to his first days working at the league’s New York office. Curtis said Marsch’s embrace of “ideas about performance and analytics” made him the perfect choice as coach to fulfill Curtis’s vision for the Red Bulls.Marsch became the 15th coach hired in the club’s 20 seasons, an era of shifting faces and philosophies that have long frustrated the team’s fans and produced only one notable trophy: the Supporters’ Shield, delivered by Petke in 2013 for leading the Red Bulls to the league’s best record.But in the league, and in New York, Petke’s dismissal changed the conversation from a more difficult topic. For days, fans in the region and elsewhere had lamented the announcement last week that Lampard would not join New York City F.C. for the start of its first season as scheduled. Instead, he will remain with New York City F.C.’s parent club and owner, the English powerhouse Manchester City, through May as it chases titles in the Premier League, the F.A. Cup and the UEFA Champions League.One player who is coming to M.L.S. is Gerrard, the longtime Liverpool star. Gerrard, 34, announced last week that he would leave Liverpool, the club he has supported and played for since he was a boy.While the timing of Gerrard’s debut remains unclear — like Lampard, he plans to finish the Premier League season before joining M.L.S. — the release of the 2015 M.L.S. schedule Wednesday allowed fans to start contemplating when it might happen. It will almost certainly not be in New York: The Galaxy will play the Red Bulls in Harrison, N.J., on April 26, before Gerrard is expected to join the team, and will host N.Y.C.F.C. in the only meeting between the teams this season, on Aug. 23 in Carson, Calif.Among the notable features of the 2015 schedule: The league will expand its playoff field to 12 teams from 10, and the final spots will be determined when all 20 teams take the field in simultaneous matches on the season’s final day, Oct. 25. Each team will play 34 regular-season games, and as a part of a new television contract with ESPN, Fox and Univision, the league will feature Friday night games and Sunday doubleheaders nearly every week.The two expansion teams, Orlando City and New York City F.C., will meet in Florida to open the season, on March 8, and the two New York area franchises will meet three times: May 10 at Red Bull Arena, June 28 at Yankee Stadium and Aug. 9 at Red Bull Arena.An article on Thursday about the up-and-down week of news in Major League Soccer misstated the number of teams that made the playoffs last year. It was 10, not eight.A version of this article appears in print on January 8, 2015, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: Red Bulls Fire Coach Amid a Whirl of Activity in M.L.S.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.