By BILL PENNINGTONJAN. 7, 2015
The usually staid Giants will enter the 2015 season with a new defensive coordinator, a second-year offensive coordinator and a head coach who, for the time being, has no contract beyond next season and has been warned to win or face dismissal.Three successive seasons without a playoff game can apparently turn even the most conservative franchise into a band of risk-takers.A week after defending the embattled defensive coordinator Perry Fewell at a news conference, Coach Tom Coughlin fired him on Wednesday. The cornerbacks coach Peter Giunta was also relieved of his duties. There may be more firings on the coaching staff as Coughlin and the Giants prepare for a make-or-break season.Coughlin said he was making the changes to shake up his team, which has lost 24 of its last 40 games. After praising Fewell and Giunta as coaches, Coughlin said in a statement: “The simple fact of the matter is in the circumstance that we find ourselves, change is necessary. That may not be the most eloquent way of saying it, but that is what I am confronted with. The hope always is invigoration. You are going to stimulate. The decision here gives us the ability to revive our defensive people, to introduce, if you will, a new, different system.”AdvertisementCoughlin added that the new defensive coordinator would bring “a new focus and a new area of concentration.”AdvertisementFewell’s defense, which had several prominent lapses late in pivotal games this season, ranked 29th in the N.F.L. in total defense. In a news conference last week, Coughlin pointed out that Fewell’s defense had performed well in some defensive categories. But John Mara, one of the Giants’ owners, twice said in his news conference the same day, “The defense must improve.”Mara added that it would be up to Coughlin to decide Fewell’s fate, but that Mara and General Manager Jerry Reese would express their opinions on the coaching staff.Fewell, who joined the Giants in 2010 and was the team’s defensive coordinator during its 2011 Super Bowl-winning season, had the eighth-ranked defense a year ago. But in 2012, the first of three consecutive nonplayoff seasons for the Giants, Fewell’s defense ranked 31st. By the midpoint of the 2014 season, Fewell had lost the support of some of the top executives in the organization.Coughlin will select Fewell’s successor. The most notable possible replacement is Steve Spagnuolo, the defensive coordinator under Coughlin when the Giants won the Super Bowl after the 2007 regular season. Spagnuolo is on the coaching staff of the Baltimore Ravens. Other likely candidates are the recently fired Atlanta coach Mike Smith, the Buffalo defensive coordinator Jim Schwartz, the former Giants defensive coordinator Mike Nolan and the San Francisco defensive coordinator Vic Fangio.But Coughlin might not be recruiting from a position of strength. Unless Coughlin’s contract is extended — and perhaps even if it is extended — the new defensive coordinator will join the Giants knowing that Coughlin could be gone by next year. That may give the new defensive coordinator a tenuous standing with the team as well.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.BECKHAM GOING TO PRO BOWL The rookie wide receiver Odell Beckham Jr. will play in the Pro Bowl on Jan. 25, the N.F.L. said. Beckham, originally a first alternate, is replacing Detroit wide receiver Calvin Johnson, who is unable to play because of an injury.“It is definitely awesome,” Beckham said in a statement released by the Giants. “It is something that means a lot to me, and I am definitely going to cherish the moment.”He added: “The goal is to be either in the Pro Bowl or the Super Bowl. That is every year. That is something you want to be able to build on and put that on your résumé.”Beckham finished the season with 91 catches and 1,305 receiving yards, despite having missed nearly all of training camp, the Giants’ off-season workouts and their first four games with a hamstring muscle strain. In a loss against the Cowboys on Nov. 23, he made a spectacular one-handed catch for a touchdown, prompting many to debate its place among the greatest catches in N.F.L. history.AdvertisementBeckham will be the first Giants rookie to play in the Pro Bowl since tight end Jeremy Shockey in 2002. He will be the team’s first wide receiver to play in the game since Victor Cruz in 2012. He is also the first Giants rookie receiver selected to the Pro Bowl.A version of this article appears in print on January 8, 2015, on Page B16 of the New York edition with the headline: Giants Start Shake-Up, Firing Defense’s Leader.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.