AdvertisementSupported byBy Tyler KepnerWhen the Los Angeles Dodgers hired Andrew Friedman to run their baseball operations last fall, his grasp of analytics was part of the attraction. It was only logical, then, that Friedman would cite percentages in explaining whether a front office can actually engineer a roster for October success.“It’s difficult,” Friedman said last month, before a game at Dodger Stadium. “In the regular season, the best team wins roughly 60 percent of the time and the worst team wins roughly 40 percent of the time. That’s only a 20 percent spread between the best and the worst. You get to the playoffs and obviously that shrinks even more.“And so much of it’s how you’re playing at the time and if you catch more breaks and the depth of your roster for different things that come up. There are a lot of different factors that go into it, but I don’t know that we have put our finger on exactly one or two things.”Of course, the Dodgers have two very important things they hope will carry them to their first championship since 1988: the pitching arms of Clayton Kershaw and Zack Greinke. Yet in their two years together, they have not lifted the Dodgers out of the N.L. playoffs. In 10 combined starts in the last two postseasons, they are 2-5 with a 3.53 E.R.A.Kershaw, who starts Game 1 against Jacob deGrom on Friday, has flashed his usual overpowering stuff in that time, with 47 strikeouts in 35⅔ innings. But ill-timed mistakes have doomed him to lose his last four starts. Greinke, who starts Game 2 against Noah Syndergaard on Saturday, has been much better, with a 1.93 E.R.A., if only about half as many strikeouts.The Mets’ young starters have similarly dominant stuff, without the track record of working deep in games. Doing so will be especially important for the Dodgers, who have a star closer in Kenley Jansen but a less imposing group of setup men.The Mets have won games started by Kershaw and Greinke this season, and that was while David Wright was injured and before their trade for outfielder Yoenis Cespedes. Then again, the Mets have never faced Dodgers shortstop Corey Seager, who unseated the veteran Jimmy Rollins by hitting .337 with four home runs after his promotion in early September.The Mets are starting right-handers in the first three games, and Seager hits left-handed. So does Adrian Gonzalez, who has only 22 career at-bats off deGrom, Syndergaard and Harvey, but has hit a homer off each of them.Bright Lights, Big Citi:  When Citi Field hosts its first postseason game Monday, with Matt Harvey opposing Brett Anderson in Game 3, it will make Marlins Park in Miami the only current stadium to never host the playoffs. The Mets reached the postseason in their seventh season at Citi Field, and only six teams waited longer to host a playoff game in their current home: the Tigers, the Brewers, the Reds, the Rays, the Pirates and the Angels. Dodger Stadium opened in 1962, and the home team won the World Series the next season.Nasty Pitches: Each team’s closer throws a pitch that is among the toughest to hit in the major leagues. According to Fangraphs, the Mets’ Jeurys Familia threw his splitter at 93.1 miles an hour, the highest average speed in the majors for pitchers with at least 50 innings. Meanwhile, the Dodgers’ Kenley Jansen dominates the way Mariano Rivera once did, with heavy reliance on a devastating cutter. Jansen said he simply throws a four-seam fastball, and it cuts naturally at just the right moment to fool the hitter.That’s Kershaw, With a K: Clayton Kershaw struck out 301 hitters in 232⅔ innings this season, an average of 11.64 strikeouts per nine innings. Only one other pitcher with that many innings has had a higher ratio of strikeouts to innings: the Hall of Famer Randy Johnson, who did it each season from 1998 through 2001.A Trojan Returns: Lucas Duda led the Mets in homers, with 27, but he did not hit many at the University of Southern California. Duda, who went to high school in Riverside, Calif., hit only 11 home runs in three seasons for the Trojans. The Mets still saw enough to draft him in the seventh round in 2007. “Early on, he was an inside-out guy,” the former Mets general manager Omar Minaya said a few years ago, referring to Duda’s swing. “He hit the ball to left field a lot, mostly a singles hitter. But you had to like the size, and he always had good balance. He used to lock himself off, and he wasn’t able to use his hips. But that can be taught.” As well as Duda has turned out, he is hardly the most accomplished Met from U.S.C. That title belongs to the Hall of Famer Tom Seaver.Six Positions, Plus Banana: If things get desperate for the Dodgers, don’t be surprised to see a utility man in a banana suit. Enrique Hernandez started at six positions and hit .307 for the Dodgers, and he also conjured the magic of the rally banana. On May 23, when the Dodgers’ hitters tied a franchise record for scoreless innings, at 35, Hernandez reached for a banana on the bench and the team scored to break the drought. He proclaimed it a “rally banana” on Twitter, and on Sept. 1, in a 14-inning game, he wore a banana suit in the dugout — on orders from Andrew Friedman. The Dodgers promptly won the game.No Hits, No Problem: Both the Mets and the Dodgers were no-hit twice this season. The Dodgers fell victim to Houston’s Mike Fiers and the Chicago Cubs’ Jake Arrieta in August, while the Mets went hitless against San Francisco’s Chris Heston in June and Washington’s Max Scherzer last Saturday. Only two other postseason teams have been no-hit twice during the regular season: the 2010 Tampa Bay Rays, who lost in the first round, and the 1917 Chicago White Sox, who won the World Series.Common Alumni: Oh, there have been a few, and that’s not even counting John Franco, who began his career in the Dodgers’ farm system, or Terry Collins, who managed there for years. Name a famous player from one team, and there’s a good chance he also played for the other: Duke Snider, Mike Piazza, Darryl Strawberry, Gary Carter, Orel Hershiser, Gil Hodges, Bobby Valentine, Sid Fernandez, Jesse Orosco, Roger McDowell, Robin Ventura, Todd Zeile, Pedro Martinez, Hideo Nomo, Bobby Ojeda, Rickey Henderson, Roger Craig, Clem Labine, Gary Sheffield, both Mike Marshalls — and the late, great Don Zimmer.Postseason History: The Mets and the Dodgers staged an epic N.L. Championship Series in 1988. The Mets stopped Orel Hershiser’s record scoreless-inning streak, at 67, in winning Game 1, and also won in his next start in Game 3. But Mike Scioscia’s clutch homer off Dwight Gooden turned the series in Game 4, which ended with a save by Hershiser, who spun a five-hit shutout to win Game 7. The teams also met in a 2006 division series, a three-game sweep by the Mets that is best remembered for the moment in Game 1 in which catcher Paul Lo Duca tagged out two Dodgers at the plate on the same play. Said Lo Duca: “It was like that movie — ‘Major League.’ ”Advertisement