AdvertisementSupported byTV SportsBy Richard SandomirIf you’re the Knicks, and playing more like the Washington Generals than the Washington Wizards, you’re likely to be penalized. But relegation is out, and fans are still stuffing Madison Square Garden even as they have watched their heroes play to a 3-16 home record this season.So it was left to ESPN on Thursday to impose some punishment, in the polite guise of using its contractual flexibility to show more compelling matchups. Having already carried three Knicks games, ESPN erased three of the four Knicks games left on its schedule. Out went the Jan. 28 game against the Oklahoma City Thunder. Gone is the Feb. 6 matchup with the Nets. The March 25 game against the Los Angeles Clippers was banished from the Bristol empire.The Knicks’ Feb. 1 date against the Los Angeles Lakers (11-25) survived the purge. But there is time to replace it with something — anything! — that will pass for a more compelling showcase. Indeed, the Knicks are so awful that nobody could blame their own network, MSG, if they considered dropping some games.ESPN made its move eight and a half hours before the Knicks played the Houston Rockets on TNT, which probably wasn’t thrilled that the game was still on its schedule. During TNT’s pregame show, the host Ernie Johnson promised that the Knicks would not be discussed — “Thank God!” Charles Barkley shouted — and soon after, Barkley vowed: “I’m not coming to work anymore if we show the Knicks or the Lakers for the rest of the season. I’m putting my foot down.”The Knicks are scheduled to be on TNT twice more — Jan. 29 against the Indiana Pacers and March 12 against the Lakers — when, presumably, Barkley will not get out of bed.Barkley has never hidden his contempt for these Knicks and their earlier versions. Last month, as he was criticizing the team during a game against the Bulls, the Knicks’ president, Phil Jackson, responded on Twitter by writing, “do I have to mute this game?”Marv Albert and Reggie Miller continued the how-bad-are-they theme during the game, during which there were several cuts to Jackson in his seat, but no interview with the sideline reporter Rachel Nichols. Fans were shown wearing bags over their heads.Early on, Albert discussed the Knicks’ “incredible numbers” — their N.B.A.-worst record and worst start in franchise history — and Miller foresaw “little help on the horizon” in free agency. Albert asked Miller if he could recall playing on a team as bad as the Knicks (he could not), and Miller was baffled that they had won only five games (“You’d think your superstar can win you five games alone,” he said). They pined for the days when the Knicks’ games were electric events.But they did not have to reminisce to find material to comment on. With Houston ahead, 30-28, TNT cut to a recorded segment of Knicks Coach Derek Fisher talking to the team during a timeout. These little sideline moments are rarely insightful or intellectually nourishing. Coaches can be banal, and some don’t want anything meaningful to be replayed for a national audience. But Fisher’s comments sounded like those of a rookie coach whose players do not listen to him.“Just relax,” he told them. “It’s basketball. All the rules of the game are the same. The basket’s the same height. They put their shorts on the same way you put yours on. Don’t matter who it is over there. Believe in who you are. You can play the game.”Miller and Albert seemed to take a deep breath before commenting. Maybe they had to stop chuckling. Albert, the former Knicks announcer, has heard sideline talks from Red Holzman, the only Knicks coach to guide the team to N.B.A. titles.Albert spoke first. “You wonder how many times Derek Fisher has said that to his team,” he said.Miller: “You usually hear that coming from college coaches.”Albert: “Maybe Derek’s watching too many old-fashioned basketball movies.”The Rockets then went on a 9-0 run and finished the first half ahead, 56-42. They pulled away in the second half for a 120-96 victory. That left the Knicks 5-34 over all.At halftime, there was more disrespect for the Knicks. Kenny Smith jokingly refused to go to his giant video board because the Knicks had won just five games. Shaquille O’Neal did not appear to know Knicks center Cole Aldrich’s name (“I never heard of him”) even as he praised Aldrich for outmuscling Dwight Howard, Houston’s star center, on the baseline. And they returned to Barkley’s insistence that he would not come to work for a Lakers or Knicks game.“I have some breaking news for you, Charles,” Johnson said, “March 12. Knicks-Lakers.”“No way,” said Barkley, whose surprise was ameliorated when Johnson told him: “Here’s the deal. We’re probably doing March Madness at that point.”Email: sandor@nytimes.comAdvertisement