By ANDREW KEHJAN. 8, 2015
Madison Square Garden has become, at least, a warm and quiet place to spend a cold evening.The hapless Knicks, as anyone could have predicted, gave their home fans almost nothing to cheer about Thursday night. But there were few jeers at the arena, either. Something about booing such an inexperienced and untalented group may have felt wrong — or perhaps it just seemed pointless.The Knicks were on a two-game trip this week when they traded away three rotation players and shed any pretense about being a competitive group this season. So as the Knicks slumped to a 120-96 loss to the Houston Rockets in their first game back home, it was quiet.While the Knicks (5-34) were extending their franchise-record single-season losing streak to 14 games, the most noticeable protests were silent ones. Sitting along the baseline, near the visiting team’s bench, were five fans wearing brown paper bags over their heads. The fans were shown on TNT’s nationally televised broadcast, and pictures spread quickly on Twitter.The television cameras and microphones also captured Coach Derek Fisher delivering a motivational pep talk to his players that reinforced the image of the amateurish team.Advertisement“Just relax,” Fisher told his players during an early timeout. “It’s basketball. All the rules of the game are the same. The basket’s the same height. They put their shorts on the same way you put yours on. Don’t matter who it is over there. Believe in who you are. You can play the game.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.It seemed like an elementary message to deliver to professional basketball players. But trades and injuries have left the Knicks with something apparently short of that — a group of young players trying to make an impression.Advertisement“We’re just playing basketball, young guys trying to make it,” said the rookie Cleanthony Early. The vibe might have been different if the Knicks had been able to use any of their expensive stars. But Carmelo Anthony missed his fifth consecutive game with a sore left knee — though he did go through a thorough shooting workout on the court on his own before the game — and Amar’e Stoudemire (knee) and Andrea Bargnani (calf) sat out as well.The Knicks were plucky enough to cut their deficit to 2 points midway through the second quarter. But James Harden re-entered the game and helped stretch the Rockets’ lead to 14 before halftime. Seven Rockets players scored in double figures; none of the Knicks’ starters did.It was the Knicks’ seventh straight double-digit loss. At least it was warm inside the building.A version of this article appears in print on January 9, 2015, on Page B15 of the New York edition with the headline: Little Excitement at Garden, on the Court or Off.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.