AdvertisementSupported byBy Tom SpoustaIRVING, Tex. — A football attached to a spring-loaded, flexible rod awaits the Dallas Cowboys’ defensive players as they enter their meeting rooms. They are expected to punch, slap, rake, strip, claw, grab — anything that might hone their technique and cause a turnover.“We punch in; we punch out,” defensive tackle Tyrone Crawford said.Jeremy Mincey, an end, said: “As soon as you see it, you want to hit it. It helps, man. Subconsciously, it puts it in your mind — to attack the ball instead of just getting the tackle.”Catchphrases are posted above lockers, too. “Jan. = Score month,” reads the latest mantra. Last month was called “Punch Out December.” Such motivational tactics are common across the N.F.L. But after fielding the third-worst defense in league history in 2013, the Cowboys desperately needed a jolt. Any cliché probably would have worked, and the atmosphere among this group of relatively anonymous and unheralded players at their practice complex suggests they would run through a brick wall for the new defensive coordinator, Rod Marinelli.The Cowboys’ goals turned into reality this season, with the defense forcing 31 turnovers, second only to the Houston Texans’ 34. In last Sunday’s wild-card game against the Detroit Lions, Dallas had three more takeaways in a come-from-behind 24-20 victory. “It’s just the hunger,” Crawford said. “Coaches talk about it every day. We see the ball everywhere; it’s all around us.” Now Dallas will find itself caught between a frozen rock and a hard place when it tries to pry turnovers in its divisional game at Green Bay on Sunday. Quarterback Aaron Rodgers has not thrown an interception in the Packers’ last 16 games at Lambeau Field, the equivalent of two regular seasons of home games. “Any quarterback, you hit him enough, you rattle him,” Mincey said. “They start looking around at ghosts when they’re not even there. Quarterbacks do that a lot. Once they start getting hit, they start looking around for who’s going to hit him, even when nobody’s about to hit him. “It’s all about getting into his head, getting some hits on him and keeping him in the pocket,” he added. Rodgers is nursing a strained left calf, an injury that could make him less mobile and keep him in the Cowboys’ cross hairs. “He’s tough,” Mincey said. “He’s as good as they come. I know he’s going to come out there and play his best game. We’ve got to be on top of our details early, focused and ready.”Few fans, if any, thought the Cowboys would be in a position to talk about Rodgers, much less face him and the Packers in the playoffs, which Dallas had not reached in four seasons. Expectations were so low after three consecutive 8-8 seasons that the Cowboys seemed to have nothing to lose — especially on defense, a unit that allowed 415.3 yards a game last season.The shift in psyche was almost instantaneous under Marinelli. But his schemes alone did not drop the Cowboys’ total yards a game this season to 355.1, which ranked 19th. Dallas was eighth in the league against the run, allowing 25.4 fewer yards a game (128.5 to 103.1 this season) and chopping off a half-yard per carry (4.7 to 4.2).“Guys are just clicking on all cylinders, coaching staff, players,” cornerback Brandon Carr said. “The expectation level is being met. Sundays is meant for guys going out and executing and having fun.”The rookie DeMarcus Lawrence was so eager to show his aggressive ball-hawking skills against the Lions that he became a hero, a goat and then a savior again — all in less than 90 seconds. Spencer had sacked Matthew Stafford, causing him to lose the ball, and Lawrence scooped it up and turned toward the end zone. But he took a jarring hit and fumbled the ball. The Lions recovered and had new life with 2 minutes 10 seconds left in the game.No matter. About a minute later, Lawrence, a backup defensive end, sealed the victory with a sack of Stafford, causing a fumble and recovering the ball in the same swoop. The Cowboys also had an interception against the Lions, a combined effort of Mincey’s deflection and linebacker Kyle Wilber’s easy catch. “That’s probably all he saw in his head; he was thinking score, score, score,” a chuckling Mincey said of Lawrence. “I’m not mad at him. Just glad he made up for his mistake and did a great job.”Tony Romo, DeMarco Murray and an offensive line loaded with first-round draft picks have helped, too. Romo has put together perhaps his best season (3,705 yards, 34 touchdowns, nine interceptions), and Murray led the league in rushing with 1,845 yards, combining to control the ball to such an extent that Dallas was second in the league in time of possession, at 32:22 per game. That is a strategy that should work in what are expected to be frigid conditions in Green Bay, and it would help keep Rodgers off the field. “We’re as confident as they come,” Mincey said. “We focused up and held Detroit to 3 points in the second half. Once we put our mind to it and started executing with our actions, everything started going smoothly. “We pulled it all together at the right time,” he added. “Everybody’s hitting. Our front seven, our cornerbacks are coming up making hits. There’s no finesse here. We just hustle and hit.” Advertisement