AdvertisementSupported byBy Tyler KepnerJon Lester has been here before. He has not faced the St. Louis Cardinals in October as a member of the Chicago Cubs, which he will do in Game 1 of their division series on Friday. But Lester has pitched at Busch Stadium in the World Series, for Boston, and won. He understands what his new team now faces.“We’ve got to beat the best team in baseball and we’ve got to go from there, so we’ll see,” Lester said at PNC Park in Pittsburgh Wednesday night, after the Cubs beat the Pirates, 4-0, behind Jake Arrieta in the wild-card game. “But really, from February, everyone was excited, but they didn’t really know what would happen. And I’m seeing more and more people cheering us on, more and more people in the streets just excited to be Cubs fans again. That’s exciting.”That’s a whole lot of excitement in one comment – and that’s before those fans knew the Cubs would be facing their longtime rivals in the postseason for the first time. The Cubs earned a spot in the division series by winning 97 games in the regular season and knocking off a Pirates team that won 98. That victory ended a nine-game postseason losing streak dating to the 2003 National League Championship Series.That was the series in which a fan deflected a critical foul ball in Game 6 against the Marlins, and then the Cubs’ shortstop, Alex Gonzalez, botched a double-play grounder. In the sixth inning of the wild card game, Cubs shortstop Addison Russell made an error on a ball that also could have been a double play. But this time, the next hitter gave him another chance, and Russell executed.Maybe things really will turn out the Cubs’ way. Anthony Rizzo, their star first baseman, said the team had been inspired by reaction around town to the Blackhawks’ Stanley Cup titles. He said he was proud to represent Ernie Banks and other Cubs from the past.“They left the jersey a lot better when they were done playing,” Rizzo said. “I know Ernie would be really proud of this team.”The Cubs have young players new to the postseason stage, like Arrieta, Rizzo, Russell, Kyle Schwarber and Kris Bryant. October baseball is much more familiar to the Cardinals, who seek their 10th trip to the N.L.C.S. in the 2000s and their 12th World Series title, which would rank second only to the Yankees.The Cardinals integrated prospects onto the roster this year, enjoyed a strong season from the free-agent-to-be Jason Heyward and drove relentlessly to 100 wins. They have weathered injuries to top players, including the ace Adam Wainwright, who tore his Achilles’ in April and returned as a reliever, and catcher Yadier Molina, who will try to play with a splint on his left thumb, which he injured when Rizzo slid into his tag on Sept. 20.But if fans want an underdog, they will find one anywhere but St. Louis. Of the eight teams remaining in the postseason, the Cardinals are the only one that has won a championship since 1993.Horned Frogs on the field! The Cubs’ Jake Arrieta and the Cardinals’ Matt Carpenter were teammates, friends and intense rivals at Texas Christian University. “We’d compete at lifting, we’d run and compete at that, we’d play basketball, we’d play ping-pong, we’d play pool and we’d play racquetball,” Arrieta said this May. “We’d keep a tally of how many games we won in each event and have bragging rights until we did it the next time.” In the majors, those bragging rights clearly go to Arrieta. In 16 career at-bats against Arrieta, Carpenter has zero hits.Big Game John: The Cardinals picked John Lackey to start Game 1 on Friday, choosing a pitcher with a 1.93 earned run average at home in 2015 and 117 career innings in the postseason. Lackey has a strong track record (7-5, with a 3.08 earned run average), and he is the only active pitcher who has won Game 7 of the World Series, which he did for the Angels in 2002. The winning pitcher in Game 7 last fall, the Giants’ Jeremy Affeldt, retired after this season.Fantastic Flipping: In their recent lean years, the Cubs deliberately tried to sign veteran pitchers to short-term deals, hoping to flip them to contenders to help build an inventory of top prospects. The strategy worked brilliantly. Paul Maholm was traded to Atlanta in 2012 for Arodys Vizcaino, who was eventually sent back to the Braves for Tommy La Stella, the Cubs’ third baseman in the wild card game. Jason Hammel (who has since returned) went to Oakland in a 2014 deal for shortstop Addison Russell. The coup, though, was signing Scott Feldman before the 2013 season and shipping him to Baltimore that summer in a trade for Jake Arrieta.Rooting for the Story: Joe Buck, the lead broadcaster for Fox, is the son of Jack Buck, the late Hall of Fame voice of the Cardinals. But Buck, who has a popular restaurant in St. Louis, said calling a Cubs World Series would be the highlight of his career. “When people say, ‘What’s the one thing you want to do?’ that’s my answer: Cubs in the World Series,” Buck told The Chicago Tribune. “I don’t want to do an N.B.A. Finals or a Kentucky Derby or moderate a presidential debate, as if that would happen. I want to sit at Wrigley Field, look out and know that a World Series game is about to start. It would be the cherry on top.”An Unwanted Number: Cubs Manager Joe Maddon usually wears a hoodie, but officially, he does have a uniform number, and it’s purposefully unusual: 70. When Maddon was a young coach for the Angels, the team acquired Don Sutton, the future Hall of Fame pitcher. Sutton was given his usual No. 20, which Maddon had worn, so Maddon decided to take a number no one would ever want. He went 50 digits up and worn No. 70 ever since.Matheny Makes a Mark – When tasked with replacing a retiring Hall of Fame manager after their 2011 World Series title, the Cardinals chose wisely by picking Mike Matheny to succeed Tony La Russa. Matheny, the team’s former catcher, had never managed before but was well-acquainted with the organization and its emphasis on player development. He has since become the first manager in major league history to lead his team to the postseason in each of his first four years.Common Alumni: Hundreds of players have worn both distinctive jerseys: redbirds on the bat for the Cardinals, bull's-eye “C” for the Cubs. Several alums of both teams are in the Hall of Fame, including, among others, Grover Cleveland Alexander, Three Finger Brown, Rogers Hornsby and Lou Brock, who was dealt from the Cubs to the Cardinals in June 1964, and immediately helped St. Louis win a championship. The Cubs’ 1979 Cy Young winner, Bruce Sutter, would go on to close out the 1982 World Series title for the Cardinals, just as current Cubs reliever Jason Motte did for St. Louis in 2011. Alas, Motte is unlikely to do the same for the Cubs; he is out with a shoulder injury.Advertisement