By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSJAN. 8, 2015
Milan Lucic scored two goals, and Niklas Svedberg earned his second N.H.L. shutout behind three periods of stifling defense as the Bruins dominated the Devils, 3-0, in Boston on Thursday night.Svedberg faced only 14 shots as the Bruins limited the Devils to three in the opening period and four in the second — three of those efforts coming on a late power play that did nothing to help the visitors.David Krejci and Torey Krug assisted on Lucic’s power-play goal with 1 minute 10 seconds left in the first, and Carl Soderberg added an unassisted goal 8:31 into the second for the only scoring until Lucic tapped in an empty-netter with 12 seconds remaining.Patrice Bergeron, who scored the winner Wednesday in Boston’s overtime victory at Pittsburgh, and Chris Kelly assisted on the final goal. It was the 700th career game for each.AdvertisementBLACKHAWKS 4, WILD 2 Bryan Bickell scored twice in the third period, Corey Crawford made a season-high 42 saves, and Chicago held on for a win against the heavy-hearted Wild in Minnesota.AdvertisementPatrick Sharp and Patrick Kane also scored for Chicago, which has won four of six. The Blackhawks entered the night 2 points behind Nashville atop the Central Division.The Wild played its second straight game without left wing Zach Parise. His father, the former Minnesota North Star J. P. Parise, died Wednesday night after battling lung cancer.PREDATORS 3, STARS 2 Shea Weber scored his second goal of the game 17 seconds into overtime, and Nashville improved to 16-2-1 at home with a victory over Dallas.Miikka Salomaki scored in his league debut, and Roman Josi had two assists, as the Predators tied Anaheim for the most points in the N.H.L.Jason Spezza and Trevor Daley each scored for Dallas.HURRICANES 5, SABRES 2 Jiri Tlusty had a goal and an assist, and Carolina scored four times in the second period to send visiting Buffalo to its sixth straight loss.Tlusty, Eric Staal and Victor Rask scored in a 69-second span late in the second period. Jeff Skinner had a goal earlier in the second, and Riley Nash added one in the third.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Ryan Murphy and Justin Faulk had two assists each for Carolina, and Cam Ward made 18 saves.Philip Varone scored both Buffalo goals in his second game this season, and Jhonas Enroth stopped 26 shots.FLYERS 3, CAPITALS 2 Jakub Voracek scored his 16th goal of the season on a power play 1 minute 28 seconds into overtime, and Philadelphia rallied twice from a goal down to overcome host Washington.AdvertisementR. J. Umberger and Sean Couturier also scored for the Flyers, and Alex Ovechkin and Karl Alzner scored for the Capitals.BLUES 7, SHARKS 2 St. Louis scored the final four goals to turn a one-goal lead into a rout of visiting San Jose.Alexander Steen, Jay Bouwmeester, Paul Stastny, Jori Lehtera, T. J. Oshie, Patrik Berglund and David Backes all scored for the Blues, who have 20 goals times in three games. Jaden Schwartz added three assists, and Brian Elliott made 25 saves.JUDGE HEARS MOTION ON SUIT The N.H.L.’s motion to dismiss a class-action lawsuit brought by former players over concussion-related injuries has been heard by the federal judge assigned to the case.Lawyers for the league and the former players gave oral arguments Thursday in the courtroom of Judge Susan Richard Nelson of United States District Court in St. Paul. The hearing lasted about five hours, and Nelson did not make a ruling or give a timetable for her decision.The players have been seeking unspecified financial damages and league-funded medical monitoring for neurological disorders. They have accused the N.H.L. of failing to warn players of the risks of head injuries and promoting the violent play that led to them.The suit, a combination of several from more than 200 former players, was formally filed in October. As a class-action complaint, the litigation covers the estimated 5,000 living former N.H.L. players.A version of this article appears in print on January 9, 2015, on Page B15 of the New York edition with the headline: Lucic Stars as Bruins Shut Out the Devils.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.