By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSJAN. 8, 2015
Nets guard Deron Williams will be sidelined indefinitely after new testing on his sore left side revealed a fracture of his rib.The Nets said Thursday that a magnetic resonance imaging exam revealed a fracture of the cartilage portion of the left 12th rib and that Williams would be evaluated in a week. There was no timetable for his return.“Deron reported some soreness above this area over the weekend and as a result underwent imaging studies on Monday, which were negative,” the Nets’ medical director, Dr. Riley Williams III, said in a statement. “Yesterday during the game he reported a new onset of symptoms below the prior area of soreness. New imaging studies done today demonstrated the fracture.”The announcement provides some clarity to what has been a confusing few days regarding Williams’s status since he was first injured Sunday in Miami.AdvertisementThe Nets listed him as probable for their game Monday against Dallas, even though Williams appeared in obvious pain at the end of Sunday’s game. He was later ruled out, but returned Wednesday against Boston after the Nets originally called him doubtful to play.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Williams came off the bench late in the first quarter but made it just four minutes before having to come back out of Brooklyn’s 89-81 loss.Williams has battled injuries since signing a $98.5 million contract in 2012 and has been coming off the bench since returning from a two-game absence because of a strained right calf. He is averaging 13.9 points and 6.3 assists.AdvertisementThe Nets also announced they had recalled guard Markel Brown and forward Cory Jefferson from the Maine Red Claws of the N.B.A. Development League.A version of this article appears in print on January 9, 2015, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: Nets’ Williams Out Indefinitely After Test Shows Rib Fracture.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.