By JERÉ LONGMANJAN. 8, 2015
Boston, which stages a celebrated marathon and has a rich history of professional championships in basketball, football, baseball and hockey, will now swing for the fences in international sport as it seeks to host the 2024 Summer Olympics.On Thursday, Boston was chosen as the American bid city over Los Angeles, San Francisco and Washington by the board of directors of the United States Olympic Committee.In September 2017, the International Olympic Committee will choose the host of the 2024 Games. The United States has not held the Summer Olympics since the Atlanta Games in 1996, but American Olympic officials “feel we have an incredibly strong partner in Boston that will work with us to present a compelling bid,” Larry Probst, chairman of the U.S.O.C., said in a statement.Boston, which has never hosted the Olympics, has broad corporate support for its bid, and it is a sports-mad region whose spirit was evident in the recovery from the 2013 Boston Marathon bombings. But public opinion about staging the Games is divided, and opposition has been organized and vocal.AdvertisementYet to be determined is whether Boston has the worldwide cachet to convince international Olympic delegates that it is a deserving host.AdvertisementRigorous competition is expected from an announced candidacy by Rome (host of the 1960 Summer Games) and perhaps other European capitals like Paris (1924) and Berlin (1936). South Africa is also expected to bid for the 2024 Games in an effort to bring the Olympics to that continent for the first time.Boston prevailed as the American candidate on the strength of its compact proposal that seeks to place no stadium farther than a 10-minute walk from public transportation; the opportunities for private financing to build facilities and stage the Games in a center of education, technology, health care and research; and a plan to incorporate the area’s universities in the Olympics.The relatively modest $4.5 billion proposal, which envisions using existing or temporary structures, also seeks to align Boston with attempts by the I.O.C. to rein in costs that have spiraled out of control. Costs reached $40 billion for the 2008 Summer Games in Beijing and $51 billion for the 2014 Winter Games in Sochi, Russia, scaring off some potential bid cities for future Games.Boston also proved attractive to the U.S.O.C. because of its television-friendly location in the Eastern time zone, its nearness to the huge population centers of the Northeast, and the area’s 51,000 hotel rooms and 30,000 available college dormitory rooms to house visitors.Organizers hope the 2024 Olympics would remedy the region’s desperate need for middle-class housing and upgrades to its roads, bridges and public transportation system. A number of improvements are already planned, with or without the Olympics, organizers said.Addressing concerns about congestion at the Games, where one lane of traffic is fully devoted to Olympic officials and journalists, organizers have pointed out that the Boston Marathon draws about 500,000 spectators each year and that the city has been able to expertly stage events like the World Series.The Olympics, though, would be a rough equivalent of holding a Boston Marathon for 17 consecutive days.AdvertisementBoston’s selection as the American bid city was “an exceptional honor,” the city’s mayor, Marty Walsh, said in a statement, adding, “This selection is in recognition of our city’s talent, diversity and global leadership.”The deadline for Boston to submit its formal bid is September. A number of significant details remain to be worked out. The city lacks four major facilities — an Olympic Stadium, an Olympic Village to house 10,500 athletes, an aquatics center for swimming and diving, and a velodrome for cycling.A temporary Olympic Stadium of at least 60,000 seats is planned for South Boston to hold the opening and closing ceremonies and the track and field competition. After the Games, the stadium would be partly or fully removed or repurposed. Organizers envision donating sections of the stadium to local parks, schools and universities. The Olympic Village could help provide affordable housing after the Games, organizers said.Early plans would place archery and fencing at M.I.T., beach volleyball on Boston Common and sailing in Boston Harbor. The traditional Boston Marathon route would apparently be altered somewhat for the Olympics. If baseball returns to the Olympics, Fenway Park would provide one of the sport’s most cherished stadiums.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Boston, though, will have to convince the I.O.C. that it wants the Games. A poll in June conducted by The Boston Globe showed that 47 percent of respondents backed the city’s bid while 43 percent opposed it.There have been organized protests against what opponents have called a lack of transparency in Boston’s bid, which is led by the construction magnate John Fish. Concerns have also been expressed about the potential for spiraling costs, nightmarish traffic, the possible diversion of resources away from housing, infrastructure and transportation, and overstated predictions about the Olympics’ lasting benefits to the region.The opposition group No Boston Olympics said in a statement Thursday, “The boosters behind Boston 2024 won today — but our commonwealth is poorer for it.”On a frozen and gridlocked Thursday evening in downtown Boston, response to Boston’s selection was mixed.“It sounds great to me,” said Tom Kruger, 25, an entrepreneur with an eye toward enhanced public transportation. “I like the idea of having infrastructure improvements.”AdvertisementBut Lisa Green, 46, a resident of Boston’s busy North End, was not so pleased. “My immediate reaction is to not want any more tourists,” said Ms. Green, a faculty manager at a health care improvement organization. She said she would probably go to Maine for a vacation if the Olympics came to town. In an already crowded city, Ms. Green said, “I think the Olympics would be more than we could take.”Still, Boston prevailed against the other three American challengers, including Los Angeles, which was seeking to host the Summer Games for the third time.Los Angeles has a revitalized downtown, Hollywood glamour and many facilities already in place, including the Coliseum, the centerpiece of the 1932 and 1984 Games. But U.S.O.C. officials apparently feared that the familiarity might have left Los Angeles vulnerable to the perception of “been there, done that” among international Olympic delegates.San Francisco might have been the American city with the best chance to convince international Olympic delegates, given its magnificent vistas, high-tech ingenuity, diversity, and raft of new, refurbished and planned stadiums. But U.S.O.C. officials expressed some concern about the city’s roiling political atmosphere and uncertain local support.Washington was always considered a long shot no matter the strength of its bid, given that American foreign policy might be polarizing to international Olympic delegates.In recent days, Boston emerged as a favorite.“We are passionate about sports because we believe in the power of sport to transform our city and inspire the world’s youth,” Mr. Fish, Boston’s bid leader, said in a statement. “A Boston Games can be one of the most innovative, sustainable and exciting in history, and will inspire the next generation of leaders here and around the world.”Jessica Bidgood contributed reporting from Boston.
 A version of this article appears in print on January 9, 2015, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: Boston Is Awarded a Shot at Winning a New Set of Rings.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.