AdvertisementSupported byBy Ken Belson and Steve EderAn investigation into how the N.F.L. handled a domestic abuse case involving the former Baltimore Ravens running back Ray Rice determined that the league was aware of the nature of the altercation but chose not to aggressively pursue additional information.Robert S. Mueller III, the former F.B.I. director chosen by the N.F.L. to determine how the league handled its investigation of the Rice case, released his findings Thursday.The inquiry found that the N.F.L. and its commissioner, Roger Goodell, did not possess and had not seen a video that showed Mr. Rice punching his fiancée, Janay Palmer, in an elevator before Mr. Goodell’s suspension of Mr. Rice for two games in July. But the league made little effort to pursue the case even after it “possessed substantial information suggesting a serious event had occurred inside the elevator,” the report said. The Ravens had received information about the video before the two-game suspension but did not share it with the league, the report said.The league had seen a video taken from outside the elevator, which was located in an Atlantic City hotel, that showed Mr. Rice dragging an unconscious Ms. Palmer from the elevator, the report said. The next day the league received a copy of a complaint summons, written by officers who had seen the in-elevator video, that charged Mr. Rice with striking Ms. Palmer with his hand, rendering her unconscious. By June 6, the N.F.L. had a copy of the grand jury indictment that said Rice “did recklessly cause significant bodily injury” to Ms. Palmer.Only after the video from inside the elevator was made public months later — and the N.F.L. came under intense criticism — did Mr. Goodell suspend Mr. Rice indefinitely, a decision that touched off an even wider debate about the league’s disciplinary policies.“This was a wake-up call for all of us,” said John Mara, the co-owner of the Giants who, along with Art Rooney II of the Pittsburgh Steelers, was Mr. Mueller’s liaison at the league.The report by Robert S. Mueller III, the former F.B.I. director chosen by the N.F.L. to determine how the league handled its investigation of a domestic abuse case involving the former Baltimore Ravens running back Ray Rice.The report was released four months after TMZ, a celebrity gossip website, published the video, which set off a ferocious backlash against the N.F.L. for its handling of domestic violence cases and prompted calls for Mr. Goodell’s resignation.The furor quickly turned into the biggest crisis of Mr. Goodell’s eight-year tenure and has played out through the season as other players, including Adrian Peterson and Greg Hardy, were named in abuse cases. Mr. Rice, who appealed his indefinite suspension, has since been reinstated by an arbitrator, who called the penalty “arbitrary” and in conflict with the facts of the case. He has not been signed by a team.Soon after the video was published, Mr. Goodell said on television that he had not seen it when he decided, two months before, to suspend Mr. Rice for two games. Mr. Goodell said the video was inconsistent with what Mr. Rice had told him and Mr. Rice was suspended indefinitely as a result.Mr. Goodell has said he did not know the full extent of the altercation captured on the video. Mr. Mueller’s report said that the league was aware of the magnitude of the encounter but that it still agreed to a light punishment for Mr. Rice.Skepticism about Mr. Goodell’s explanation grew and the integrity of the league was being questioned. To quell the public’s unrest, the N.F.L. asked Mr. Mueller to review the league’s investigation. Mr. Mueller has had full access to N.F.L. officials, computers and other information. He and his team interviewed more than 200 people and looked specifically for phone calls made from N.F.L. offices to numbers in New Jersey, which is where law enforcement investigators were located.In a statement, Mr. Mara and Mr. Rooney expressed relief that Mr. Mueller’s investigation found that the N.F.L. had not received the video, as the commissioner contended from the outset.But they also said “we were slow to react, and in the case of Ray Rice, the original punishment was insufficient” and that the “the steps taken by the N.F.L. to investigate this matter were inadequate.” An enhanced personal conduct policy recently instituted by the N.F.L., they said, should help the league avoid similar pitfalls in the future.“This matter has tarnished the reputation of the N.F.L. due to our failure to hand out proper punishments,” they said. Mr. Mueller’s finding that Mr. Goodell did not see the in-elevator video was not entirely surprising. During Mr. Rice’s appeal, Barbara Jones, a former federal judge who served as arbitrator, wrote that while the N.F.L. was aware of the video, the league never requested a copy of it, and therefore Mr. Goodell had never seen it.Mr. Mueller, however, detailed the league’s missteps in its handling of the case. After the Rice scandal exploded in mid-February into what John Raucci, the N.F.L.’s director of investigative services, termed “an Internet feeding frenzy,” the league asked James Buckley, a private investigator and former police detective who has worked with the N.F.L. since 1999, to look into the case, the report said.A series of emails between Mr. Raucci and Mr. Buckley revealed how the N.F.L.’s investigative department was thinking about the altercation and how to best gather information.For example, Mr. Raucci wrote to Mr. Buckley on Feb. 20 that he had “never heard” of a casino not having elevator cameras. He continued: “Separate and apart we have heard from a source, with no attribution, the interior camera shows RR striking his fiancé, more than once, above the shoulders, after she knocked off his hat.” “RR” referred to Ray Rice. Mr. Buckley did not follow up with the casino about the in-elevator video, the report said, but he did confirm the existence of cameras with a source.In other emails, Mr. Raucci asked Mr. Buckley to find out if the incident included “mutual pushing and shoving vs. cold-cocks her and knocks her unconscious.”“Between us DV” — or domestic violence — “is DV and if the Commissioner is going to come down hard on the guy he should do so; I don’t care who started the incident,” Mr. Raucci wrote.Meanwhile, the Ravens received a “detailed description of the in-elevator video” by phone from an Atlantic City police lieutenant in late February. Those details, the report said, were not volunteered to the league.Mr. Buckley’s work for the N.F.L. between March and May amounted to a passive monitoring of developments. “He did not perform any additional investigative steps, nor was he instructed by the league to seek additional information,” the report found.In late May, as Mr. Goodell prepared for a disciplinary hearing with Rice, Jeffrey Miller, the N.F.L.’s head of security, asked Mr. Raucci in an email, “Have we provided as clear a picture as possible for Commissioner Goodell to make an appropriate decision here?” He added, “Were we able to see video from inside the elevator as to him striking her?”Mr. Raucci asked Mr. Buckley to speak with a lead detective in Atlantic City, but he was not optimistic. “The Atlantic City police are an extremely closed organization, and they seldom, if ever, cooperate with us,” Mr. Raucci wrote to Mr. Miller.By that point, Mr. Rice had agreed to enter a diversion program to postpone any criminal proceedings. In the wake of the scandal, Mr. Goodell has strengthened the league’s personal conduct policy to include penalties for a wider range of violent offenses. The N.F.L. will expand the use of paid leave for players facing legal problems. Mr. Goodell will also appoint a special counselor to mete out penalties, a job he used to handle. He will, however, continue to hear appeals.“We have all learned a great deal in the past months,” Mr. Goodell said in a statement.Mr. Mara and Mr. Rooney said Mr. Goodell had the full support of the owners.Yet like so much in the Rice case, even the choice of Mr. Mueller created controversy. A former F.B.I. chief who served for 12 years under Presidents George W. Bush and Barack Obama, Mr. Mueller now works at a Washington law firm that has done work for the N.F.L.Robert Boland, who teaches sports law at New York University, said the report did nothing to dispel the perception that Mr. Mueller had a conflict of interest. He said that the N.F.L.’s insistence on continuing to investigate player misconduct could lead to other controversies in the future.“This could blow up again on the N.F.L.,” he said.Steve Eder contributed reporting.Advertisement