
On Soccer By                     
JOHN DUERDEN

JAN. 8, 2015
Nine years after leaving Oceania to join the Asian Football Confederation, Australia is hosting the continent’s biggest soccer tournament, the Asian Cup. It may be an opportunity to bring the countries involved closer together, but most fans in Australia will be looking for success on the field after 18 months of poor results.The Australian team, known as the Socceroos, faces Kuwait in Melbourne on Friday night in the opening game of the 16-nation competition. After reaching the final four years ago, only to lose to Japan in Qatar, anything less this time around on home soil would be seen as a disappointment.And the pressure may be even higher after Australia’s recent run of poor results. In 18 games since qualifying for the 2014 World Cup in June 2013, Australia has won just three times — against Costa Rica, Canada and Saudi Arabia.Successive 6-0 defeats at the hands of Brazil and France in September and October 2013 cost Holger Osieck his job as head coach. His replacement, Ange Postecoglou, has been attempting to rebuild what was an aging team.AdvertisementThat, along with the fact that many of the recent defeats have come against some of the best teams in the world — including Chile and the Netherlands at the 2014 World Cup — has led to patience from fans and critics in the media.AdvertisementHowever, concerns have been growing, with the team slipping 44 spaces in just a year to No.100 in the FIFA world rankings.“Regeneration has been problematic, being belated and out of step with the international cycle amidst two major tournaments, Brazil 2014 and the Asian Cup, making the task of Ange Postecoglou more difficult,” the former Australia midfielder Craig Foster, now chief soccer analyst of Sydney broadcaster SBS, said in an email. “Positive performances in Brazil built goodwill which has survived negative results since, though pressure has significantly increased on the coach.”Veterans such as Lucas Neill and Mark Schwarzer, players with vast European experience who starred at the 2006 and 2010 World Cups and had major parts in qualifying for the 2014 tournament, have been replaced with younger counterparts, though the team still relies on 35 year-old Tim Cahill of the Red Bulls of Major League Soccer for goals. “The 2006 generation were overwhelmingly playing consistently in tier one European leagues, and several had Champions League experience,” noted Foster. “The 2014 group are talented, but largely not yet established at the top level.”David Gallop, the chief executive of Football Federation Australia, believes that success in the competition is important for the country, both commercially and at the grassroots level, in addition to being an end in itself. “We want to be at the pointy end of the tournament and still around in the latter stages,” Gallop said by telephone. “Over the past 12 months or so, the team has been going through a regeneration process.“We have trialed lots of players, now is the time to see the results of that on the pitch.”According to Foster, home-field advantage could be decisive. “I believe we will contest the final, likely winning via home support which, in Australian sporting culture, is immensely energizing and protective,” he said. “The Socceroos always perform extremely well at home and, significantly, our Asian opponents are often the opposite, including Japan.”To win, it is possible, perhaps probable, that Australia will have to defeat Japan, the team that has ended the Socceroos’ two Asian Cup campaigns to date, first in 2007 in the quarterfinals, then four year later in the final.Despite a disappointing World Cup, when it collected just one point in three games, the four-time continental champion Japan is still seen as the favorite. Its roster is bursting with European-based talent like Keisuke Honda, Shinji Kagawa and Maya Yoshida, active in the Italian, German and English leagues.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Yet Japan is in transition under its new coach, Javier Aguirre. To complicate matters, the Mexican is being investigated over allegations of match-fixing during his time as coach of the Spanish club Real Zaragoza in 2011. Aguirre has denied the allegations and will appear in a Spanish court in February.AdvertisementSouth Korea, another traditional Asian powerhouse, is also coming to grips with a new coach after a hugely disappointing World Cup. On the plus side, South Korea’s European-based stars are in good form, especially Son Heung-min, Bayer Leverkusen’s star forward, with five goals already this season in the UEFA Champions League; and Ki Sung-yueng, a midfielder with Swansea City in the English Premier League.If the three favored teams fail to find their form or cope with the pressure, the tournament will be open to any one of five or six contenders.Iran has kept former the Real Madrid and Portugal coach Carlos Queiroz after a reasonable showing last year in the World Cup.In its group, Iran takes on Qatar and the United Arab Emirates, two teams that have never won before but are seen having an outside chance at the title. Uzbekistan and Saudi Arabia could also go far if they find their form at the right time.One participant expected to be going home early is the Palestinian team. The team is preparing for a first-ever appearance at the Asian Cup after beating the Philippines last May. It features players who play in the semiprofessional West Bank Premier League, as well as in Saudi Arabia, Sweden, Slovenia, Poland and China, but its first match is a tough one: against Japan in Newcastle, Australia, on Monday.The opening game is expected to sell out, but attracting fans to games like Saturday’s meeting between North Korea and Uzbekistan in Sydney will prove to be much tougher sells.Organizers are confident they can sell 500,000 tickets over the 32-game competition and they been working closely with the various Asian communities that live in the country to rally support.But there is no doubt that the biggest lift, in terms of sustained marketing and promotion, would be Socceroos success.“A good performance from the home team enhances any tournament and the hype, and we saw how the whole country of Brazil got behind the team at the World Cup,” Michael Brown, the chief executive of the 2015 Asian Cup, said by telephone.Advertisement“This is Asia’s biggest sporting event with a television audience of over 800 million, and we are honored to host it. Whatever happens we are looking forward to it.”An article in some editions last Sunday about the struggles of the Australian national men’s soccer team ahead of the Asian Cup tournament misspelled the name of a midfielder with Swansea City who played for South Korea in the event. He is Ki Sung-yueng, not Ki Seung-yeung.A version of this article appears in print on January 9, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »