AdvertisementSupported byBy David WaldsteinDuring the final week of the 2014 regular season, when almost every microphone and camera lens at Yankees games was pointed in Derek Jeter’s direction, Stephen Drew was quietly finishing his worst year in the major leagues. As Drew prepared to go to the field for batting practice one day, a reporter asked him about the defensive shifts being used against him. In Drew’s mind, the shifts were unusual and unexpected, as well as an indication of how far he had fallen. He prides himself on hitting to all fields and considers himself the kind of player who cannot be thwarted by a defense that some regard as gimmicky.Still, he could not hide from the facts.“It’s funny they are shifting on me,” said Drew, a left-handed hitter. “That won’t happen again. It won’t.”The Yankees are gambling on that. They agreed to pay the 31-year-old Drew $5 million for one year in the hope that he can recover the success he had as recently as 2013, when he was the starting shortstop for the World Series champion Boston Red Sox. That season he had a .333 on-base percentage with 29 doubles, 13 home runs and 67 runs batted in, a far cry from last year, when he batted .162 over all and only .150 for the Yankees.Drew and others are convinced that his sharp decline was caused by unusual contractual circumstances last year that forced him to miss spring training and the first two months of the regular season. It was the third straight year in which Drew had missed all or most of spring training. After he broke his ankle with the Arizona Diamondbacks in 2011, he did not return until June 27, 2012. In 2013, he sustained a concussion when he was hit in the head with a pitch on March 7, and he played in only six spring training games. In 2014, he never made it to spring training.“When I finally have a normal spring training and get into a routine with the guys,” Drew said in September, “I think it’s going to be a lot better.”After the Red Sox won the World Series in 2013, Drew declined the team’s one-year qualifying offer of $14 million, hoping to make more in free agency. But for most teams, signing a player who had been given a qualifying offer would have meant surrendering their top draft pick to the Red Sox, and no team was willing to do so. So Drew sat out until the Red Sox signed him on May 21, and he did not play his first game with Boston until June 2. The Red Sox brought him back for $10.1 million.When he finally played, he was awful, at least offensively — hitting about 100 points lower than his career batting average through his first eight seasons — and the Yankees acquired him and cash in a trade for Kelly Johnson on July 31. With the Yankees, Drew played second base for the first time in his career. With that in mind, and with few teams willing to spend big money to make Drew an everyday shortstop, the Yankees decided to give him another chance at a lower price. They told Drew’s agent, Scott Boras, early on that signing Drew was not a priority, even when the Yankees did not have a shortstop. They filled that need, which was created by Jeter’s retirement, when they acquired Didi Gregorius from the Diamondbacks in a three-team trade. The Yankees hope that Drew can fill the utility role that they had envisioned for Martin Prado before they traded him to Miami for pitcher Nathan Eovaldi. If Drew plays well, he could earn as much as $2 million more in incentives. If he plays poorly, the Yankees could cut him and swallow the loss.If he is somewhere in between, he could play second base every day or platoon with Rob Refsnyder or Jose Pirela, the Yankees’ top prospects at that position. Drew can also fill in at third base and, of course, shortstop. During the season, if he and one of the prospects are both playing well, Drew could become a valuable trading chip for the Yankees.At the least, with a full spring training, perhaps he can avoid infield shifts.Advertisement