By SETH BERKMANJAN. 10, 2015
NEWARK —  At the midway point of their farewell season at Nassau Coliseum, the Islanders have surprisingly entrenched themselves as a contender for the Metropolitan Division title.The excitement surrounding the Islanders — who have not won a playoff series since 1993 — has encouraged their devotees to endure several train rides or multiple tolls to follow the team on the road.The trip on Friday was worthwhile, as the Islanders skated to a 3-2 overtime win over the Devils.“We were joking before how they came all this way,” Islanders center John Tavares said of the support, while describing Islanders fans as being among the most passionate in the league. “They’ve been phenomenal all year.”As the teams took the ice for warm-ups about 40 minutes before the game, close to 100 fans wearing Islanders jersey swarmed toward the boards to cheer their team on.AdvertisementTen minutes before the puck dropped, chants of “Let’s go, Islanders” resonated from the upper level of the Prudential Center.AdvertisementThe win propelled the Islanders into first place, with a game at Columbus on Saturday and a highly anticipated battle with the Rangers on Tuesday at Madison Square Garden.On Friday night, the cheapest tickets for Tuesday’s game were selling for $210 each on StubHub, $75 more than for the least expensive seat for any other remaining Rangers regular-season home game.On Friday, the Islanders appeared to have the advantage from the outset. The Devils mustered only two shots on goal, 12 minutes 18 seconds apart, in the first period.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But in the second, the Devils began penetrating the Islanders’ zone, holding the puck for longer possessions as skaters found space. During one possession, the Islanders’ Kyle Okposo lost his stick and missed on an attempt to clear the puck with his skate, allowing Patrik Elias to find Travis Zajac for the first goal of the game. Later, during a four-minute stretch beginning with 6:50 remaining, the teams combined for three penalties and two fighting majors, opening up the ice as the Islanders returned to attacking the Devils’ zone. But goaltender Keith Kinkaid made several sprawling stops and had 20 saves as the Devils held a 1-0 lead after two periods.The Islanders finally broke through when Josh Bailey deflected in a shot by Calvin de Haan that tied the score 1:02 into the third, but a mistake by Islanders goaltender Jaroslav Halak proved costly. While Halak struggled to clear the puck behind his net, Adam Henrique took possession and found Scott Gomez in front of an empty net to give the Devils a 2-1 lead.The Islanders kept up the aggressive play on offense, controlling the puck throughout the period. That led to a tying power-play goal by Tavares, when he stood parallel to the goal and shot the puck off Kinkaid’s back left leg.“I could feel it,” Islanders Coach Jack Capuano said. “We were generating, we were getting some good zone time, we were getting some shots through. To me it was just a matter of time until we got a chance.”Tavares also netted the game-winner, with 1:55 left in overtime.“We’re right where we want to be,” Islanders winger Michael Grabner said. “It’s the halfway point. There’s a lot of hockey left, a lot of tough games coming up.”An article in some editions last Saturday about the Islanders’ 3-2 victory over the Devils misidentified, in some copies, the Islanders player who scored a goal early in the third period. Josh Bailey made the goal — not Calvin de Haan, who was initially credited with the goal.A version of this article appears in print on January 10, 2015, on Page D4 of the New York edition with the headline: With Fans in Tow, Islanders Edge Devils to Land in First.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.