AdvertisementSupported byBy Allan KredaFor the past two seasons, the Harvard men’s hockey team had to look up at its archrival Yale.When Yale was on its way to an N.C.A.A. men’s hockey title two years ago, Harvard was struggling to a 10-19-3 record. Last season, Harvard endured a 10-17-4 record, going 0-4-1 against Yale and being outscored by 18-6. But entering Saturday night’s game against Yale at Madison Square Garden, Harvard was 10-1-2 and ranked third in Division I, riding a seven-game winning streak. That one loss? To Yale, of course.Still, the pieces have been falling into place this season for Harvard Coach Ted Donato. Led by the junior forward and leading scorer Jimmy Vesey and his linemates Alexander Kerfoot and Kyle Criscuolo plus the senior goaltender Steve Michalek, Harvard is outscoring opponents by more than two goals a game, the largest margin in Division I. The Crimson have road victories over four top-10 opponents including Boston University, Boston College and Massachusetts-Lowell.“We have great leadership and we’ve really come together as a team this year,” said Michalek, a 2011 draft pick by the Minnesota Wild and one of 10 N.H.L. draft picks on the Crimson roster. “Everyone knows their roles, and everyone has been on point just about every night,” he said at the Rangers’ practice rink in Greenburgh, N.Y.Donato, in his 11th season as coach, played for the Harvard squad that won the university’s only N.C.A.A. men’s hockey championship, in 1989, before going on to 13 N.H.L. seasons. But he has not led Harvard to an N.C.A.A. tournament since 2006, and the Crimson have not won an N.C.A.A. tournament game since 1994. Referring to Yale’s N.C.A.A. title in 2013, Donato said: “We’re all competitive by nature and there’s a lot of respect for what they stand for and the success they’ve had. But there’s certainly something in the water at Harvard that the school in New Haven is not our friend. And when both teams are going well, it certainly adds to the rivalry.”Harvard leads the overall series, 140-86-19, but has not beaten Yale since the 2012 Eastern College Athletic Conference tournament. “The difference from where we are and where we’ve been is not something we’re really thinking about,” said Michalek, who has played every game this season. “We just want to focus on the now.”Since Coach Keith Allain’s tenure began in 2006, Yale has made four N.C.A.A. tournament appearances and won two E.C.A.C. titles. The Bulldogs (8-4-2) enter Saturday’s game ranked 19th. Allain, a former Yale goaltender who was a coach for the Washington Capitals and the St. Louis Blues before returning to his alma mater, said he wanted his players to savor the chance to play in an N.H.L. arena, especially one with all the sports history of the Garden.“A hockey season and a hockey career is all about moments,” he said. “It would be tragic if you waited until it was all over to realize how great it was.”The first game between the teams was also in Manhattan, on Feb. 26, 1900, at St. Nicholas Rink. Last season the series returned to New York for the first time since 1970, with a 5-1 victory for Yale. “That’s pretty hard to believe — being part of something that goes back 115 years,” said Harvard defenseman Patrick McNally, who grew up an Islanders fan in Glen Head, N.Y.The excitement of this college rivalry game enthralled Pierre McGuire, an NBC Sports hockey analyst, who will fit the contest into his busy schedule of N.H.L. games.“The energy for college hockey is off the charts, and it makes you feel young again,” McGuire said. “It’s a blast because you’re in an environment where it’s not about the money or the 2 points. It’s about playing for your school.”For the sophomore Harvard forward Luke Esposito, whose uncle happens to be Mark Messier, the former Rangers captain, skating at the Garden comes with extra expectations. He was among the Messier family members who gathered when Messier’s No. 11 was raised to the Garden rafters in 2006.The chance to play in the same space where his uncle lifted the Stanley Cup in 1994 is humbling, Esposito, 21, said. The hockey lessons gleaned from Messier, who was scheduled to drop the ceremonial first puck with his Rangers teammate Mike Richter and former Gov. George Pataki of New York, have also helped Esposito appreciate Harvard’s resurgent season. “If there’s one thing I’ve learned, it would be how to conduct yourself,” Esposito said. “Appreciate your role and appreciate everyone for what they each do for the team. The way we’ve been winning this year, the locker room is fun and the guys are relaxed. It’s really great to be part of all that.”Advertisement