AdvertisementSupported byN.B.A. RoundupBy The Associated PressThe Milwaukee Bucks signed the veteran forward Kenyon Martin to replenish their depleted frontcourt, reuniting him with Jason Kidd, his former Nets teammate and the current Milwaukee coach.Martin signed a 10-day contract on Friday. The team waived guard Nate Wolters to make room on the roster.Martin, 37, played 32 games last season for the Knicks before becoming a free agent. He worked out for the Bucks last week.Martin has averaged 12.5 points and 6.9 rebounds in 14 seasons. He might earn immediate playing time after the Bucks lost the rookie Jabari Parker to a season-ending left knee injury last month.Forward Ersan Ilyasova was also recovering from a concussion, and center Larry Sanders was out for personal reasons.“Excited to be back in the court,” Martin posted on Twitter. “Would like to thank the Bucks for the opportunity to play again.”Martin and Kidd, a former All-Star point guard, helped the Nets advance to the N.B.A. finals in 2002 and 2003.Wolters played sporadically this season after averaging 7.2 points in 58 games last season under Larry drew, the former Bucks coach.SUNS-CELTICS DEAL The Phoenix Suns made a move to beef up their front line by acquiring Brandan Wright from the Boston Celtics for a protected first-round draft pick.Wright, a 6-foot-10 forward, averaged 7.5 points, 3.6 rebounds and 1.2 blocks in 35 games this season for Dallas and Boston.A former first-round draft pick, Wright is in his seventh N.B.A. season.KIRILENKO SUSPENDED The Philadelphia 76ers suspended forward Andrei Kirilenko for not reporting to the team after his trade from the Nets last month.Coach Brett Brown confirmed the suspension.It was not clear why Kirilenko had not joined the Sixers since the Dec. 11 trade. The deal sent forward Brandon Davies to the Nets for Kirilenko, as well as a second-round pick in the 2020 draft, guard Jorge Gutierrez and cash.Kirilenko had not played since Nov. 13 and was used sparingly in seven games this season. He cited family matters as part of the reason for his absence.Advertisement