AdvertisementSupported byTV SportsBy Richard SandomirWhen commercials for advertisers such as Allstate and AT&T made their debuts during the Rose and Sugar Bowls on New Year’s Day, it was reasonable to assume that some marketers saw the College Football Playoff as an event with Super Bowl-like power to reach a massive audience. No one can rightly compare the two directly, not as long as the Super Bowl attracts more than 100 million viewers each year, serves as a national holiday of sorts and has a 48-year head start.But the College Football Playoff started so well — the Rose and Sugar Bowls, which served as the Playoff’s semifinals — drew more than 28 million viewers each on ESPN, more than any event ever on cable television. When Oregon plays Ohio State on Monday night for the championship, it would surprise no one if the viewership exceeds the 35.1 million who watched Magic Johnson and Larry Bird meet in the N.C.A.A. championship in 1979, when Michigan State defeated Indiana State, or the 35.6 million who tuned in to Texas’s victory over Southern California in 2006 for the national championship at the Rose Bowl.“Now we’ve got the true Super Bowl of college football,” Bob Dorfman, a sports advertising expert and executive vice president of Baker Street Advertising, wrote in an email. He added: “It’s a little less risky — and more affordable — than a $4 million, one-off, 30-second spot, and though it may not get the same ratings numbers as the N.F.L.’s big game, it’s still must-see live TV that reaches a huge audience and broad demographic. And smart advertisers could use it to undercut their competitors who opt for the big Super Bowl buy.”Advertisers gently declined to make an explicit comparison between the Playoff and the Super Bowl. They view the Playoff as a deeper dive into a world of college football that is about fans’ deep attachments to their favorite universities, rather than hot-button issues such as compensating players for their work or the drive for unionization among some of those the N.C.A.A. insists on calling student-athletes.“College sports is a huge priority for us,” said David Christopher, the chief marketing officer of AT&T Mobility, “and college football is a real bright spot.”Lisa Cochrane, the senior vice president of marketing at Allstate, said, “I’ve never referred to this as another Super Bowl, but it’s a wonderful, fresh new opportunity.” Cochrane said the Sugar Bowl — or, to use its corporate name, the Allstate Sugar Bowl — had served before as a launching pad for new ads.We’ve published maps showing where fan support for one team begins and another ends for baseball and basketball. Now we’re pleased to offer another one: the United States according to college football fans.On New Year’s Day, Allstate escalated its Sugar Bowl marketing ambitions with an eight-episode arc of “Mayhem” commercials, in which the scruffy character played by the actor Dean Winters burgled the home of a couple who had used social media to inform the world that they were at the Sugar Bowl. And, in a series of cheesy Home Shopping Network-like commercials, he offered to sell their pillaged goods, at deeply discounted prices, on mayhemsale.com. There, a pop-up directed users to an Allstate public awareness program that offers ways to safeguard one’s social media privacy to avoid “Mayhem”-like thefts.Traffic to mayhemsale.com reached 30 million page views during the evening of the game between Alabama and Ohio State, according to Allstate. Over all, there were about one million unique visitors.“I was dancing in the hallways of the Superdome because of what we were seeing,” Cochrane said. “It happened right away, with the first spot. People got the message that it wasn’t just another ‘Mayhem’ spot, but about how cool ‘Mayhem’ was.”Allstate shifted its strategy on Friday away from returning to Mayhem in the final to a campaign that first broke last month targeting young households. AT&T used a quartet of recognizable football players — Herschel Walker, Bo Jackson and Doug Flutie, all Heisman Trophy winners, and Joe Montana, who won four Super Bowls — in a series of humorous ads that were designed specifically for the Playoff.“It was a great way to tie our network’s claims to having the strongest signals to college football,” said Christopher, who added, “We started planning something unique a couple of months ago.” Two years ago, AT&T made similar use of Bird, Johnson, Bill Russell and Kareem Abdul-Jabbar during the N.C.A.A. men’s basketball tournament.The Playoff is largely an extravaganza for ESPN, which is paying $7.3 billion over 12 years to televise the College Football Playoff and sell all the games’ advertising and sponsorships.“We feel it’s been a good start so far,” said Edward Erhardt, ESPN’s president of global customer marketing and sales. “People are saying this is a well-priced alternative, relative to other places, to break new creative, and, by the nature of there being a nearly two-week window between the semis and final, they have all that time to market.”Most of the newly created Playoff advertising was produced with the event in mind. “They wanted to make it contextually relevant, which we encouraged,” Erhardt said.Unilever’s ad for Axe White Label dry spray deodorant lacks a football theme and made its first showing on Dec. 29, in advance of the Playoff semifinals, where it was seen by a much broader audience.“What’s exciting about the Playoff is that for years, there’s been pent-up demand about how fans wanted to get more out of college football,” said Matthew McCarthy, Unilever’s senior director of deodorants and men’s grooming. “Once we saw things take shape, we got excited about how this could unlock more excitement for the fans.”Email: sandor@nytimes.com Advertisement