

 Scott Cacciola
 

NOT THE KNICKS
JAN. 9, 2015
ST. JOSEPH, Mo. —  The Lady Hornets of Emporia State, 130 miles from home, had gone scoreless in their first two possessions against Missouri Western on Thursday night when the freshman point guard Addie Lackey cradled the basketball near midcourt and turned to her coach, Jory Collins, for instruction.“Motion!” Collins yelled. “Let’s go!”Three words were all it took for Lackey to ignite the offense, sending the ball from one pair of hands to the next until Merissa Quick made a short jumper. It was the type of precise possession that has become brutally familiar to opponents not only this season, but also for much of the past two decades.The Lady Hornets, the top-ranked women’s team in Division II and a perennial power, are known for their patience and their passing. And when they venture forth from their campus in Emporia, Kan., to showcase their brand of basketball across the snow-coated plains of the Midwest as they did this week, they tend to create problems for the plucky teams tasked with slowing them down.“They don’t have rebuilding years,” said Rob Edmisson, the Missouri Western coach. “They have replacement years. It’s what the great teams do.”AdvertisementFor Collins, who patrols the sideline with the cool demeanor of a sommelier, that has meant filling out his roster with seven new players: three freshmen, three transfers and a redshirt sophomore who had missed the previous two seasons with knee injuries.So while Emporia State has the sort of storied tradition that drips trophies — a national championship in 2010, five trips to the Round of 8 and, in the last three seasons, three appearances in the Round of 16 — the team could have labored this winter with so many new parts. It would have been perfectly understandable.AdvertisementInstead, the Lady Hornets are 13-0 heading into their game Saturday against Central Missouri, a fellow member of the Mid-America Intercollegiate Athletics Association.“Everyone talks about how we’ve been good for all these years,” said Quick, a senior forward. “But until you see what happens behind the scenes, it’s hard to understand the culture and what goes into it.”Despite the constant turnover among players, the program has achieved a level of continuity that is difficult to replicate. It starts with Collins, 36, a longtime assistant to the former coach Brandon Schneider, who left for Stephen F. Austin in 2010 after infusing Emporia State with an uncommon attention to detail.Much as Schneider did before him, Collins preaches the importance of self-improvement. He has his players read books about leadership. (“Toughness” by Jay Bilas and “The Energy Bus” by Jon Gordon were two recent selections.) If a player bobbles a pass at practice, sprints are meted out as punishment.And before free throws, the players on the floor huddle for a few seconds so they can talk about making adjustments. Collins even wants them to punctuate those in-game meetings by clapping their hands simultaneously — a new policy that has some audible kinks.“We’re still working on it,” Quick said.But for all the preparation and tradition and focus on discipline, Collins acknowledged a larger truth.Advertisement“Coaching doesn’t matter,” he said, “if your players aren’t any good.”Collins, who often recruits against midmajor Division I programs, sells players on the chance to vie for championships. He cites the community’s broad support for the team — average attendance last season of 1,847 for home games at White Auditorium, which ranked fourth in the country among Division II teams. And amid cost-cutting measures at newspapers across the country, The Emporia Gazette continues to send a reporter, Stephen Coleman, to nearly all the team’s games, home and away. (Coleman shoots photos, too.)“I feel like every high school player wants to go Division I, because they see them on TV and everything like that,” said Kelly Moten, a sophomore guard and the team’s leading scorer. “But Division I isn’t for everybody, and I knew that Division II was the way to go for me to be as successful as I can be.”Collins likes players who come from successful high school programs. Consider his three freshmen. Jacee Kramer, a guard from Winchester, Kan., went to three straight state championship games. Kyrstie Miller, a guard from Holton, Kan., had lost a total of three games entering her senior year. And Lackey, who grew up in Hillsboro, Kan., and whose parents both played basketball at Emporia State, reached three state semifinals, in addition to winning three state championships in volleyball.But above all, Collins covets talent. It was what led him to Moten, after he saw a short video clip of her playing for her high school team in Gary, Ind.“I just said, ‘Holy cow, we have to get after this girl if we can,’ ” Collins said.Her recruitment was a process. Moten grew up in a tough neighborhood, and her mother, Karen, was wary when Collins knocked on the door. She refused to let him inside.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“She didn’t really want to have much to do with me,” Collins said.So the three of them sat on the porch. Collins broke out his laptop to show film of the team. He pitched the virtues of the program and persuaded Moten to visit the university. She liked what she saw. “I felt comfortable immediately,” she said.These days, Collins and Moten’s mother speak on the phone every week — “They just have a weird bond that I don’t understand,” Moten said, laughing — and for someone who aspires to play professional basketball overseas, Moten said that Emporia State had been a transformative force in her life. Back home last summer, she said, she attended the funerals of several of her friends, the victims of violence.“I don’t even think I’m going to go home this summer,” she said. “I’ll take a class and work out, get myself in better shape so I can get to where I want to go.”Collins goes 11 players deep with an 11-player roster. In the first half against Missouri Western, each player logged at least five minutes — a balanced approach that had something to do with foul trouble. But Collins likes to spread the wealth, regardless. Each player, he said, brings a unique skill. They all contribute.AdvertisementIt can make the Lady Hornets a matchup nightmare. Consider back-to-back games at the start of the month. On Jan. 3, Lincoln of Missouri fronted Emporia State’s post players to force perimeter shots. Lackey and Kelsey Barnwell combined to shoot 6 of 9 from 3-point range, and the Lady Hornets won by 42. Then, on Monday, with Lindenwood extending to the 3-point arc, Quick and Amber Vandiver calmly went about their business down low, combining for 43 points in a 45-point win.“If you’re going to try to guard us a specific way,” Collins said, “then we’re going to specifically try to make you pay for doing that.”On Thursday, Missouri Western muddied things up with an unconventional defense — zone along the perimeter and man-to-man inside. It was an effective strategy by Edmisson, who took over at Missouri Western in 2012 after winning a national championship at Oklahoma City, an N.A.I.A. program.“We’re trying to build something here,” Edmisson said. “We’ve crossed the hurdle to being competitive, and now we’re trying to win close games. But it’s been humbling.”Emporia State, hindered by 23 turnovers, managed to escape with a 57-56 win — a closer result than anyone had expected, and one that reinforced the point that winning is hard, no matter the opponent. In the locker room, Collins reminded his players that there was room for improvement, even if he was glad for the win.“You’ve got to be mentally tougher,” he told his players, “because winning is just going to get harder from here.”Not the Knicks: Articles in this series are chronicling Scott
Cacciola’s sabbatical from covering the woeful
Knicks. He will check out some of the good
basketball around the country, recommended
by readers of The New York Times.A version of this article appears in print on January 10, 2015, on Page D1 of the New York edition with the headline: They Don’t Rebuild. They Replace.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »