AdvertisementSupported byBy Bill PenningtonFOXBOROUGH, Mass. — Thirty years ago, when restricted free agency kept N.F.L. rosters unchanged and parity was not the goal of the game schedule, it was customary for powerhouse teams to meet in the postseason year after year.The familiarity of those matchups bred contempt. Rivalries grew fierce and the trash talking became personal. Every year it seemed the 49ers and the Cowboys would be snarling at each other, and if not those teams, then it was the Steelers and the Houston Oilers, the Giants and the Redskins, or the Broncos and the Raiders.The N.F.L. is more antiseptic now. Taunting is actually a penalty. The recurring, heated and ill-mannered postseason matchup is less common.Saturday’s divisional round playoff game between the Baltimore Ravens and the New England Patriots is the nasty exception. Ravens-Patriots may not be a historic rivalry, since the teams have met in the playoffs only three times since 2009, but they have packed a lot of malevolence in a short period.Consider that Baltimore’s star linebacker, Terrell Suggs, refuses to even speak the name of Patriots quarterback Tom Brady. To Suggs, Brady is always “the pretty boy from up north,” or something worse.“I don’t like him,” Suggs said in 2013. “He don’t like me. I don’t like his hair. I don’t like his smug attitude.”Brady knows Suggs’s name and even utters it — sometimes loudly and coarsely. Brady has had shouting matches with Suggs during games, and sniped at him when the game was over, too.“He talks a lot, but he had his chance to back up his words,” Brady said after a Patriots victory.Suggs fired back when the Ravens crushed the Patriots’ Super Bowl dreams in the A.F.C. championship game two years ago. Jogging off the field, Suggs yelled, “Have fun at the Pro Bowl.” The Patriots did send seven players to the Pro Bowl that year. The Ravens raised the Lombardi Trophy.Brady and Suggs are not the only notable combatants eyeing each other from across the line of scrimmage. There is typically trash talking all over the field, and it will only escalate with Baltimore having added wide receiver Steve Smith, a Pro Bowler and an all-time agitator.The jawing between players has even been addressed by the coaches this week. Baltimore’s John Harbaugh never muzzles his players as the game is being hyped.“We’ve always told guys to speak their mind and be themselves,” Harbaugh said this week. “Be their best self.”But Harbaugh warns his players to be careful on the field. Saying something untoward with a reporter’s tape recorder nearby is one thing. Saying something too provocative when standing close to an official is verboten.New England’s Bill Belichick has issued the same caution to his charges.As Patriots linebacker Dont’a Hightower said this week: “We’re not really ones to start it, but we’re not going to back down. We’re obviously not going to do anything stupid. We have to avoid 15-yard penalties.”Harbaugh and Belichick have been dragged into the belligerence in minor, if noticeable, ways. Harbaugh and Belichick are friendly — if any two N.F.L. coaches are friendly — but Belichick grows conspicuously tense when discussing Harbaugh and the Ravens. This week, the stoic Belichick responded in a spirited fashion, at least for him, when asked about the Ravens’ 2-1 playoff record against the Patriots.Reminders of New England’s troubles with Baltimore — a shanked Billy Cundiff 32-yard field goal might be all that separates the Ravens from an undefeated postseason record against the Patriots at Gillette Stadium — brought a deeper, more agitated grumble to Belichick’s usual news conference growl.“We’re not really worried about any of those games or any of those other years or any of those other players,” Belichick said, his lips curling.Asked why the Ravens seem to give the Patriots such trouble in Foxborough, Belichick replied: “I just answered that question. I don’t think any of those games really matter.”It is not customary for a coach of a team that has lost just once at home in the last two years to be so patently defensive as he prepares to host another opponent. Then again, the last significant Patriots home loss was to Baltimore.The questioning about the Ravens clearly irks the Patriots, and with good reason. The Ravens could be the only team in the A.F.C. that does not seem affected by playing in Foxborough. The Ravens, who are 10-5 all-time in road playoff games and 2-0 in Super Bowls, do not appear intimidated playing anywhere.Harbaugh is 10-4 in the postseason. The first time Baltimore stunned the Patriots in Foxborough was in the 2009-10 season, when the 9-7 Ravens became the first team to defeat the Patriots in the Brady-Belichick era at home in the playoffs. The Ravens won easily, 33-14.Two years later, the Patriots were victorious in the A.F.C. championship game, but only after Cundiff, who did not know it was fourth down, raced onto the field in the game’s final seconds and hurriedly missed a game-tying field goal attempt.In a rematch the next year, the Ravens picked off Brady twice and scored 21 points in the second half to run away from the mistake-prone Patriots, 28-13. In three playoff games against Baltimore, Brady has thrown seven interceptions and three touchdown passes. And now, here come the confident Ravens again, who barely qualified for the playoffs and yet marched into a hostile environment in Pittsburgh a week ago and thrashed the Steelers, 30-17.Still, the Patriots are the No.1 seed and have the healthier team, along with strong cornerbacks and the game’s most versatile tight end in Rob Gronkowski. But this bitter rivalry has the teams’ attention.“It is there,” Brady said of the rivalry. “But I don’t want to spend time thinking about that.”This week, Brady has instead tried to throw off the Ravens with friendliness. Told that Suggs will not speak his name, Brady replied: “People can call me what they want.”Asked to assess Suggs’s play, Brady said Wednesday: “He’s phenomenal. He’s a smart player.”Suggs’s reaction when Brady’s words were related to him back in Baltimore?“Say what? Did they record him saying that — like with a camera?” Suggs said. “I’d love to see his face when he said it.”Pro football rivalries might not be what they once were. But there is at least one exception. Another chapter unfolds on Saturday. There may be something other than sweet nothings exchanged between Brady and Suggs.N.F.L. PLAYOFFS DIVISIONAL ROUNDAdvertisement