AdvertisementSupported byN.F.L. RoundupBy Ken BelsonIn a bid to keep the Rams from moving to Southern California, civic leaders in St. Louis on Friday unveiled plans to build a 64,000-seat outdoor stadium along the Mississippi River.The stadium, which is expected to cost as much as $1 billion, could be financed by rolling over existing bonds that were issued to pay for the Edward Jones Dome, where the Rams play.The project was announced by a task force appointed by Gov. Jay Nixon. The proposed stadium, designed to be used for soccer as well, could open in 2020 and would be part of a mixed-use development.Plans for the stadium had been in the works for months and were designed to persuade the Rams’ owner, Stan Kroenke, to stay in St. Louis.Last year, Kroenke and the stadium authority that runs the Edward Jones Dome were unable to agree on renovations to the 20-year-old building. At the end of this month, Kroenke has the option of changing to a year-to-year lease, which would give him more flexibility to leave the city.On Monday, Kroenke announced plans to build an 80,000-seat football stadium in Inglewood, Calif., about 10 miles from downtown Los Angeles. Kroenke said his proposed stadium would be part of a sports and entertainment district and that there would be no need for public funds.The Rams — along with the San Diego Chargers and the Oakland Raiders, two other teams once based in Los Angeles — are among the teams considered most likely to move to the city, which has not had an N.F.L. team for two decades.TRADEMARK DECISION  The Department of Justice said Friday that it would defend the federal government’s decision to revoke six trademark protections for the Washington Redskins because the name was considered disparaging to Native Americans.Angered by the ruling in June by the Trademark Trial and Appeal Board, which is part of the United States Patent and Trademark Office, the Redskins petitioned the United States District Court in the Eastern District of Virginia, arguing that their First Amendment rights had been violated.The Justice Department said it would defend the constitutionality of the federal statute.The revocation of the Redskins’ trademarks is unlikely to have an immediate financial impact while the team’s appeal is heard. Even if the government successfully defends its ruling, the Redskins can use the name and enforce its trademarks using common-law rights.Native American groups and members of Congress have pressured Commissioner Roger Goodell and Daniel Snyder, the owner of the Redskins, to abandon the team name. NURSING AILMENTS Carolina wide receiver Philly Brown and Seattle tight end Tony Moeaki are both questionable for Saturday’s N.F.C. divisional playoff game. Brown was a limited participant in practice on Friday, while Seattle held a walk-through practice. Brown sustained a shoulder injury. He has started three of the last four games, including last week’s wild-card round win over Arizona, and he is Carolina’s best threat in the deep passing game.Moeaki sustained a calf injury in practice this week, and Seahawks Coach Pete Carroll said that playing him would be a game-time decision. (AP)Advertisement