By TIM CASEYJAN. 9, 2015
PRINCETON, N.J. —  As a women’s basketball assistant at Dartmouth in 2007, Courtney Banghart juggled her coaching duties with requirements for a master’s degree in writing and leadership development. For her final project, she conducted in-person interviews with accomplished coaches, including the North Carolina women’s soccer coach, Anson Dorrance, and the Connecticut women’s basketball coach, Geno Auriemma.That May, days after completing and defending her 100-page oral history on sports leadership, Banghart, then 29, was hired as Princeton’s coach. She is now a rising star in a profession she never thought she would pursue when she was a neuroscience major and two-time first-team all-Ivy League guard as an undergraduate at Dartmouth.Banghart has led Princeton to the only four N.C.A.A. tournament appearances in team history and to a 16-0 record this season. The Tigers are one of four undefeated teams in Division I, and 22nd in the Associated Press poll, the second time an Ivy League women’s program has been ranked. The first came in March 2012, when Princeton was 24th in the final regular-season poll. No conference team had been in the USA Today coaches poll until Princeton was 24th in the rankings released Tuesday.When Banghart spoke with Auriemma, Dorrance and others, she was not sure if she would pursue a head coaching job. She was passionate about education and seriously considered a career as a college or high school administrator. Now, she is happy she stuck with coaching, and she still thinks of her graduate thesis.Advertisement“The thing I took away from that was how authentic each leader was,” Banghart said. “When I got the job at Princeton, I didn’t try to be the next Pat Summitt or the next Geno Auriemma or the next Anson Dorrance. I realized that what made them great is they were who they were. I was going to be the best version of me.”AdvertisementPrinceton was 7-23 in Banghart’s first season, but the Tigers went undefeated in the Ivy League and finished 26-3 by her third season. It was the start of four consecutive conference titles from 2010 to 2013, a streak that ended last March when Princeton lost at home to Pennsylvania in the regular-season finale, which determined the league champion. Princeton hosts Penn on Saturday in the conference opener for both teams.Since Banghart arrived, the Tigers have played as many major-conference teams as possible to prepare for the Ivy League schedule. This season, they have victories over teams from the Atlantic Coast Conference (Pittsburgh and Wake Forest), the Big East (Georgetown) and the Big Ten (Michigan). Princeton seems to have a good shot at joining the 1998 Harvard team as the only Ivy League squad to win an N.C.A.A. tournament game.Of the Tigers’ 16 victories, 12 have come on the road and all have been decided by at least 12 points, except for a 63-56 win at American University on Nov. 23 in Washington. During that trip, Princeton had a private White House tour and played on the White House basketball court. The next day, at halftime of the American game, the first lady, Michelle Obama, addressed the players in the Tigers’ locker room. Obama is a 1985 Princeton graduate, and her niece, Leslie Robinson, is a freshman forward on the team.“It was very clear that she was in tune and she had actually been watching,” said the senior point guard Blake Dietrick, who leads Princeton in scoring (15.2 points) and assists (5.7) and averages 5.0 rebounds per game. “She wasn’t just there to make an appearance. She was like, ‘Great job — keep pressuring them on defense,’ which was a focus of ours that we had talked about before the game.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Craig Robinson, Leslie’s father and the first lady’s brother, said his sister enjoyed watching the game. Robinson, a former men’s basketball coach at Brown and Oregon State, has seen a few Princeton games in person and follows the rest on the Internet.He was particularly impressed by the Tigers’ 85-55 victory at Michigan on Dec. 9.“We looked like the bigger school and the tougher school,” said Robinson, who is now an ESPN analyst. “That was when I got a real feel for their toughness. I think that’s one of the biggest positive attributes of the team.”The Tigers have plenty of top students, as well. As an Ivy League school, Princeton has academic standards for admission that are more stringent than at most programs, so its roster is filled with high achievers in the classroom who are encouraged to pursue summer internships related to their majors and to prepare for life after basketball.The junior guard Michelle Miller, who scored more than 3,300 points in high school and chose Princeton over Southern California, received the prestigious Shapiro Prize for academic achievement in October. Miller, the team’s second-leading scorer at 12.8 points per game, is a chemistry major and is heading to medical school. She also plans to apply for a Rhodes Scholarship.Advertisement“You go through that list of players, and they are stunningly impressive people,” said the former Princeton athletic director Gary Walters, who hired Banghart. “The thing that pleases me the most about Courtney’s program is they’re fulfilling our mission, which is education through athletics.”Instead of complaining about Princeton’s stringent academic requirements, Banghart embraces them. She remembers what Auriemma said to her when she interviewed him for her graduate thesis. He told her there are two types of coaches: those who can recruit, and those who get fired. She has had no trouble convincing players to come to Princeton.“As an Ivy Leaguer myself, I believe in it,” Banghart said. “I think I’m able to articulate that this is who we are, this is what we offer and it’s different. In a lot of ways, it’s the best of all worlds.”A version of this article appears in print on January 10, 2015, on Page D5 of the New York edition with the headline: At Princeton, a Student of Sports Leadership Successfully Applies Her Research.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.