AdvertisementSupported byBy Ben ShpigelRENTON, Wash. — The morning after his life changed forever, Malcolm Smith boarded a private jet bound for Florida. A waiter catered to his and his girlfriend’s every need, recharging Smith for the parade that awaited him when he landed.He rode in the back of a convertible and waved at the thousands of people cheering along Main Street U.S.A. at Disney World, where he did not even have time to sample a turkey leg. He signed some footballs, spoke to some reporters, went on a ride — only one, and he doesn’t remember which — and gaped at fans wearing his No. 53 Seattle Seahawks jersey.“It almost felt fake, you know?” Smith said.Not many people do know. Only 42 others had been selected as the most valuable player of the Super Bowl. Terry Bradshaw and Lynn Swann know. So do Joe Montana and Jerry Rice. Tom Brady. John Elway. Joe Namath.Smith was one of them, except he wasn’t.“With us,” the Seattle linebackers coach Ken Norton Jr. said, “he’s the M.V.P., and he can’t even get on the field.”This is Smith’s reality, 11 months after he capped a terrific postseason by recovering a fumble and returning an interception 69 yards for a touchdown in Seattle’s 43-8 mauling of Denver in last year’s Super Bowl. (He also grabbed the pass in the end zone deflected by Richard Sherman that secured the N.F.C. championship over San Francisco.)Special treatment does not exist at Seahawks headquarters, a place where the Pro Bowl safeties Kam Chancellor and Earl Thomas demand to contribute to special teams and practice days have names like Competition Wednesdays.If Smith deserved to start, to play more than 28.5 percent of the team’s defensive snaps (according to Pro Football Focus), he would. The circumstances that conspired to elevate his profile last season, when he started eight games and two more in the playoffs, have now diminished it. Seattle’s three best linebackers — Bruce Irvin, K. J. Wright and the All-Pro Bobby Wagner — are durable and dominant, slashing Smith’s playing time. During the Seahawks’ six-game winning streak, Smith has played linebacker in two of those games, in all of 26 snaps.“I’m sure little kids say to him, ‘You’re the Super Bowl M.V.P., how come you’re not playing?’ ” Smith’s older brother Steve, a former N.F.L. receiver who won a Super Bowl with the Giants, said in a telephone interview. “But they know this team is stacked. It’s tough, but we understand. Malcolm created the whole situation himself by playing so well in the Super Bowl.”Every day Smith has navigated a realm for which no manual applies. Most of the M.V.P.s who preceded him, from Joe Flacco to Eli Manning to Aaron Rodgers, were famous, popular long before attaining individual glory. They did not need an award to validate their career or provide them with endorsement opportunities.The career arc Smith envisioned for himself followed the familiar trope — playing for a college powerhouse, reaching the N.F.L. and prevailing in a Super Bowl. But never did he expect he would ever win the M.V.P. — not at 24 years old, not as a defensive player, not as a seventh-round draft pick (No. 242 over all) — and, particularly, the celebrity turn that followed. Dinners out, once quiet affairs, turned into autograph and photo sessions.“I don’t know if it’s something you can prepare for, but I just know that I didn’t,” Smith, now 25, said at his locker last week. “I’m just kind of experiencing it.”Only Marcus Allen, Swann and Brady — two Hall of Famers and another who will almost certainly join them — were younger than Smith when honored. Those around the Seahawks characterize Smith as mature and thoughtful. They were less concerned than curious about how Smith would deal with fame. Norton remembers how Smith would sit in the linebackers room at Southern California and not talk, allowing strong personalities like Rey Maualuga, Clay Matthews and Brian Cushing, all future N.F.L. players, to lead discussions.The night of the Super Bowl, the Hall of Fame running back Marshall Faulk urged Smith to enjoy the moment but also to remember the role his teammates played in his achievement. On a visit to NFL Network a few weeks later, Smith met Terrell Davis, a former Super Bowl M.V.P. himself, who reminded him to stay humble.Chevrolet presented Smith with a new Silverado, which is back home in California. He gave it to his mother, a gracious if symbolic gesture: He left the Super Bowl trappings behind. The league invited him on a delegation to Alaska. Public-speaking engagements abounded. Asked to share his story, he gladly accepted.To civic and business groups across the Seattle area, he explained how injuries interrupted his career at U.S.C., and how the onset of a rare disorder of the esophagus called achalasia hindered his ability to swallow and caused him to lose 30 pounds and jeopardized his football future, and how he was not even invited to the N.F.L. scouting combine in 2011, so remote was the chance he would be drafted.From recruiting his brother to U.S.C., Seahawks Coach Pete Carroll has known Malcolm Smith for more than half his life. The same qualities that equipped Smith for N.F.L. survival have helped him handle success.“There was never any issue at all,” Carroll said. “He’s worked like crazy and been there for us every step of the way.”Most steps, rather. Off-season ankle surgery sidelined Smith for three months, delaying his availability at training camp until mid-August. He returned without a starting job but as versatile — he can play on the strong side, closer to the line of scrimmage, but also in space — and as fast as his coaches remember.Norton always tells him, “Good things happen to those who run,” so that is what Smith does, even if he now does this mostly on special teams. Early in the season, the special teams coordinator Brian Schneider gathered the rookies, he said, and described what he expected of them: selflessness and effort. If the Super Bowl M.V.P. embraced that credo, he said, then everyone else best do the same.Finishing his fourth season, Smith has exceeded the projections for a seventh-round pick. He becomes an unrestricted free agent in March, and regardless of whether Seattle re-signs him, Steve Smith figures that winning the M.V.P. extended his brother’s career by another four years. Teams know exactly who he is, and what he has accomplished.“I just try to make sure I know that I’m capable and just stay capable,” Malcolm Smith said. “I wasn’t going to be the one who made excuses. I find ways to make things work for me. I always have. I always will.”Advertisement