

 Jeré Longman
 

ON OLYMPICS
JAN. 9, 2015
Christmas has come and gone, but a holiday spirit lingers in Boston. Not the holly-jolly kind, but the quizzical kind where you unwrap a glitzy present and immediately wonder if it ought to be returned.Leave now if you want to make it to the 2024 Summer Olympics, is the new joke. Traffic is already backed up.An editorial in Friday’s Boston Globe noted that, ahem, Boston is not required to buy a gown just because it was invited to the prom. A request to bid on the Olympics does not mean the city cannot R.S.V.P. “thanks but no thanks.”Boston’s nomination “should only begin the public discussion of the wisdom of hosting the Games here, not end it,” the editorial said.AdvertisementYou usually have to attend a Bill Belichick news conference to find such cheery enthusiasm. (While we’re on the subject, has the hobo hoodie been trademarked as the official sweatshirt of the Boston Games?)AdvertisementAcross the country, in San Francisco, a great cheer arose at Thursday’s announcement: At least it wasn’t us!“Let’s pause for a moment to give thanks to the United States Olympic Committee,” the columnist Ann Killion wrote in The San Francisco Chronicle.Actually, it’s too bad that Boston isn’t being considered for the Winter Olympics. Maybe somebody at M.I.T. could explain the judging system in figure skating.But the Summer Games it will have to be, leaving all of Boston to wonder: What on earth is dressage, and do we really need synchronized swimming to be considered a world-class city?It’s a fair and necessary question.Once upon a time, the Olympics might have been worth it for the Cold War theater alone: Our nukes are fueled by better steroids than your nukes. But unless Vladimir Putin gets the old gang together and restores the Soviet Union — just kidding, Ukraine — the theme of a Boston Games would likely be financial, not geopolitical, antagonism. Organizers would have to manage a bloated spectacle while trying to explain exactly why it made sense to spend $15 billion on shuttlecocks.Look, don’t get me wrong. In a fractious world, the Summer Olympics remind us, if only fleetingly, that we are more noble together than apart. And the competition is mesmerizing. No one who was in Beijing in 2008 could fail to be stirred as Usain Bolt of Jamaica shattered the limits of human speed and broke the too-much-fun law in celebration.John Fish, the construction magnate who is chairman of Boston’s Olympic bid and has recused his company from any Games-related work, has spoken eloquently and passionately about the event. He envisions the Games as forcing the region to “think bigger and bolder” and serving as an accelerant to affordable housing, and improved roads, bridges and public transportation.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But lofty talk about the Olympics as an opportunity to transform Boston must be balanced against history. And it suggests that Boston’s preliminary $4.5 billion budget would trampoline. And any residual benefit from hosting the Games would likely be as ephemeral as a rhythmic gymnastics routine. Studies suggest only scattered evidence of long-term growth and economic benefit. During the 2012 Summer Games, tourism in London decreased instead of increased.Advertisement(Of course, this might be consoling to those worried about congestion in Boston and a reminder that the real traffic jams might happen on Cape Cod as vacationers flee the Games.)“If the question is, is it in the interests of the citizens of Boston and in the economic development of Boston to host the Olympic Games, I would say, unequivocally, the answer is no,” said Andrew Zimbalist, an economics professor at Smith College and author of “Circus Maximus: The Economic Gamble Behind Hosting the Olympics and the World Cup,” slated to be published next week.A city must fit the Olympics into a coherent strategy for the future, not try to shoehorn the strategy into the Games, as Boston seems to be doing, Zimbalist said.While $2 billion or $3 billion of value might emerge from a Boston Games in roads, affordable housing, upgraded public transportation and innovative technology, he asked, “Why do you have to spend $15 billion to do that?”So is there any good reason to seek an international sporting event? Well, there is one, Victor Matheson, an economist at Holy Cross in Worcester, Mass., told Binyamin Appelbaum of The New York Times after the 2014 World Cup: “It’s like a wedding. It won’t make you rich, but it may make you happy.”Nice theory, but happiness rests primarily in the dreams of developers, not the public, in Boston, said my friend Mark Starr, a native who covered 11 Olympics (and had a gold-medal expense account) at Newsweek before retiring.Bostonians fear white-elephant stadiums and suffer nightmares of pink invoices from the cost overruns and inconvenience of the Big Dig highway project, Starr said. His view: Let the 2024 Games go to Rome or Paris or Berlin or Johannesburg. A place like Boston, so proudly provincial that it barely has street signs, feels no need to impress the world.“We know we’re great,” Starr said. “Of all the things that are supposed to come here, casinos, medical marijuana and the Olympics, the Olympics would rank a distant third in the popular vote.”And did anyone mention traffic?“I don’t know how anyone would get around,” Starr said, “unless we do a Paul Revere redux and give them a horse and a lantern.”AdvertisementJust the thing to liven up the dressage competition.A version of this article appears in print on January 10, 2015, on Page D1 of the New York edition with the headline: Pursuing Games, Boston Jumps In With One Foot.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »