By DAVID WALDSTEINJAN. 9, 2015
In late December, when Manchester City caught Chelsea at the top of the English Premier League standings, City’s fans showered their team’s new hero in song. “He’s top of the league, he’s top of the league. Oh, Frank Lampard, he’s top of the league.”Lampard currently holds a much lower standing in New York, where later this month he was supposed to be joining a different club, the newly formed New York City F.C., in Florida for preseason training.Instead, Lampard almost certainly will not arrive in New York until July, four months into N.Y.C.F.C.’s first season, as a result of some contractual gymnastics that had been largely a secret until last week. That announcement, along with the confusion about Lampard’s paperwork, has infuriated fans in the United States; prompted questions from the Premier League about rules violations in England; and left Lampard’s new league, Major League Soccer, with a little egg on its face. Of all the things that New York City F.C. has done since its inception — and there have been several, some of them headscratching — causing an international incident probably has been the most remarkable.To quell the outcry, Lampard finally signed a contract with New York City F.C. this week, according to team’s sporting director, Claudio Reyna. That deal stipulates Lampard will join N.Y.C.F.C. on July 1.Advertisement“He signed a standard M.L.S. contract,” Reyna said in a telephone interview Friday, his first public comments since the announcement on Dec. 31 that Lampard would staying at Manchester City through the end of the Premier League season. “Frank is very committed to N.Y.C.F.C. and is eager to join us as soon as possible to build a strong club.”AdvertisementLampard also spoke for the first time Friday, in a post on his Facebook page in which he lamented the “lies and nonsense” he said he had been reading online and pledging, “I can say that I am very excited about arriving in New York and giving everything to the team to make us a success in the MLS as soon as possible.”That news may reassure some fans about Lampard’s intentions, but it may not erase lingering resentment about the way the situation — and the entire presentation of New York City F.C. over the past year — has been managed.“I don’t like the way the Lampard situation has been handled from top to bottom,” said Chance Michaels, the president of The Third Rail, an N.Y.C.F.C. supporters group.Michaels made clear that he was describing his personal sentiments on the matter, not his group’s, but he and others have plunked down thousands of dollars for season tickets in order to be part of New York City F.C.’s inaugural season. Many of those fans were attracted by the promise of watching Lampard, a former star player for Chelsea whose image has been a key part of a flashy rollout of the club since its creation nearly two years ago as a partnership between Manchester City and the Yankees. (The Yankees own 20 percent of N.Y.C.F.C. but are not involved in soccer matters.)Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The signings of David Villa and Lampard were widely hailed as coups, and the hiring of Reyna, a former Manchester City player, and Coach Jason Kreis were praised as astute appointments.But the smooth ride has encountered its share of turbulence. One of the most challenging problems has been finding space within the city limits — as much as 18 acres — to build a soccer-specific stadium. Originally, the team hoped it could secure land in Flushing Meadows Park, but those plans were overruled by local opposition.With the Yankees president Randy Levine taking the lead, a site just south of Yankees Stadium in the Bronx was targeted next, but the owners of the property, G.A.L. Manufacturing, decided against selling.Manufacturing in the five boroughs is almost as rare as professional soccer, and G.A.L. ultimately decided moving wasn’t worth the trouble. “We’re holding out and doing well,” said Paul Seifried, an executive with the company.AdvertisementFor now, the team continues to look at alternative sites in Queens, Brooklyn and the Bronx, and it will play at Yankee Stadium for at least its first few seasons, broadcasting its games on the Yankee-owned YES Network.The team’s uniform design also received criticism from fans who considered it an almost exact replica of Manchester City’s sky-blue outfits, a choice that fed the impression that N.Y.C.F.C. was little more than a minor-league affiliate of its parent club in England. The news that Lampard would delay his arrival in New York while he played on in Manchester only reawakened those suspicions.Reyna is said to have pleaded in meetings with City Football Group’s leadership to have Lampard come in January as scheduled, stressing his importance to the team’s launch. But Lampard’s increasingly valuable role for an injury-plagued Manchester City team allowed that squad’s coach, Manuel Pellegrini, to win the day.“I understand the anger of the fans,” said Reyna, who has been caught in the middle. “It was never the intention for him to stay at City, but circumstances changed. Frank is a great player and has done great things. We’re really looking forward to him coming to join us in July.”A version of this article appears in print on January 10, 2015, on Page D2 of the New York edition with the headline: Lampard Promises Fans He’ll Arrive in Summer.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.