By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSJAN. 10, 2015
Brian Strait had a goal and an assist, and the visiting Islanders used a three-goal second period to power past the Columbus Blue Jackets, 5-2, on Saturday night.Nikolay Kulemin, Matt Martin, Anders Lee and Kyle Okposo also scored for the Islanders, who remained in first place in the Metropolitan Division with their second victory in two nights.Ryan Strome and Thomas Hickey each had two assists, and the backup goalie Chad Johnson made 16 saves in his first start since Dec. 23.Jack Johnson and Nick Foligno scored for Columbus, which had returned home after a 2-2 trip.The Islanders found the net three times in a span of 7 minutes 27 seconds in the middle period to move ahead, 4-1.AdvertisementTied at 1-1, the Islanders got a perfect passing combination off a rush started by Casey Cizikas. Strome then sent a pass from the right wing to Martin for an easy redirection in front at 10:04 for his sixth goal.AdvertisementThree minutes later, Kevin Connauton had trouble with a bouncing puck in his skates. Lee grabbed it at the blue line, raced in and beat Sergei Bobrovsky between the legs for his 10th.Strait followed with his first of the season at 17:31 on a shot that deflected off the stick of Columbus’s Ryan Johansen.Early in the third period, Foligno snapped home a rebound off a shot by Johansen to close the gap to two on his career-high-tying 18th of the season. Okposo closed the scoring with his ninth at 14:54.RANGERS 3, SHARKS 1 Henrik Lundqvist made 30 saves just hours after he was passed over for the All-Star Game, and the Rangers completed a rare California sweep by winning at San Jose.“I want to be one of those guys, obviously,” Lundqvist, who reached 20 wins for a 10th straight season, said of the All-Star selections. “I see myself as a guy that can compete against the guys that are there. At the same time, there’s a lot of guys having a strong season right now. For me, it’s more important to get the results right now.”Chris Kreider scored one goal and set up Martin St. Louis for another for the Rangers, who have 13 wins in 14 games for the first time since 1973. That includes wins in a four-day span at Anaheim, Los Angeles and San Jose — the first time the Rangers have even beaten those three teams on the road in the same season.Rick Nash added an empty-net goal to seal the outcome.“It was a great answering of the bell,” Nash said. “We talked about it for the three days before we came out here that this was going to be a gritty task, and I thought we played great. It’s impressive to get these three wins. At the same point, it’s just three wins.”AdvertisementEven the return of Joe Thornton (shoulder) could not rescue the Sharks, who were coming off a second 7-2 loss to St. Louis in a six-day span.The game was a return to San Jose for the Rangers’ Dan Boyle, who became the Sharks’ career leader in points by a defenseman in his six years with the team. Boyle got a bloody nose on his opening shift and had to go to the locker room. But he was back later in the first period for a video tribute that was followed by a long ovation and stick tapping from both teams.“It was an amazing moment,” he said. “It was just a minute long, but that’s going to stay with me for a lifetime.”The Rangers took nearly 10 minutes to get their first shot on goal but still ended up ahead, 2-0, by the end of the first period, scoring after face-offs in the offensive zone.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.BRUINS 3, FLYERS 1  The rookie David Pastrnak scored his first two N.H.L. goals to lead Boston over host Philadelphia.Chris Kelly added a short-handed goal for Boston, which won its third consecutive game.Claude Giroux scored for Philadelphia, which fell further behind in the Eastern Conference playoff race. Jakub Voracek, who entered leading the N.H.L. with 49 points, assisted on Giroux’s goal.CAPITALS 3 RED WINGS 1  John Carlson and Joel Ward scored in the second period, and Braden Holtby stopped 26 shots in Washington’s victory over visiting Detroit.Troy Brouwer also scored for Washington, which improved to 12-1-4 in its last 17 games.SENATORS 5, COYOTES 1  Five Ottawa players scored as the Senators snapped a three-game losing streak, defeating host Arizona. Craig Anderson had 31 saves for the Senators, who scored five straight goals after the Coyotes took an early lead on Mikkel Boedker’s goal.The Senators’ Mika Zibanejad had two assists.AVALANCHE 4, STARS 3 Nathan MacKinnon broke a second-period tie, and Semyon Varlamov stopped 37 shots to lead host Colorado past Dallas.AdvertisementErik Johnson, John Mitchell and Matt Duchene also scored as Colorado won for the fifth time in six games to leapfrog Dallas in the Central Division standings.MacKinnon’s goal with 8.4 seconds left in the second was part of a three-goal period for the Avalanche.Brett Ritchie, Colton Sceviour and Ales Hemsky had goals for the Stars, who have dropped five straight in Denver.PREDATORS 3, WILD 1  Calle Jarnkrok scored a tiebreaking goal early in the third period, and Nashville beat host Minnesota.Mike Fisher and Colin Wilson also scored for Nashville, which is 9-1-2 in its last 12 games.Charlie Coyle scored for Minnesota, which has lost 10 of 12.PENGUINS 2, CANADIENS 1  Sidney Crosby scored a power-play goal 3:41 into overtime, lifting visiting Pittsburgh over Montreal. Evgeni Malkin also scored for the Penguins.Max Pacioretty scored the lone goal for the Canadiens.BLUES 5, HURRICANES 4  Vladimir Tarasenko tied the score early in the third period and T. J. Oshie had the lone goal in a shootout to lift host St. Louis, which has won four in a row.A version of this article appears in print on January 11, 2015, on Page SP10 of the New York edition with the headline: Islanders Use 3-Goal Surge to Remain Atop Division.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.