By BILL PENNINGTONJAN. 10, 2015
FOXBOROUGH, Mass. —  Pro football plays in the modern era usually have lengthy, byzantine names designed to make them almost incomprehensible to anyone outside the team. But the play that turned around the A.F.C. divisional playoff game between the Baltimore Ravens and the New England Patriots on Saturday was just the opposite.It had a name from a playground pickup game: double pass.Deception was already built into the play; a simple name would suffice.The way the play is designed, quarterback Tom Brady throws to wide receiver Julian Edelman — a backward pass, which makes it a lateral. Edelman, a former college quarterback, then throws the ball downfield to his fellow wide receiver Danny Amendola, who runs into the end zone.The Patriots have had the play in their arsenal for years, but they did not necessarily have big plans for it — they practiced it only every few weeks. With the Patriots trailing the Ravens by a touchdown late in the third quarter Saturday, though, the play was radioed into Brady’s helmet.AdvertisementWhen the rest of the team was told the call, Edelman thought to himself that he had never thrown a pass in the N.F.L. Amendola was reminded that catching the ball was the least sensational part of the play, but a last, vital element nonetheless.AdvertisementAnd then the double pass was executed as designed. The Patriots, who twice trailed by 14 points Saturday, tied the game and used the momentum the trick play provided to edge past the pesky Ravens in the fourth quarter for a 35-31 victory.“A pretty sweet play,” Brady said of the 51-yard touchdown pass from Edelman to Amendola. “He threw that better than me. We may have to make some rules that they can’t throw better than me.”Brady could afford to be gracious. With 5 minutes 13 seconds left in the fourth quarter, he had lofted a deft touch pass over Baltimore cornerback Rashaan Melvin and into the arms of Patriots wide receiver Brandon LaFell, who tumbled into the end zone for the winning touchdown.It was Brady’s third touchdown pass of the game and the 46th postseason touchdown pass of his career, breaking Joe Montana’s record.A late drive by the Ravens ended with an interception in the end zone by New England’s Duron Harmon.On Jan. 18, the Patriots will host the winner of Sunday’s game between the Indianapolis Colts and the Denver Broncos.Saturday’s game was a malevolent affair and seemed to put both teams in a foul mood, with frequent grappling and sneering after the whistle.AdvertisementThe Patriots were dominated in the early moments of the first and third quarters and fell behind by 14-0 and later by 28-14. Brady’s 5-yard touchdown pass to tight end Rob Gronkowski cut Baltimore’s third-quarter lead to a touchdown, but the Ravens’ swarming defense had kept Brady under pressure, and New England’s running game had proved to be ineffective.It seemed like a perfect time for a deceiving play meant to punish a confident, assertive defense.“They’ve got an aggressive mentality,” Edelman said. “That kind of play works in that situation. But it’s still a great call.”Brady had to make an accurate pass to give Edelman enough time, and Amendola had to fake as if he were doing anything other than dashing for the end zone.“Everybody did his job,” said Amendola, who was Edelman’s only receiving option on the play. “I was open, and then I saw the ball flying toward me.”What were his thoughts?“Catch the ball,” Amendola said, smiling. “Fortunately, you don’t have a lot of time to think anything else.”The wide-receiver pass was not the only trickery the Patriots employed Saturday. Unable to stop a fearsome Baltimore pass rush, and with one of their starting offensive linemen out with an injury, the Patriots occasionally played just four offensive linemen in the second half, using tight end Michael Hoomanawanui or running back Shane Vereen as an ineligible blocker.The ineligible blocker would be announced just before the play was run, giving the Ravens little time to adjust to which players were eligible and which were not.Baltimore Coach John Harbaugh called the tactic “clearly deceptive” and said the Patriots should have been penalized.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“It’s not something that anybody has ever done before,” Harbaugh said. “They’re an illegal, trick type of a thing, and I’m sure that the league will make some adjustments and things like that.”AdvertisementHe added, “They don’t give you the chance to make the proper substitutions and things like that.”Brady smiled when told that Harbaugh thought the Patriots had been deceitful.“Maybe they should study the rules,” Brady said with a grin that grew wider with each word. “We obviously knew what we were doing. I don’t know what’s deceiving about that.”For much of the game, there was certainly nothing deceptive about what the Ravens were doing. They were picking apart the Patriots’ defense.The Ravens could not have had a better start to the game: They scored on their first two possessions. Baltimore’s first play from scrimmage was a 19-yard completion from Joe Flacco to Steve Smith. Three plays later, Flacco connected with Torrey Smith for 22 yards.On the succeeding play, Flacco, who had plenty of time in the pocket, waited for wide receiver Kamar Aiken to come open and then drilled a 19-yard touchdown pass that put the Ravens ahead by 7-0 less than three minutes into the game.Baltimore extended its lead to two touchdowns shortly afterward as Steve Smith, going one-on-one against New England’s Darrelle Revis, caught a 9-yard touchdown pass.The 14-0 deficit had the Gillette Stadium fans uneasy, and they were no more comfortable when the Patriots gained just 2 yards on the first two plays of the next possession. With the Patriots facing third-and-8 at their own 24-yard line, the next play began inauspiciously, as the center snap nearly went over Brady’s head. Brady snatched the ball, but the miscue ruined the timing, and he was under pressure as soon as he dropped back to pass.But he wriggled out of the clutches of one defender and, staggering forward, looked up and found Gronkowski over the middle for 16 yards.AdvertisementTwo plays later, Brady connected with Edelman for 13 yards to the Baltimore 1. But a first-down run by the Patriots lost 3 yards, and a second-down pass was incomplete.The Ravens blitzed three defenders from Brady’s right on third down, but Brady waited calmly in the pocket and then ran through a gaping hole on his left for a 4-yard touchdown that got New England back in the game.It was an important score that halted Baltimore’s mounting momentum, and in the end zone, Brady spiked the ball forcefully.From there, the Patriots noticeably began to avoid the run, but they were still moving the ball. With a little less than four minutes left in the first half, Brady threw near the left sideline to Amendola, who slipped a tackle attempt by safety Matt Elam and dived into the end zone for a tying touchdown.But a Brady interception led to a Baltimore touchdown with 10 seconds left in the first half.A 16-yard pass from Flacco to running back Justin Forsett gave the Ravens a two-touchdown edge again. Flacco threw four touchdown passes in the game.The Patriots were about to begin their second comeback of the game. This time, they used a little skulduggery.“They bit up on that double pass,” said Brady, who extended his N.F.L. record for playoff victories as a starting quarterback to 19. “Like I said, pretty sweet play.”A version of this article appears in print on January 11, 2015, on Page SP1 of the New York edition with the headline: Receiver’s Pass Does Trick for Patriots.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.