AdvertisementSupported byBy Ken BelsonIRVING, Tex. — It was 72 hours after the Dallas Cowboys had won a thrilling playoff game against the Detroit Lions, and Jerry Jones, the team’s owner, president, general manager and chief cheerleader, was beaming. Tired, but beaming.The Cowboys not only advanced to the divisional round of the playoffs against the Packers in Green Bay on Sunday, but they also won at home during the postseason for only the second time in 18 years. That, at least, is what the box score said.But to Jones, the N.F.L.’s most irrepressible salesman, dreamer and entrepreneur, the victory was also the culmination of a decade-long vision to turn Dallas into the center of the sports world and AT&T Stadium into a magnet for what he calls “iconic events.”Since it opened in 2009, the stadium, which cost $1.2 billion, has hosted a Super Bowl, an N.B.A. All-Star Game, marquee boxing and soccer matches, the N.C.A.A. Final Four and big-name concerts. On Monday, the stadium’s list of firsts will add the inaugural College Football Playoff championship game, between Ohio State and Oregon.But until Sunday, the Cowboys, the building’s main tenant, were rarely participants on the list of unforgettable games at the stadium. The Cowboys finished 8-8 the last three seasons, getting knocked out of the playoff hunt in the last game of the season each time. The years immediately before that stretch were not always kinder. After beating the Philadelphia Eagles in a wild-card game at home in the 2009 season, they were trounced by the Vikings in Minnesota.The Cowboys’ stirring — and controversial — victory against the Lions allowed Jones to exhale. “To me, Sunday was a real culmination of frankly a dream, to have a game of that quality, to have our team taking a step like that, as well as having played in that stadium,” Jones said while sitting on a sofa in his office, the team’s five Super Bowl trophies — the last won nearly two decades ago — on a shelf nearby. “I just had to stand there while everyone was sitting there screaming after the last sack, and I just had to soak it in.”With the Cowboys-Packers game on Sunday and the college football championship the next day, Jones seemed at midweek to be conserving his energy before another whirlwind began. As soon as the Cowboys and the Packers finish playing Sunday afternoon, Jones and his wife, Gene, will race back to Dallas to host a party at 7 p.m. for college football dignitaries.At the Cowboys’ practice site Wednesday, Jones nursed an iced tea, his voice a bit hoarse. He preferred to chew over the playoff victory rather than talk about the coming game. Perhaps it was superstition, or perhaps it was the reality that the Packers have a perfect record at Lambeau Field this season and are 6-point favorites Sunday.“I just can’t describe the combination of having that 91,000 people sitting there cranking it up and living and breathing and dying and coming back to life,” Jones said. “That was something that you dream about.”A born showman who cannot help attracting attention, Jones chuckled about the series of small earthquakes that occurred the day before. Perhaps aptly, Irving was the epicenter of the tremors.He marveled at how he and his team had turned into a national lightning rod, thanks to the presence of Gov. Chris Christie of New Jersey in Jones’s luxury box for the Lions game. An unabashed Cowboys fan, Christie was ridiculed for rooting for a rival of one of the two N.F.L. teams that play in his home state. His awkward nationally televised celebration with Jones and Jones’s son, Stephen, was lampooned. Christie’s political opponents are questioning the ethics of his having accepted transportation and tickets.Jones shrugged.“I think it is a big plus, not a minus, and it adds a lot of flair to what we’re doing,” he said. “Things like this are humorous relative to the things they do every day.”Jones invited Christie and his bright orange “lucky” sweater to sit with him in Green Bay. The governor accepted the offer but said he would pay his own way this time.The kerfuffle seemed to symbolize how the Cowboys, with their five Super Bowl titles and their self-proclaimed nickname, America’s Team, remain a franchise that many fans love to hate. The Cowboys’ power led some fans to posit that Jones had influenced the officials’ decision not to call a penalty against Dallas at a key point in the fourth quarter of its victory over Detroit.Ever the optimist, Jones considered this a sign of respect. Fans do not hate teams that are boring or unsuccessful; they pity them.“That is a compliment, to even think you could have that kind of influence,” Jones said.Only a few years after Jones bought the Cowboys in 1989 for what was then a record $140 million, they won three championships. They have won none in the last 19 years, much to the glee of the team’s detractors.For Jones, the inability to return to the Super Bowl is a source of unending frustration. For all his success at turning the Cowboys into one of the most valuable sports franchises in the United States, Jones, 72, cannot get the one thing he really wants: another Vince Lombardi Trophy for that shelf.So he has poured a lot of his energy into the thing he can control, AT&T Stadium. Jones has spent an estimated $100 million on additional improvements, a considerable sum for a building so new. That includes upgraded Wi-Fi inside and a $15 million sculpture by the artist Anish Kapoor outside. He has also continued to seek marquee events to host.“Total exclusivity just adds to the cachet” of the stadium, he said. “Obviously, we’re going to have a lot more playoff games, but not necessarily the first one.”Jones is considered one of the most powerful N.F.L. owners not just because he owns the richest team, but because he has pushed the league to, as he said, “grow the pie” by chasing new financial opportunities. He also spends countless hours promoting the league, including wooing new owners.About a decade ago, he was a guest on a yacht owned by Shahid Khan, who was looking to buy a team. What started out as a conversation turned into a weekend-long gabfest about the merits of investing in the N.F.L.“He didn’t know me from Adam,” said Khan, now the Jacksonville Jaguars’ owner. “We stayed up late into the night. He’s the kind of guy you’d want to have a beer with. He’ll talk and talk.” Jones has often been compared to his friend George Steinbrenner, the Yankees owner who died in 2010, because of his championship-or-bust attitude, his willingness to reinvest in his team and his showmanship.“He reminds me of George a lot in that he’s completely dedicated to winning, his passion for the Cowboys is second to none, and he’s smart and creative,” said Randy Levine, the president of the Yankees, who are partners with the Cowboys in Legends Hospitality, a stadium concession business.But like Steinbrenner, Jones is sometimes criticized for his ambitions. He is, for instance, among only a handful of owners who double as general managers, which means he is criticized when the team does poorly.His predilection for the spotlight has turned him into a media celebrity, but he can come across as a camera hog, or worse. Last year a woman accused him of a 2009 sexual assault, but her civil suit was dismissed.In 2009, Commissioner Roger Goodell fined Jones $100,000 for suggesting that revenue sharing — a cornerstone of the league’s financial success — was “on its way out.”With some of the deepest pockets of any N.F.L. owner, Jones has been chastised for violating salary-cap rules, too. In 2012, the Redskins and the Cowboys were docked millions of dollars in salary-cap space after deliberately dumping salaries to gain an unfair competitive advantage.The shenanigans speak to Jones’s competitiveness, as well as his willingness to throw his money around. But money, he knows, will never erase his frustration at not being able to get what he most wants: another championship.“I wouldn’t embarrass you or anybody to give you the size of the check I’d write if I could buy a Super Bowl,” he said. “It would probably be my largest investment ever, but that’s not the way it works.”Advertisement