By ZACH SCHONBRUNJAN. 10, 2015
WHITE PLAINS —  Although the Knicks trailed by 18 late in the second quarter, with nine turnovers by the time they hit their first nine field goals, nobody at Westchester County Center on Friday seemed ready to boo, or storm out, or don a paper bag mask in mock protest, a common gesture these days at Madison Square Garden.In fact, fans were waving towels, children were running around the perimeter of the court and a woman in the mezzanine punctuated the atmosphere with a cowbell.After all, these were the Westchester Knicks of the N.B.A. Development League. As the name suggests, sloppy basketball and some ragged execution are expected — all for the sake of, well, at some point, development. The crowd was simply delighted to witness the Knicks come back to tie the score against Fort Wayne with 3.6 seconds left before falling at the buzzer, 96-94.When Westchester (7-13) was formed as an expansion team last spring, it was intended to serve as more than a feeder system to the N.B.A. It was a copycat organization programmed to teach the Knicks’ way, an apprenticeship for pro basketball.AdvertisementThe symmetry flowed from the superficial (practicing at the Knicks’ site and wearing blue-and-orange uniforms) to the fundamental, with the D-League Knicks teaching Phil Jackson’s triangle offense the same way it is being run at the Garden.AdvertisementThe result, in a sardonic twist, has been an offense that has struggled in both leagues.Entering Saturday, the Westchester Knicks ranked last in the D-League in points per game (94.4), field-goal percentage (43.1), 3-point percentage (29.6), offensive rating (98.2), effective field-goal percentage (46.4) and true shooting percentage (50.8). They were second to last in assist ratio (13.2) and a statistic called pace, which is the number of possessions per 48 minutes for a team.If these numbers look familiar, it’s perhaps because they are similar to those of the N.B.A.’s Knicks. Entering Saturday’s game, their averages were 93.2 points per game, 44.2 percent shooting, a 99.4 offensive rating, a 48.6 effective field-goal percentage and a 52.1 true shooting percentage. Their pace ranked third from the bottom.The offense’s patience and deliberateness are intentional; the lack of production is not. During the 11 seasons that Jackson coached the Los Angeles Lakers, they were often outside the top 10 in pace. But his teams averaged an offensive rating of 106.2, a number that, if generated by the Knicks today, would rank sixth in the N.B.A.In Westchester, forward Darnell Jackson said the triangle had been “without a doubt” the most difficult offense he had tried to learn.“I say it all the time: Sometimes I still feel like I don’t understand the triangle,” he said after practice Thursday.Darnell Jackson was not surprised to hear the former Knicks guard J. R. Smith’s recent comments that the triangle required “too much thinking” and left players “pretty much walking on eggshells” as they tried to learn it.As he watches his team on film, Darnell Jackson said, at times it appears as though players are stationary, rather than moving and cutting.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“We’re not setting guys up, we’re not cutting hard,” he said. “It’s just guys getting a feel of it.”AdvertisementWestchester point guard Andre Barrett, referring to his team’s Manhattan counterpart, said: “You see it with the Knicks. Guys who are talented offensively are struggling a little bit because they’re trying to get it.”The cohesion of the two programs, however, helped Langston Galloway earn a 10-day contract with the Knicks and fit seamlessly into the offense the way a signee from another organization might not. But as far as being a system that produces wins for either Knicks team, the triangle remains a work in progress.“It’s happened to us in games where it just looks beautiful,” Barrett said. “Guys are cutting, moving, everyone’s touching the ball, you get wide-open shots.“And then you have your times when,” he said, then paused. “It’s a struggle.”Westchester Coach Kevin Whitted learned the triangle offense from Jim Cleamons as a player in training camp with the Dallas Mavericks in 1997. But he acknowledged that it took him more than three months to feel as if he had a complete understanding of the system. By then, he was playing in Spain.“It takes 40 days to even get a grasp of this,” Whitted said. “The first 20 days, we were just trying to learn the movements. Everyone is trying to learn it, like a dance step. After the 35th day, it starts to become instinctive.”He said his team had just begun to move from Point A (understanding how the system is supposed to look) to Point B (being able to make reads and adapt).Point C, presumably, is winning games. Both teams are still waiting to get there.“It’s a beautiful thing to be a part of,” Whitted said, “if you have five guys who understand it.”A version of this article appears in print on January 11, 2015, on Page SP9 of the New York edition with the headline: Triangle Offense Baffles a Second Group of Lowly and Anemic Knicks.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.