AdvertisementSupported byKeeping ScoreBy Benjamin HoffmanRed Auerbach won nine N.B.A. titles as coach of the Boston Celtics and seven more as an executive. He was known for, among other things, lighting victory cigars and having an aversion to cheerleaders. One of his most enduring quotations referred to virtually any player who stands 7 feet or taller: “You can’t teach height.”That no one seems to recall when or where Auerbach spoke those words, or if they even originated with him, hardly matters because they still hold true.The latest example of how much value teams place on height was a trade last week between the Cleveland Cavaliers and the Denver Nuggets. To land Timofey Mozgov, a relatively nondescript 28-year-old center who stands 7 feet 1 inch but has never averaged more than 9.4 points or 7.8 rebounds a game, Cleveland paid a steep price: two first-round draft picks.At first glance, the deal may seem like highway robbery, but given the scarcity of competent 7-footers in the N.B.A., the Cavaliers may have found a bargain. As it has been in every season since 1980-81, the average height in the N.B.A. is 6 feet 7 inches. Of the 455 players who have played at least one minute of a game this season, 38 stand 7 feet or taller. Only one, Roy Hibbert, at 7-2, can claim to be taller than Mozgov. The question now is whether Mozgov will be tall and good, or just tall.Originally signed by the Knicks before the 2010-11 season, Mozgov was part of the trade in which they acquired Carmelo Anthony. The Nuggets liked what they saw and signed him to a three-year, $14 million contract extension before last season. Mozgov proceeded to blossom, producing a 16.7 player efficiency rating in 21.6 minutes a game, which placed him comfortably above the league average. His true-shooting percentage, a statistic that accounts for the relative importance of 2-pointers, 3-pointers and free throws, was a robust .584, and he graded as above the league average on both offense and defense in terms of win shares, an advanced statistic that estimates how many wins a player contributes to his team. Those statistics may not seem flashy, but they look a lot better because the N.B.A. now has only nine players who are 7 feet or taller, average 25 or more minutes a game and have a player efficiency rating of 15 or better. Because four of the nine are on the wrong side of 30 and the average salary of the group is $10.4 million, the potential for the younger, cheaper Mozgov to get to that level makes him worth a gamble. Mozgov’s numbers have declined a bit this season, with his player efficiency rating dropping to 13.9, but most of that can be attributed to his slightly worse shooting; his defense and rebounding have held steady. David Blatt, his former coach with the Russian national team, is now the Cavaliers’ coach, and it is easy to envision Mozgov thriving for Cleveland.The Cavaliers’ desire to acquire Mozgov turned to desperation when Anderson Varejao, one of their few players inclined to play defense, was lost for the season with a torn Achilles’ tendon. Built around three offensive stars in LeBron James, Kevin Love and Kyrie Irving, the team needed a rim protector if it intended to contend in the playoffs.The Cavaliers have a short window to figure things out, given Love’s pending free agency and James’s ability to walk away from the team after either of the next two seasons. They have now traded a majority of their movable assets for the former Knicks J. R. Smith, Iman Shumpert and Mozgov. Smith and Shumpert could go either way for the Cavaliers in terms of effectiveness, but Mozgov seems a safe bet to deliver on what Cleveland wants from him because he can focus on defense and leave the offense to the team’s stars. And when opposing players try to get to the rim against Cleveland, they will find a 7-1 Russian standing in their way. That is something you cannot teach.Advertisement