AdvertisementSupported byBy Karen CrouseENGLEWOOD, Colo. — The Denver Broncos are like the perky family whose holiday card is the picture of beatitude. Outwardly, it looks as if all is well. What others fail to see, but what is glaring to the Broncos, is the shadow darkening this season’s group portrait. Unbeaten at home and 12-4 over all, the Broncos are two victories from a second straight trip to the Super Bowl. They will host the Indianapolis Colts on Sunday in a divisional playoff game that is a sequel to the teams’ season opener, won by the Broncos. As Denver closed in last month on a fourth consecutive A.F.C. West title, its leader was conspicuously absent. The local fans have talked themselves hoarse lamenting how Peyton Manning, their future first-ballot Hall-of-Fame quarterback, has not been himself lately. And it’s true, Manning threw as many touchdown passes in the first half of the season opener as he did in the last four regular-season games (three). Manning was the artisan behind last year’s Super Bowl run, but the man the players and the staff wish could magically turn up in the postseason is the architect of their franchise, Pat Bowlen. Bowlen bought the Broncos in 1984 and built a championship culture using caring and commitment as the mortar and bricks, and community as the insulation. With the support of his twin columns, quarterbacks John Elway and Manning, Bowlen became the only individual owner to orchestrate more than 300 victories and six Super Bowl appearances in his first 30 seasons. Last July, on the eve of training camp, Bowlen yielded control of the team because of the progressive decline in his health caused by Alzheimer’s disease. On July 23, the day Bowlen’s retirement was announced, Elway, the team’s general manager since 2011, met with reporters. For 22 seconds, no words came as he gulped back tears and breathed from the bottom of his diaphragm. When he was able to speak, the first words out of his mouth were, “This place will never be the same.” In one respect, nothing has changed. Starting with Joe Ellis, who assumed control of the team, everybody has practiced what Bowlen always preached: Make football your top priority and strive to be the best at your job.But Elway was right. The Broncos are like a riderless horse without Bowlen, who has not attended a game this season. Aside from a brief appearance last fall for the team picture, he has stayed away from the practice site, where he kept an office. John Fox, the Broncos’ coach since 2011, said: “I’ve missed him a lot. In my tenure here, it was not unusual that every day he’d stop by my office and visit.” At the stadium Bowlen built, where the Broncos have lost eight games in the past four seasons, Bowlen had a locker next to Fox’s for storing his personal belongings. After every game at Sports Authority Field at Mile High, the men would meet at their lockers and go over what had transpired like children fresh out of gym class. “He was very positive,” Fox said. “I can remember countless times we’d lose a game and I’d say, ‘Sorry, Mr. B.’ He was always very classy in the sense he’d say, ‘You didn’t play a down.’ “He’s just a great guy to have around, and I miss him.”The Broncos player with the longest tenure is Ryan Clady, an offensive lineman in his seventh season with the team. In 2008, as a rookie, he received second-team All-Pro honors. Clady said that on the day the news was announced, Bowlen found him in the training room and congratulated him.“That’s the kind of owner he was,” Clady said. “He was definitely hands-on. It is a little strange not seeing him all the time.” Ellis said, “I think everybody feels that way.” He added: “Everything that he taught us, everything that he stated, we’ve carried out. But his presence in the building meant so much to me and everybody else. And when he wasn’t here, it’s definitely had an effect on everybody in the workplace. It’s a noticeable void.” During the first television timeout in the Broncos’ opener against the Colts, the team paid tribute to Bowlen in a short video. The next month, at Denver’s annual Walk to End Alzheimer’s, friends and relatives calling themselves Team Super Bowlen raised more than $68,000 for the Alzheimer’s Association. Since Bowlen stepped down, the Broncos have chosen the Alzheimer’s organization, whose Colorado chapter has headquarters in Denver, as one of their 10 community partners. They have teamed to raise awareness and provide support for the more than five million Americans living with the disease, including more than 68,000 Coloradans. Linda Mitchell, the Colorado chapter president, described the Broncos’ involvement as “a game changer.”She said: “To have their stamp of approval has been huge to us. It’s a gift like nothing we’ve ever received.” The Broncos provided eight tickets to Sunday’s divisional playoff game for a drawing among those who registered on the Alzheimer’s Association of Colorado website. More than 8,000 signed up for a chance to win a pair of tickets. On Tuesday, after the giveaway was announced, the site attracted 7,720 visitors. On the same day last year, it had 248, said Khristine Rogers, the Alzheimer’s Association of Colorado vice president for communications and marketing. For the past week, Rogers said, the site had 9,969 page views, up from 1,420 in the same period last year. “What’s really happened is the Broncos have given us a platform that’s really amplified our ability to connect with people,” Rogers said.Ellis has maintained one of the most important relationships of his life through frequents visits with Bowlen. Their conversations skim over the team’s current performance. Ellis said he brings up stories from the past, plugging into Bowlen’s long-term memory to recharge their friendship. “I talk about the good times,” Ellis said, “and try to get some chuckles and laughter going.” The architect of the Broncos no longer pays attention to every detail.“I think he’s probably pleased with the way things are going, but he’s fully immersed in his care and his well-being,” Ellis said. “Alzheimer’s is a very unfair disease, and it affects not only those who come down with it but so many family and friends and everybody else. It’s very, very hard for him, and extremely difficult for his family.” Ellis added: “People talk about win one for Peyton, win one for Pat. Pat’s reaction would be, ‘Let’s just win one.’ ”Advertisement