AdvertisementSupported byInboxTough Climb Has Its ComfortsTo the Sports Editor:Re “Abduction. Lost Finger. Now, the Tallest Hurdle,” Jan. 8: Tommy Caldwell and Kevin Jorgeson use ropes so they don’t fall. After climbing a stretch of El Capitan’s Dawn Wall, they lower themselves with the ropes to a camp, where they have stoves, food supplied by porters, phones and electronic devices, and other supplies.Then they climb another stretch and come back to the same well-equipped rest area. Yet their attempt at the most difficult rock climb in the world is considered without aid. Right.DAVID HARRIS, West Chester, Pa.Second Thoughts on Sports FilmsTo the Sports Editor:Re “The Best Sports Films Often Are Not,” Jan. 4: Perhaps missing from Richard Sandomir’s listing of the top 10 sports films is “The Harder They Fall,” a boxing film starring Humphrey Bogart and Rod Steiger in 1956. It contains several memorable scenes, including the reigning champion’s destruction of the giant Argentine challenger, who won mostly fixed fights.RICHARD A. NORTON, BrooklynThe Case for MurphyTo the Sports Editor:Re “Making the Case for Mattingly on His Last Chance for Cooperstown,” Jan. 4: The 1980s player who truly deserves to make the Hall of Fame is Dale Murphy of the Atlanta Braves. Murphy won two Most Valuable Player awards to Mattingly’s one.From 1982 to 1987, Murphy had more than 100 runs batted in five times, and he hit 36 home runs or more five times. He made the All-Star Game seven times. In 1983, he led the league in slugging percentage and on-base plus slugging percentage, hit 36 homers, had a league-leading 121 R.B.I. and stole 30 bases. Murphy’s numbers dwarf Mattingly’s.RANDY HENRICK, Syosset, N.Y.College Football and CapitalismTo the Sports Editor:Re “What Made College Ball More Like Pros? $7.3 Billion, for a Start,” Dec. 31: That big-time college football has become a multibillion-dollar industry raises the question of why state governments should be in a business in direct competition with professional sports teams as well as other entertainment companies.It is ironic that many of the football programs that generate the most revenue are in states that are the most politically conservative. Presumably they are led by governors and legislators who would not countenance government operation of activities that could be run better, or equally well, in the private sector. Is it not puzzling that their commitment to the fundamental principles of capitalism excludes the areas bounded by goal posts?MICHAEL GRANOF, Austin, Tex.Advertisement