
Sports of The Times By                     
 WILLIAM C. RHODEN
 
JAN. 10, 2015
Michael J. Seferian is the mayor of Oregon, Ohio.Until two weeks ago, Seferian and the northern Ohio city he governs were not on the national radar screen. But after Oregon routed Florida State on New Year’s Day and earned a spot in Monday’s College Football Playoff championship game against Ohio State, everything changed.Quickly.Two Oregon natives, Matt Squibb and Mark Rabbitt, whose families still live in the city, suggested that Oregon change its name temporarily “so we don’t get confused and people think that we are part of the University of Oregon,” Seferian said during a phone interview. He was blindsided by the avalanche of email and social-media chatter clamoring for a temporary name change.“I’m not the college football gung-ho enthusiast fan,” he said. “I didn’t even know what was going on. All I knew was that it was growing exponentially.”Quickly sizing up the situation, Seferian decided that a temporary name might help raise the city’s profile, provided that Oregon remained part of it. His other rationale was based on history: Oregon, Ohio, dates to 1838, 21 years before the state of Oregon was admitted to the Union.Advertisement“I’m not going to give our name away when we had it first,” he said.Playing off the city’s motto, “Oregon on the Bay: City of Opportunity,” Seferian issued a proclamation declaring that for the week of Jan. 5 to 12, the name would be “Oregon, Ohio Buckeyes on the Bay: City of Duck Hunters.”Advertisement“We have a very enthusiastic outdoorsman group that takes hunting around here very seriously,” he said. “Duck hunting is very big in Oregon, so it all works.”With just over 20,000 residents in 28.5 square miles, Oregon, Ohio, is a full-service city, with water and wastewater treatment plants, police and fire departments, and a municipal court.Lake ErieMICH.OregonClevelandOHIOColumbusCincinnatiW.VA.KY.100 miles“We do everything a big city does, on a smaller scale,” Seferian, 57, said.He moved to Oregon with his family from nearby Point Place in 1961 at age 4. Seferian began his political career as a councilman in 1989 after complaining that the city was not doing enough to develop softball fields. He made an unsuccessful bid for mayor in 2001. An independent, he ran again in 2009 and won.In 2013, Oregon made a smaller splash when the Ohio Power Siting Board approved the construction of an $860 million power plant there.“We got nowhere near the attention for that power plant as we did for this,” Seferian said of the championship game.“For years, people did not know who we were,” he said. “They think it’s on an island somewhere off the Lake Erie coast. Now people know that we actually exist out there, and it really kind of put us on the map.”Critics of sports, and especially the often lavish pageantry surrounding sports, complain that these mega-events numb our sensibilities and divert attention from pressing social issues.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.That is a central attraction — and mission — of the sports and entertainment industry: escape.“I don’t find it disturbing,” he said. “People in society live at such a fast pace that when you get off work, you’re looking for something to put your mind at ease or put it in another spot.Advertisement“This gives people the opportunity to just kind of escape a little bit, relax and have fun. If you can’t have fun, it makes life a little miserable.”(Urbana, Ohio, has also gotten into the spirit. On Monday, it will be known as the city of Urban, to honor Ohio State Coach Urban Meyer.)
                We’ve published maps showing where fan support for one team begins and another ends for baseball and basketball. Now we’re pleased to offer another one: the United States according to college football fans.            This is where the story is supposed to focus on the unifying power of sports and how a game like the matchup between Ohio State and Oregon can bring together fans in each state.That’s not going to happen.Anyone who thinks it will does not understand the depth of emotion that defines college football rivalries.Many Oregon State fans will be rooting for Ohio State, and Seferian knows that Oregon will probably pick up a large contingent of Michigan and Notre Dame fans who live in northern Ohio. Many of them live in his city, which is closer to Ann Arbor, Mich., home of the Wolverines, than to Columbus, home of the Buckeyes.“We have a lot of Notre Dame fans and a lot of Michigan fans and a lot of Ohio State fans who are always in competition and feuds and battles with one another,” Seferian said. “We’ll have a lot of people in Oregon who are Michigan fans and Notre Dame fans who will be hoping the Oregon Ducks beat Ohio State.”The animosity extends to the seemingly innocent gesture of temporarily renaming the city. Objections to the change came primarily from Michigan fans living there.“They don’t want to give the Buckeyes anything; they don’t want to give them any recognition,” Seferian said. “But they enjoy the fact that Ohio State is in another battle, that they’ll get all the attention and then, hopefully, lose.”Seferian said he was not in that camp. He knows a political land mine when he sees one.Asked which team he favored to win Monday, Seferian did not hesitate.Advertisement“I’m not a die-hard college football fan,” he said, “but I’m pulling for the Buckeyes.”Email: wcr@nytimes.com A version of this article appears in print on January 11, 2015, on Page SP7 of the New York edition with the headline: Buckeyes Are Beloved in Oregon (Not That One).  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »