By ZACH SCHONBRUNJAN. 10, 2015
This is a mea culpa, Phil Jackson said, his tall frame leaning slightly against a lectern Saturday. In 30 minutes, his hapless Knicks were due to tip off against the Charlotte Hornets. Jackson had lost sleep, he said, and it was evident. He wore a black suit and a black-and-gray tie, but none of the 13 N.B.A. championship rings he had won over the years.“I take responsibility,” he said.The words seemed to be getting yanked out of him like embedded splinters. These were his first public comments since early December, and they came amid a franchise-worst losing streak that was extended to 15 with a defeat against the Hornets that needed a separate round of atonement.Playing a team that had come into the game 10 games under .500 — though Charlotte (15-24) had won four games in a row — the Knicks were outrebounded, 51-29, and seemed poised to flirt with the franchise record for fewest points scored in a game (58), set in December 2000. They trailed by as many as 45 in the third quarter before eventually succumbing, 110-82, at Madison Square Garden, leaving them a preposterous 5-35 on the season, without a victory at home since Nov. 22.Jackson remained in the stands watching it all. Fans booed, though no one appeared to be wearing a paper bag, as some did Thursday. A few children chanted, “Fire Fisher,” referring to Knicks Coach Derek Fisher. Others mockingly yelled, “M.V.P.!” — not for Carmelo Anthony, but for Quincy Acy, as he stepped to the free-throw line in the waning seconds.AdvertisementThese Knicks — led by Acy and Shane Larkin and Cole Aldrich and so on — were wholly unrecognizable from the lineup Jackson assembled last summer, his first as a basketball executive. They more closely resembled Fisher’s summer league team.And now Jackson, a name synonymous with winning over the last quarter-century, signed last spring as the man with the Midas touch who could bring titles back to New York, was left to acknowledge the team’s profound dysfunction.“I wake up in the night thinking about how I can help this team out,” Jackson said. “Thinking about what’s different, what we could do to be different.”AdvertisementThe Knicks have dropped like an anvil to the bottom of the N.B.A. standings. On Monday, Jackson traded J. R. Smith and Iman Shumpert to the Cleveland Cavaliers in a dump of salary that illustrated what fans had sensed: Building for the future was the goal.Five days later, Jackson said the deal was “the right thing to do” as he shouldered responsibility for constructing an impotent roster. Now, he said, it is time to restart.“The reality is this is probably the best way to go about this business,” Jackson said.He added: “To begin, to restart, to do it the right way, and put it together in a way that makes sense. We hope we’re on the right track, even though this is not the track that we anticipated.”Anthony missed his sixth consecutive game, and Amar’e Stoudemire and Andrea Bargnani sat out as well. The Knicks were led by Acy (18 points) and Tim Hardaway Jr. (15). Both brought some life back to the game in the fourth quarter. Kemba Walker of the Hornets scored 28 points in 28 minutes and did not play in the final quarter.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.When Fisher was asked what he could be looking for when his team was trailing by 45 in the final quarter, he said he wanted to see players who would continue to play hard, as some did Saturday.“That’s been the biggest issue for us,” Fisher said, “consistently finding five guys that can do that.”The roster, though, if key players remain sidelined, does not look like one that could yield many more victories. Anthony could return to play next week in London, but surgery on his knee remains a possibility.“That has to be up to him,” Jackson said.Are there additional moves to come? Jackson said yes. He said he would like to bring “five or six” new players to the team for next season, and he indicated that the team could be active over the next month. He wants players the Knicks can build with. He said that New York remained a destination and that he believed free agents still wanted to come here.But his most forceful pronouncement came in support of Fisher, the first-year coach whom some fans have lambasted for the team’s struggles.Advertisement“The fans, I want them to leave Derek alone in this regard,” Jackson said. “He’s doing the best job possible, and it’s not his fault.”Jackson went on to praise Fisher’s patience, his calm temperament and his consistent approach, describing his resolve and character as stable, which is what he said the team needed right now.“I think in a lot of ways that’s what leadership is,” Fisher said. “To be consistent even when things aren’t going so well.”Jackson’s treatise lasted almost 18 minutes, and when he finished, the national anthem was moments away. He settled into his seat a few rows up. By the second quarter, fans were booing his coach, his players, his team.A version of this article appears in print on January 11, 2015, on Page SP1 of the New York edition with the headline: After Jackson Takes Blame, His Knicks Take a Drubbing.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.