AdvertisementSupported byBy Pat BorziMINNEAPOLIS — The Minnesota players watched Rachel Banham, their leader, collapse in pain during a Dec. 10 game at North Dakota. But Coach Marlene Stollings missed it. Stollings had turned to say something to one of her reserves while Banham, a senior guard and the preseason pick as Big Ten player of the year, drove to the basket. “I knew she had a breakaway, wide-open layup, and I wasn’t worried about it going in,” Stollings said. “I was using that moment to teach a little bit. All of a sudden, I’m talking to the players on the bench, and I noticed they’re not looking at me. It’s just complete silence in the gym. “When I turned around, I didn’t realize it was Rachel immediately. But I heard the scream. When you’ve heard that, you pretty much know exactly what it is.”A torn right anterior cruciate ligament ended Banham’s season, and perhaps Minnesota’s best chance to make its first N.C.A.A. tournament since 2009. The charter flight home from Grand Forks, N.D., was grim, punctuated by Banham’s crying as she kept her throbbing knee elevated.“It was a devastating time for the team,” guard Shayne Mullaney said.Before the season, Minnesota’s players vowed to get Banham to her first N.C.A.A. tournament in her final season. The injury could have wrecked all that. Instead, the Golden Gophers increased their resolve. With contributions from throughout their lineup, the Gophers (14-1) have won five consecutive games without Banham and 10 straight over all to crack the Associated Press poll for the first time since 2006, at No. 23. Minnesota and the Big Ten newcomer Maryland (12-2) share the conference lead at 3-0. The No. 12 Terrapins face the Gophers on national television Sunday at Williams Arena, the sternest test the team has faced without Banham.“It’s awesome that we’re ranked top 25, and this is the best we’ve done since I’ve been here,” said Mullaney, the daughter of the former Minnesota Vikings defensive end Mark Mullaney. “But we’re not content where we’re at. We want to get higher in the rankings and stay undefeated in the Big Ten.”That seemed unlikely a month ago.Banham, whose 2,179 points rank second in the program’s history, held the career record for 3-pointers and needed 107 points to pass Lindsay Whalen as the top career scorer when her knee gave out. Stollings, hired from Virginia Commonwealth before this season to replace Pam Borton, who was fired, structured her up-tempo offense to showcase Banham’s versatile shooting and ball-handling skills. Banham, who had knee surgery last Monday, is so respected by her teammates that even before her injury, seven of them adopted her trademark wide, black headband.“She’s the Kobe of our team, on and off the court,” said the sophomore center Amanda Zahui B., referring to the Los Angeles Lakers star Kobe Bryant. “She always brings positive energy. She’s probably the most positive person about this whole knee injury. She’s the one trying to keep us together, keep everybody in a positive circle. On the court, obviously, she’s a killer.”After Banham’s injury, which occurred during the week of final exams, Stollings gave the players two days off to regroup. Stollings asked Zahui B., a 6-foot-5 native of Sweden and last year’s conference freshman of the year, to think of a way to honor Banham before Minnesota’s next game. The players exchanged texts and decided on T-shirts adorned with the words “Buckets for Banham,” which they wear during warm-ups.“We talked as a team and thought it would be cool to make shirts and dedicate it to Rachel,” Mullaney said. “She was super surprised, and she loved it. It was fun.”The hard part would be making up the 35 points per game that Stollings and her staff figured Banham accounted for, based on the 20 points and 5 assists she averaged through nine games, as well as her immeasurable court savvy. The Gophers still had good players in Zahui B., Mullaney, forward Shae Kelley (a graduate student who transferred from Old Dominion) and guard Mikayla Bailey, a 3-point specialist. Stollings asked for more from everyone based on playing time — an extra offensive rebound from one, one more 3-pointer from another.“It wasn’t going to be like, ‘Amanda, you’re going to have to get 10 more points a game,’ or ‘Shayne, you’ve got to get 10 more points a game,’ ” Stollings said. “While that would be nice, we didn’t want to put all that pressure on one player, or two. We chose to give everybody a role in Rachel’s absence they could latch on to and have success with. That really took off.”Stollings also granted Banham free rein to act as an unofficial assistant coach, pulling players aside at practice, or tapping her encyclopedic knowledge of Big Ten player tendencies during games.“When we play defense on this side and she sits on the bench, I lock everything out but Rachel,” Zahui B. said. “I hear, ‘Amanda, be ready for this move, it’s coming.’ And it comes. We have trust in her as a leader, and now as a coach.” Minnesota won twice in its holiday classic at home, then opened the Big Ten season Dec. 29 with a stunner, coming from 17 points down in the second half to beat No. 12 Nebraska, 72-69. Mullaney drove around a high-post screen from Kelley for the go-ahead layup with 33 seconds left, a play the Gophers often ran for Banham. Zahui B. contributed 20 points, 15 rebounds and 4 blocks, hitting two foul shots with six seconds left.“That gave us a lot of confidence,” Zahui B. said. “I think we showed each other we can actually play without Rachel, and play at this high level. It was an amazing feeling in the locker room after, kind of like a shock — like, ‘We did this.’ ”The Gophers followed that up Jan. 1 by winning at Purdue for the first time in 10 years, 81-68, then beating Wisconsin, 72-60, in Madison three days later.Zahui B. has averaged 19.2 points, 14.4 rebounds and 4.8 blocks since Banham’s injury. Mullaney, a career 7.1-point scorer before this season, is up to 14.6 points with 6 assists per game in Big Ten play. “We’ve been a second-half team all year,” Stollings said. “With our strength and conditioning, we feel superior. In those moments, we feel like that’s our time. If it’s close and under four minutes, our kids believe they’re going to win, because we’ve won every single close game we’ve been in.”With or without their leader.Advertisement