By KEN BELSONJAN. 10, 2015
GREEN BAY, Wis. —  The N.F.L. loves to trumpet that its players can overcome anything, including subzero temperatures and howling winds. So it is no surprise that the divisional playoff game between the Packers and Cowboys here has been called Ice Bowl II, a reference to the last time these teams met at Lambeau Field in the postseason in 1967.But this matchup will be far from a repeat of that game, which the Packers won, 21-17.The weather at kickoff is expected to be about 20 degrees and sunny with light winds, a far cry from the wind chill of minus 46 degrees registered nearly half a century ago.Playing conditions have changed, too. Players now wear lightweight, high-tech uniforms and undergarments that better insulate. They sit on heated benches and dry their helmets nearby. Under the field is a network of pipes with a solution that includes antifreeze to warm the grass.With these and other modern improvements, the players are shrugging off the weather — even the Packers, who might otherwise want to crow that their team is more acclimated to the elements.Advertisement“We’ll be warm on the sidelines, they’ll be warm on the sidelines and then when you get on the field, you don’t even think of the weather,” Packers fullback John Kuhn said. “We like the cold weather, we thrive in the cold weather, but we’re facing a really tough opponent.”AdvertisementIt is clear the Packers thrive in the cold weather, but they usually thrive whatever the weather. In the past 10 seasons, the Packers have a 13-8 record in regular-season games played in 30 degrees or lower, according to Elias Sports Bureau. That is a .619 winning percentage, only slightly above the .613 winning percentage Green Bay has for all its regular-season games during that 10-year span.The advantage in the playoffs is also slim. In the last decade, the Packers are 3-2 during the postseason in games played in below-freezing temperatures, and their overall playoff record during that period is 6-5.Some of the Packers have been watching footage of the 1967 Ice Bowl game to lift their spirits, and for good reason. It was a gritty game with a thrilling finish, and it has come to symbolize the determination of the teams coached by Vince Lombardi. But it is also ancient history to players whose parents might not have been old enough to watch the game.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“We get hit in the face with the history of the Green Bay Packers stuff,” said Packers kicker Mason Crosby, 30, who grew up in Texas, “and it’s an easy game to go back to because it’s iconic. But it’s something of a different time.”The players do prepare to brave the elements. Because it snowed in Green Bay during the week, Crosby was unable to practice in Lambeau Field. Instead, he kicked in the team’s practice facility nearby, with the doors open to allow in a breeze and cold air.About two hours before the game, he will kick some balls on the field to get a feel for the way the wind is blowing. During the game, he will take a few extra practice kicks on the sideline to keep his feet warm. He will avoid sitting on the heated benches too long.“When you get that burst of warmth, you get colder when you walk away from them,” he said.In the past decade, the Cowboys have played just three regular-season games (and none in the playoffs) in temperatures of 30 degrees or lower, and they lost all three, according to Elias.But they are undefeated on the road this season, which matches the Packers’ 8-0 home record, and Dallas quarterback Tony Romo grew up in southern Wisconsin. Some players will wear an extra layer under their uniform and perhaps adjust the number of cleats in their shoes to for better traction.They also play mind games to get themselves ready.“You prepare mentally,” Cowboys defensive end Jeremy Mincey said last Tuesday. “You just tell yourself it’s not cold. And you start doing that now.”Tom Spousta contributed reporting.
 A version of this article appears in print on January 11, 2015, on Page SP2 of the New York edition with the headline: This Time, Forecast in Green Bay Is a Balmy 20 Degrees.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.