AdvertisementSupported byBy Marc TracySpectators at the men’s basketball Final Four last April at AT&T Stadium in Arlington, Tex., could buy burgers, sodas and even Texas-shaped waffles. But they could not buy alcohol. The N.C.A.A. does not permit alcohol sales — or even its advertising — at the 89 championships it administers.But on Monday night, about 80,000 fans will flock to the same stadium for the first College Football Playoff title game, between Oregon and Ohio State, and they will be able to select from an array of beer, wine and spirits. They can even order a Cowboyrita, the signature drink at the Dallas Cowboys’ home field, made with 100 percent blue agave tequila. Alcohol was also sold at the six bowls affiliated with this season’s inaugural playoffs.Fans who care to imbibe can thank the powerful Football Bowl Subdivision, the only N.C.A.A.-sanctioned group whose championship is not governed by the N.C.A.A. It therefore essentially gets to play by its own rules. In recent years, the championship was conducted by the Bowl Championship Series, which also permitted the sale of alcohol.College football’s drawing power — which has only increased with the advent of the playoffs — has made the sport a lineman-size target for critics who contend that players are entitled to a greater share of the revenue. It has also made the sport the one most likely to drive change. In August, the N.C.A.A. granted the so-called Big 5 conferences substantial autonomy, and on Tuesday, it acted with uncharacteristic speed when it enabled the playoffs’ organizer to reimburse the family of each player in this year’s championship game up to $3,000 to travel to Texas.“The B.C.S. changed the landscape,” said Mike Tranghese, a former commissioner of the previous Big East, a basketball-heavy league. “What I think it also did, it brought the so-called power conferences together, and what they learned is that collectively they could do so much more together than they could individually.”Football — particularly in the Southeastern, Atlantic Coast, Pacific 12, Big 12 and Big Ten conferences — accounts for most of the revenue at top Division I athletic departments. Partly because of its relative independence and partly because of its popularity, football can be more brashly commercialized.“Football is such a phenomenon, and it has such economic power, that those five conferences can do what they want,” Tranghese said.Citing a new interpretation of its rules, the N.C.A.A., which previously permitted universities to offer $800-per-family stipends for championship travel, on Tuesday also approved reimbursements comparable to the ones for the playoff final to families headed to the men’s and women’s basketball Final Fours as part of a pilot program. Yet there are no plans for such aid for the 87 other championships that will be conducted by the N.C.A.A. this season.The Final Fours have been contested for decades, and as Mark Lewis, the executive vice president for championships and alliances, acknowledged in an N.C.A.A. news release, “providing travel expenses has long been a part of this discussion.” But several officials in college sports suggested that the playoffs’ unrivaled visibility all but forced the N.C.A.A.’s hand.“With this championship, this new structure, things may have gotten accelerated,” Rob Mullens, Oregon’s athletic director, said.Bill Hancock, the playoffs’ executive director and a past director of the Final Four, agreed.“This is symbolic of the importance of football in college athletics,” he said. “I don’t know whether this would have happened absent the Playoff.” He added, “You can read what you want to into the fact that it happened six days before the championship game.”There is no denying the popularity of the playoffs. The event has begun to draw nearly Super Bowl-level interest from some advertisers, and the Jan. 1 national semifinals on ESPN — the Rose Bowl and the Sugar Bowl — were the two highest-rated broadcasts in cable television history. Each topped last year’s Bowl Championship Series title game, also on ESPN, and beat the 2014 men’s basketball title game on CBS. That kind of exposure does not come cheaply: ESPN is paying $7.3 billion over 12 years to telecast seven College Football Playoff-affiliated games a year — four major bowl games, two semifinal bowl games and the national championship game.Still, not everyone is happy. Although more sports could have their championships included in travel reimbursement legislation, some say football is leaving others behind, including less-affluent conferences and women’s sports. The revenue from Monday’s title game will be distributed among all the football-playing conferences and independents and the College Football Playoff Foundation, which primarily supports education.Donna Lopiano, president of Sports Management Resources, a consulting firm, said universities that benefited from the changes would probably be violating Title IX, a federal statute that mandates gender equality in educational settings.“This is a very incomplete and shortsighted statement on the part of the N.C.A.A.,” she said. “It should be thinking first of its obligations of not putting its members in a position of violating federal law. Institutions have an obligation to treat men and women equally.”Over the past month, Ohio State Coach Urban Meyer made comments in support of more generous travel reimbursements. Several parents of Buckeyes players wrote to the Big Ten expressing similar sentiments.At a news conference after his team’s Sugar Bowl victory over top-ranked Alabama on Jan. 1, Meyer reiterated his concerns. “Let’s get them to Dallas and watch their sons play in college football history,” he said. “And I hope you all write that. That’s more important than anything else being said today.”Outside criticism; high-profile lawsuits like the Ed O’Bannon case, which sought compensation for the use of college players’ images; and a unionization drive among Northwestern football players have helped prod universities toward making more resources available to athletes. At this month’s N.C.A.A. convention, the Big 5 conferences are expected to approve providing athletes with the full cost of college attendance, which would be worth several thousand dollars more than a typical scholarship.These actions, officials hope, will help circumvent the threat from outside parties who offer unauthorized financial aid, which can lead to penalties. Meyer said Tuesday that without generous expense allowances, players might take money “from someone that you’re not supposed to take money from, and then we’ll miss a bowl game.”We’ve published maps showing where fan support for one team begins and another ends for baseball and basketball. Now we’re pleased to offer another one: the United States according to college football fans.The cry for travel assistance was heard at N.C.A.A. headquarters in Indianapolis. Lewis and Kevin Lennon, the vice president for academic and membership affairs, re-examined the association’s bylaws, and by Monday morning they had found an interpretation that allowed reimbursements as a pilot program.“What we figured out was that if the organizing group — the committee organizing the event — instead of the schools” did the reimbursing, Lewis said, “there was a basis to allow for that under our rules.”On Tuesday, the playoffs’ management committee — comprising university presidents from each of the 10 Football Bowl Subdivision conferences and Notre Dame, a football independent — approved the reimbursement policy unanimously, Hancock said. (Ohio State and Oregon plan to co-sponsor N.C.A.A. legislation that would codify the arrangement.)Gene Smith, Ohio State’s athletic director, said he was shocked that the policy had been approved so quickly. Even Lewis acknowledged that the N.C.A.A. could be “glacially slow.”College football’s relative freedom dates to 1984, when the Supreme Court barred the N.C.A.A. from regulating how games were broadcast, which allowed conferences and schools to make T.V. deals and start cable networks. It also allowed for the creation of the B.C.S. and now the playoffs.Though the Big 5 is typically referred to as a regulatory group, it was originally distinguished by football: Representatives of those five conferences automatically qualify for the six playoff-affiliated bowls. But Division I has 32 conferences, and football and basketball are among dozens of sports.“Why just those sports and not the others?” Tom Yeager, the commissioner of the Colonial Athletic Association, said, referring to the travel reimbursements.Among the sports left out, Yeager noted, was football. The Football Championship Subdivision, made up of 13 Division I conferences including the Colonial, has had a 24-team, five-round football playoff for years.Parents of players for North Dakota State and Illinois State were not reimbursed up to $3,000 to travel to see North Dakota State’s 29-27 victory in the F.C.S. championship game on Saturday in Frisco, Tex., only 40 miles from AT&T Stadium.They also could not raise a toast containing alcohol during the game.Advertisement