By RICHARD SANDOMIRJAN. 10, 2015
One day in late October 1962, when the Giants were playing the Washington Redskins at Yankee Stadium, 500 fans were watching the game at a motel in Stratford, Conn.The Stratford Motor Inn’s 158 rooms were packed with fans, some of whom had traveled more than 100 miles, paying just $10 for the afternoon. Waiters delivered ice and beer.And every few minutes, wrote Gay Talese in The New York Times, “echoing above the parking area near the pool could be heard the cheers coming from the rooms. ‘Beautiful! Wow! Atta boy, Shofner!’ ”Scenes like that were replayed at motels, bars, country clubs and bowling alleys in Connecticut, on Long Island and in Westchester County in the 1960s, when N.F.L. home games were blacked out in local markets — leaving fans to listen on the radio or take road trips in search of televisions with antennas capable of picking up the signal from WTIC-TV, a station in Hartford that carried Giants games.Advertisement“I still get a lot of mail from people who did that,” said John Mara, the chief executive of the Giants. “They start by saying, ‘I didn’t have tickets in the ’60s, so myself and my father and brothers drove up to New Haven to a motel room to watch the games.’ ”Some fans wrote to his father, Wellington Mara, using their tales of venturing afar to watch games to leapfrog others on the season-ticket waiting list.Advertisement“Invariably, they ended up with tickets,” John Mara said. “They knew which chord to hit.”The heyday of road tripping to watch home games coincided with Allie Sherman’s early seasons as the Giants’ coach. Sherman, who died this month, succeeded Jim Lee Howell in 1961. The Giants were quite good in those days — with stars like Y. A. Tittle, Rosey Grier, Sam Huff, Frank Gifford and Erich Barnes — but in each of Sherman’s first three seasons, his team was defeated in the N.F.L. championship game.The success of the Giants, who also lost the 1958 and ’59 title games to the Baltimore Colts, fueled the desire of some fans to watch their home games. But the league’s blackout policy was firm: Home games could not be broadcast within the 75-mile radius that constituted the Giants’ New York market. The policy was amended in the 1970s to impose a blackout only if the games were not sold out within 72 hours of kickoff. Although blackouts were fairly common through the 1990s, they have gradually tailed off. Last season, the league said, there were only two. This season, there were none.But when every home game was unavailable to watch within the teams’ markets, an informal bootlegging business grew with the purchase of powerful antennas that were pointed toward Hartford.“There were probably as many Giants fans in motels as at Yankee Stadium,” Don Smith, the Giants’ former public-relations director, told Gerald Eskenazi in his book “There Were Giants in Those Days.”Bob Simon, an accountant from the Bronx who drove up to the Stratford motel that day in October 1962, told Talese, “On the Connecticut Turnpike, there were cars that would pull alongside us, signal us to roll down our windows and ask, ‘Going to the game? Want to share a room?’ Instead of the eight you see here, we could have 13 in this room.”When a news bulletin about Secretary General U Thant of the United Nations interrupted the game, one fan protested, saying: “Get him off. This is not important; we’re missing a touchdown.”AdvertisementOn Long Island, taverns, country clubs and motels — from Greenvale to Commack and Locust Valley — were showing Giants games. Outside the Pickwick Motor Inn in Plainview, a banner stripped across the third floor of the motel read: “N.Y. Giant Football Home Games.” In Woodbury’s Heritage Motor Inn, 400 fans rented out 70 of its 83 rooms — at a $12 rate — to watch the Giants play the Browns in 1963.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“As far as I’m concerned, God bless them,” John Mara said. “All those people passed that passion on to the next generation. That’s something we’ve been blessed with.”But by the next season, the appeal of watching the transmissions of Giants games was starting to wane. Sherman’s team was on its way to a 2-10-2 record. The “Goodbye Allie” chant was starting to be heard at Yankee Stadium and would grow in volume until Sherman was fired before the 1969 season. And while no one could foresee it then, the Giants would endure another 20 years of generally bad football.So when the Giants beat the St. Louis Cardinals on Nov. 1, 1964, only 18 rooms were reserved for Giants fans at the Stratford Motor Inn. The motel’s manager told Talese, “It was better than I thought.”A version of this article appears in print on January 11, 2015, on Page SP5 of the New York edition with the headline: In the Era of N.F.L. Blackouts, Giants Nation Put Its Lead Foot Down.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.