
On Baseball By                     
 TYLER KEPNER
 
JAN. 10, 2015
Tim Mead was 12 years old when his family moved from Virginia to California. The family drove, arriving at its new home in Highland ahead of its furniture. Mead, who had brought a transistor radio, sat on the floor of his family’s new kitchen, turned the dial and found an Angels game. He was hooked on a team not much younger than he was.After a decade or so, Mead went to work for the Angels in Anaheim. In 35 years as an executive, he has seen a lot. Two players have hit their 500th home runs as Angels. Another earned his 300th victory under the halo, and another slapped his 3,000th hit. The Angels won the World Series in 2002, and their players have won Most Valuable Player and Cy Young awards.But Mead has never seen a player enter the Hall of Fame as an Angel.“We don’t lose sleep over it,” said Mead, the vice president for communications and a former assistant general manager. “But it would be nice to go to Cooperstown and see the A. That day will come.”The day came for another early 1960s expansion team, the Houston Astros, when Craig Biggio was elected to the Hall of Fame on Tuesday. Biggio will be the first player to wear an Astros cap on his plaque, a long wait for a team that joined the majors in 1962, as the Colt .45s.AdvertisementThe Angels are a year older than the Astros, having joined the American League as an expansion team in 1961. Other current teams not represented on a plaque are much newer, including Arizona (1998), Colorado (1993), Miami (1993), Seattle (1977), Tampa Bay (1998) and Washington (2005).AdvertisementRandy Johnson, another new Hall of Famer, starred for the Mariners and the Diamondbacks. Johnson won one Cy Young Award and no championships with Seattle, but four Cy Young Awards and one title with Arizona. Unless Johnson goes in with a blank cap, Arizona is the better choice. That would allow Ken Griffey Jr., a lock for the 2016 class, to be the first Mariner.The Angels, though, may be waiting awhile. Their homegrown superstar, Mike Trout, is off to a breathtaking start — but at 23, he may be closer to birth than to Cooperstown. Manager Mike Scioscia is building a case but does not appear to be close to retirement.The earliest Vladimir Guerrero could be elected is January 2017, but Guerrero is no lock. His closest statistical equivalents, according to the Baseball Reference website, are Jeff Bagwell and Larry Walker, who are not in. And Guerrero played more games with the Montreal Expos.
            Twenty-two major league teams have their logos on the cap of at least one player in the Hall of Fame. The eight other teams have yet to get on a plaque. If a team’s nickname survived a franchise shift (Brooklyn/Los Angeles Dodgers, for example), all the players from each location are included. If the nickname did not survive a shift (Washington Senators/Minnesota Twins), only the players from the current location are included.        0AngelsAstros00D’backs0Mariners0MarlinsNationals0Rays00Rockies1Royals1Mets1Blue Jays1Rangers2Padres2Brewers4Twins5Athletics6Orioles6Red Sox6White Sox6Phillies7Reds8Braves9Cubs9Pirates10Tigers10Cardinals11Indians13Dodgers15Giants18Yankees“But he made postseason appearances and won the M.V.P. for the Angels,” Mead said. “That’s going to be a good test. It’s going to be interesting.”The Hall of Fame makes the final decision on caps, in consultation with the inductee. The plaques do list every stop in the inductee’s career, so the Angels are mentioned 12 times: for Bert Blyleven, Rod Carew, Rickey Henderson, Whitey Herzog, Reggie Jackson, Eddie Murray, Frank Robinson, Nolan Ryan, Don Sutton, Hoyt Wilhelm, Dick Williams and Dave Winfield.Albert Pujols, clearly a future Hall of Famer based on his years with St. Louis, swatted his 500th career homer last April during his third season as an Angel. Jackson hit his 500th in 1984 as an Angel, while Carew got his 3,000th hit the next season and Sutton his 300th win in 1986.Ryan is in the Hall as a Texas Ranger, but he had more victories, innings, strikeouts and no-hitters for the Angels than he did for any other team. He established the single-season strikeout record (383) as an Angel in 1973, but he signed with the Astros before the 1980 season.AdvertisementBuzzie Bavasi, then the Angels’ general manager, refused to make Ryan the game’s first $1 million player. Infamously, Bavasi said he could find two pitchers to go 8-7 to replace one who had just gone 16-14.“Years later, when Ryan was continuing to pitch into his 40s, Buzzie sent him a telegram,” said Ross Newhan, the retired baseball columnist. “He said, ‘Not signing you was my biggest mistake — but you don’t have to keep rubbing it in.’ ”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Newhan won the J. G. Taylor Spink Award, presented at the Hall of Fame, in 2000. As a beat writer in 1961, he covered the Angels’ first game, a victory in Baltimore that preceded eight losses in a row. Incredibly, the Angels’ overall franchise record did not rise above .500 again until last July.In the early years, the Angels’ biggest star was shortstop Jim Fregosi, who was eventually traded to the Mets for Ryan. But another player, Dean Chance, briefly offered a glimmer of Cooperstown promise.In 1964, at age 23, Chance went 20-9 with a 1.65 earned run average and 11 shutouts to win the Cy Young Award, then given to just one pitcher in the majors. Chance pitched 50 innings against the lordly Yankees that season and allowed only one run, on a solo homer by Mickey Mantle.“Bill Rigney had seen a lot of young pitchers with the Giants’ organization,” Newhan said, referring to the Angels’ first manager, “and he said Dean Chance was the best he’d ever seen.”Alas, Chance lasted just two more years with the Angels and was finished at 30. The franchise would spend years searching for its way, its periodic successes due largely to imported stars like Jackson, Carew, Fred Lynn, Bobby Grich and Bob Boone.“There were so many changes in the front office, so many managers and so many changes in philosophy, that there was just no continuity — and that was reflected in players’ tenures, and a lot of things,” Newhan said. “In the ’70s and ’80s, it was just constant turnover.”The Angels’ career leaders in wins above replacement are Chuck Finley, Fregosi and Tim Salmon — each a reliable stalwart but not a strong Hall of Fame candidate.AdvertisementSeveral longtime Angels, like Garret Anderson, Darin Erstad and Troy Percival, can be viewed the same way. Major award winners like Don Baylor (1979 M.V.P.) and Bartolo Colon (2005 Cy Young) spent the bulks of their careers elsewhere.Trout, the reigning M.V.P. in the A.L., is a different case. He is performing at an elite level and is signed through 2020, tying him to the Angels through the first decade of his career.If he stays on his current trajectory, he will have a compelling case to be the first Angel in bronze, provided no one beats him to the honor.“Internally, we were always taught, ‘Don’t put too much public pressure on a player,’ ” Mead said. “And if you look at Mike, it’s not so much what we’ve said about him, but what others have said. The people that have seen some of the great players play, they draw their own comparisons. I think the sky’s the limit for him.”In baseball, the sky means Cooperstown.A version of this article appears in print on January 11, 2015, on Page SP5 of the New York edition with the headline: A Team Has Golden Moments but Lacks a Halo in Bronze.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »