AdvertisementSupported byBy Jeré LongmanHe Zhenliang, a key figure in returning China to the Olympics in the 1980s after an absence of almost three decades and in securing the 2008 Summer Games for Beijing, died on Jan. 4 in Beijing. He was 85.The Chinese Olympic Committee announced his death without specifying a cause. Mr. He’s death came two days before Beijing entered a formal bid with the International Olympic Committee to host the 2022 Winter Games. If successful, it would make Beijing the first city to hold both the Summer Olympics and the Winter Olympics.“He was the bridge between China and the outside world and, in particular, between China and the I.O.C.,” said Susan Brownell, who translated the biography “He Zhenliang and China’s Olympic Dream” into English. “I just don’t know if there was anybody else who had the international understanding and the political commitment it would have taken to be that bridge all those years.”As a member of his country’s official delegation, Mr. He attended the 1952 Summer Games in Helsinki, Finland — the first Olympics in which Communist China participated, and the last for nearly 30 years. Because of a tense and protracted dispute over the status of Taiwan, which now competes as Chinese Taipei, China did not participate again in the Olympics until the 1980 Winter Games in Lake Placid, N.Y.When China, with a fifth of the world’s population, fully re-engaged with the international sports world, twice bidding on the Summer Games — the second time successfully — Mr. He was credited with playing a pivotal role in making the country more open to the world.He had been educated by Westerners in high school and college in Shanghai, spoke the official Olympic languages of French and English, and had an approachable personality and an engaging sense of humor, Olympic officials said. That helped him build trusting, long-term relationships within the insular, Eurocentric world of international Olympic politics. “In those days, the I.O.C. was a club,” said Anita DeFrantz, a longtime committee delegate from the United States. “You had to get to know people. He was very serious about his role, and also a delightful person.”In 1979, Mr. He, then a high-ranking official with the Chinese Olympic Committee, signaled at an I.O.C. meeting that China could compromise if Taiwan agreed to compete in the Games as Chinese Taipei. China then returned to the Olympics, and in 1981, Mr. He was named the first delegate to the international committee from the People’s Republic of China.The committee’s president at the time, Juan Antonio Samaranch, a former Spanish diplomat, had worked to resolve the China-Taiwan issue. By bringing Mr. He into the I.O.C., Mr. Samaranch demonstrated his desire to unify the Olympic movement and make it universal, said Richard Pound, a committee delegate from Montreal.“One way to do that with a stroke of a pen is to add a billion Chinese people,” Mr. Pound said.Mr. Samaranch may also have intended to curtail the boycotts that would disrupt Olympic participation from the mid-1970s through the late 1980s. China participated in the 1984 Summer Games in Los Angeles, ignoring a Soviet boycott, and also competed in the 1988 Summer Games in Seoul, South Korea, declining to join boycotts by North Korea, Cuba and Ethiopia. Mr. He remained a delegate for nearly three decades, until 2010, serving three terms on the Olympic committee’s powerful executive board. He was also a prominent figure in Beijing’s bids to host the 2000 and 2008 Summer Games. According to Dr. Brownell, an anthropologist and expert on Chinese sports at the University of Missouri-St. Louis, Mr. He established his political and athletic credentials by becoming an underground member of the Communist Party in Shanghai before the 1949 revolution; serving as a translator for Premier Zhou Enlai; gaining positions of authority in China’s gymnastics and table tennis federations; and participating in the so-called Ping-Pong diplomacy of the early 1970s, which helped lead to improved relations with the United States and countries in Asia, Africa and Latin America.He Zhenliang was born in 1929 in coastal Zhejiang Province, south of Shanghai, according to China Vitae, a biographical website. (Information on his survivors was not available.)Educated by French Jesuits in Shanghai, Mr. He became fluent in the French language and culture, Dr. Brownell said. He moved comfortably among Westerners with his wife, Liang Lijuan, a journalist who spoke English and worked with her husband. Beijing’s attempt to host the 2000 Summer Games fell excruciatingly short; the city lost by two votes to Sydney, Australia. China’s record on human rights was cited by many as the reason for the narrow and unexpected defeat.Mr. He was said to be angry and frustrated and to weep privately.But while some Chinese officials reacted stridently, Mr. He “stayed calm and strong,” said Ms. DeFrantz, the American Olympic delegate.Having endured stints of hard labor during China’s Cultural Revolution, which began in 1966, and having spent nearly 30 years trying to return China to the Olympics on its terms, Mr. He took a long view in helping to develop Beijing into a serious candidate to host the Summer Games, Dr. Brownell said. “He just really had the long-term perspective, which was a case of never give up,” she said, adding, “Time didn’t mean a lot to him.”Mr. He’s persistence paid off when Beijing resoundingly defeated Toronto for the right to host the 2008 Summer Olympics.While China’s human rights record remained a polarizing issue and the atmosphere sometimes felt a bit soulless, the Games offered an extravagant opening ceremony, breathtaking stadiums, and mesmerizing competition that featured eight gold medals by the American swimmer Michael Phelps and startling world records by the Jamaican sprinter Usain Bolt. China led all nations with 51 gold medals.Advertisement