AdvertisementSupported byBy Daniel E. SlotnikJ. P. Parise, an All-Star left wing for the Minnesota North Stars who was traded midseason to the Islanders in 1975 and went on to help them win their first playoff series, defeating the Rangers, died on Wednesday at his home in Prior Lake, Minn. He was 73. A spokesman for the Minnesota Wild, for whom Parise’s son Zach is a star left wing, said the cause was lung cancer. (The North Stars moved to Dallas in 1993 and were renamed the Stars.)A left-handed, 5-foot-9-inch, 175-pound sharpshooter, the elder Parise (pronounced pah-REE-see) scored 238 goals and had 356 assists over 14 seasons in the National Hockey League. He played in All-Star Games in 1970 and 1973, reaching career highs of 27 goals and 48 assists in the 1972-73 season with the North Stars.Parise and his North Stars teammate Jude Drouin were traded to the Islanders during the 1974-75 season, when the team was finally hitting its stride in its third year, having added Coach Al Arbour and young players like Denis Potvin. (Arbour and Potvin were later inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame.) Trades for veterans like Parise made the Islanders even stronger.The Islanders faced the Rangers, their top rivals, in a best-of-three series in the first round of the playoffs that season. They won the first game, 3-2, at Madison Square Garden and lost the second, 8-3, at Nassau Coliseum on Long Island. The third game, played at the Garden, went into overtime after the Islanders squandered a three-goal lead in the third period. Seconds into overtime, Drouin passed the puck behind the net to Parise, who slammed it behind the Rangers’ goalie, Ed Giacomin, to win the game, 4-3.The Islanders came back from three losses to win their best-of-seven quarterfinal series against the Pittsburgh Penguins, becoming the second team in N.H.L. history to win a playoff series after facing a 3-0 deficit. (The Toronto Maple Leafs did it in 1942 to win the Stanley Cup.) The Islanders almost repeated the feat in the semifinals against the Philadelphia Flyers but lost in the seventh game. The Islanders were contenders for the rest of the 1970s and most of the ’80s, winning the Stanley Cup in 1980, ’81, ’82 and ’83. But Parise was not on the championship teams: He was traded to the Cleveland Barons during the 1977-78 season. He finished his career with Minnesota the next year. Jean-Paul Parise was born on Dec. 11, 1941, in Smooth Rock Falls, in northeast Ontario, where he grew up playing hockey outdoors, sometimes when it was 50 degrees below zero, he told The New York Times in 1977. He was signed by the Boston Bruins as a teenager and played junior and minor league hockey before making his debut with the team in 1965. In 1972 he helped Canada win three games in a row to beat the Soviet Union, 4-3-1, in an international matchup now known as the Summit Series. After retiring as a player, Parise became an assistant coach with the North Stars and was later the director of hockey at Shattuck-St. Mary’s School in Faribault, Minn. There he coached his son Zach, who was the captain of the United States men’s team at the 2014 Winter Olympics in Sochi. Besides Zach, survivors include his wife, Donna; another son, Jordan; and two grandchildren. A family friend said he was also survived by a son and a daughter from a previous marriage. After Parise learned he had lung cancer about a year ago, he accompanied Zach on a road trip with the Wild, The Star Tribune of Minneapolis reported. During the trip, the son surpassed his father’s career total of 238 goals, reaching 240. The elder Parise was reportedly delighted.Advertisement