AdvertisementSupported bySports of The TimesBy William C. RhodenDALLAS — On Monday evening, Oregon will face Ohio State in the first College Football Playoff championship game. The Ducks, with their high-octane spread offense, annihilated Florida State in one semifinal. In the other, the Buckeyes, behind a quarterback making his second start, upset Alabama.Those are impressive victories. But if big-time college football’s inaugural tournament does anything, it should be to disabuse us of the silly notion that the competitive games we’re watching are semipro football.Highly commercialized? Yes.Semiprofessional? Not close.This time of year, we are able to watch the best college teams and the best of the N.F.L. side by side, and it has become apparent that college football has evolved into a sport distinct from the N.F.L. Oregon, with its quirky formations and trick plays, reflects the growing divide between what we see on college Saturdays and what we see on N.F.L. Sundays. “I think there’s certain things that don’t translate,” Ohio State Coach Urban Meyer said Saturday. “It’s a much different game.”Spread offenses like Oregon’s use their best athlete at quarterback and rely on having more talented players than the opposition, much like the wishbone and option offenses of generations past. Those college game plans are designed to attack individual weak links. There are not so many vulnerable spots to attack in the N.F.L.“It’s an all-star game in the N.F.L.,” Meyer said. “Every best player from every team is playing in the N.F.L., and they’re mature guys. We’ve got the 17-, 18-, 19-year-olds.” He added: “They get to pick their players, and if they don’t like them, they cut them. We don’t cut players. We recruit them, and we’ve got them.”Critics of big-time intercollegiate athletics often refer to college football — derisively — as merely a minor league for the pros. That is no longer accurate, if it ever was. College football is no more of a minor league than, say, the universities’ schools of journalism, engineering or music are. We can argue at another time whether football should occupy the same space on campus as those disciplines, but for now, it does. The critical point is that a coach is less concerned with preparing athletes for the next level than he is with molding them to fit a system that helps him win games, keep his job and, eventually, move on to a position with a more prestigious program.Coaches are taking care of their own needs first and leaving it to N.F.L. teams to retrain the players; colleges’ role as a feeder system has become almost incidental.“We’ve got to train you to win games in our system,” said Tom Herman, Ohio State’s offensive coordinator. Herman, who will take over as the University of Houston’s head coach for next season, added: “Our system totally prepares you to play in the N.F.L., but you have to face it: Either you’re good enough, or you’re not good enough. The N.F.L. takes the best players in the world and pays them a whole lot of money to do a job, and none of that is predicated on what kind of system you ran in college.”The widening gap in philosophies, however, means that players’ adjustment to the N.F.L. could take longer — especially for spread-offense quarterbacks and the offensive linemen who, in many systems, almost exclusively pass block. Meyer, Ohio State’s coach, developed quarterback Alex Smith while they were at Utah, and Smith, the top pick in the 2005 N.F.L. draft, has become a serviceable professional. But at Florida, Meyer also coached Tim Tebow and Chris Leak, quarterbacks who were great for Meyer’s system but not much else.Cardale Jones, the Ohio State quarterback who started the Alabama game and will start against Oregon, is big, strong and capable of throwing a football 80 yards. He is a perfect fit for the Buckeyes’ offense. But will he be a fit for an N.F.L. team? And if he isn’t, is that Meyer’s problem?“We have a job to do, and that’s to develop players and win games at this level,” Meyer said. To bolster his argument that superior talent can survive in any system, Herman mentioned Russell Wilson, Cam Newton and Robert Griffin III as examples of spread-formation quarterbacks who made it in the N.F.L.But while Wilson could make it anywhere, Newton continues to learn and to struggle, and it is quite possible that Griffin has already had his best days as a pro. And Johnny Manziel of the Cleveland Browns is just one other example of how college coaches may be doing players a disservice by focusing on their own interests. From a broader perspective, there is nothing necessarily wrong with the divide. College football has its own brand, distinct from the N.F.L.’s. There is the pageantry, and the universities’ alumni can enjoy the nostalgia and the emotional connection to their teams. For students, there is the prospect of an exciting trip to a bowl game. Players get a once-in-a-lifetime experience — for many, the last great athletic experience of their lives. But let’s vanquish the notion that college football is closely tied to professional football. It has become an entity unto itself; we should enjoy the difference.Email: wcr@nytimes.com Advertisement