AdvertisementSupported byBy Marc TracyCOLUMBUS, Ohio — At the Woody Hayes Athletic Center here, there is a wall listing all the Ohio State captains with the title “A Legacy of Leadership.” The wall was donated by Kirk Herbstreit, the ESPN college football analyst and captain of the 1992 team, and his wife, Allison. Listed among the six captains in 1982 is running back Tim Spencer, the third-leading rusher in Buckeyes history behind the Heisman Trophy winners Archie Griffin and Eddie George.If Coach Urban Meyer makes good on a pledge this week, Spencer’s son, Evan, a senior wide receiver, will take his place alongside him on the wall.“He’s the M.V.P. of our team,” Meyer said Tuesday. “I’ll probably make an executive decision and make him a captain. He’s a wonderful kid. He’s really what, to me, football is all about.”His father, of course, agreed.“Look at statistics, you’re not going to see big numbers,” said Tim Spencer, a former running backs coach for Ohio State who now holds that job with the Tampa Bay Buccaneers. “He struggled a little not getting the ball,” Spencer added about his son, who averages nearly 10 yards per touch. “I told him, nothing you can do about that. The ball doesn’t have to be in your hands to make a play.’”Spencer’s reputation may be that of a less-showy, hardworking, team-first player.“Whatever you want Evan to do, you tell him once, and he’ll do it,” said Devin Smith, a fellow wide receiver.While Spencer may not be the Buckeyes’ top receiver, he came through big in their most important game yet during this surreal season, a 42-35 victory against Alabama in the Sugar Bowl, a semifinal for the first College Football Playoff. Spencer blocked two defenders on Ezekiel Elliott’s game-breaking 85-yard touchdown run; recovered an Alabama onside kick that would have given the Crimson Tide the ball with less than two minutes left and only a one-score deficit; and, on a reverse, threw for a 13-yard touchdown that swung the momentum in Ohio State’s favor just before halftime.It was the first passing touchdown of Spencer’s football career.“I think I was maybe 1 for 2 in high school, with a pick,” he said.Spencer said having his father to go over tape with had been invaluable. “At the end of the day, he’s always supportive of me,” Spencer said. “But he’s also critical. I think that’s what’s helped me become a great player. I know after every game, I’m going to sit down and have a talk with him with things I could have done better and things I did well.”Spencer’s dedication is a tribute to a perhaps underrated aspect of this Ohio State team, which plays Oregon on Monday night for the national championship. Several crucial players — Smith, cornerback Doran Grant and defensive tackle Michael Bennett among them — have bought in to Meyer’s program, even though they were recruited by the former Ohio State coach Jim Tressel, who was elected to the College Football Hall of Fame last week despite having been barred from a job in college football because of N.C.A.A. sanctions.“I’d say the first year, guys were still stuck on, ‘Well, it used to be like this, and now we’re changing it up,’ ” said Bennett, who noted that the team practiced longer hours under Meyer than it did before.“We really trust Coach Meyer, we believe in him, and he’s grown to trust us and believe in us,” Bennett added.Of course, the adjustment may have been less difficult for Spencer, who was, by his father’s admission, “brainwashed” into being a Buckeye at a young age. The elder Spencer was the running backs coach from 1994 to 2003, including the 1995 season, when George won the Heisman Trophy. A self-proclaimed “motormouth,” Spencer made friends with players like George and Cie Grant, who forced an incompletion out of Miami quarterback Ken Dorsey in the January 2003 Fiesta Bowl, securing Ohio State’s last national title.“I was around here all the time,” said Spencer, who recalled “getting into trouble whenever I could, getting into huddles.”A local television reporter said he remembered bouncing him on his knee.“To say I play at the university where I grew up idolizing the players — it’s awesome,” Spencer said.Spencer attended high school at Vernon Hills, outside Chicago. By then, his father worked for the Bears, who reached the Super Bowl in the 2006 season while he was on staff. Spencer lived down the block from Notre Dame wide receiver DaVaris Daniels, who likewise had a career day against Alabama, in the January 2013 B.C.S. national title game. Though previously a running back, Spencer decided to move to receiver in high school. Yet even this decision may have set him more firmly in his father’s footsteps.“I think he thought it was a little more glamorous,” Tim Spencer said of becoming a wide receiver. Referring to being a running back, he said, “When I was coming up, it was the glamorous position, so that’s what I went to.”Referring to the N.F.L., he added, “Now, you can’t even touch the receivers in our league.”As for the N.F.L., Evan Spencer it is not counting that out. He plans to live with his father after graduation and train in Tampa Bay.“If I’m lucky enough, blessed enough, to play in the next level, I’m going to give everything I have,” he said.His performance in the Sugar Bowl perhaps gave scouts something to think about.On Elliott’s run in the fourth quarter, for instance, Spencer was supposed to motion in right before the snap and block. But quarterback Cardale Jones called an audible, and Spencer did not notice amid the noise inside the Superdome.“I went in there — I was kind of in a panic mode, so I tried to get in there as fast as possible,” Spencer recalled. “Then I noticed Zeke hadn’t hit the hole yet, and I saw the guy I was supposed to hit, so I went in there and tried to clean him up to the best of my ability, and then I felt two dudes hit me, and all of a sudden the crowd’s going wild.” He looked up, and Elliott was off toward the end zone. And then there was the pass. With the first half about to end, Spencer was told not to run — he was to throw the ball either to the open man or out of bounds. Spencer took the ball on a reverse, gathered himself and chucked it across his body from behind the 20-yard line into a corner of the end zone, in pretty much the only location where wide receiver Michael Thomas could make a play on it.“There’s not that many starting quarterbacks in college who could make that throw,” said Ohio State’s wide receivers coach, Zach Smith. “It was unbelievable.”Even Spencer’s father was amazed. He and another son, Cole, a scout for the Washington Redskins, had seen practice tape of the play.“My oldest and I said, ‘Look — if it ain’t there, throw it away,’ ” the elder Spencer said. He added: “If it had been us, we wouldn’t have thrown. We would have ran.”Advertisement