AdvertisementSupported bySports of The TimesBy Juliet MacurBURLINGTON, Wis. — Just as she has done for every Green Bay Packers game for years now, Florence Semrau donned her Packers hat and her Packers sweatshirt and made her way through the crowd at Fred’s Parkview burger joint here to sell her homemade Packers pins. Round needlepoint pins with a Green Bay “G.” Rectangular pins. Pins shaped like a shield. With her delicate 86-year-old hands, Semrau had made 40 of those pins, banking on them going fast here in Packers country on the day of a playoff game against the Dallas Cowboys.“One for $2, two for 3,” she told a potential customer Sunday, holding out a plastic takeout container filled with her goods.But wait: One customer spied a layer of pins beneath those Packers pins. And those pins weren’t green, white and yellow. They were — gasp — blue and white. And for gosh sake, they were in the shape of stars. “Hold on; are those Cowboys pins?” said Gerry Cwienkala, a retired financial services executive. “How could you?”Semrau was just being savvy about her clientele. Here in this land of Cheeseheads — in this rural town of 10,000 about a 150-mile drive south of Green Bay — some Dallas fans do exist, thanks to Cowboys quarterback Tony Romo, who grew up here and kept strong ties to the area. Romo’s No. 9 jersey hangs in Fred’s and in other places around here, like the Town Fryer, a diner he has visited for years for the Burly, a breakfast special of “two farm-fresh eggs and three fluffy pancakes.” But surrounding that jersey at the Town Fryer are photos of Brett Favre. In front of it is a Packers doll and a poster of Packers helmets. Romo may be royalty here, but he’s certainly not the king. And so this town was torn on Sunday. Many Packers fans were rooting for their team to win but also wanted Romo to have a great game. They couldn’t have both.In the fourth quarter, when Romo threw what appeared to be a miraculous pass to Dez Bryant to bring the Cowboys within a yard of a go-ahead touchdown, the bar area at Fred’s fell nearly silent. It was as if the fans were trying to decide which of their two children they loved more. When the catch was overturned — a call that may have cost Dallas the game — only one voice at the bar shouted out. “Yes, woo, go, Packers!” yelled Nick Ebert, a Marine Corps recruiter who was wearing an Aaron Rodgers jersey. Ebert was forgiven for cheering so loudly against Romo. He had moved to Burlington just a day before.“Sorry, Tony, you just play for the wrong team,” he said.Maggie Hegeman, the bartender, shook her head and said, “Poor Tony.” She went to high school with him and said that he was always a nice guy and that he still greeted her with a hug. Yet that didn’t keep her from wearing a Packers T-shirt.Nancy Catalanello, from a town nearby, said that “Tony’s throw was good,” adding that the call should not have been overturned. Her daughter and Romo were friends in high school, and Romo was always polite when he hung out at her house, Catalanello said.Among other fans at Fred’s, there was some internal strife. Some families struggled with the urge to root for Romo because it tugged against their instinct to root for the Packers. That Packers loyalty, some families said, had been born generations before, and pulling for Romo would be, let’s say, unnatural.“I’m for the local kid,” Frank Grippe said as his wife, Gayle Kerznar, glared at him.“But it is hard,” Grippe said, perhaps trying to soften the blow. “I mean, I usually hate the Cowboys because they used to beat us up when Brett Favre was playing. “And I mean, come on, who can like Jerry Jones?” he added, referring to the Cowboys’ owner.Grippe failed to melt his wife’s icy look.In the end, Grippe and Kerznar came to the conclusion that it would not be the end of the world if Romo’s Cowboys won. That seemed to be the consensus at Fred’s. Romo is, after all, the perfect story of an underdog who has done pretty well for himself.When people here say he is like the boy next door, they aren’t kidding. He was a quarterback who seemed so mediocre that he was snubbed by top-tier programs and then went undrafted out of Eastern Illinois.It took him a while to become a star. For three years, he sat on the bench for the Cowboys, watching and learning under the coach then, Bill Parcells; devouring motivational books by legends like Michael Jordan and Larry Bird; and listening to the theme song from the movie “Rocky” to push himself.Romo became a starter in 2006 and has shown some brilliance ever since. Efficiency. Resilience. He bounced back from injuries: chipped vertebrae, broken ribs and a punctured lung. But big games late in the regular season and in the playoffs — one in which he dropped a snap, ruining a chance for a last-minute field goal in 2007 — have been his downfall. Really, though, that’s another reason to like him even more: He is fallible, just like the rest of us.On Sunday, which concluded his best season yet, Romo said that he appreciated the support from his fans in Wisconsin and that “it means a lot.”But the loss still hurt.“It just doesn’t feel very good right now because you feel like you let one slip away and that you had an opportunity with a good ball club that had a chance to win this thing,” he told reporters.Instead, the Packers won, and the home crowd celebrated. The fans cheered at Lambeau Field, and they cheered in Burlington, between Milwaukee and Chicago.And they cheered, albeit quietly, at Fred’s. Romo had played well — no horrendous mistakes as in some past playoff games. But at 34, he is nearing the end of his career, and the fans here realize that his chances to make the playoffs again are growing slim.Still, Semrau, the woman selling Packers and Cowboys pins, remained hopeful. Of the 10 Cowboys star pins she had made, she had seven left.“Ooh, I’m keeping these for next year,” she said. “Tony is a Wisconsin boy, tough and strong, like all of us here. Just you see; he’ll be back.”Email: juliet@nytimes.com Advertisement