By KAREN CROUSEJAN. 11, 2015
Every new beginning comes from some other beginning’s end — isn’t that how life is scripted?Not if Peyton Manning had one more audible in him. With pinpoint passing, he guided the Broncos to a first-quarter lead Sunday in their A.F.C. divisional playoff game against the Indianapolis Colts, his former team. That was as good as it would get for Manning, who struggled in the Broncos’ 24-13 defeat and stammered afterward when asked about his playing future. It sounded as if he were cuing the curtain when he said there was no “simple answer” to the question of whether he would return for an 18th season.“I need to process this game,” he said.Will he be back? “I could not say that,” Manning said. The game was hyped as a mortality play pitting Manning, a five-time N.F.L. most valuable player who won a Super Bowl with the Colts, against his successor in Indianapolis, Andrew Luck.AdvertisementSince Luck entered the league in 2012, he has been considered a star in waiting, his every gain measured against Manning’s growth chart. Although Luck collected his first playoff victory in less time than it took his predecessor, Manning reached his third Super Bowl last year. As recently as November, Manning appeared poised to pilot a more balanced team back to the title game.AdvertisementBut down the stretch, a time for the stars to come out, Manning faded. In his last five games, he threw four touchdown passes, including one on Sunday, and six interceptions. On Sunday he finished with 211 yards passing, which would have been a productive first half last season. He also turned the ball over once, fumbling while being sacked.Luck completed 27 of 43 passes for 265 yards and two touchdowns. He was not perfect — he made two mindless decisions that resulted in interceptions by a Denver defense that was revamped after last year’s Super Bowl loss — but the Broncos were unable to capitalize.“So proud to be a part of the Colts in this victory,” Luck said, adding, “To come on the road against a very good team in this round of the playoffs and get a win, that’s huge and that’s awesome.”Luck said he did not pay any mind to the story line that cast him as the ingénue chasing the legend off the stage. When he saw Manning after the game, Luck said, no figurative torch was passed. “Just the regular after-the-game handshake,” he said.As much as Luck tried to play it down, his performance called to mind other time passages in sports. It was like watching Tiger Woods take the mantle from Jack Nicklaus when they were paired during the 2000 P.G.A. Championship, won by Woods, or watching Roger Federer end Pete Sampras’s 31-match winning streak in 2001 in the fourth round at Wimbledon.While the quarterbacks Sunday were not going head to head, Luck’s success amplified Manning’s struggles. Attention must be paid to Luck, a star surrounded on offense by character actors. Trent Richardson, the running back acquired less than two years ago to lead the rushing attack, was deactivated Sunday. Dan Herron, who began the season far down on the depth chart, led the Colts with 63 yards on 23 carries and had a team-high eight catches.With the Broncos unable to run effectively against the Colts — C. J. Anderson finished with 80 yards on 18 carries — the game ultimately rested on Manning’s arm. After his auspicious start, he began overthrowing receivers, including Emmanuel Sanders repeatedly, on long routes.Advertisement“Those were my decisions,” Manning said, adding, “I know I had two to Emmanuel where I thought he was open; I thought I could hit him.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.For whatever reason, Manning was not the same passer who torched the Colts for three touchdowns in the first half in a season-opening victory. After November, he was as flat as a soda left open for a day. It was hard to gauge whether a thigh injury was responsible for the drop-off in his performance or if a sprained ankle of his favorite target, tight end Julius Thomas, was to blame.Manning connected with Thomas on a 32-yard pass on the Broncos’ opening possession, teasing the fans. Thomas did not have another catch in the first half. He finished with six.In the fourth quarter, after the seemingly ageless Adam Vinatieri kicked a 32-yard field goal to extend the Colts’ lead to 24-13, Manning mounted his last stand. Starting at the Denver 20, Manning threw three consecutive completions before the Broncos’ momentum stalled near midfield. On a fourth-and-8 at the Denver 46, Manning completed a pass to Anderson for 7 yards.The play summed up the day for the Broncos, who were not quite good enough in every phase. “Rather than dwell on our ineffectiveness, I would give them some credit,” Broncos Coach John Fox said, referring to the Colts.He added: “There’s only one happy camper at the end of this. So at some point, it’s a train wreck for everybody but one.”There were rumblings before the game not only that Manning’s future was in doubt, but that perhaps Fox’s future in Denver was imperiled, his winning percentage of .718 notwithstanding. After the Broncos’ 43-8 loss to the Seattle Seahawks in the Super Bowl, General Manager John Elway shored up the defense by signing defensive end DeMarcus Ware, safety T. J. Ward and cornerback Aqib Talib and using a first-round draft pick on cornerback Bradley Roby.The unit played well during the regular season but picked the wrong time to have its worst game.“We didn’t play consistent enough to win,” Ware said. He added, “You sit back and think about right now, and you lost a game of a lifetime, but you have to go back and re-evaluate how you can get better next season.”It will be an eternity of an off-season for the Broncos’ faithful, who have gone 16 years and 12 starting quarterbacks since their last championship celebration, with no end in sight.Perhaps a 13th quarterback is on the horizon. A version of this article appears in print on January 12, 2015, on Page D2 of the New York edition with the headline: In Manning’s Woes and Luck’s Grit, a Torch Seemingly Passed.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.