By JONAH BROMWICHJAN. 11, 2015
Every week, The New York Times will choose one essential game to watch, highlighting hot teams, winning and losing streaks and statistical intrigue in the N.B.A.Washington at Chicago, Wednesday, 8 p.m. Eastern, ESPNSince the beginning of the season, the N.B.A.’s Eastern Conference has been a shadow of its Western counterpart. In the last couple of weeks, though, something seems to have shifted.The Atlanta Hawks, who entered Monday on an eight-game winning streak, are being acknowledged as one of the best teams in the league, having stamped opponents on a recent West Coast trip. After trading away Josh Smith, the Detroit Pistons, who had won five games all season, promptly went on a seven-game winning streak of their own, defeating San Antonio and Dallas during the run. They were ultimately beaten not by some Western power but by the Hawks, 106-103.The three teams after Atlanta in the East have also continued to look impressive while trading places in the standings: Toronto and Washington entered Sunday tied for second place, with Chicago slightly trailing both teams in winning percentage. The Hawks’ 120-89 home victory over the Wizards on Sunday dropped Washington to fourth, a half-game behind the Raptors and the Bulls.AdvertisementChicago is scheduled to host Atlanta on Saturday, but unfortunately, that game is not nationally televised. Almost as solid an option, though, is the Bulls’ rematch against the Wizards on Wednesday.AdvertisementWashington thoroughly outplayed Chicago on Friday, but the Bulls rebounded to beat the Bucks the next night as Pau Gasol scored a career-high 46 points and had 18 rebounds while helping his team limit Milwaukee to 87 points, more than 10 below its season average. The win was Chicago’s 14th in 18 games.Gasol and the Bulls now get another chance at the Wizards, and an opportunity to take the lead in their season series. In a 99-91 road win on Dec. 23, the Bulls dominated Washington inside, with a 52-41 advantage in rebounds and a 50-42 edge in points in the paint.The Bulls are not a particularly good jump-shooting team, so it is important for them to win the battle in the lane; a presence inside can lead to more high-percentage shots.Chicago’s defense entered Sunday among the top 10 in the league in points per possession, but its efficiency has declined significantly since last season. The dip is surprising given the presence of Jimmy Butler and Joakim Noah, last season’s defensive player of the year, although Noah has underperformed this season.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Coach Tom Thibodeau’s defensive system requires his players to have a heightened awareness of one another’s positioning, and the Bulls may be somewhat out of sync because a string of injuries early this season forced the lineup to change frequently. If so, it is not a terrible problem to have: Even if Derrick Rose misses games every so often, as he did against Milwaukee on Saturday, the Bulls are becoming healthier.Despite Thibodeau’s résumé and the Bulls’ recent history, the Wizards entered Sunday with a more efficient defense, largely because of Randy Wittman’s coaching. Wittman started his tenure in Washington with players like Emeka Okafor and Trevor Ariza on the roster, but even in the absence of those heralded stoppers, he has had the Wizards playing great defense.Young stars like John Wall and Bradley Beal can make Washington seem reliant on its guards, but without its frontcourt pairing of Marcin Gortat and Nene, the team would be far less threatening. Even though Nene is not a particularly high scorer, Washington performs far better when he is in the lineup and playing well.Still, it is impossible to discuss the Wizards without talking about Wall, a fifth-year point guard who is now equally threatening shooting or finding one of his teammates off the dribble.AdvertisementHis field-goal percentage this season (.459) would be the best of his career, and he is also averaging more assists than in any previous season (10.3 a game). Wall’s improved ability to distribute the ball has helped shape a successful basketball culture in Washington. The team does not average as many possessions per 48 minutes as the Hawks — a measure of a squad’s pace — but the Wizards’ passing makes them seem as if they are moving more quickly than they are.Washington, in fact, is playing at a slower pace than Chicago this season, a testament to the way both teams have developed to suit their improving rosters. The Wizards have grown more methodical, the Bulls more dynamic.With their towering frontcourts and All-Star point guards, the teams resemble each other more than people may think. Their similarities, and a budding rivalry that began when Washington eliminated Chicago from the playoffs in April, should make for good basketball on Wednesday, and further down the road.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.