By KEN BELSONJAN. 11, 2015
GREEN BAY, Wis. —  More than three decades ago, the Dallas Cowboys lost an N.F.C. championship game to the San Francisco 49ers because of a 6-yard touchdown pass from Joe Montana to Dwight Clark that has become known as the Catch.Now, the Cowboys and their fans will have to grapple with what may end up being called the Non-Catch.With 4 minutes 42 seconds left in the fourth quarter in their divisional playoff game Sunday against the Packers, the Cowboys were facing a fourth-and-2 at the Green Bay 32, with the Packers clinging to a 26-21 lead. Dallas quarterback Tony Romo threw deep to receiver Dez Bryant, who leapt and seemed to corral the ball, tuck it, spin and land near the goal line.The ball was initially ruled a catch at the 1, but Packers Coach Mike McCarthy threw a challenge flag, believing that Bryant had not had full possession of the ball.Advertisement“I mean, some people probably think throwing red flags is a lot of fun,” McCarthy said. “I mean, it’s not all it’s cut out to be, I can tell you. But that was such an impactful play, you have to challenge that.”AdvertisementAfter a review, the call was reversed. The Packers took over on downs and never gave the ball back. They will face the Seattle Seahawks next weekend, while the Cowboys will clean out their lockers.The Cowboys are all too familiar with how a reversed call by the referees can affect a team’s fortunes, and its season.Last week, against the Detroit Lions, officials reversed a pass interference call, paving the way for Dallas to advance to the divisional game. On that play, Dallas linebacker Anthony Hitchens was called for pass interference on a third-and-1 throw to Detroit tight end Brandon Pettigrew midway through the fourth quarter. The referee Pete Morelli marked it off, giving the Lions a first down.But the head linesman overruled the call. Morelli later explained that the flag was picked up because the head linesman ruled it was incidental contact and Hitchens was simply face-guarding, which is not a penalty.The Cowboys scored the winning touchdown soon after.Dean Blandino, the head of officiating for the league, said the next day that the pass interference call was debatable, but that the Cowboys should have been called for defensive holding on the play.On Sunday, had Bryant’s catch been upheld and the Cowboys scored a touchdown to retake the lead, Packers quarterback Aaron Rodgers, who has been hobbled by a calf injury, would have had to orchestrate another comeback drive.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Like the call last week, the reversal of the Bryant catch created an instant controversy on social media. Giants wide receiver Odell Beckham Jr. called it a joke. Mike Pereira, the N.F.L.’s former head of officiating, said the referee made the right decision.At Lambeau Field, the Packers predictably agreed, while the Cowboys’ owner, Jerry Jones, called it “disappointing.” Bryant said, “All I know is I had possession, and I had possession of the ball coming down.”AdvertisementCowboys Coach Jason Garrett declined to blame the officiating for the result, but he said he thought that the referees had missed the call.“He maintained possession of it throughout, in my opinion,” he said.League rules are not supposed to be a matter of opinion.The officials reviewed what is known as a process rule governing a receiver who falls to the ground with the ball. The rule states: “If a player goes to the ground in the act of catching a pass (with or without contact by an opponent), he must maintain control of the ball throughout the process of contacting the ground, whether in the field of play or the end zone. If he loses control of the ball, and the ball touches the ground before he regains control, the pass is incomplete. If he regains control prior to the ball touching the ground, the pass is complete.”After the game, the referee Gene Steratore clarified the decision to reverse the catch.“Although the receiver is possessing the football, he must maintain possession of that football throughout the entire process of the catch,” he said. “In our judgment, he maintained possession but continued to fall and never had another act common to the game.”Although Bryant regained possession of the ball, it had already hit the ground, nullifying the catch, Steratore said. He added that officials in the league’s headquarters in New York agreed.Steratore’s ruling has precedent. In 2010, Calvin Johnson of the Lions caught a touchdown pass in the waning seconds of a game against the Chicago Bears. Like Bryant, he leapt for the ball and came down with it. But after he hit the ground, the ball bounced free. The touchdown was nullified and the Lions lost.Steratore was the referee in that game, as well.A version of this article appears in print on January 12, 2015, on Page D4 of the New York edition with the headline: Catch Is Ruled a Bobble as Dallas’s Good Fortune Turns to Agony.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.