AdvertisementSupported byPackers 26, Cowboys 21By Ken BelsonGREEN BAY, Wis. — By all accounts, Cowboys quarterback Tony Romo threw a perfect, arcing pass on a fourth down with the game on the line. Dallas’s star receiver, Dez Bryant, leapt high in the air and made a fabulous grab, landing a yard short of the goal line. Trailing by 5 points with less than five minutes left in their playoff game against the Green Bay Packers on Sunday, the Cowboys were on the verge of advancing to the N.F.C. championship game for the first time in 19 years.But Packers Coach Mike McCarthy — and most of the crowd, announced as a Lambeau Field-record 79,704 — saw Bryant bobble the ball as he hit the turf. McCarthy had lost all three challenges he made during the regular season, but he threw his red flag anyway.“It was a confident challenge, and a hopeful one, too,” he said.Not long after, the referee Gene Steratore turned the apparent catch into an incomplete pass, ruling that Bryant lacked full possession of the ball.The Cowboys turned over the ball on downs and never got it back. The Packers ran out the clock for a 26-21 victory and will face the Seahawks in Seattle next week for a shot at the Super Bowl.“Although the receiver is possessing the football, he must maintain possession of that football throughout the entire process of the catch,” Steratore said after the game.The reversed call was loaded with meaning. The Cowboys had advanced to the divisional-round game at Green Bay in part because of an equally controversial negating of a pass interference call in last week’s game against Detroit. The Lions punted on the next play, and the Cowboys later mounted a scoring drive and won, 24-20.Dean Blandino, the N.F.L.’s vice president for officiating, said last week that while the pass interference call was debatable, the Cowboys should have been called for defensive holding on the play. The symmetry of the Cowboys’ benefiting from one reversal and agonizing over another one instantly fueled conspiracy theories on social media. Some said the second call was retribution for the owner Jerry Jones of the Cowboys and his friend Chris Christie, the governor of New Jersey, who flew to Wisconsin to root for the team.“This is really seriously one of the more disappointing times I’ve had on a personal basis,” Jones said.Whatever the cosmic significance, the contentious call is unlikely to diminish the dazzling effort by Packers quarterback Aaron Rodgers. Although hobbled by a left calf injury, Rodgers completed 24 of his 35 passes for 316 yards and three touchdowns, with no interceptions.Because the Packers had earned a first-round bye, Rodgers had an extra week to recuperate. But as he stood in the tunnel before the game, slowly rocking back and forth, it was unclear how he would emerge. When his name was called and he jogged out slowly to join his Packers teammates, the crowd roared and exhaled all at once.Perhaps not since Willis Reed of the Knicks limped onto the court for the final game of the 1970 N.B.A. finals had a captain’s introductory walk been so closely scrutinized.Rodgers is the Packers’ undisputed leader, and without him in the lineup, Green Bay would have stood little chance against Dallas. Still, Rodgers’s leg had not fully healed, and, at least by his high standards, he looked like an ordinary quarterback Sunday — until he did not.Grimacing and limping all game, Rodgers came alive as the day wore on, engineering a stirring comeback in a topsy-turvy game that included scuffles. The Packers rejiggered their high-octane passing attack to offset Rodgers’s lack of mobility and the blanket coverage of Jordy Nelson and Randall Cobb, and the team’s running game, led by Eddie Lacy and James Starks, was effective. Rodgers took snaps from the shotgun formation and often called plays without a huddle. But at times he could not scramble to allow for his receivers to get open. He often threw off his back foot for the benefit of his injured calf.Still, in the second half, Rodgers used his strong arm to toss pinpoint passes to Cobb, Davante Adams and tight end Richard Rodgers. In the third quarter, Adams caught a short pass, eluded a defender and scampered 46 yards to the end zone to draw the Packers within a point of the Cowboys. In the fourth quarter, Aaron Rodgers evaded defenders and hit Richard Rodgers with a 13-yard scoring pass. The Packers failed to convert a 2-point play, but their 26-21 lead stood up.“It’s fun to still be alive,” Aaron Rodgers said of the win. “To be the best, you have to beat the best.”Asked how he planned to withstand the Seahawks’ withering defense next Sunday, Rodgers said he had enough for 120 more minutes of football — the N.F.C. championship game and the Super Bowl. Green Bay and Seattle met in the first week of the regular season, with the Seahawks winning convincingly.Sunday’s game was the first playoff matchup between a team with an 8-0 home record (Green Bay) and one with an 8-0 road record (Dallas). It was also the Cowboys’ first visit to Lambeau Field in the postseason since 1967, when they played the Packers in a game now known as the Ice Bowl because of the frigid conditions. The Packers won that game, too, 21-17, when a different star quarterback, Bart Starr, ran into the end zone in the waning seconds.On Sunday, the conditions were balmy by comparison, with the temperature 24 degrees at kickoff, but the loss was no less sour for the Cowboys. After three consecutive 8-8 finishes, they went 12-4 this season and seemed as likely as they had in years to advance past the divisional round. Romo had perhaps the best season of his career, and DeMarco Murray was the N.F.L.’s leading rusher.Murray ran for 123 yards Sunday. Romo was not flashy, but he was efficient, completing 15 of his 19 passes for 191 yards and two touchdowns. It was his pass to Bryant, eventually ruled an incompletion, that will be most remembered, however.“It just doesn’t feel very good right now because you feel like you let one slip away and that you had an opportunity with a good ball club that had a chance to win this thing,” Romo said. “That is going to eat at you for a while.”CONFERENCE CHAMPIONSHIPS
SUNDAY
N.F.C. 3:05 p.m., Fox
Green Bay at Seattle
A.F.C. 6:40 p.m., CBS
Indianapolis at New EnglandAdvertisement