By ROB HUGHESJAN. 11, 2015
LONDON —  Lionel Messi is one of the two outstanding players of this generation. Given the humility with which he has carried his fame, many admirers would give him the edge over his sole challenger, Cristiano Ronaldo.It is irrelevant which of the two is recognized in Zurich on Monday night as FIFA’s world player of 2014. They have monopolized this award since 2008, kicking it between them like their personal soccer ball, and only Manuel Neuer, Germany’s goalkeeper at the 2014 World Cup, is in the frame with them for the award this time.Messi, though, is in danger of jeopardizing what separates him from most others: his childlike joy, along with his game-winning effectiveness at the heart of Barcelona’s team.We are looking for that smile, that simplicity, more than ever right now. Very few are able to exhibit such traits in a team sport driven by winner-takes-all pressures. But as Barcelona seems to be unraveling around him, now is the time for Messi to be part of the solution, not the deepening division around him.AdvertisementHe is 27, a mature age in soccer. He already has more personal and team accolades than one player might reasonably expect in a lifetime. Yet a week ago, rather than accept that his coach has the right to select whatever players he deems fit and ready for any particular game, Messi brooded on the sideline.AdvertisementRight or wrong, Coach Luis Enrique is relatively new to Barcelona team management. Enrique joined the Barça ranks as a player in the mid-90s, spent three years in charge of the junior players on the Barcelona B team, and then had short-lived coaching spells at Roma and Celta Vigo.Enrique’s task now is bigger than any he has known. The Catalans expect their style — first implanted by Johann Cruyff more than two decades ago, then carried to superlative heights recently under Pep Guardiola and Tito Vilanova — to be perpetuated, perhaps even improved upon.The challenges to the club are immense. It faces a sudden presidential election at the end of this season. It is under a FIFA embargo that prevents it from signing new players. Its soccer director, Andoni Zubizarreta, was dismissed last week, and its core brand, the flowing style of play that moves the ball like water dropping off a leaf, is easier to disrupt now than at any time over the past decade.Why? Because continuity is the hardest thing to manage in a sport where every ambitious team sets out to break it.Guardiola said when he left after four all-conquering seasons that the effort drained him. His understudy at first maintained the success, not least because he was known to other members of the club and trusted by them.It cannot be exaggerated how much Vilanova’s cancer, and then his untimely death, affected not only the players, but everyone at the club, from the president Josep Bartomeu on down. They lost a colleague in what should have been the prime of his life.That was followed by the inevitable decline of key players, the injury-hastened end to captain Carles Puyol’s career and the slow ebb of Xavi Hernández and Andrés Iniesta as play-makers. What team in the world can find another leader like Puyol or a metronomic pass-master like Xavi?Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Barça did as big clubs do: It showered money on the transfer market.It threw at Luis Enrique the task of rebuilding a team, and a philosophy, around the seemingly incredible attacking trio of Messi, Neymar and Luis Suárez.AdvertisementMessi, a contender for the best of all-time. Neymar, a Brazilian seen as possibly the best since Pelé. Suárez, a Uruguayan who transcended England’s Premier League last season.If that threesome is to gel, there has to be give and take. In part, the purchase of the other two was a response to Messi’s breaking down two seasons ago when his insistence on playing every minute of every game was indulged by his coach, Guardiola.Messi’s hamstrings rebelled because no man can withstand the speed of modern soccer when it is played twice or even three times a week. The boy in Messi wanted to be that exception, but the duty of the coach is to protect the player from breakdown.Ronaldo right now is leveling off too, and that is most likely a repercussion of striving to go goal-for-goal with Messi at such an extraordinary level.What elevated Messi above Ronaldo was the joy he exuded. Ronaldo brooded, while Messi brimmed with pleasure.When the ball was taken from Messi because of injuries, the smile waned. At that time, the Argentine and his father were being investigated by tax authorities in Catalonia, and he still may face a trial over the matter.But whether Messi likes it or not, sheer economics suggest there is no escape. The buyout clause in his contract means that any rival team would have to pay 250 million euros, about $295 million, simply to relieve Barcelona of him. (And Barcelona reiterates that he is not for sale, that he is the embodiment of the club.)A club would need to triple that sum to include image rights and salary for Messi, and even Paris St.-Germain, Chelsea or Manchester City could not afford the deal because of UEFA restrictions.So where does this leave Messi? It leaves him as the star of one of the best clubs on earth.He should be growing into a leadership role, and it diminishes him, and his club, if he throws a fit because the coach leaves him on the bench for half a game after returning from an extended Christmas break.AdvertisementIt still is, even for the great players, a team game.A version of this article appears in print on January 12, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.