By TOM PEDULLAJAN. 11, 2015
Rex Ryan, the outspoken coach who was fired by the Jets after a six-year tenure of extreme highs and lows, was close to a deal Sunday night to take over as coach of the A.F.C. East rival Buffalo Bills.Buddy Ryan, Rex’s father and a former N.F.L. coach, confirmed Buffalo’s offer to his son. Although the Bills have endured a 15-year playoff drought, the longest in the league, Buddy Ryan, during a phone interview from his farm in Shelbyville, Ky., said his son would be a “great” fit for the team.The Bills and Rex Ryan’s representatives were working toward an agreement on a five-year contract, according to NFL Network.Scott Berchtold, a Bills spokesman, said the team had “nothing to report” on Sunday.Ryan, 52, led the Jets to the A.F.C. championship game in his first two seasons but failed to reach the playoffs in the last four. This season, the Jets had an eight-game losing streak — equaling the franchise’s worst slide — and tumbled to a 4-12 record. It was their worst finish since 2007 and included two lopsided losses to Buffalo.AdvertisementThe Jets fell, 43-23, on Oct. 26 after the second-year quarterback Geno Smith was intercepted on three consecutive possessions in the opening quarter. They were pounded, 38-3, four weeks later, dropping the Jets to 1-5 under Ryan in games after a bye week.AdvertisementRyan went 46-50 in the regular season with the Jets and 4-2 in the postseason.Terry and Kim Pegula, who bought the Bills from the estate of Ralph Wilson in October, had two extensive interviews with the persuasive Ryan, the most recent one on Saturday at their home in Boca Raton, Fla.The Pegulas suddenly found themselves in need of a coach in December when Doug Marrone exercised an opt-out clause that allowed him to leave in the event of an ownership change. Marrone, who has interviewed for the Jets’ coaching vacancy, led the Bills to a 9-7 record in 2014, their first winning season in a decade, after going 6-10 in his first season.If Ryan takes the Buffalo job, he will face his former team and the New England Patriots twice each during the regular season, giving the A.F.C. East quite a potential sideline show. There is no telling how much braggadocio would come from Ryan in the days before Bills-Jets games. When the Jets hired him, he promised a Super Bowl title and stoked an already intense rivalry with New England by saying he was not going to kiss the championship rings of Patriots Coach Bill Belichick.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In the end, Ryan did not have the upper hand against New England, going 4-9 against the Patriots and 16-21 in the division (although the Jets defeated the Patriots in a January 2011 playoff game). That task does not appear much easier with the Bills, a small-market team that plays at one of the league’s most unappealing stadiums.Even after a recent sprucing-up of that stadium, which is named for Wilson, the Pegulas hope to build a new home for the Bills, but it is unclear whether they can generate financial support from the state government to make that a reality.Ryan would most likely count on his reputation as a players’ coach to appeal to free agents, and his defensive expertise would be expected to turn the Bills into an even greater force on that side of the ball. They feature one of the game’s most imposing defensive fronts.Offensively, Ryan would be confronted by a familiar problem: the presence of a young quarterback. E. J. Manuel was benched this season, his second year entering as Buffalo’s starting quarterback, and Kyle Orton took over and managed the offense well. Orton retired at the end of the regular season.Ryan went through three offensive coordinators with the Jets, and the unit struggled to establish an identity. He was hindered by growing pains with quarterbacks, first Mark Sanchez and then Smith.Sanchez became notorious for fumbling when he ran into the backside of his teammate Brandon Moore against New England on Thanksgiving in 2012. Smith was benched this season after he missed pregame meetings in San Diego, apparently confused by the time change.AdvertisementEven the Bills, for all their futility in the last 15 years, did not experience such follies.Ken Belson contributed reporting.
 A version of this article appears in print on January 12, 2015, on Page D6 of the New York edition with the headline: Ryan Is Close to a Deal to Coach the Bills, the Jets’ A.F.C. East Rival.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.