By DAVID WALDSTEINJAN. 13, 2015
When Brian Cashman was interviewing candidates for the Yankees’ hitting coach opening, they told him that the job was now a two-person assignment.“They all agreed,” Cashman said, so he did, too.For the first time, the Yankees will have two hitting coaches, Jeff Pentland and Alan Cockrell, the team announced Monday. Pentland will establish a philosophy and set the agenda, Cashman said, and Cockrell will assist him, following Pentland’s direction. Having two instructors should give each player more time with a coach.The Yankees also announced a reshuffling of some of their other coaches. Rob Thomson, who was the third-base coach, will become Joe Girardi’s bench coach. The previous bench coach, Tony Pena, will move to first base to replace Mick Kelleher, who was let go after last season. Joe Espada, who joined the Yankees last year as a scout, will become the third-base coach, having performed the same duties with the Marlins from 2010 to 2013.“We had a lot of options, and we think we have the best possible arrangement of our coaches,” Cashman said.AdvertisementWhile Pentland will quarterback the hitting approach, his assistant, Cockrell, actually was a quarterback, one who once outdueled Boomer Esiason and Frank Reich.AdvertisementCockrell, 52, was an all-American outfielder at Tennessee and the quarterback who led the Volunteers against Maryland in the 1983 Citrus Bowl. Esiason, Maryland’s starting quarterback in that game, injured his shoulder and was replaced by Reich, but Tennessee won, 30-23.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Cockrell played nine games for the Colorado Rockies in 1996 and served as their hitting coach in 2002 and in 2007 — the year they went to the World Series — and 2008. He also held the position for the Seattle Mariners in 2009 and 2010.Pentland, 68, has 16 years of experience as a major league hitting coach, starting in 1996. He served in that position for the Marlins, the Chicago Cubs, the Kansas City Royals, the Seattle Mariners and the Los Angeles Dodgers. Cashman said he could not speak on Pentland’s behalf but added, “He believes in getting a good pitch and hitting it as hard as you can.”Cashman said that defensive shifts were an issue discussed during the interview process but that Pentland was not brought in specifically to deal with them.“Asking a hitter to switch from the things that made him successful is not an easy thing to do,” Cashman said.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.