AdvertisementSupported byBy Allan KredaGREENBURGH, N.Y. — A game against the first-place Islanders is not familiar territory for the Rangers, or any team for that matter. That makes Tuesday night’s clash at Madison Square Garden that much more meaningful. Not since 1983-84 have both squads been winning at this pace this deep into a season. Back then, the Islanders were four-time defending champions, and they finished with 104 points, the best mark in their division; the Rangers, coached by Herb Brooks, had perhaps their best chance to end the dynasty, finishing the regular season in fourth with 93 points. This season’s Islanders (28-13-1) have been a revelation, and the Rangers (24-11-4) have won five straight, and 13 of their last 14. They return home for Tuesday’s game as the hottest team in the N.H.L., having swept their games against three tough Western Conference opponents: Anaheim, Los Angeles and San Jose. Rick Nash, who entered Monday tied with Tyler Seguin of Dallas for the league lead with 26 goals, was even-keeled as usual as he looked ahead to the game against the Islanders, a longtime Rangers rival. “Any Rangers-Islanders game is a big deal, no matter what the records are,” Nash said. “I think the biggest thing is how much both teams need the points. It’s going to be a huge game.” The Rangers have been frustrated lately in home games against the Islanders, who won by 6-3 on Oct. 14 and took two of their three meetings at the Garden last season. Rangers Coach Alain Vigneault gave credit to the Islanders, who are off to the same kind of start as the teams that won four straight Stanley Cups from 1980 to 1983. “They are playing extremely well at both ends of the rink, a team that has basically been red-hot since the start of the season,” Vigneault said. “It’s going to be a New York classic. It should be a lot of fun for both teams.” The Islanders, who have not played at home since beating Washington on Dec. 29, are coming off wins over the Devils and the Columbus Blue Jackets, after four games in the West. Their game against the Rangers will conclude the trip, a stretch in which they have gone 4-2. The Islanders’ captain, John Tavares, who scored his third overtime winner of the season in a 3-2 victory over the Devils on Friday, said his team would be ready to meet the Rangers. “It’s a big test; certainly playing these guys brings out our best,” said Tavares, who leads the Islanders with 19 goals and 39 points. He added: “Our focus and attitude is important. You just want to go out there and play well.” Henrik Lundqvist, who became the first N.H.L. goaltender to record 20 wins in each of his first 10 seasons when the Rangers beat the Sharks on Saturday, also said he was looking forward to the game. “You have to challenge yourself a lot to try and beat them, and the fact that they’re a New York team,” Lundqvist said. “They’ve been working hard the last few years, adding pieces. They’ve got something going.” The Rangers trail the Islanders by 5 points in the Eastern Conference’s Metropolitan Division but have three games in hand. Still, Nash said that advantage held little meaning and said his team had to guard against a letdown.“These are the games you worry about, coming back from a trip,” he said. “You have to use your fans’ energy to your benefit and come out with a good effort.” The teams will meet three more times this season, all at Nassau Coliseum, which the Islanders will leave after this season for Barclays Center in Brooklyn. Then there is the possibility of a playoff series between the teams, which met five times in the postseason between 1979 and 1984 but only twice since. Their 1984 meeting was particularly compelling: The Islanders needed an overtime goal by Ken Morrow in Game 5 to escape the first-round series. “Both teams always play each other with a little more edge,” said Dave Maloney, a Rangers broadcaster and a defenseman on their 1983-84 team. “It’s fun.” Advertisement