By ANDREW KEHJAN. 12, 2015
GREENBURGH, N.Y. —  Since the Phoenix Suns and the Utah Jazz opened the 1990-91 N.B.A. season in Tokyo, the league has used parts of its schedule to promote its product overseas.This week, the mission of spreading the joy of basketball around the world slipped into somewhat dubious hands: those of the Knicks, candidates to be called the league’s worst team.As the Knicks prepared on Monday to depart for London, where they will play Thursday night against the Milwaukee Bucks, Coach Derek Fisher emphasized that his players had a job to do in England, both on the court and off it, despite the team’s shambolic state.“We’re representing the city; we’re representing our organization and the entire league,” Fisher said. “Regardless of our individual circumstance right now, we still have to go out there still with a sense of pride about what our purpose is for being there.”AdvertisementThat individual circumstance is rather poor.The Knicks on Saturday fell to the Charlotte Hornets, 110-82, their 15th consecutive loss — the longest skid in franchise history — and they departed for Europe with a 5-35 record and the league’s lowest winning percentage. The Knicks’ average margin of defeat in their previous eight losses was 19.5 points. And after a big trade last week, they are speaking openly about operating in an all-out rebuilding mode.AdvertisementThis would have been difficult to predict in late October, when tickets to the London game, set to take place at O2 Arena, were put on sale. They sold out that day in one hour, according to an N.B.A. spokesman.The Knicks played in London two seasons ago, when they finished with 54 wins in the regular season before losing in the second round of the playoffs.At the time, the Knicks had a cast of established, veteran stars. The names in their lineups of late inspire casual fans to open Google on their smartphones.The hope will be that the game does end up featuring one of the league’s biggest stars, Carmelo Anthony — but that remained a question as the Knicks held their final workout in New York.Anthony has missed the team’s past six games with a sore left knee while undergoing a two-week rehabilitation program to try to salvage his season. Monday afternoon’s practice was Anthony’s first since he was sidelined, although he participated in only some of the full-contact portions.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Anthony said he would keep testing the knee until just before the game, when he would decide whether he would play.“Right now, it’s just sticking with the program and testing it out and seeing what my body can respond to,” said Anthony, who will appear alongside Prince Harry at a charity event scheduled for Wednesday afternoon at St. James’s Palace.Anthony’s knee has represented one of the Knicks’ biggest conundrums this season, inspiring debate about how exactly it should be treated. (Complicating the public side of the conversation has been the fact that neither the team nor Anthony has disclosed the exact nature of the problem or any sort of medical diagnosis.)AdvertisementPhil Jackson, the Knicks’ president, said during the weekend that he believed Anthony considered it important to play in London and in the All-Star Game, which is set for Feb. 15 at Madison Square Garden.On Monday, Anthony seemed to accept that surgery represented a likely end for the issue, his strongest indication yet that there is an extended layoff in his near future.“I’m pretty sure, at some point, that’s going to be my only option,” Anthony said, “but until that time, I can’t sit out.”All that will be determined in time. For now, the Knicks went through a particularly rigorous practice on Monday, which Fisher said was meant to encourage them to play at a quicker pace.“We have to continue to get down the floor earlier, attack earlier in transition, and part of that is being able to run,” Fisher said, “so we did a lot of that today.”Then it was off to London, where local fans will try to find the beauty of basketball in a Knicks game.A version of this article appears in print on January 13, 2015, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: Knicks Heading to London as a Ragged Ambassador.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.