AdvertisementSupported byBy Brendan PruntyDave Popkin, the play-by-play announcer for Seton Hall men’s basketball games, knew things would be different when the team switched radio homes three years ago. After almost two decades on the air with WABC-AM, Seton Hall’s games moved to WMTR-AM — a 7,000-watt station based in Morristown, N.J. But fans were finding only static.“I’d hear it on social media and anecdotally,” Popkin recalled, “that people who lived in certain areas couldn’t get the games as well, because of the signal.”Seton Hall games had moved from a station that could be heard clearly around the region — WABC has a 50,000-watt signal — to a station fans could not pick up near the university’s South Orange campus. That relationship lasted only one year; Seton Hall switched last season to WNYM-AM. But while Seton Hall’s new home broadcasts at 50,000 watts during the day, it drops to 5,000 at night — when most games are aired. That leaves Seton Hall in a situation more and more college basketball programs are finding themselves in as stations have found that they can bring in more advertising money with news or talk-radio programs than with sports.“Certainly, there are a lot of different options for a fan base now,” said Aaron Worsham, senior vice president for affiliate relations of Learfield Sports, which represents the media interests of nearly 100 colleges and universities, including Seton Hall.“It’s progressed throughout the years, and there are some differences from years past,” he said. “But I’m still a firm believer in college and radio. Tuning into a station — whether it’s AM or FM, whether it’s on an app or being streamed — live content is unique.”This season, especially, is one that Seton Hall fans would most likely love to tune in for. The team (13-3, 3-1 Big East) entered the Associated Press Top 25 rankings at No. 19 last week, its highest ranking since the 2000-1 season; this week it dropped to No. 21. It began the season 12-2 and started Big East play with victories over ranked opponents, St. John’s and Villanova, before losing on the road to Xavier on Wednesday and then barely surviving against Creighton, 68-67, on Saturday. In Philadelphia, Villanova had a multiyear contract with WIP-AM, formerly an all-sports station. But seven of Villanova’s 16 games have been broadcast on WIP’s sister stations because of time conflicts. Boston College and Georgetown have similar arrangements with their partners.“In a major market like we’re in, we don’t talk a lot of college sports at all,” said Spike Eskin, program director for WIP-FM, which formerly broadcast Villanova games. “For me, I don’t know if in a major market — with pro teams — it has a ton of fit.”Rutgers is the lone team in the New York area that has had a steady radio home, despite not having reached the N.C.A.A. tournament in 24 years. WOR-AM has broadcast Rutgers games for almost a decade, partly because Rutgers pays close to $10,000 per game — a price many schools are unwilling to pay to guarantee consistent airtime on a major station.Seton Hall and St. John’s each pay WNYM $5,000 per game. As for all-sports stations, WFAN — the New York area’s most prominent — charges about $12,000 to air a college basketball game, because its professional sports deals are far more lucrative.“We had St. John’s on for a number of years,” said Mark Chernoff, WFAN’s vice president for programming. “And it got to a point that in their 30-plus-game schedule, I was only able to clear sometimes eight to 11 games of their season.”Increasingly, universities are looking toward digital and satellite radio, and to apps like TuneIn Radio, which allow users to listen anywhere on phones or tablets.“It was a luxury for Seton Hall to be on WABC, because the signal was huge,” said Popkin, the Seton Hall announcer. “I used to be able to listen to Seton Hall games all the way out in Chicago. But things change. Conservative talk dominates AM radio so much these days that this is where we’re at. But we’re still on the air.”Advertisement