
Keeping Score By                     
JAY SCHREIBER and


NAILA-JEAN MEYERS

JAN. 12, 2015
Except for the fact that they share an arena and an owner, the Knicks and the Rangers have been going their separate ways for some time now.The Rangers have made it to the playoffs in eight of the past nine seasons, and have won eight playoff series along the way. Last season, they made it all the way to the Stanley Cup finals before losing to the Los Angeles Kings in five games.The Knicks have made it to the playoffs in only four of the past nine seasons and won just one playoff series along the way. Last year, they made it all the way to Game 82 of the regular season, finishing with a 37-45 record that cost yet another Knicks coach, Mike Woodson, his job.But perhaps at no time in this period has the gap between the two teams been as pronounced as it is at the moment. The Knicks have lost a franchise-record 15 games in a row, many of them by big, fat margins, and with an overall, hard-to-believe record of 5-35 may be headed for the worst season mark in their history. Will they even win 10 games this season? Who knows?AdvertisementIn contrast, the Rangers are on a remarkable roll. In their last 15 games, they are 13-2 and are on a five-game winning streak that included a resounding West Coast sweep of three tough teams — the Kings, the Anaheim Ducks and the San Jose Sharks. Their season record is 24-11-4.AdvertisementThe Rangers are also back home now and will take on a newly formidable Islanders club on Tuesday night in what might be the most anticipated matchup between these two local rivals in decades.The Knicks were on their way to London on Monday evening, somewhat comically representing the N.B.A. in a regular-season game against the Milwaukee Bucks on Thursday. As far as a lot of Knicks fans are concerned, the team can probably stay overseas as long as it likes, maybe check out some soccer games, do a little sightseeing, perhaps come back in March or April. In reality, the Knicks will be back in action at Madison Square Garden on Monday, trying to win their first game on their home court in nearly two months.So how in the name of James Dolan did the gap between these two clubs grow so large? The most obvious answer, and perhaps the best one, is that Dolan, often depicted as an impetuous, meddling owner, has appeared to stay out of the way with the Rangers, letting Glen Sather, the team’s president and general manager, do what he sees fit, season after season after season.Actually, that did not work so well in the beginning. Dolan hired Sather, who was a revered figure in hockey, in June 2000, and Sather proceeded to stumble repeatedly, failing to get the Rangers into the postseason during his first four years in charge.But everything changed after the lockout that cost the National Hockey League the 2004-5 season. Since then, the Rangers have been a consistently competitive club, and sometimes a very good one. Sather has had an assortment of coaches behind the Rangers’ bench — including himself at one point — but in general, he seems to know what he is doing.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Knicks? In something of a twist, they were actually pretty decent when Dolan first took over as chairman of the Garden during the 1998-99 season. In the 1999 playoffs, the Knicks, as an eighth-seeded team, surprised everyone by making it to the N.B.A. finals with Jeff Van Gundy as the coach.A season later, they went a very respectable 50-32, again with Van Gundy in charge, and got as far as the Eastern Conference finals. But by the 2001-2 season, things had deteriorated and have never really recovered — except for that meteor that flashed across the sky in 2012-13, when the Knicks went 54-28, won a playoff series, and then immediately started losing all over again the next season.It has generally been a mess, and Dolan has been viewed as being a direct cause of at least some of it, interfering in trade talks, dismissing a general manager on the eve of training camp, letting Isiah Thomas offer him advice even after he had been sent packing as the team’s top executive.Last March, Dolan handed the team over to Phil Jackson and has seemingly stayed out of the way since then, even though Jackson’s first season in charge has been a disaster. If given time, and left to figure it out himself, perhaps Jackson can eventually turn things around, as Sather did.AdvertisementBut for now, the two teams who once marched together to Game 7 of their respective league finals in 1994, who had Knicks fans chanting, “Let’s go, Rangers!” at playoff games that year, are as different as can be.A version of this article appears in print on January 13, 2015, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: Rangers and Knicks Share Only an Address.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »