By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSJAN. 12, 2015
Roy Tarpley, a former Dallas Mavericks star center whose promising N.B.A. career was cut short by drug abuse, leading the league to bar him twice, died on Friday in a hospital in Arlington, Tex. He was 50.A report by the Tarrant County medical examiner did not list a cause.Tarpley was the seventh overall pick in the 1986 N.B.A. draft out of Michigan. He played for the Mavericks until October 1991, when he was kicked out of the league for using cocaine.Norm Sonju, who was the Mavericks’ chief executive when he drafted Tarpley, said the team had carefully researched Tarpley’s background at Michigan, knowing cocaine was a pervasive threat in all big-time athletics in the 1980s.“We had people tell us to our face that he had no problems,” he said.After he was barred, Tarpley played in Greece until the N.B.A. reinstated him in 1994. He signed a six-year, $20 million contract with the Mavericks but was permanently barred in December 1995 for using alcohol and violating the terms of a court-imposed personal aftercare program.AdvertisementTarpley averaged 12.6 points and 10.0 rebounds in 280 regular-season games.In 1987-88, he averaged 17.1 points and 15.0 rebounds in a career-high 81 games and won the N.B.A.’s Sixth Man of the Year award. He helped Dallas reach the Western Conference finals that season, averaging 17.9 points and 12.9 rebounds in 17 playoff games. Dallas lost to the eventual champions, the Los Angeles Lakers, in seven games.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Roy Tarpley was born on Nov. 28, 1964, in New York City. Information about his survivors was not available.After his N.B.A. career ended, he returned to Greece and also played in Cyprus, Russia and China. He later spent time in the Continental Basketball Association and the United States Basketball League.AdvertisementTarpley sued the N.B.A. and the Mavericks in 2007, saying they had discriminated against him on the basis of his disability as a recovering drug and alcohol abuser. The lawsuit was settled, but the terms were not disclosed.A version of this article appears in print on January 13, 2015, on Page A19 of the New York edition with the headline: Roy Tarpley, 50, Center Banished by N.B.A.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.