By CHASE STUARTJAN. 12, 2015
At Stanford, Andrew Luck was immensely hyped as the next great quarterback prospect. The Indianapolis Colts selected him with the first overall pick in 2012, and remarkably, Luck has managed to meet even the highest of expectations. After helping turn a 2-14 team in 2011 into a playoff team in 2012, Luck won his first playoff game during the 2013 season and has now guided the Indianapolis Colts to the A.F.C. championship game.Just 25 years old, Luck threw for a league-high 40 touchdowns during the regular season. On Sunday, against the heavily favored Denver Broncos, he delivered another strong performance, throwing for two touchdowns and guiding an offense centered on the passing game.Luck is perhaps the most important person to his franchise of any player in the N.F.L. But it is Green Bay quarterback Aaron Rodgers, and not Luck, who is likely to be named the league’s most valuable player this month. Rodgers averaged 7.68 net yards per attempt during the regular season, the highest in football. Rodgers also led the N.F.L. in interception rate (a minuscule 1.0 percent) and finished second to Dallas’s Tony Romo in touchdown rate (7.3 percent).Over the last five years, he has won both a Super Bowl and the Associated Press Most Valuable Player award (the only player to have accomplished both feats), while his 110.3 passer rating is easily the best in the N.F.L. over that stretch.AdvertisementRodgers, who turned 31 in December, continued his hot play into the playoffs. In Green Bay’s victory over Dallas, he threw for 316 yards and three touchdowns with no interceptions. That included a remarkable second half in which Rodgers completed 15 of 20 passes for 226 yards and two touchdowns.AdvertisementYet both Luck and Rodgers enter the conference championship round of the playoffs as the star players on teams that are underdogs by a touchdown. That is because the Colts are facing the most dominant team of the last 15 years, and the Packers face the most dominant team of the last three years. In addition to having star quarterbacks of their own in Tom Brady and Russell Wilson, the Patriots and the Seahawks have built outstanding supporting casts. The Patriots are 3-0 against the Colts and the Seahawks are 2-0 against the Packers since Luck and Wilson entered the N.F.L. in 2012.That season, the Seahawks defeated Green Bay, 14-12, in a contest remembered as the Fail Mary game. With Seattle trailing in the final seconds, Wilson heaved the ball into the end zone, where it was simultaneously (depending on whom you ask) caught by both Green Bay’s M. D. Jennings and Seattle’s Golden Tate. At the time, the league had been in a labor dispute with the N.F.L. Referees Association, and it was a set of replacement referees who ruled (after much discussion) that the play had resulted in a Seattle touchdown. The crazy ending overshadowed a dominant performance by the Seattle defense, which sacked Rodgers eight times and kept him out of the end zone.Then, in this season’s opening game, Seattle dominated the Packers, 36-16; the Seahawks jumped out to a 29-10 fourth-quarter lead before Rodgers finally threw his first touchdown pass. Rodgers has thrown a touchdown on just 1.4 percent of his passes against the Seahawks over the last three years, and on 7.2 percent of his passes against all other teams since 2012.Luck’s history against the Patriots is even uglier. Indianapolis lost by more than 20 points in each meeting, including a playoff game last year. In those three games, Luck has thrown six touchdowns against eight interceptions, and four of those scoring throws occurred when the Colts were down by at least double digits.The Patriots dominated Indianapolis on the ground earlier this season. Excluding quarterback kneels, the Patriots rushed 40 times for 250 yards and 4 touchdowns, with the bulk of the workload carried by Jonas Gray. In a playoff matchup last season with the Colts, New England rushed for six touchdowns, with LeGarrette Blount as the star. But the Patriots are as flexible as any team in the N.F.L., and against the Ravens on Saturday, New England won despite not having handed off to a running back a single time in the second half. For the game, the Patriots finished with just 14 rushing yards, the fewest by a winning team in a playoff game.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Seattle, meanwhile, has won seven consecutive games by 10 points or more. Since 2012, the Seahawks are 25-2 at home. And Rodgers, despite a fantastic second half against the Cowboys, remains clearly limited by an injured calf. Given the outcomes earlier this season, is there hope for either underdog on Sunday?For the Colts to pull off an upset, they will need more than a herculean effort from Luck. New England has scored an impressive 144 points in its three games against Luck’s Colts. Is an Indianapolis defense that has allowed only 23 points in two playoff games up for the challenge? On the other hand, the Colts have had no answer for the dynamic Patriots offense at any point in the last three years. And New England is showing no signs of slowing down: Excluding the meaningless Week 17 game in which the Patriots rested several starters, New England has averaged 39.1 points per game in its last seven home games.For the Packers, the best chance for success is clearer: It will require another magical performance from Rodgers. Seattle boasts one of the toughest run defenses in the N.F.L., and the Seahawks limited Eddie Lacy to just 34 yards on 12 carries in Week 1. Over the last three seasons, just three running backs (Adrian Peterson, Mike James and DeMarco Murray) have rushed for even 75 yards in a game in Seattle.Not that Rodgers will have it easy: Over Seattle’s last eight games, the pass defense has allowed just four touchdowns and 1,155 yards (an anemic 144 yards per game), while forcing nine interceptions. And while Rodgers’s 105.3 passer rating in the postseason is the second best in playoff history, it is Wilson who holds the top spot at 109.6 (with a minimum of 150 pass attempts).AdvertisementRodgers and Luck are, perhaps, the two best players in the N.F.L. But they will be facing the league’s two best teams on Sunday, a pair of rivals who have confounded even the game’s best quarterbacks. But more than any other sport, the N.F.L. is about the team instead of the star, and no player has won the Super Bowl and the M.V.P. award in the same season since Kurt Warner in 1999. For the Packers and the Colts to pull off upsets, they will need great games out of more players than just their star quarterbacks.A news analysis article on Tuesday about the quarterbacks involved in the N.F.L. conference championship games referred incorrectly to the success of the New England Patriots and the Seattle Seahawks against the Indianapolis Colts and the Green Bay Packers. The Patriots are 3-0 against the Colts and the Seahawks are 2-0 against the Packers since quarterbacks Andrew Luck and Russell Wilson entered the N.F.L. in 2012; the Patriots and Seahawks are not “a combined 5-0 against the Colts and the Packers” since then. (New England has lost to Green Bay, and Seattle has lost to Indianapolis.)A version of this news analysis appears in print on January 13, 2015, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Stellar Passers, Sure, but That May Not Be Enough.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.