By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSJAN. 12, 2015
PLANTATION, Fla. —  The former Dolphins fullback Rob Konrad entered the room on Monday with a wobble in his walk and needed assistance climbing a podium to discuss his improbable 16-hour swim to shore.He sipped from a bottle of water, still rehydrating four days after the episode. His wife sat at his side rubbing his leg in support. Tears welled in their eyes as he spoke.“Happy to be here,” Konrad began with a wry smile.“I shouldn’t be here,” he said later, his voice cracking.The 38-year-old Konrad’s escape was a testament to willpower and world-class athleticism.“It’s an incredible story,” the endurance swimmer Diana Nyad said. “Taking his life in his hands and deciding he was going to save himself.”AdvertisementKonrad, who played for the Miami Dolphins from 1999 to 2004, had been around boats since his childhood on Boston’s North Shore. So he knew what it meant when he fell off his 31-foot Grady-White while fishing alone nine miles from land.“A boater’s nightmare,” he said.He swam to Palm Beach, covering a distance of 27 miles before ringing the doorbell of an oceanfront home for help at 4:30 a.m. Thursday.AdvertisementThe details of his survival were hard to believe, he and his wife, Tammy Konrad, agreed.“It was a miracle he made it home,” she said.Rob Konrad said he was taking his boat for servicing Wednesday and decided to fish along the way. He had caught a fish and was attending to the rod when a large wave hit, flipping him overboard.The boat was on autopilot and headed east; no others were in sight. Konrad was not wearing a life preserver. It was 12:30 p.m.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I realized I was in some real trouble,” he said.Konrad decided to swim toward shore, although he figured the trip would take more than 10 hours, and he feared succumbing to hypothermia or cramps after two or three hours. The ocean temperature was in the 70s — far from frigid, but a lot colder than his body temperature.He took off his shirt and began alternating between a breaststroke and backstroke.Konrad said he got bit “by a whole bunch of stuff.” A shark circled before moving along. “There was a lot of stuff glowing at night, probably some jellyfish,” he said.He could also see lights along the coast and pick out landmarks. As he tired, he gained emotional strength.“Five or six hours in, I realized, ‘Maybe I can do this,’” he said.A recreational fishing boat approached, and then a Coast Guard helicopter searching for him flew overhead, but he was not seen.AdvertisementStill, Konrad kept swimming, thinking of his daughters, ages 8 and 10. “He had two angels on his back,” his wife said.“I was probably pretty delirious at the time, but I could see the lights getting closer and closer,” he said.Then the sound of the ocean changed. He heard waves hitting the shore and finally reached land.“The problem was, I couldn’t walk,” he said. “My body was shaking uncontrollably. I crawled up on the beach.”His boat was found near Grand Bahama Island on Deadman’s Reef, the irony of the name not lost on Konrad. He had gone the other way.A version of this article appears in print on January 13, 2015, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: Ex-Dolphins Player Tells of Survival Swim.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.