

 Michael Powell
 

SPORTS OF THE TIMES
JAN. 12, 2015
BOULDER, Colo. — College football has gone on a roll that would bring a giggle to the lips of King Midas.On New Year’s Day, more than 28 million Americans watched the playoffs, and more still probably watched Ohio State’s 42-20 victory over Oregon in the championship matchup on Monday night. And, good God, that glorious cascade of cash: College conferences expect to pull in hundreds of millions of dollars; ESPN executives take daily baths in their riches; professional gamblers are beside themselves.The coaches, those fellows in sweatpants and headsets, are experiencing a hedge fund moment as their salaries make joyful, geometric leaps upward. Jim Harbaugh experienced a down year in the N.F.L., but no worries: The University of Michigan, a public institution wrestling with budget cuts in a fiscally straitened state, recently agreed to pay him $5 million next year, with millions of dollars of incentives.Athletic directors are paid like potentates. University presidential suites at stadiums serve lamb roast and Cristal.AdvertisementWhat, I asked Kain Colter, to make of this glorious bacchanal?We sit in his living room on a high plains ridge outside Boulder. A lean, athletic 22-year-old man, he has the Cowboys-Packers game on the television and workout equipment around him. He made the Vikings’ practice squad this season and hopes to join the team next season.AdvertisementHe also organized a players union movement at Northwestern, where he played quarterback for four years.“I mean, as a fan, it’s great fun, I love the college game,” he said of college bowl madness. “But the incredible money underlines that we are truly the engines of a multibillion-dollar industry.“Honestly, every guy in every college locker room in the nation talks about this.”Oregon and Ohio State possess fine quarterbacks, whirling dervish running backs, all-American defensive linemen and special teams that charge downfield like barbarian hordes.Not a single one of these marvelously talented athletes makes a dime off his labor — sometimes as much as 60 hours a week — beyond a scholarship. In fact, if next season a coach recruits a better, more mountainous defensive lineman, there are no N.C.A.A. rules to prevent this season’s version from losing his scholarship.Most college football players practice longer and harder in pads and helmets than do the pros — the N.F.L. players union forced teams to set weekly limits on high-impact practices.And those blown knees and concussions? Most players are on their own. Unlike the N.F.L., the N.C.A.A. has made no financial reckoning with the damage wrought on students by concussions.Colter loved Northwestern, and 90 percent of its football players graduated, which is unusual for a major university. It came with compromises. Colter declared pre-med until it became an impossibility. His core classes conflicted with the football practices that were a condition of his scholarship.AdvertisementLinemen gorged on food to keep their weight up. “It truly is a job,” Colter said. “If you don’t keep your weight up, you won’t play or you won’t start.”Colter and Ramogi Huma, president of the National College Players Association, the group seeking to represent college athletes, envision nothing like the high peaks of N.F.L. salaries. Minimum wage might be a nice start. Colter said he would like to see the colleges divert a small rivulet of their riches to establish endowments, which players could tap years after graduation.“Even the players who graduate often don’t really get an education,” Colter noted.Michigan offers a case in point. So high are its academic standards that it is often referred to as a public Ivy. Yet only 69 percent of football players graduate.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Michigan’s new president, Mark Schlissel, a former provost at Brown University, recently committed the sin of talking honestly. “We admit students who aren’t as qualified, and it’s probably the kids that we admit that can’t honestly, even with lots of help, do the amount of work and the quality of work it takes to make progression from year to year.”Such candor mortified alumni, who speculated that Schlissel was an Ivy League pinhead, or perhaps simply barking mad. The president soon backpedaled, proclaiming his allegiance to the athletic department, which — like those at Oregon and Ohio State — has budgets and revenues in the many tens of millions of dollars.Michigan legislators took the role of blocking backs in protecting university gilt. In December, Al Pscholka, a Republican state representative in Michigan, pushed through a bill that forbids state college athletes to organize unions. Gov. Rick Snyder, a Republican, signed it into law about the time that Harbaugh signed his $5-million-a-year deal.Michigan was once a proud union state, and labor leaders could have put up a fight. Nick Ciaramitaro, legislative director of the American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees Council 25, which represents state workers, shrugged.We didn’t, he said, have plans to organize athletes anyway. He thus offered a study guide in the toothlessness of American labor.Colter and his fellow players were tougher. A regional director of the National Labor Relations Board has ruled that players are, in fact, employees. And suddenly universities have begun making changes.AdvertisementThe Big Ten offered guaranteed four-year scholarships, and the Pacific-12 took it one step further, guaranteeing scholarships and postgraduate health care. There is more talk of health insurance for players after college, and bigger scholarship stipends.Colter smiled. “They are taking steps to try to insulate themselves,” he said. “That’s good; that’s what the threat of a union does.”New challenges loom. There is chatter about expanding the College Football Playoff to eight teams.That would mean more hard games and hard practices, more time away from class and more opportunities to sustain season- and career-ending injuries. Ohio State won the national title with its third quarterback of the season.Ohio State Coach Urban Meyer had pushed the N.C.A.A. to find a way to pay for players’ families to travel to the championship game (an initiative that was approved last week). That’s sweet. I’m guessing a few more dollars in players’ pockets and the guarantee of degrees paid for by universities grown fat on football might have more meaning.Meyer, another of the millionaire coaches, has stated that he is not a fan of unionization. Colter doesn’t worry about that.“If they can pay Harbaugh close to $8 million with incentives, they can put in place support programs for athletes,” he said. “It’s not really that complicated, is it?”Email: powellm@nytimes.com A version of this article appears in print on January 13, 2015, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: A Threat to Unionize, and Then Benefits Trickle in for Players.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »