By TIM ROHANJAN. 12, 2015
MILLBRAE, Calif. —  The last time Oregon played Ohio State was at the Rose Bowl five years ago. Jeremiah Masoli and Terrelle Pryor were the quarterbacks. Ohio State won, 26-17, and Masoli lingered on the field afterward, watching as the Buckeyes celebrated. He vowed to work harder the next season.Back then, Masoli was maybe in the best position in college football.He was the centerpiece of Oregon’s high-powered offense, he had access to Coach Chip Kelly’s genius, and the Ducks had surrounded him with explosive talent. The next year, though, Oregon made it to the national championship game without him. Months after the Rose Bowl, he and another player pleaded guilty to second-degree burglary of a fraternity house. He was suspended indefinitely and later dismissed from the team after the police found marijuana in his car.Last week, before Oregon and Ohio State were to play again, this time for the College Football Playoff national championship Monday in Arlington, Tex., Masoli hunched over a plate of pancakes at a restaurant outside San Francisco, not far from where he lives with his parents, and reminisced. He is 26 and set to begin his fourth year in the Canadian Football League, as a backup quarterback for the Hamilton Tiger-Cats. He seemed aware that his shot at a second chance at the N.F.L. was dwindling. He agreed to be interviewed partly because he will be a free agent at the end of the season.He spoke as if he were using talking points aimed at N.F.L. general managers. He said he had matured in the last four years. He referred multiple times to a Sports Illustrated article that cast doubt on whether he had been involved in the burglary. The article indicated that Masoli had pleaded guilty because if he had gone to trial and lost, he would have faced mandatory jail time.Advertisement“I’ve learned my lesson from that,” Masoli said. He leaned back, clenched his fists, closed his eyes and shook his head. “I’ve learned my lesson from that,” he repeated. “Just having it all taken away because I was at the wrong place at the wrong time.Advertisement“I was 21 then. I’m 26 now. I’ve grown a lot.”Still, his past keeps following him. He is not sure how much his exit from Oregon has affected his N.F.L. chances. People ask him about the 2010 Rose Bowl. Former teammates text him whenever it is replayed on TV, and he feels a twinge of regret.Masoli, who graduated from Oregon with a degree in sociology, follows the Ducks from afar. He watched this year’s Rose Bowl and was impressed with how the Heisman Trophy winner Marcus Mariota carved up the Florida State Seminoles, running essentially the same spread offense he ran to near perfection.“It’s his poise,” Masoli said. “He’s the same on every play, whether it’s the first play or whether it’s the last play of the game. His head is screwed on straight.”Masoli went on: “That guy’s chin, his moxie, his heart, his brain is just all in tune and focused on what he’s doing. He’s just in the zone. I can see it. I’ve been in the zone, too.”Mariota’s boy-next-door image is perhaps the antithesis of Masoli’s image. Oregon Coach Mark Helfrich said he was being selective in the type of players he recruited, trying to distance the program from the off-field problems that had plagued it in the past, including charges of domestic violence, burglary, assault and drunken driving.“I want guys that we want to be around and guys that want to be around us,” said Helfrich, who replaced Kelly as coach in 2013. “I don’t want to recruit a guy and go, ‘Oh, God, I’ve got to go spend another two hours with this guy in practice,’ and have to motivate him to do the right thing.”Masoli’s entire family cheers on Mariota now. The two quarterbacks do have a lot in common. Both are part Samoan. Both played at Oregon. Both attended St. Louis, an all-boys parochial high school in Honolulu.AdvertisementMasoli credited Vinnie Passas, the same quarterback coach who groomed Mariota, as the first person who truly taught him the position and how to read defenses. Passas’ run-and-shoot offense showed Masoli how much fun playing quarterback could be.Speaking of Masoli’s troubles at Oregon, Passas said: “I never expected anything like that. He was a nice guy, just humble. He threw the ball well. The only thing was he didn’t have Marcus’s height and Marcus’s speed. As far as personality-wise, I thought they were both pretty similar.”The similarities might end there, though. Masoli attended St. Louis for only one year, and only after he had been expelled from Serra High School in San Mateo, Calif., for being involved in a strong-arm robbery. He spent time in a juvenile facility, and then his father, Kennedy, moved him to Hawaii and sent him to St. Louis to gain discipline.Masoli’s route to Oregon was circuitous, too. He spent two years at the City College of San Francisco and won a junior college national title before transferring.In his two seasons at Oregon, Masoli never had quite the same kind of success that Mariota has had. In the 2009 season, when Masoli led Oregon to a 10-3 record, he completed 177 of 305 passes for 2,147 yards and 15 touchdowns. He also ran for 13 scores. After he was dismissed from the team, he played one season at Mississippi, throwing 14 touchdowns and 13 interceptions. He went undrafted the next year, signed with the San Francisco 49ers and was released before the end of training camp.Masoli said the Seattle Seahawks had shown interest in him playing another position, maybe running back, which would have been a logical switch. He is listed at 5 feet 11, and quarterbacks of his height are often asked to change positions. Masoli refused.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.He has spent the last few years working for another shot. In limited playing time last season, he completed 21 of 45 passes for 293 yards and a touchdown. The Tiger-Cats appear high on him. They extended his contract through next season, which will end around late November. (A spokesman for the team said Masoli’s coaches were unavailable for comment because they were on vacation.)Masoli changed agents last year, and he said his new one was putting out feelers. Last season, he spent three days a week watching extra film with one of his Hamilton coaches. He emphasized that he was surrounding himself with the right people. If he carried any resentment toward Oregon, it did not show.“He’s put it behind him,” his father said in a telephone interview. He paused for a moment. “He’s put it behind him. It’s something that happened, and however it happened, it was a tough thing all-around for him. You just move on.”AdvertisementThis off-season has been particularly hectic for Masoli. He is engaged to his high school sweetheart, and the wedding is scheduled for May. They are thinking about buying a house. Otherwise, Masoli spends a lot of time training, usually with his 19-year-old brother, Zachariah, who is in his first year as a quarterback at City College.They work out together, and throw together, and Masoli tries to teach him football’s finer points. Masoli hopes Zachariah will get a chance to play next year. Then, who knows? Maybe he can transfer, as his brother did. Masoli said he had contacts at West Virginia and Kansas State. He was just waiting for his brother to get a shot and create some film they could send out.Masoli grinned.“As soon as he does,” he said, “nobody can say anything.”A version of this article appears in print on January 13, 2015, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: Former Oregon Quarterback Yearns for a Second Chance.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.