AdvertisementSupported byN.H.L. RoundupBy The Associated PressMats Zuccarello had two goals, and the Rangers scored three times in just over a minute in the third period to rally for a 4-2 win over the host Columbus Blue Jackets on Friday night.Brandon Saad, the Blue Jackets’ blockbuster acquisition in the off-season, scored on a power play at 16 minutes 10 seconds of the third to give the Blue Jackets a 2-1 lead in their season opener.But after a Columbus turnover, Oscar Lindberg netted a low shot for his second goal in two games to tie it at 2-2.Just 17 seconds later, Kevin Hayes made it 3-2 with a shot from the right corner along the end line that found its way past Sergei Bobrovsky, who finished with 21 stops. Zuccarello capped the scoring from the right circle a minute later.Henrik Lundqvist finished with 21 saves.The Rangers played another strong road game, coming off a 3-2 win in their season opener Wednesday over the defending Stanley Cup champion Chicago Blackhawks.Cam Atkinson also scored for the Blue Jackets, who are looking to avoid the slow starts that have put them in deep holes the past four seasons. Zuccarello started the scoring late in a hard-hitting, fast-paced first period. Gregory Campbell could not reach a short pass from David Savard deep in the Columbus end. Zuccarello scooped up the loose puck near the crease and flipped a backhand shot past Bobrovsky.Atkinson pulled Columbus even at the midpoint of the second period. He scored on a breakaway on a nifty move for his first goal on a long pass from Brandon Dubinsky from his knees.JETS 3, DEVILS 1 Andrew Ladd and Blake Wheeler each had a goal and an assist in a big second period, and visiting Winnipeg beat the Devils to spoil John Hynes’s N.H.L. coaching debut.Mathieu Perreault had two assists in the three-goal second period, and Michael Hutchinson made 20 saves to help the Jets win for the second time in two nights.Mark Scheifele ignited Winnipeg’s outburst with his second goal of the season. The Jets have scored six goals in middle periods this season.Jiri Tlusty scored for the Devils in his debut. It was actually an own goal that Winnipeg defenseman Jacob Trouba fired into his net while trying to clear a puck in front.Cory Schneider made 27 saves for the Devils, who have missed the playoffs the past three seasons.Hynes, 40, is the N.H.L.’s youngest coach.Scheifele, who scored the Jets’ first goal in Thursday’s victory over the Bruins, got them started again with a shot from the left circle at 1:13. The puck seemed to fool Schneider and might have been deflected by Devils defenseman David Schlemko.Less than three minutes later, Wheeler snapped a shot past Schneider from the dot in the same circle. The goal was waved off by one of the referees, but a replay clearly showed it hitting the back of the net. Even Schneider knew it.Tlusty, with Trouba’s assistance, cut the lead to a goal at 12:53, but Ladd beat Schneider from the right circle off a nice cross-ice pass by Perreault.Hutchinson was at his best in the third period, stopping 10 shots.RED WINGS 4, MAPLE LEAFS 0  Justin Abdelkader had a hat trick, and Dylan Larkin scored in his N.H.L. debut, helping host Detroit beat Toronto. Jimmy Howard stopped 21 shots for his 21st career shutout for the Red Wings, who won their season-opening game and dropped Toronto to 0-2 with its $50 million coach, Mike Babcock.The Maple Leafs lured Babcock from Detroit with an eight-year contract that more than doubled what any other coach is making is making per season in the league.Abdelkader scored on Detroit’s first shot, making the most of a power play 1:15 into the game. He had another goal midway through the first period off a centering pass from Larkin. Abdelkader completed the hat trick at 3:54 of the second.Advertisement