

 Scott Cacciola
 

NOT THE KNICKS
JAN. 12, 2015
HOLLAND, Mich. — As much as he emphasizes the twin concepts of consistency and continuity, Kevin Vande Streek dabbled in the unconventional when his players gathered for practice Friday.Vande Streek, the longtime coach of the Calvin College men’s basketball team, found an old CD at the college’s gymnasium in Grand Rapids, Mich., and loaded it into a stereo. And then he turned the volume up — way up.The music that bounced off the walls offered a vivid reminder to his players that they were only hours from renewing one of the great rivalries in Division III sports and that the atmosphere at Hope College on Saturday afternoon promised to be loud and jarring. But Vande Streek sensed that music or no music, his team was almost too revved up.“We were just flying off the ceiling, throwing the ball all over the place,” he recalled.Games against Hope tend to have that effect. It makes sense given the longevity of the series (95 years), the geographic proximity of the schools (30 miles along Interstate 196) and their dominance of the Michigan Intercollegiate Athletic Association (at least a share of 58 regular-season titles since 1953). Add to the mix a knotty theological rift that reaches back to the mid-19th century, and these games take on a spiritual fervor all their own.Advertisement“The fans are — wow,” Vande Streek said. “I don’t know what it’s like in Division I. I just know that they want you tarred and feathered if you don’t win.”AdvertisementThat can be expected when a rivalry, doused in religion, dates to 1857 — the year a group of Dutch immigrants left the Reformed Church in America to create the Christian Reformed Church in North America. Part of the split was over which hymnals should be used in church services.Hope, founded in 1866, is affiliated with the Reformed Church in America, while Calvin, founded in 1876, is affiliated with the Christian Reformed Church in North America. Both are Christian-based liberals arts colleges, and both religious branches fall under the Protestant umbrella.“But most people around here couldn’t even tell you the difference,” said Tom Davelaar, a Hope alumnus now in his 33rd season as an assistant coach. “One of the reasons it’s such a rivalry is that both schools and fan bases are so alike — and yet we think we’re different somehow. We’re really just two peas in a pod.”It is a concession that most people affiliated with the basketball programs are willing to make — players are frequently recruited by both colleges — although the embers of competition smolder.On Saturday, before a capacity crowd of 3,434 at Hope’s DeVos Fieldhouse, which served the ancillary purpose of sheltering everyone from subarctic temperatures, the Calvin Knights emerged with a huge run in the second half for an 88-64 victory, trimming Hope’s lead in the series to 98-91. If that margin seems close, consider that the Hope Flying Dutchmen have outscored Calvin by a total of 65 points over those 189 games. The giant scoreboard in the sky now reads: Hope 12,843, Calvin 12,778.“If anything,” Hope Coach Greg Mitchell said, “the rivalry just continues to grow.”So it was perfectly reasonable for Bryan Powell, a former guard for Calvin, to recall in an interview how “Calvin students decided to challenge” Hope and make it sound as if the episode was fresh on his mind. Except he was talking about a game that had occurred in 1917.The back story goes something like this: Hope had gotten a head start on its athletics program, forming a basketball team in 1902, and a group of Calvin students who were eager to catch up created a team of their own — without telling college officials. It turned out to be a lose-lose situation for the Calvin students, who fell to Hope by a score of 51-8 and were subsequently reprimanded by the college for their unauthorized activities.AdvertisementOnly history absolved them — neither college counts the game as being “official” — and the first real game was staged in 1920. Hope won that one, too.For much of its first three decades, though, the rivalry ran too hot. It was abandoned from 1925 to 1929, according to college officials, because of “defacing of property, verbal abuse and fistfights” that followed games, and again from 1937 to 1943 because of poor behavior by fans.There was also a “tendency to use game results to bolster denominational positions in Sunday sermons,” according to historical notes compiled by the colleges. And when games were played, they were so fraught with tension that Albert Muyskens, a former Calvin coach, sometimes felt compelled to leave his spot on the bench and spend the final few minutes pacing in the locker room, leaving his players to fend for themselves.“He would be back there taking Maalox pills or whatever they had in the 1930s,” said Jeff Febus, the sports information director at Calvin.The games eventually took on a far more respectful tone. Hope went so far as to sponsor Calvin’s membership application to the M.I.A.A. in 1953, an act of benevolence that the Knights did not waste, winning the league title in their inaugural season.Momentum in the rivalry has ebbed and flowed, with games featuring transcendent players like Floyd Brady, who scored a team-record 2,004 points for Hope in the 1960s, and Mark Veenstra, a formidable center who turned down Big Ten scholarship offers to play an outsize role in Calvin’s 22-game winning streak that spanned the 1970s.Davelaar, the Hope assistant, recalled attending games with his grandfather as a child growing up in Grand Rapids. By now, he has witnessed more games than he can count, each memorable in its own way — though familiarity takes a toll. In the 2006-7 season, the teams met five times: twice in the regular season, once in a holiday tournament, once in the league tournament and again in the N.C.A.A. tournament.“That was probably too much,” Davelaar said.Davelaar was a longtime assistant under Glenn Van Wieren, who retired in 2010 after coaching the Flying Dutchmen to 660 wins, 31 straight winning seasons and 21 appearances in the N.C.A.A. tournament. But for all the team’s success, Davelaar remembers a game in 2005 against Calvin when fans, flush against the court, forced Van Wieren to roam from the bench — and accidentally make contact with a Calvin player who was shooting a jumper. Van Wieren was called for a technical foul.Advertisement“All the players were giving Glenn a hard time afterward,” Davelaar said. “So he just said, ‘Hey, nobody else was guarding those guys.’ ”For players, too, the small moments live on. Powell, the former Calvin guard, had a breakaway dunk against Hope in his junior season.“It will probably be the highlight of my life,” he said.On Saturday, as they have for years, alumni from Calvin and Hope gathered at more than 70 locations around the world for joint watch parties of the broadcast.Daniel Stout, a senior center for Calvin, said his parents had organized one at a Buffalo Wild Wings in San Diego, much as they had since he was a child. And while his father and grandfather had both attended Calvin, Stout said he was free to go where he wanted for college.“Probably not to Hope, though,” he said.Inside DeVos, Hope students stuffed the bleachers.“It’s one of the biggest rivalries in history!” said Luke Champion, a freshman from Metamora, Mich., who expressed his support by wearing a blue unitard with orange shorts.Calvin took control late behind Jordan Brink, a senior guard whose parents are alumni. He scored 29 points and made four 3-pointers.Vande Streek, in his 19th season at Calvin, said he had always been struck by the ties between the two programs rather than by their differences. The fundamental style of play. The winning traditions. The high school teammates who now find themselves defending each other. “We’ve had guys stand up at each other’s weddings,” he said.But as the final seconds ticked away, Vande Streek put all the nostalgia aside.“When you win,” he said, “it’s the greatest thing ever.”Articles in this series are chronicling
Scott Cacciola’s sabbatical from
covering the woeful Knicks. He will
check out some of the good basketball
around the country, recommended by
readers of The New York Times.A version of this article appears in print on January 13, 2015, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: Rivalry’s Edict: Drub Thy Neighbor.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »