AdvertisementSupported byLynx 80, Fever 77By The Associated PressINDIANAPOLIS — Maya Moore made a 3-pointer at the buzzer from the top of the key to give the Minnesota Lynx an 80-77 victory over the Indiana Fever on Friday night in Game 3 of the W.N.B.A. finals.Moore, who finished with 24 points, took an inbounds pass with 1.7 seconds left, moved to her right and swished the winner. The referees reviewed the play for a few minutes before declaring the basket good, leaving the crowd stunned.Moore said 1.7 seconds was “a lot of time.” “I’m a basketball junkie, watch basketball a lot,” she said, adding: “It was a basketball move, and I was able to get it off. Fortunately, I have a pretty quick release, and it worked out. I haven’t seen the replay yet. When I let it go, I knew I got it off.”Minnesota leads the best-of-five series, two games to one.In Game 4 on Sunday night, Minnesota will try to win its third title in five years. The team that has won Game 3 has won the title 70 percent of the time since the W.N.B.A. finals changed to a best-of-five format in 2005. Indiana is trying to become the first No. 3 seed to win a title. The first 18 championships were won by first or second seeds.The Lynx and the Fever played in the finals in 2012, when Indiana won its only title. After splitting the first two games that season, Indiana routed Minnesota in Game 3. This was a much tighter game.As was the case in the first two games in the series, in which each team won by 6 points, this one came down to the end. Neither team led by more than 5 points in the fourth quarter. Minnesota trailed by 77-74 with 2 minutes 8 seconds left before Renee Montgomery hit a 3-pointer to tie the score at 77-77 with 1:11 left.Both teams missed shots over the next 40 seconds before Indiana took possession with 25 seconds left. A jumper from the corner by Shenise Johnson was tipped with a few seconds left, and the ball went out of bounds, giving Minnesota one last chance to win in regulation. Moore took advantage.Advertisement