By ZACH SCHONBRUNJAN. 12, 2015
Phil Steele, the founder and author of a highly regarded college football preview magazine now in its 20th year, will have all 12 televisions in his office tuned to one game Monday night: the national title showdown between Oregon and Ohio State. He gave us some quick thoughts on the matchup. (This interview has been edited and condensed.)Q. What does Ohio State have to do to beat Oregon?A. The key is keeping Oregon from scoring so quickly. They were running those plays every 16 seconds against Florida State. And for Ohio State, its defensive front four is outstanding, but the depth isn’t there. If they do have to go to their depth, they could get themselves in a little bit of trouble. Now, Oregon is going to be without three receivers — Darren Carrington, Devon Allen and their tight end Pharaoh Brown. Those are three pretty good receivers, but they do have some pretty good depth. The key for them is just to get their offense rolling, which they should have a good chance to do. They [the Buckeyes] just took on two of the better defenses in the N.C.A.A., both ranked in the top five, and they just shredded both of them. Ezekiel Elliott rushed for over 200 yards in both games. And Cardale Jones put up some pretty good numbers against Wisconsin and Alabama. So I think Ohio State will be able to score against Oregon, and so the key is getting Oregon’s offense off the field quickly.Q. What have you liked from Cardale Jones in the past two games?A. We don’t know how he’s going to be completely reading defenses. A lot of his throws have been the deep ball, and he has the arm to get there. He’s also a big boy, so if you’re a linebacker, you don’t want to see him coming your way and try to take him down. I don’t think he can break down a defense quite like J. T. Barrett was breaking it down by the end of the year. But you’ve got to love his arm strength and the fact that, given the game plan he’s been given, he’s really thrived in it.Q. Does Ohio State have the best defensive front that Oregon has faced this season?A. Yeah, I would say so. I don’t think you find a better defensive front four in the country. But Oregon has got some pretty good offensive linemen. The left tackle and their center are among the best in the country.AdvertisementQ. How should Ohio State defend all of Oregon’s “pick” plays?A. Get more pressure on the quarterback and don’t allow the routes to develop. If they can get through, as opposed to giving Marcus Mariota that extra second or two to get the picks to develop, maybe disrupt the pass that way. But, hey, Oregon is going to score. My favorite thing about this game is I like the over — both teams are going to score in this game. It’s difficult to slow down Oregon because they’re loaded and they run their offense so quick. But, as I said, if Ohio State can put up 59 and 42 points against Wisconsin and Alabama, they’re taking a step down a level with the defense they’re facing against Oregon.Q. Will the loss of Oregon’s Carrington have an impact?A. When you look at Carrington, he had 165 and 126 yards his last two games. Before that, on the season coming into those two games, he averaged 1.9 catches per game and 34 yards per game. Now Devon Allen is another guy who’s out, and he had 674 yards on the year. He got injured against Florida State and basically missed the entire game. And Pharaoh Brown is out, but they have a 6-foot-5 kid named Dwayne Stanford who had 103 yards against Washington State. He was my No. 25-rated receiver out of high school. They’ve got Byron Marshall, Keanon Lowe, and then the true freshman in Charles Nelson, who in 10 games this year had two receptions or less because he was buried. But against Arizona, he had 104 yards. So, really, if you’re a defensive coordinator, your main thing is to stop Oregon’s rush, but you’re going to get some open receivers there. They just have a lot of depth at receiver.AdvertisementQ. Any prediction about which team will win?A. I’m leaving it on the over. If you’re going to pick against Oregon, wow. They’ve covered eight straight games, and they just took on a team that hadn’t lost in two years and beat them badly. But are you going to pick against Ohio State after they just demolished Wisconsin and beat Alabama with a third-string quarterback? I couldn’t pick against either of these two teams. But I like their offenses. So I’m taking the over.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.