By ROB HUGHESJAN. 12, 2015
LONDON —  The answer to many so-called crises in soccer lies on the field.Barcelona’s stadium fell silent Sunday night in a show of solidarity after the attacks in Paris last week, but then the crowd of 81,658 demanded, and got, total intensity from their players, as Barça took on Atlético Madrid.Neymar, Luis Suárez and, inevitably, Lionel Messi scored as Barcelona beat Atlético, 3-1. It took strong wills and some intense desire to overcome the team that won La Liga last season and that beat Real Madrid in the Copa del Rey last week.But when you have three predators and when they deliver as Messi did on Sunday, then all of the stories — some real, many made up — dissolve.Messi was so fired up that he was involved in all the goals, by both the home and the visiting clubs. He played with a frenzy seldom seen, responding to opponents with such physicality that it at times bordered on the fouls often perpetrated upon him.AdvertisementFirst, he rushed a scoring chance and missed. He was in good company there, because Neymar also hastily misdirected a header in front of an open goal. But Barcelona kept it up against an opponent that has patented perseverance and hard work in league play over the past four seasons.AdvertisementDiego Simeone, the coach who instills those traits in his team as few others can from the sidelines, paid tribute to Barcelona afterward. “In the first half,” Simeone told reporters, “their speed, their great intensity at recovering the ball quickly, wouldn’t let us counter. The rival is a great team, with great ability.”Precisely. Atlético won La Liga and nearly won the Champions League last year, despite having less talent than its top opponents. And after the season, it had to sell players like Diego Costa, whose knack for scoring was augmented by his precious ability to hold onto the ball, allowing his teammates time to rush forward and ambush the opponent.To overcome Simeone’s Atlético, teams first must match it in effort and then in the dark art of gaining an advantage in any and every way possible.Messi, of all people, did that Sunday. His part in the opening goal, 12 minutes in, was a pure kill: a darting run at a hapless defender and a pass inside, and though Suárez failed to control the ball, it was sent into the net by the next man, Neymar.Then came Messi’s small sin of the night. He was giving his defender, Jesús Gámez, the runaround, not only because Messi is so quick and guileful, but because Simeone had strangely decided to put Gámez, a right back, on the left side. In creating the second goal, however, Messi deceived more than his opponent as he surreptitiously used his upper arm to control the ball so quickly that the referee, Undiano Mallenco, missed it.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Is Messi, then, a cheat? In this instance, he was, and it led directly to Suarez’s scoring goal No.2.Halftime followed shortly after the second goal. It is possible that Mallenco then saw a replay of that score, because the first chance he got to make amends, the referee signaled a foul against Messi and a penalty kick.Barcelona’s biggest star had tried to win the ball from Gámez, and there had been the lightest brush of shin upon shin. Mallenco ruled it a penalty, and Mario Mandzukic hammered it home to pull Atlético back to within a goal at 2-1.AdvertisementFor a time, Barcelona seemed rattled. The television cameras focussed on Barcelona Coach Luis Enrique who, rumor had it, was facing dismissal in his first season in charge.In time, Barcelona rediscovered its rhythm. Andrés Iniesta was instrumental in that, as was the home defense, which had been coached by Enrique to deal with every high ball and every set piece of Atlético.Messi applied the finishing touches with just minutes to go. Dancing among defenders who had kicked Neymar so severely that blood seeped through his sock, Messi preyed on a minuscule defensive error to poach the final goal.“Messi! Messi! Messi!” the 80,000 fans chorused.Later, in the quiet of Barcelona’s own TV studio, Messi answered the rumors that he had undermined the coach and plotted to quit the club that had been his home since he was 13. “I have never wanted to go anywhere else,” he insisted. “I have heard that I, or my father, spoke to Chelsea and Manchester City, it is all lies. I am tired of hearing things about me, that I run the club. I am just another player.”Wrong. Messi, on the night of his 450th game for Barcelona, was again anything but just another player.A version of this article appears in print on January 13, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.