AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated Press and Ken BelsonCoach John Fox and the Denver Broncos are parting ways after the team’s latest playoff meltdown.The Broncos won the A.F.C. West all four of Fox’s years in Denver, but each season ended in an ugly fashion in the playoffs, culminating with a 24-13 loss to Indianapolis on Sunday.Asked after the game about a pregame report that he could be available if the Broncos fell to the Colts, Fox did not shoot it down, saying: “I don’t control that. My intentions are to be a Denver Bronco.”Fox might already have something in the works with another team. Neither he nor General Manager John Elway would say what was discussed Monday when they met — other than that it was time to split up.“It became clear that it was best for both the Denver Broncos and Coach Fox to move on and make this change,” Elway said in a statement.Fox departs after going 49-22 in Denver, including the playoffs, after a 73-71 record in nine years with the Carolina Panthers.The Broncos went 8-8 in Fox’s first year, when Tebowmania was in full pitch. Hopes were further raised when Denver won the Peyton Manning sweepstakes and replaced Tim Tebow in 2012.Denver went 38-10 in the regular season with Manning, but the Broncos were upset twice at home in the divisional round and were crushed by the Seahawks, 43-8, in last year’s Super Bowl.Elway thanked Fox for helping to “establish a positive, winning culture for this team,” and said Fox deserved “a lot of credit for the Broncos’ turnaround.” Fox characterized his meeting with Elway as productive and honest and said the two “mutually agreed that the timing was right for this decision.”“Although we came up short of our ultimate goal, I am proud of our team’s many accomplishments during these last four years,” Fox said in a statement.“I am eager to continue my coaching career and look forward to the opportunities that lie ahead.” Fox added.Fox became the only coach in N.F.L. history to win a dozen consecutive divisional road games on his way to an unprecedented four straight A.F.C. West titles in Denver.But the goal when Manning came on board was Super Bowl trophies. Instead, Manning is 2-3 in the playoffs with the Broncos.Manning was murky about his future Sunday night, saying he had to process the Broncos’ latest loss before he decided whether to play an 18th N.F.L. season.JONES SAYS RAMS CAN MOVE When the St. Louis Rams owner Stan Kroenke announced plans last week to build an 80,000-seat football stadium near downtown Los Angeles, it raised the specter that he might unilaterally move his team to Southern California.After his announcement, the N.F.L. reiterated that any team relocation must be approved by at least 24 out of the league’s 32 owners. The N.F.L. controls the Los Angeles market, and Commissioner Roger Goodell has said that any move there must be done in an orderly way.But in an interview last week, the Dallas Cowboys’ owner, Jerry Jones, said that while he prefers that the owners approve any team moving to Los Angeles, a team could possibly move there without league approval.“As it would turn out now, apart from the league saying no, you can move there,” he said. “Keep in mind that teams have moved without the permission of the league. They just have.”Asked if Kroenke could move on his own, Jones said: “He can if the league says he can’t.”Asked if the N.F.L. preferred to coordinate any relocation, Jones said: “Again, there are just certain things that clubs can do.”Jones’s comments are bound to stir interest in a murky and emotional process because he is one of the N.F.L.’s most powerful and unconventional owners.The league said last month that the Rams, the San Diego Chargers and the Oakland Raiders would not move to Los Angeles in 2015. But Kroenke has the ability to shift to a year-to-year lease at the Edward Jones Dome, where the Rams play. That would give him the flexibility to leave St. Louis in the coming years.“The idea of Stan going ahead and making his announcement was driven by all of the right things,” said Jones, who cited Kroenke’s having a deal for a location and his owning a team with “a great legacy.”Jones added, “All of that is to me a very positive thing for Los Angeles and for the N.F.L.”Last week, civic leaders in Missouri unveiled plans to build a new 64,000-seat outdoor stadium in downtown St. Louis to persuade Kroenke to stay. KEN BELSONAdvertisement