AdvertisementSupported byCardinals 4, Cubs 0By Tyler KepnerST. LOUIS — The St. Louis Cardinals fly 11 red flags above the right-field scoreboard at Busch Stadium. No other National League team has claimed as many World Series championships, and when the Cardinals do not win, they usually come close. They have advanced in October in each of the last four seasons.“It doesn’t matter if it’s us or the Pirates or the Dodgers or the Mets,” Jon Lester, who started Game 1 of the division series for the Chicago Cubs, said on Friday. “It’s gone through this city for a long time. You look at those banners in right-center field, you know that.”The Cubs have not won a title since 1908. Their giddy pursuit this season, with young stars emerging ahead of schedule, has broad appeal. Their rivals understand it. “That’s fine,” Cardinals pitcher Adam Wainwright said. “That’s baseball. People want to see a good story, and they certainly are a good story. They’ve been a great team all year long and have some great players that have built up to this moment, and now they’re feeling that mojo. It’s been exciting to watch.”Around here, though, the Cardinals are pretty exciting, too. Their pitchers stifled the Cubs in a 4-0 victory in Game 1, and the major contributors exemplified the St. Louis way.John Lackey, who worked seven and a third innings, came here in July 2014 in an inspired trade from the Boston Red Sox for Allen Craig and Joe Kelly, homegrown players who had become expendable. Stephen Piscotty doubled, homered and scored twice on Friday, and Tommy Pham also homered. Piscotty and Pham are rookies, the latest in what seems like an annual wave of young talent.“There’s always somebody in that clubhouse who can say: ‘We have done it,’ ” General Manager John Mozeliak said recently. “It’s not new to anybody. When somebody takes over, there’s like a healthy churn. And when you look at our club, you can clearly see that.”That healthy churn produced a resilient roster that scrapped for 100 wins in a division with the Pittsburgh Pirates, who won 98, and the Cubs, who won 97. It saved the Cardinals from a wild-card knockout game, which the Cubs won in Pittsburgh behind Jake Arrieta on Wednesday.Without Arrieta, the Cubs turned to Lester, their $155 million free agent from last winter. Lester was very good for seven and a third innings, but Lackey was better, allowing just two hits and a walk, with five strikeouts.“You know what Lack’s going to do,” Lester said. “First five innings, he gives up one base runner. He had it working tonight. Sometimes, one is all a guy needs, and that’s all he really needed tonight.”As much as these teams’ fans clash, some of the people in uniform have deep connections to the other side. Cubs Manager Joe Maddon grew up rooting for the Cardinals’ World Series teams of the 1960s. Arrieta was a groomsman in the wedding of Matt Carpenter, the Cardinals’ third baseman and a teammate at Texas Christian.Lester and Lackey were the top two starters on the Red Sox team that beat the Cardinals in the 2013 World Series. They bonded over “country stuff,” Lackey said on Thursday, meaning music, hunting and trucks, before Boston traded both last July.Acquiring Lackey, a durable postseason stalwart, has been crucial for the Cardinals. Two young starters, Michael Wacha and Carlos Martinez, were All-Stars this season, but Wacha has faded, and Martinez is out with a shoulder injury. In Lackey, the Cardinals found a veteran who could easily handle a playoff opener.“We liked that trade a lot,” Bill DeWitt Jr., owner of the Cardinals, said after Game 1. “He was a very valuable pitcher for us, a veteran winner. He’d finished off two World Series championships; he’s a competitor. He had what we were looking for.”Lackey, who turns 37 this month, made his 19th career postseason start, the most among active pitchers. He is 8-5 with a 2.90 E.R.A. in the postseason, and his victories include World Series clinchers for the 2002 Angels and the 2013 Red Sox.“He was always kind of fearless,” said Maddon, who coached for those Angels. “He comes from Texas, kind of does the John Wayne strut out there. He’s that guy, but we had the same guy in return with Jon Lester.”It was Lackey, though, who retired his first 10 hitters on Friday. The Cubs’ first hit against him was a bouncer through the middle by Addison Russell to lead off the sixth. Their other was a bunt by Kyle Schwarber against the infield shift in the seventh.Lackey twice induced double plays to end innings. He spotted his fastball well against an aggressive lineup and survived his biggest mistake when Dexter Fowler popped out to the right-field wall with a runner on third in the seventh. Fowler said he had hit balls worse and seen them become home runs.“Playoffs, man,” Lackey said. “This is what you play for. I’ve been playing awhile, and this is pretty much the only reason I’m still going. I’m trying to win rings and be part of something special.”By the time Trevor Rosenthal entered for the ninth, the game was no longer close. Pham and Piscotty had homered in the eighth, and when Kris Bryant batted with two on in the ninth, he was not even the tying run. Rosenthal caught him looking at a 98-mile-an-hour fastball to end the game.Advertisement