AdvertisementSupported byBy Ben ShpigelAs the Jets enter what their owner Woody Johnson called a critical juncture for the organization, they are set to entrust the football operations department to Mike Maccagnan, who is on the verge of being hired as general manager.No deal is final, but the sides are moving toward an agreement, and the Jets are confident that they will strike one, according to a person familiar with the team’s plan.Maccagnan, the Houston Texans’ director of college scouting, emerged from a field of seven candidates interviewed over a two-week search that centered on executives with vast experience in personnel. Among that group, only Maccagnan interviewed a second time with Jets officials, dining Friday night with Johnson and spending the weekend in New Jersey.Maccagnan represents a stark change from his predecessor, John Idzik, who was experienced in salary-cap management and contract negotiation but not player evaluation. For the last 21 seasons, Maccagnan has worked in N.F.L. personnel departments, rising from a college scout with the Washington Redskins to his current position in Houston, where his responsibilities included assessing college prospects and other teams’ players in advance of free agency. How he fares in those areas may determine how soon the Jets, after four consecutive seasons without a playoff berth, return to prominence. Maccagnan would inherit financial flexibility — the Jets are projected to have at least $40 million in salary-cap space — and the No. 6 pick in the draft. But he also must ascertain how to proceed at quarterback, whether to re-sign any of the Jets’ 17 unrestricted free agents and the best way to improve a team that must improve at cornerback, at receiver, on the offensive line and in the pass rush. Maccagnan’s approach would hinge, in part, on the philosophy and preferred playing style of the Jets’ next coach, who has not yet been hired. The Jets have interviewed six candidates and are slated to meet Wednesday with a seventh, the Panthers defensive coordinator Sean McDermott, whose unit ranked in the top 10 in all three seasons of his tenure. A second interview has been scheduled with the Arizona defensive coordinator Todd Bowles, who has also interested Atlanta.Bowles impressed the Jets, but the favorite to replace Rex Ryan — should they be willing to wait — is the Seattle defensive coordinator Dan Quinn. However much the Jets want to hire him, Quinn cannot receive an offer until after the Seahawks’ season ends, and if Seattle advances to the Super Bowl, he will not be available until the night of Feb. 1. The Jets will have to balance their perceived chances of luring Quinn with any concern they may have about his ability to assemble a staff long after many top assistants will have found other jobs. All along, the Jets preferred to hire a general manager before a coach, and they conducted concurrent searches for competitive reasons. Doing so allowed them to develop a sense for coaching candidates they liked, and to envision potential tandems they thought would mesh. Maccagnan, a native of Hightstown, N.J., began his career in 1990 as an intern in the Redskins’ scouting department. It was there he met Charley Casserly, one of two former general managers Johnson enlisted as consultants to guide him through replacing Idzik and Rex Ryan.Maccagnan held personnel positions in the World League of American Football and the Canadian Football League, working for Ottawa and Saskatchewan, before Casserly hired him in 1994. Bryan Broaddus, a former N.F.L. scout who worked with Maccagnan in the World League and has remained friendly with him, characterized him as quiet, almost professorial, and as having a “great eye for talent.”“He’s very honest,” Broaddus said in a telephone interview. “When he talks about players, he’s got your utmost respect.” He added: “Some scouts can fake their way through understanding players, but Michael wasn’t like that. He was a grinder. His way of doing it was to sit down, watch the tape and then formulate his opinion based on what he saw.”When Casserly became general manager of an expansion franchise in Houston in January 2000, Maccagnan accompanied him, and he was promoted three months later to coordinator of college scouting. He was elevated in 2010 to the assistant director of college scouting and, a year later, promoted to director. Maccagnan had an influential voice in Houston’s last four drafts, which netted the star defensive end J. J. Watt, the No. 1 overall pick Jadeveon Clowney, the receiver DeAndre Hopkins and two starting offensive linemen, Brandon Brooks and Ben Jones. The Texans, however, also had notable misses, including what seems to have been a poor draft in 2013. Their two third-round picks that year, offensive lineman Brennan Williams and defensive end Sam Montgomery, and their fourth-round choice, linebacker Trevardo Williams, did not last more than one season. Tom Pedulla contributed reporting.Advertisement