By FILIP BONDYOCT. 9, 2015
Thirteen minutes into the first period, Artem Anisimov broke down ice and flipped a top-shelf backhander toward the Islanders’ net past goaltender Thomas Greiss. It was the first regular-season goal ever scored at Barclays Center. From Section 201, however, there was only the sight of Anisimov’s shot heading toward a black hole somewhere below.Then silence. Then anger. The goal itself had been obscured by the Brooklyn building’s quirky, asymmetric architecture.“You got to be kidding,” said Christopher Dabrowski, a Long Islander from Franklin Square, who had paid $125 for a seat that did not allow him to see the goal at his end of the building.While it was true that Dabrowski had purchased a ticket featuring the explicit warning “Limited view,” he had not expected his view to be quite so limited. He could not be blamed for expecting more from an arena that bills itself as “one of the most intimate seating configurations ever designed.”Advertisement“I took a chance, but this is horrible,” Dabrowski said. “This stadium is not made for hockey, plain and simple.”AdvertisementThe Islanders’ opener on Friday night received mixed reviews from the fans in attendance, whose experiences varied greatly according to ticket price and location. For one thing, the crowd was far quieter than those that filled Nassau Coliseum at times. The decibel level was far lower than those at the Islanders’ playoff games last spring.Many in the crowd had made the commute from Nassau and Suffolk Counties by train or car. These were old-style blue-and-orange loyalists, not Brooklyn hipsters in the team’s alternate black jersey. Upon arrival, some of the more privileged supporters were wined and dined in the arena’s fanciest niches, the clubs. They had a grand old time. Others — the fans sitting up by Denis Potvin’s retired jersey in Sections 201, 202, 203, 229, 230 and 231 — found life far more frustrating.The second goal also came at the wrong end. In the second period, John Tavares fired a shot from the crease that, like the others, disappeared into the darkness below. This time it was an Islanders goal. Once more, right below. Fans who had not been watching the scoreboard as it happened had to settle for a replay on the big screen.“I’m getting madder and madder the more I think about it,” said Kristie Rodgers of Merrick.Rodgers remembered how she and her high school friends had worn hard hats to games at the Coliseum, goofing around with the notion that the ceiling might fall down upon them at any moment.“The Islanders need to go back to Long Island,” Rodgers said. “I’d rather be in the Coliseum wearing a hard hat than here with an obstructed view.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.There have been obstructed views before at New York hockey games. Fans sitting along the side of the upper deck at the old Madison Square Garden often could not see the quarter of the ice closest to them, though they could see the goals. Pillars in Nassau Coliseum blocked some views, yet most of those were mere visual nuisances.A pregame ceremony at Barclays Center, a celebration of the team’s Long Island history, was enough to charm even some of the fans near the rafters. The most cynical among them had to admit that this was a more convenient new home for the Islanders than Kansas City, one potential location the owner Charles Wang had flirted with.“It’s a bit disappointing, but it’s good to be here,” said Dave Barbieri of Garden City. “People just have got to suck it up.”AdvertisementSome fans predicted that the Islanders would be back on Long Island within five years after attendance had faded in Brooklyn and the Coliseum site had been revamped. Others blamed their basketball-friendly sightlines on Jay Z. There were also suggestions for how to fix the arena, starting with the removal of a banner, advertising a sports fantasy website, that blocked the view of many rows.“I’m no architect, but they could take out five rows on one end, shift the ice,” said Patrick Drexler of Brooklyn. “They really botched this. It’s not O.K. But in the end, it’s about the product that’s on the ice.”The league did the Islanders no favors in scheduling them against the Blackhawks, the Stanley Cup champions, who were coming off a tough opening loss to the Rangers and looking for a quick rebound.Still, this was a marquee event at a clean, well-ordered arena. Rodgers, the fan from Merrick, eventually settled into her seat and tried to watch the game. Then things grew worse. A few minutes before the start, a large, loud man in a Blackhawks jersey took his seat directly in front of her, further blocking her view and disturbing her peace.“Go, Hawks!” he screamed.“Aargh,” Rodgers said.A version of this article appears in print on October 10, 2015, on Page D1 of the New York edition with the headline: They Came. They Didn’t See. They Griped. .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.