AdvertisementSupported byBlackhawks 3, Islanders 2By Allan KredaAfter a surprisingly perfunctory pregame ceremony at Barclays Center on Friday — ending with a center-ice puck drop that featured three current and future Islanders owners and four team legends — the Islanders tried but could not quite live up to the relentless three-year buildup to playing hockey in Brooklyn.Patrick Kane’s goal in overtime, his second of the game, lifted the Chicago Blackhawks to a 3-2 win, much to the dismay of the fans, but not so much to the Islanders themselves.“We’ll keep competing the way we’re doing, and we’ll be fine,” Islanders center Frans Nielsen said. “We’re on the board.”Defenseman Marek Zidlicky scored for the Islanders to knot the game, 2-2, at 1 minute 18 seconds of the third period after Kane gave the Blackhawks a 2-1 lead with a wrist shot at 15:11 of the second. Kane then scored on a four-on-three power play at 1:49 of overtime to give the defending Stanley Cup champion Blackhawks the win and sending the crowd of 15,795 quietly off into the streets of Brooklyn instead of the parking lots of Nassau Coliseum.Though the opening-night tally was listed as a sellout, the lower bowl had many rows of empty seats and was reminiscent of the sea of vacant seats often seen in field level sections at Yankee Stadium.The captain John Tavares registered the first Islanders goal when he tied the contest at 1-1 with a shot past goaltender Corey Crawford at 5:22 of the middle period.“We all thought about that — your captain, your best player, and he bangs in the first one,” Islanders Coach Jack Capuano said. “That’s something he’ll remember.”The former Ranger Artem Anisimov scored short-handed 13:28 into the first to give Chicago the lead after one period. Each squad registered 12 shots in the opening period. The Islanders had a 23-22 shots advantage after two periods.The Islanders started the backup goaltender Thomas Greiss in place of the injured Jaroslav Halak. Greiss signed as a free agent in July after playing 20 games for Pittsburgh last season.Before the game, the 29-year-old Greiss said he was looking forward to his Islanders debut and the chance to make history in Brooklyn.“I know they will come hard,” Greiss said of the Blackhawks, who lost their season opener, 3-2, to Rangers on Wednesday in Chicago.The fans were mostly clad in the blue and orange they had been wearing to games on Long Island for more than four decades, and they were eager to explode for a goal. They finally got the chance when Tavares tied the game.Johnny Boychuk and Casey Cizikas assisted on the goal, setting off the traditional chant of “Yes! Yes! Yes!” — mainly in the upper levels of the arena that were mostly filled with boisterous fans.Hours before the long-awaited opener, workmen were still sprucing up ice-level areas as both teams went through morning skates.Planks of plywood were in motion. Glass surrounding the rink was being shined. Various beverage items in bulk moved past Capuano as he spoke to reporters.“We want to compete and execute and have a big game in our new arena,” he said.The effort was there against the Blackhawks, but as when the Islanders faltered down the stretch last season and frittered away home-ice advantage to start the playoffs, they couldn’t come away with two points despite numerous opportunities. Capuano remained heartened and praised the performance of Greiss, who made 32 saves in his Islanders debut. “Our goalie gave us a chance to win against a pretty good hockey team,” he said. Barclays Center did take on a spiffier hockey appearance for the game. Joining four Stanley Cup banners already dangling from the rafters through the preseason were individual new ones listing the team’s conference and division crowns plus the six retired jersey numbers in Islanders history.In addition, the former coach Al Arbour and general manager Bill Torrey — architects of the Stanley Cup run from 1980-83 — had their banners next to the No. 5 of Hall of Fame defenseman Denis Potvin. A moment of silence was held before the game for Arbour, who died in August at 82.Joining the departing owner Charles Wang for the pregame ceremony were the future majority owners Jon Ledecky and Scott Malkin as well as four Islanders with their numbers retired — Bob Nystrom, Billy Smith, Bryan Trottier and Mike Bossy.SLAP SHOTSPatrick Kane was taunted by the crowd when he was on the ice. Multiple news reports have said that Kane was accused of raping a woman in early August at his off-season home in Buffalo, though he has not been charged. ... Alexa Ray Joel — daughter of Billy Joel and Christie Brinkley — sang the national anthem. Advertisement