By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSOCT. 9, 2015
Marshawn Lynch will miss a second straight game for the Seattle Seahawks because of a hamstring strain.On Friday, the team officially ruled Lynch out for Sunday’s game against the Cincinnati Bengals.Lynch injured his hamstring in the second quarter of the team’s 26-0 victory over the Chicago Bears in Week 3. Lynch returned to limited participation in practice on Thursday but is not ready to return. He will not travel with the team to Cincinnati.“He could try to come back and play, but we think he’d be vulnerable,” Seahawks Coach Pete Carroll said. “He needs another weekend to get through it, and then by next week, by Wednesday or something, we think we can get him going again. We’re just about over the hump.”GIANTS DEFENDERS SIDELINED The strongside linebacker Devon Kennard and defensive linemen Robert Ayers Jr. and George Selvie will miss the Giants’ game Sunday night against the San Francisco 49ers because of injuries.AdvertisementCoach Tom Coughlin ruled out the three players and receiver Victor Cruz on Friday after they did not practice.AdvertisementAyers has a hamstring injury. Kennard pulled a hamstring last weekend in a win over the Buffalo Bills, and Selvie hurt a calf. Cruz has been sidelined all season with a calf injury.Linebacker Jonathan Casillas (calf) and backup cornerbacks Jayron Hosley (concussion) and Trumaine McBride (groin) are listed as questionable.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Tight end Jerome Cunningham (knee), tackle Ereck Flowers (ankle) and defensive tackle Markus Kuhn (knee) all practiced and are listed as probable.SAINT TO MAKE FIRST START New Orleans left tackle Terron Armstead has been ruled out with a knee injury for Sunday’s game at Philadelphia, opening the way for the club’s top draft pick, Andrus Peat, to make his first N.F.L. start.HOYER BACK AS STARTER Brian Hoyer has his job back as the Houston Texans’ starting quarterback.Hoyer won the job out of camp but was pulled in the fourth quarter of a season-opening loss to the Kansas City Chiefs after committing two turnovers. Ryan Mallett has started since then, but he has struggled, and Hoyer took over in both of the last two games as the Texans fell to 1-4.MCCOY REMAINS OUT A left hamstring injury could sideline the Buffalo Bills’ star running back, LeSean McCoy, for another month.McCoy said Friday that the medical staff had given him a three- to four-week timetable to recover from the injury, which he aggravated during practice Sept. 24. That could delay his return until after the Bills come back from their bye week to host the Dolphins on Nov. 8.AdvertisementFINES AFTER BILLS-GIANTS GAME Buffalo defensive end Jerry Hughes was fined more than $30,000 by the N.F.L. for incidents in last weekend’s loss to the Giants.Hughes, who has a history of verbally admonishing game officials, was fined $23,152 for abusive language toward an official and $8,681 for unnecessary roughness for head-butting the Giants rookie tackle Ereck Flowers.Giants receiver Odell Beckham Jr. was fined $8,681 for throwing punches and striking Buffalo’s Duke Williams.A version of this article appears in print on October 10, 2015, on Page D6 of the New York edition with the headline: Hamstring Injury Forces Lynch From Second Straight Game .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.