AdvertisementSupported byN.F.L. RoundupBy Ken BelsonCivic leaders in St. Louis are disappointed with comments made by the Dallas Cowboys owner Jerry Jones, who said that an owner could move a team without league approval.Last week, a group appointed by Gov. Jay Nixon of Missouri announced plans for a 64,000-seat outdoor stadium in downtown St. Louis as a way to persuade the St. Louis Rams owner Stan Kroenke to remain there.Kroenke also announced plans to build an 80,000-seat stadium near downtown Los Angeles, stoking fears in St. Louis that he would move the team. The N.F.L. requires that at least 24 of the league’s 32 owners approve any relocation.But Jones said in an interview that while he preferred that owners got league approval, it was possible for teams to move without it.“As it would turn out now, apart from the league saying no, you can move there,” he said. “Keep in mind that teams have moved without the permission of the league. They just have.”Dave Peacock, who is spearheading an effort to build a new stadium in St. Louis, was dismayed.“We’re disappointed that anyone associated with the N.F.L. might dismiss the bylaws they wrote to govern themselves,” he said. “We’ve put a lot of faith in those bylaws.”Peacock said he has been talking with league officials and Kevin Demoff, the chief operating officer of the Rams — although not with Kroenke — about the proposed stadium.Peacock said he was confident that about $400 million in public money can be raised to pay for the stadium, which is expected to cost about $1 billion. Other money could come from the sale of personal seat licenses, loans from the N.F.L. and Kroenke, said Peacock, who added that the group was prepared to begin acquiring land for the project.“With a plan, that’s going to reinforce that not only do we deserve an N.F.L. team, we should continue to have an N.F.L. team,” he said.NEW DEAL IN DALLAS Cowboys Coach Jason Garrett has agreed to a five-year contract and Rod Marinelli, the team’s defensive coordinator, is returning on a three-year contract, according to multiple news media reports.Garrett led the Cowboys to the playoffs for the first time since 2009. The defense improved significantly this season after Marinelli was promoted from defensive line coach. (AP)ELWAY WANTS MANNING If John Elway gets to choose, his quarterback next season will be Peyton Manning.During a news conference, Elway said he did not press Manning for a decision on his future when they met the day after Denver’s loss to the Indianapolis Colts in the playoffs. Elway, the Broncos’ general manager and executive vice president, said he expected to reconvene with Manning in about a month to see where he stands. (AP)CHANGES IN BUFFALO Rex Ryan’s first full day on the job as the Buffalo Bills’ coach featured an expected change of coordinators. Greg Roman was hired to run the offense, and Jim Schwartz is out as defensive coordinator. (AP)PROMOTION IN PITTSBURGH The Steelers promoted their longtime linebackers coach, Keith Butler, to defensive coordinator, giving him a three-year contract to replace Dick LeBeau, a Hall of Famer who spent two stints with the Steelers building defenses that regularly led the club to the postseason. LeBeau, 77, stepped down on Saturday. (AP)Advertisement