AdvertisementSupported byIslanders 3, Rangers 0By Allan KredaPerched in first place, the Islanders find themselves in rarefied air halfway through the season, their last in Nassau County before moving to Brooklyn.Everything feels different after last year’s dismal last-place finish in the Metropolitan Division. But winning at Madison Square Garden has been a regular occurrence for the Islanders, and on Tuesday night they extended that streak with efficiency.Anders Lee, Nikolay Kulemin and Frans Nielsen scored second-period goals, and Jaroslav Halak made 27 saves as the Islanders unleashed 44 shots and downed the Rangers, 3-0, winning for the fifth time in their last six visits to the Garden. It was the first time the Islanders shut out the Rangers at the Garden since Dec. 17, 1975.“It was a big rivalry game, and the guys deserve a lot of credit for playing hard hockey,” said Halak, who won for the 23rd time this season. “I’ll take it — another 2 points, and we keep climbing the ladder.”The Rangers (24-12-4) came in as the hottest team in the N.H.L., winners of five straight and 13 of their last 14 going back to Dec. 6. The Garden faithful were eager for the clash, chanting, “Let’s go, Rangers” from the opening face-off as they tried to inspire their surging team.But the Islanders excelled with varying doses of speed and slick playmaking.Lee broke through at 8 minutes 49 seconds of the second period when he knocked a rebound past Henrik Lundqvist.The goal, Lee’s 11th of the season, ignited the familiar Nassau Coliseum chant of “Yes! Yes! Yes!” from pockets of Islanders fans. A few rounds of “Let’s go, Islanders” followed, to the chagrin of the home crowd.Kulemin made the score 2-0 at 16:31 of the second with a shot from the slot that appeared to fool a screened Lundqvist before Nielsen scored his ninth of the season — with the Islanders short-handed — at 19:19 with an assist from defenseman Johnny Boychuk.“We were playing on the road against a pretty good team, and we did a good job of getting our game going,” said John Tavares, the Islanders’ captain.Lundqvist, who made of number of acrobatic saves, was replaced by Cam Talbot at the beginning of the third period.“Tonight was a tough outing for us,” Lundqvist said. “They kept the pressure on us. The way they play, they have a lot of skill up front. They create a lot of chances.”Both teams had opportunities early as the Islanders outshot the Rangers by 13-9 in the first period. Rick Nash and Derick Brassard each hit the posts behind Halak on the same play late in the period.An apparent Islanders goal early in the second was waved off because Casey Cizikas had interfered with Lundqvist in the crease.Before the game, players and coaches on each side were all politeness and admiration.Islanders Coach Jack Capuano said he expected his team to play with its usual energetic approach.“Our focus and attitude is all about how we prepare,” he said. “It’s all about character and accountability.”Capuano’s words proved prophetic as the Islanders improved to 29-13-1, and 10-3-1 since Dec. 11. The Islanders are in first place in the Eastern Conference and have a 1-point lead over the Tampa Bay Lightning and the Pittsburgh Penguins, whom they will face on Friday at home. “It’s going to be a big game,” said Halak, who recorded his fourth shutout this season.Halak had a team-record 11-game winning streak from Nov. 5 to Dec. 4 and a seven-game streak after that. He is nine wins shy of tying the Islanders record for wins in a season, a mark shared by Billy Smith, Chris Osgood and Rick DiPietro.Not only was the Rangers’ flat performance surprising, but it was also the first time in 13 games they lost in regulation to a division opponent. It was only their second loss in their last 10 home games.It followed a glorious trip in which the Rangers defeated three tough opponents from the Western Conference: Anaheim, Los Angeles and San Jose.“We gave up a short-handed goal, and that seemed to take the energy right out of our game,” Rangers Coach Alain Vigneault said, referring to Nielsen’s goal. “That goal really hurt us.”SLAP SHOTSThe teams meet three more times, all at Nassau Coliseum, on Jan. 27, Feb. 16 and March 10. ... Rangers forward Martin St. Louis played the 1,100th game of his career, while defenseman Marc Staal skated in his 500th contest on his 28th birthday. ... The Rangers’ top-line center, Derek Stepan — who missed the first 12 games of the season with a fractured fibula — did not return for the third period because of an upper-body injury. Advertisement