By BEN SHPIGELJAN. 13, 2015
In two swift moves Tuesday night, the Jets remodeled their franchise.They apparently reached an agreement with Todd Bowles, the defensive coordinator of the Arizona Cardinals, to become their next coach. A few hours earlier, the team announced that it had hired Mike Maccagnan, the Texans’ director of college scouting, to become its next general manager.The Jets have not formally acknowledged Bowles’s hiring, but two people with direct knowledge of the search process said that a deal would be reached.Bowles, in a text message to ESPN’s Josina Anderson that she posted on Twitter, said, “I’m taking the Jets job.”As the Jets seek to reach the playoffs for the first time since 2010, they have turned to two New Jersey natives who are widely respected around the N.F.L. to restore the team to prominence.AdvertisementWhereas Maccagnan emerged as the clear front-runner last week, interviewing a second time with Jets officials on Friday and spending the weekend in New Jersey, Bowles gathered late momentum.AdvertisementThe Jets’ top two choices were Bowles and the Seattle defensive coordinator Dan Quinn, but the team was concerned about waiting for Quinn, who could not receive — or accept — any offers until after the Seahawks’ season, which could last until the Super Bowl. If the Jets were going to hold out for Quinn, the most coveted assistant in the league, they needed to be certain that he would pick them.With an appealing job in Denver opening on Monday after the departure of John Fox, adding to Quinn’s list of potential suitors, the Jets pounced on Bowles. He impressed them in his initial interview last Wednesday and returned for a second meeting on Tuesday, when dinner went so well with the owner Woody Johnson and the consultants Charley Casserly and Ron Wolf that the Jets canceled their scheduled interview Wednesday with the Carolina defensive coordinator Sean McDermott.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Bowles, who succeeds Rex Ryan, becomes the sixth consecutive Jets head coach with a defensive background — and the fourth hired by Johnson, who has altered the power structure so that Bowles and Maccagnan both report directly to him, and that Maccagnan would be an “equal partner” with the next coach.In hiring Bowles, 51, the day after Ryan was formally announced as the Buffalo Bills’ coach, the Jets are replacing one excellent defensive coach with another. The Cardinals ranked in the top seven in scoring defense in both of Bowles’s seasons with the team. In 2013 they led the N.F.L. in rushing defense, allowing the fewest yards in team history over a 16-game season.Bowles, who played at Temple and for eight years in the N.F.L., has spent the last 15 seasons in the league coaching defenses, primarily the secondary. He began his N.F.L. coaching career with the Jets, in 2000, and also worked for Cleveland, Dallas, Miami and Philadelphia before going to Arizona before the 2013 season.It will be critical for Bowles to assemble a strong staff, and while he is expected to bring some coaches with him from Arizona, he is likely to pursue Chan Gailey, the former Bills coach, as the offensive coordinator.Maccagnan, whose ties to Casserly may have helped to endear him to Johnson, still must prove his aptitude as a general manager, but he possesses an extensive background in player evaluation that his failed predecessor, John Idzik, sorely lacked during his 23 months with the team.“We interviewed a number of impressive, qualified candidates, but Mike Maccagnan clearly stood out,” Johnson said in a statement issued by the team. “Mike’s attention to detail, strong personnel background and collaborative approach to evaluating players made it clear that he is the right choice to be the next general manager of the New York Jets.”A version of this article appears in print on January 14, 2015, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Jets Rebuilding Again With New Power Structure.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.