By FRED BIERMANOCT. 9, 2015
No. 23 California at No. 5 Utah10 p.m. Eastern, ESPNIt is worth staying up late for this one. While it is not a date that many people would have circled on their calendars, this Pacific-12 matchup might produce the game of the week. Utah (4-0) has been the surprise of the season. The Utes opened with a victory over Michigan, but it was a 62-20 victory over Oregon in Eugene that vaulted them into the spotlight. They are not a spectacular team, but they are balanced on offense and defense, and a victory here would give them a résumé as good as any team in the country. California (5-0) has been a surprise as well, just not quite on the level of Utah. The Bears’ competition has not been as tough (they needed a missed extra point for a wild 45-44 victory over a Texas team that is 1-4). But quarterback Jared Goff is having a breakout season, with 15 touchdown passes and a 70 percent completion rate, and California’s offense has always been a strength. — the mostNo. 13 Northwestern at No. 18 Michigan3:30 p.m., Big Ten NetworkTwo of the Big Ten’s best defenses square off at the Big House in a rivalry that has seen its share of ridiculous finishes. Unfortunately for Northwestern, that ridiculousness has favored Michigan. The Wildcats lead the nation in scoring defense, while the Wolverines are coming off consecutive shutouts. For Michigan, it all starts with protecting the ball. Quarterback Jake Rudock has struggled in that department, having thrown six interceptions and lost two fumbles.Navy at No. 15 Notre Dame3:30 p.m., NBCThese two teams have met every season since 1927, making this the most frequently played nonconference rivalry in college football. It is also one of the most one-sided, with Notre Dame holding a 75-12-1 advantage. From 1964 to 2006, Notre Dame won 43 straight games in the series, the longest winning streak between two annual opponents in what is now the Bowl Championship Subdivision. This year it is Navy that comes in undefeated, and a victory in South Bend would most likely be good enough for the Midshipmen to crack the regular-season top 25 for the first time since 1979. Leading the triple option attack for Navy is the senior quarterback Keenan Reynolds, who needs only four rushing touchdowns to tie Monte Ball’s N.C.A.A. record of 77 career scores. Notre Dame has little margin for error in the race for the playoff after losing at Clemson last week.Miami at No. 12 Florida State8 p.m., ABCMiami Coach Al Golden could really use a victory. The Hurricanes followed a win over Nebraska by laying an egg against Cincinnati last week. Even in Cincinnati, an airplane with a “Fire Al Golden” banner flew over the stadium. Beating Florida State for the first time in six years might quiet some of those critics. Of course, this is a Seminoles team that has not lost a regular-season game since November 2012. Florida State has struggled to find balance on offense, with running back Dalvin Cook carrying much of the load.AdvertisementNo. 11 Florida at Missouri7:30 p.m., SECNAfter blowing out No. 3 Mississippi, 38-10, last week, Florida jumped 14 spots in the poll and is suddenly the favorite in the Southeastern Conference’s East Division. Missouri has dominated the last two meetings in this series and went on to win the East both years. Florida is hoping for a changing of the guard. The Tigers have been suspect on offense, but their defense is allowing only 12 points a game, which leads the SEC.Illinois at No. 22 IowaNoon, ESPN2Iowa (5-0) is ranked in the top 25 for the first time in five years. Its defense has yet to allow a rushing touchdown, and cornerback Desmond King has five interceptions (tied for most in the nation).AdvertisementNo. 10 Oklahoma vs. Texas at DallasNoon, ABCThe wheels appear to have come off at Texas. The Longhorns (1-4) are off to their worst start in 60 years, and last week a player was on Twitter during halftime of a blowout against Texas Christian. Oklahoma (4-0) appears headed in the opposite direction, and not surprisingly, the Sooners are 17-point favorites.A version of this article appears in print on October 10, 2015, on Page D7 of the New York edition with the headline: Games to Watch.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.