AdvertisementSupported byBy Richard SandomirFive years after he purchased the Nets and became the first overseas owner in the N.B.A., Mikhail D. Prokhorov is actively seeking potential buyers for the team, two people with knowledge of his plans said. The two people said Prokhorov was using the New York investment banker Evercore Partners to gauge interest in a sale. If it were to occur, Prokhorov would probably receive at least several times the $223 million that he paid in 2010 for 80 percent of the Nets and 45 percent of Barclays Center, the Brooklyn arena where the team plays. The market has changed drastically since Prokhorov entered the N.B.A. scene as a 6-foot-8-inch Russian oligarch who enjoyed making quips and very much wanted to make a splash. Since then, the Golden State Warriors were sold for $450 million, the Milwaukee Bucks were sold for $550 million and, most recently, the Los Angeles Clippers were purchased by Steve Ballmer for $2 billion.Ellen Pinchuk, a spokeswoman for Prokhorov, acknowledged that he was open to discussing the possible sale of the team. “That’s his approach,” Pinchuk said. “But nothing is imminent and nothing is in the works.” She added that Prokhorov recognized “that the value of the team has increased many times since he bought it.”“And he’s a businessman,” Pinchuk said. “But beyond that, nothing has changed from our point of view.”Since last year, Evercore has also been seeking buyers for the stakes in the Nets and Barclays that are owned by Forest City Enterprises. Evercore’s involvement with Prokhorov was first reported by Bloomberg News. Prokhorov’s rationale for formally looking at offers is not known. But he could be frustrated with his team. When he bought the Nets in 2010, they were still playing in New Jersey and losing almost every game. He set a goal of contending for an N.B.A. title within five years. For a while, the team made progress. In 2012-13, the Nets’ first season in Brooklyn, they went 49-33 and then lost in the first round of the playoffs. Last season, after making a daring trade for two aging Boston Celtics stars, Paul Pierce and Kevin Garnett, the Nets went backward, finishing 44-38. They advanced to the second round in the postseason but did not seem to be a club on the rise.This season, they appear to be a team on the decline. Pierce has moved on, Garnett seems near the end of his career, and two players previously considered among the team’s top stars — Deron Williams and Brook Lopez — have slowly evolved into injury-prone, inconsistent performers. Heading into Wednesday’s game against Memphis, the Nets have a 16-22 record, have lost six games in a row and seem far removed from being a serious contender for a championship.Rather than brooding about the team, and the many millions he has lost in owning it, Prokhorov may now see an easy way to cash in for perhaps $1 billion in profit. He could also be looking to discard a valuable United States asset at a time when the Russian economy is in turmoil as it copes with Western penalties, the falling value of the ruble and tumbling oil prices. As for a potential buyer, acquiring a team in the New York market, where major sports franchises rarely go on sale, could be tantalizing.“You’re dealing with an asset that is exceptionally rare,” said Robert Leib, a principal at Leib Advisors, a financial consultant to the sports and entertainment industries. “It could go well north of the Clippers’ price; in an auction situation, it could go to crazy levels.”Leib suggested that an available team in New York could lure bids from wealthy people who would view a purchase as “one of the last great ways to shield taxable income.”The Clippers’ sale price was elevated by the prospect of greater riches coming from a new TV deal for the N.B.A. — which will nearly triple annual revenue from ESPN and TNT — and the presence of extremely wealthy bidders like Ballmer. But the Clippers do not own their home, Staples Center, while the Nets play in an arena controlled by Prokhorov and Bruce C. Ratner, through Forest City. That would surely enhance the Nets’ value. This is not the first time Prokhorov has been said to be interested in selling the Nets. Last fall, there were reports of a complex deal in which he would have combined his assets with those of the investor group that owns the Los Angeles Dodgers. It was, at best, in an embryonic stage of negotiations when news of the discussions leaked, and the transaction never came to fruition.Michael J. de la Merced contributed reporting.Advertisement