By TOM PEDULLAJAN. 13, 2015
Mike Maccagnan, the Houston Texans’ director of college scouting, was hired on Tuesday to become the general manager of the downtrodden Jets.Maccagnan, whose ties to the Jets consultant Charley Casserly may have helped to endear him to the team’s owner, Woody Johnson, still must prove his aptitude as a general manager, but he possesses an extensive background in player evaluation that his failed predecessor, John Idzik, sorely lacked during his 23 months with the team.“We interviewed a number of impressive, qualified candidates, but Mike Maccagnan clearly stood out,” Johnson said.Maccagnan’s first task is to help the Jets find a head coach. The team brought Todd Bowles, the Arizona Cardinals’ defensive coordinator, back for a second interview on Tuesday, according to a person familiar with the team’s process.AdvertisementThe Jets may be growing increasingly uneasy about waiting to interview Dan Quinn, the Seahawks’ defensive coordinator. Their wait could be in vain if Denver wants Quinn to succeed John Fox and Quinn finds the Broncos more appealing than the Jets.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Johnson hired Maccagnan with understanding that he will be an “equal partner” with the new head coach. The coach will report not to the general manager but to Johnson.Casserly hired Maccagnan as a scout for the Washington Redskins in 1994. When Casserly became general manager of an expansion franchise in Houston in 2000, Maccagnan accompanied him, and he was promoted to coordinator of college scouting a few months after his arrival. He was named the Texans’ director of college scouting in July 2011.AdvertisementMaccagnan represents a curious appointment at a critical juncture for the franchise because Houston does not have a strong recent history of draft picks beyond J. J. Watt.A version of this article appears in print on January 14, 2015, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Jets Name New General Manager as Coaching Search Grows Complicated .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.