By JERÉ LONGMANJAN. 13, 2015
A judge dismissed misdemeanor assault charges against United States goalkeeper Hope Solo on Tuesday, most likely clearing the way for her to participate in the Women’s World Cup this summer in Canada.Solo, the longtime starter for the national team, had faced two counts of fourth-degree misdemeanor assault in Kirkland, Wash., after what was described in court papers as an alcohol-fueled scuffle with her half sister and teenage nephew last June.But the accusers declined to give a full interview to Solo’s lawyer and had changed their stories, according to the lawyer, Todd Maybrown, who pressed to have all charges dismissed before a trial that had been scheduled to begin next week.“Today’s decision brings closure to what has been one of the most difficult and emotionally draining times of my life,” Solo said in a statement posted on her Facebook page. “I always had faith that once the facts of the case were presented, I would be cleared of all charges and I am so happy and relieved to finally have it all behind me.”AdvertisementSolo was the victim, not the aggressor, in the altercation, Maybrown has said in court papers. He said that Solo had sustained a concussion after being hit in the head with a broomstick by her nephew.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The nephew, who was 17 at the time of the episode, became enraged at a comment Solo made and hit her repeatedly over the head with a broomstick handle, according to court records. The nephew previously said that Solo had been drinking wine and told him that he was “too fat and overweight and crazy to ever be an athlete.”The teenager called Solo a name, and she attacked him and her half sister, the nephew said in court documents. The documents said the nephew had scratch marks and a torn T-shirt. Solo has been ordered to stay away from the two and refrain from drinking alcohol.AdvertisementIf Solo had been found guilty at trial or reached a plea agreement, she most likely would have been suspended by the United States Soccer Federation. But now that her legal troubles have ended, she is expected to start in goal as the Americans seek to win their first Women’s World Cup title since 1999.A version of this article appears in print on January 14, 2015, on Page B15 of the New York edition with the headline: U.S. Goalie Has Charges Against Her Dismissed.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.