

 Marc Tracy
 

ON COLLEGE FOOTBALL
JAN. 13, 2015
ARLINGTON, Tex. —  With 28 seconds left in the national championship game, Ohio State running back Ezekiel Elliott scored his fourth and final touchdown. After celebrating in the end zone, he ran to the sideline, where he slapped hands with one of the most famous athletes in the world, LeBron James, who banged Elliott’s helmet with pride as Elliott jogged off to be with his teammates.James wore a Cleveland Cavaliers hat, an Ohio State jersey with his No. 23 on it and scarlet-and-gray sneakers, complete with Buckeye stickers.“He said he always believed in us,” Elliott said after Ohio State defeated Oregon, 42-20, on Monday night.James’s words were a reminder that not everyone always believed in Ohio State, and the Buckeyes almost were not here at all. The team sustained an early-season loss to lowly Virginia Tech and was down to its third-string quarterback, so many thought Baylor or Texas Christian deserved to be the final team in the inaugural College Football Playoff. Certainly few believed the Buckeyes would have played for the national title had only two teams been selected, as was the case in the 16 years of the Bowl Championship Series.AdvertisementAsked whether he thought Ohio State would have been picked to play in a hypothetical B.C.S. title game this season, Bill Hancock, the playoffs’ executive director and a former director of the B.C.S., answered bluntly, “No.”AdvertisementThere were many valuable players as No. 4 Ohio State (14-1) soundly beat No. 2 Oregon (13-2), at times making the Ducks look like a junior varsity team. The defense held the Heisman Trophy-winning quarterback Marcus Mariota and his turbocharged Ducks to a modest outing by their standards. Buckeyes quarterback Cardale Jones, who heading into the season was third on the depth chart, made some big throws, used his huge frame to run for first downs and won his third straight postseason game, prompting chatter that he could declare for the N.F.L. draft after only three college starts. (Jones, a redshirt sophomore, said Tuesday that he had not made a decision.)But it was Elliott, not to mention his offensive line, who was most valuable Monday, as shown by his trophy for most valuable player on offense. On a season-high 36 carries, he ran for 246 yards — a record for a Football Bowl Subdivision title game (of which there have been 17 officially), and third most ever for Ohio State. In his last three games — against Wisconsin, Alabama and Oregon — he ran for 696 yards and eight touchdowns.“A monster,” Coach Urban Meyer called him after the game.Elliott said he would cherish the victory.“All the great running backs that have come through Ohio State — Archie Griffin, Eddie George, Beanie Wells,” he said, going on to refer to the national championship. “Just being able to accomplish something that all of them weren’t able to accomplish, it means the world to me, and I’m happy that I was able to carry on that lineage.”Wide receiver Evan Spencer, whose father, Tim, is Ohio State’s third-leading career rusher, added, “That’s the type of team we are — offensive line, defensive line.”Elliott will probably enter next season as a presumptive Heisman front-runner, a bruising back with a million-dollar smile who spent much of a postgame news conference finding creative ways to flick bits of confetti onto Jones.“Zeke was that kid who knew everything,” Gus Frerotte, a former Washington Redskins quarterback who coached Elliott at John Burroughs School in St. Louis, said in a phone interview Tuesday. “You could tell him to go play offensive line, he could play that. Tell him to go play receiver, he could play that.”AdvertisementFrerotte added, “He could play quarterback, but he can’t throw.”Elliott committed to Ohio State not half a year after Meyer became coach and more than a year before he graduated high school. He helped John Burroughs, a private school west of downtown St. Louis, reach the state championship in his senior year.
CreditCooper Neill for The New York Times        Recruiting him was not the easiest task, Meyer said at a news conference Tuesday, because his parents, Stacy and Dawn, were athletes at Missouri, Stacy in football and Dawn in track.“His dad got real involved, and his dad’s issue is that he loves his son so much that he was right in the middle to the point where it drove us nuts,” Meyer said, explaining that Elliott’s father was concerned his son could get crowded out by other running backs on the roster.Things, you could say, have been patched up: The Elliotts have had Thanksgiving dinner at Meyer’s house the past two years.“Obviously, we’re glad that we did not walk away because Zeke is a wonderful guy,” Meyer added.Frerotte knew Elliott had speed and talent, and he assumed the bulk would come. He was 198 pounds in high school and is now listed at 6 feet, 225 pounds.“He was always fast, always had good moves,” Frerotte said. “Nobody was ever going to catch him. He was a workhorse, just like he was last night.”He continued: “I knew he probably would explode once he was going to be at a program where he was going to lift every day. His willingness to be the best was always at a premium. He was able to do whatever it takes to win.”Ohio State offensive tackle Taylor Decker knows all about Elliott’s talent.“He just has an intangible sixth sense to find those holes and to squirt through there,” Decker said. “We know if we block the down guys and get him to the second level, he’s a good enough back and a good enough player to make people miss and to get yards after the contact.”AdvertisementA Big Ten team winning the national title over a Pacific-12 team with a running back carrying the ball 36 times harked back to an earlier era of college football.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.It was a triumph for Meyer’s system, which combines the spread offense he helped invent more than a decade ago at Utah and which he used to win two national titles at Florida with the ground-and-pound mentality one expects from a traditional Big Ten program.Given how much Elliott averaged per carry against Alabama, you might call it 11 ½ yards and a cloud of dust.“It is a spread offense, but we’re going to run the ball downhill,” Decker said.On Tuesday morning, Meyer reconciled the two aspects of his offense, which will presumably keep him in the title conversation for the foreseeable future.“I hear people say we’re a spread offense, but it’s a line-of-scrimmage league,” he said.He continued: “You win on the offensive line and defensive line. When we get on a plane first class, the quarterback doesn’t sit up there.”He turned to Jones, who sat next to him, and asked, “Who sits up there?”Jones was ready with the answer: “The offensive line.”Oregon defensive end DeForest Buckner credited Elliott and the Buckeyes’ offensive line after the game.“They did pretty much what we thought they were going to do,” he said. “He’s a good running back, broke a lot of tackles.”AdvertisementAfter the regular season, Elliott was not among the four running backs chosen for the all-Big Ten first and second teams.Elliott heard the doubters. After the Sugar Bowl, he told reporters: “I was ready coming into the game. Barry Sanders said before the game there were two great running backs that were going to play tonight, and they both were for ’Bama.”On Monday night, Elliott kept his ankle wrapped — he originally injured it in Ohio State’s double-overtime victory at Penn State in October.“Just feels more comfortable that way,” Elliott said. “It’s going to be nice to get healthy in the off-season.”One can only imagine what a healthy Elliott could do.A version of this article appears in print on January 14, 2015, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: In Convincing Win, Buckeyes Conquered Ducks and Doubts.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »