By JEFF ARNOLDOCT. 9, 2015
EVANSTON, Ill. —  The statistical superlatives suggest that the defense at Northwestern, which has deemed itself Chicago’s Big Ten team, has reached a level of superiority that extends well beyond the limits of the city that sits just south of campus along Lake Michigan.At Northwestern, a private university known more for its rigorous academic standards than for its football prowess — save for back-to-back Big Ten championships in the mid-1990s — defense has brought the Wildcats back to national prominence.A string of victories this season includes two shutouts: a victory over Eastern Illinois and, more notably, a 27-0 thrashing of Minnesota in the Wildcats’ Big Ten opener last weekend. That has placed Northwestern at No. 13 in the Associated Press Top 25 and also atop the Football Bowl Subdivision rankings for scoring defense; the Wildcats have allowed an average of only 7 points a game. The unit, which ranks fifth in the F.B.S. in total defense, has surrendered only three touchdowns in five games heading into Saturday’s showdown at No. 18 Michigan.But as dominating as Northwestern has been defensively, Coach Pat Fitzgerald says he is not interested in outside praise — even if the numbers support the notion that this year’s defense could be as successful in locking down opponents as the one Fitzgerald led as an all-American linebacker 20 years ago.“We’ve got a lot of work to do defensively,” Fitzgerald said, adding, “We are far, far from what I believe we’re capable of.”AdvertisementThe constant push for perfection fuels Fitzgerald, an intense Chicago native whose firm jawline and closely cropped haircut remain intact from his playing days.AdvertisementEven after the Wildcats’ most recent dominating performance, in which they limited Minnesota to 173 yards, Fitzgerald nitpicked the showing, characterizing it as the worst tackling performance of the season.After Northwestern’s linebacker corps struggled in Minnesota’s first two drives last week, Fitzgerald took charge of the first few minutes of Monday’s linebacker meeting to ensure that his displeasure came through loud and clear.“We didn’t play to our standards,” said the sophomore linebacker Anthony Walker, Northwestern’s leading tackler. “You always want to be perfect. It’s not always going to be perfect, but we aim for perfection.”Reaching the bar of expectation set by Fitzgerald and the defensive coordinator Mike Hankwitz has become increasingly difficult. Hankwitz, a veteran coordinator who began his college coaching career as a graduate assistant under the former Michigan coach Bo Schembechler, has constantly pushed for more, building off last season, when Northwestern’s defense made what most considered significant strides in an otherwise disappointing 5-7 campaign.Using last year’s frustration as motivation while relying on a defense with plenty of experience, Hankwitz has molded Northwestern’s current unit into a ball-hawking collaboration of talented players who feed off one another.“We talk about defense as a cumulative effort of 11 guys,” Hankwitz said. “The harder we can play and do it just a little harder than most teams would, I think we understand what that can do for us.”In the face of that intensity, however, Fitzgerald recently challenged his defense to have more fun, to find enjoyment in the process of improving from week to week. Hankwitz quickly offered a reminder that fun is a relative term — used in this instance as a way of celebrating playmaking success in the middle of games before flipping the switch back to the hard-hitting level Fitzgerald expects.AdvertisementSafety Traveon Henry has been tabbed as Northwestern’s so-called Celebration King, charged with making sure individual achievement is recognized while the defense is on the field. His fellow safety Godwin Igwebuike holds down the role of the unit’s resident comedian, often pointing to the scoreboard whenever one of his teammates is projected on it before telling him that he has a big camera looking at him.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The momentary levity has paid off in the way Northwestern goes about its business.“Honestly, it’s just going back to our roots — playing football as if we were young and making sure it doesn’t get too serious for us,” Igwebuike said.Yet defense has become a serious business at Northwestern. This season’s early success has brought comparisons to the Wildcats’ defensive dominance during Fitzgerald’s playing career, when he was twice named the Big Ten defensive player of the year and won national awards as the country’s best defensive player.Fitzgerald is hesitant to make such connections, having the luxury of understanding the full body of work that he and his teammates compiled two decades ago.“I’m not ready to even put this group in the same category because we have a lot of chapters yet to write,” Fitzgerald said. “But I think if they continue to progress, they’ve got a chance obviously to be much better. It’s much more athletic; it’s much deeper. But we’re going to continue to put weight on the bar.“As you go up in Big Ten play, it gets heavier and heavier and gets harder and harder, so we’ll see how the next few chapters progress.”Saturday’s game could be the toughest test yet. Michigan, under its first-year coach, Jim Harbaugh, has also made a name for itself defensively. The Wolverines rank second in the F.B.S. in total defense, surrendering only 184 yards a game. And they are second in scoring defense, just behind Northwestern at 7.6 points per game.A version of this article appears in print on October 10, 2015, on Page D7 of the New York edition with the headline: Northwestern’s Suffocating Defense Is Having Serious Fun.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.