AdvertisementSupported byBy Andrew DasNew York City F.C. completed the signing of midfielder Mix Diskerud on Tuesday, bolstering a midfield — and a club — trying to regain its footing since the recent announcement that another of its high-profile signings would not arrive in time for the start of the team’s inaugural season.Diskerud, 24, joined on a free transfer from the Norwegian club Rosenborg, where he has played since 2012. A member of the United States World Cup team last summer, he has made 25 appearances for the national team and become a regular in its lineup since the tournament, starting the Americans’ past five games.“For me it’s huge to come back to the States because I haven’t really lived in the U.S.,” the Oslo-born Diskerud said in a video posted on N.Y.C.F.C.’s website.“I can’t wait to live in New York,” he added. “It’s almost too much to handle.”Diskerud is expected to add some creativity and skill to the New York City F.C. lineup and to team with the Spanish striker David Villa as the faces of the club until the team’s most prominent signing, midfielder Frank Lampard, arrives in midseason.Lampard, who joined New York City F.C. in July, is playing for Manchester City this season in a much-discussed arrangement that was initially described as a loan. It was later revealed that Lampard was never technically under contract to New York City F.C., or to Major League Soccer, which owns all player contracts in the league.The revelation on Dec. 31 that Lampard had extended his contract with Manchester City through May came as a surprise to many, angering fans in New York and prompting questions from the Premier League about his dual commitment to City and to M.L.S. The signing of a prominent American like Diskerud could help ease some of the grumbling.“I’m a happy man today!” Coach Jason Kreis wrote on his Twitter account after the signing was announced, adding, “Onwards!”Kreis will take his players to Jacksonville, Fla., on Jan. 24 for a weeklong training camp. The team will then head to Manchester for a 10-day camp and two exhibition games.New York City F.C. opens the M.L.S. season with a game at Orlando City, the league’s other expansion team, on March 8.Advertisement