
Sports of The Times By                     
 WILLIAM C. RHODEN
 
JAN. 13, 2015
ARLINGTON, Tex. — Cardale Jones was not the most valuable player of college football’s national championship game Monday night. That honor went to the sensational sophomore running back Ezekiel Elliott, his Ohio State teammate, who alternated between safety net and battering ram in the Buckeyes’ 42-20 pulverizing of Oregon.But although Jones, Ohio State’s quarterback, was not the M.V.P., over the last four games, he has become the symbol of the Buckeyes’ rapid transformation from a program that had lost its way to one re-energized under Coach Urban Meyer.The same could be said for Jones.After watching Jones direct Ohio State in its win over Oregon in only his third college start, Meyer gazed at his young star and said, “Cardale is a case study for overcoming adversity and how if alignment is — if his personal alignment with his mentor, his high school coach and his coaching staff, if that didn’t happen, he wouldn’t be sitting here.”Long before Jones became nationally known for being thrust into a starting role for his title-contending team, he became infamous for an October 2012 social media gaffe when he wrote impetuously on Twitter: “Why should we have to go to class if we came here to play FOOTBALL, we ain’t come to play SCHOOL, classes are POINTLESS.”AdvertisementThe incident, which took place after a sociology exam in Jones’s redshirt freshman season, embarrassed many at Ohio State. Gene Smith, the Ohio State athletic director since 2005 and a university vice president, said that he had seen a multitude of young athletes pass through Ohio State during his tenure. Some have matured faster than others. Jones, he said, continues to evolve.
CreditCooper Neill for The New York Times        “He’s come a long way,” Smith said Monday. “He had a hard time going to class when he first came to school. Now he’s rocking it.”AdvertisementSmith offered no concrete examples of what “rocking it” meant in an academic sense, but he said of Jones: “I think he’s a perfect example of a natural progression and maturity.“He was so immature, but he really just listened. He kept listening and listening, not just to Urban, but to the other guys around him.”One of the most meaningful recent conversations Jones had was with Troy Smith, the former quarterback and Heisman Trophy winner who led Ohio State in the 2007 national championship game — against Florida, then coached by Meyer. Ohio State lost in a rout, and Smith completed only 4 of 14 passes for 35 yards. He threw an interception, lost a fumble and was sacked five times.Jones said their conversation “came out of nowhere.”“I called him after one of our meetings, and his first words were, ‘Do everything you can so you don’t feel the way I felt walking off that field,’ ” Jones recalled.One of the greatest measures of Jones’s growth may be how he sees the position he plays, and what he thinks it will take for him to continue to improve.Not long ago, Jones was an afterthought at Ohio State, an inconsistent player and student more likely to be kicked off the team than asked to lead it. When the Buckeyes lost their starting quarterback, the Heisman contender Braxton Miller, before the season, Meyer turned not to Jones but to J. T. Barrett to replace him.AdvertisementWhen Barrett broke his ankle in the regular-season finale, Jones’s rise from third-stringer to starter was complete. But few expected him to produce three straight wins and a national title.“J. T.’s best, physically, is not as good as Cardale’s,” the Ohio State offensive coordinator Tom Herman said.“Cardale is 6-5, 250. He can throw it through a wall, and he can run. But Cardale’s bad was really, really bad: dropping snaps, throwing really ridiculous interceptions, or being really inaccurate or having awful footwork.“His really good was the best of the bunch,” Herman went on, “but his really bad was the worst of the bunch.”Jones showed all of that Monday night: strong, arching throws that stretched the Oregon defense and a powerful 1-yard touchdown run, but also two fumbles and a second-half interception.He also showed off his newfound maturity, his realization that quarterbacks win not just because they are big and fast and strong — though that helps — but because they are prepared.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“There are a lot of guys who have the ability to run and throw, but they probably can’t process and pick up the information,” Jones said. “I don’t think it’s going to be based on your athletic ability. It’s going to be based on your ability to process and diagnose information.”He added: “I’ve heard experts say that the game of football changes dramatically for quarterbacks as they prepare and as they begin to understand. That’s when the game really slows down.”In just his third college start, Jones seems to have slowed the game to a crawl. Sure, there were mistakes, but there were more game-winning, game-saving plays.Jones delivered a championship that once seemed unlikely, both for him and for his team. But to the celebrating Buckeyes fans, he delivered something else, too: the promise of more evenings like Monday to come.Email: wcr@nytimes.com A version of this article appears in print on January 14, 2015, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Quarterback Is a Work in Progress, but Oh, What Progress.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »