By VIV BERNSTEINOCT. 9, 2015
CONCORD, N.C. —  Three weeks into the 10-race Nascar Sprint Cup playoff, this much is already clear: The defending champion, Kevin Harvick, is the driver to beat for the 2015 title. And Jimmie Johnson, who has dominated Nascar for most of the last decade, will not be the man to beat him.It is too early to know whether that represents a seismic shift within the hierarchy of the sport or if this is merely an off year for Johnson, the six-time champion who was eliminated from the playoff last weekend at his best track, Dover International Speedway in Delaware. Either way, Harvick has replaced Johnson as the focal point of the annual Chase.And right now, there is not a close second.The veteran Jeff Gordon, when asked if a torch had been passed to Harvick, a top-tier Cup driver for years who finally became a champion in 2014 after joining Stewart-Haas Racing and pairing with the crew chief Rodney Childers, said: “It’s possible; it’s very possible. I will say, consistently every weekend, he’s at the top of the board — he’s the guy I think everyone’s measuring themselves off of.”Harvick, 39, is coming off a playoff-saving victory at Dover, where he led for 355 of 400 laps to advance to the next round of the Chase. On Saturday, he will start 11th in the Bank of America 500 at Charlotte Motor Speedway, the first race of the second round. Matt Kenseth is on the pole.AdvertisementKenseth and his Joe Gibbs Racing teammates Denny Hamlin, Kyle Busch and Carl Edwards seemed to be the favorites entering the playoff after showing more power than the rest of the field late in the regular season. But Harvick was apparently unimpressed.AdvertisementBefore the first race of the playoff, at Chicagoland Speedway on Sept. 20, he declared, “I think we’re going to pound them into the ground.”It did not look as if Harvick would be able to back up that statement after his No. 4 Chevrolet was bumped by Johnson’s No. 48 during the Chicagoland race and was damaged, leaving him in 42nd after a start on the pole. That put Harvick in the difficult position of having to win one of the next two races in the first round to advance.Harvick slugged Johnson in the chest after the race — the first postrace punch in this playoff elimination format, although there were several scuffles in its first run a year ago.Harvick then led for 216 of 300 laps at New Hampshire Motor Speedway on Sept. 27 in the second race of the playoff. But he came up short again, running out of gas with three laps to go to finish 21st as Kenseth took the victory.That left Harvick one last chance to advance. His performance at Dover, where he raced to the front early and stayed there virtually the entire race, secured his berth in the second round.The effort was reminiscent of Harvick’s feat in last year’s playoff. He needed to win at Phoenix in the penultimate race to advance to the final four-car showdown at Homestead-Miami Speedway, and then he won the finale to capture his first title. Harvick has now recorded victories in three consecutive must-win playoff races.Asked about his confidence under pressure, he said this week, “I don’t think we lack that.”It perhaps helps to know that one of his most dangerous opponents is no longer a threat. Johnson has not had a career year despite four victories. But he was expected to be among the 12 cars to advance from the first round, particularly given his success at Dover. He had won 10 times there, most recently in May.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But a part failure last Sunday forced Johnson to the garage for repairs, and he finished 41st, failing to qualify for the second round.AdvertisementAll four of the Joe Gibbs Racing drivers advanced, with Kenseth and Hamlin posting first-round victories. Still, Harvick has led for an impressive 571 of 700 laps in the last two playoff races combined. Kenseth is a distant second, with 53 laps led in that stretch. It is clear whom everyone is chasing.Harvick’s performance at Dover left little doubt about his mettle but raised immediate questions about his racecar. Opponents noticed that Harvick blew out his tires in a postrace celebration and also hit the inside wall with the back end of his car. They suggested that Harvick had deliberately damaged it to avoid failing a postrace inspection.“Nothing we do is without merit,” Hamlin said. “We all know what we’re doing.”Harvick, though, said he was innocent.“These things are hard to win, and I enjoy celebrating, and I’m going to burn the tires off,” he said, brushing off the criticism. “That’s what they’re supposed to do. They’re supposed to try to create commotion.”Of course, that was what Harvick did when he made his pound-to-the-ground comment in the opening salvo of the Chase.“He didn’t need to do that,” Busch said. “We know. You’re good. We get it. We’ll be racing you come Homestead, I’m sure.”A version of this article appears in print on October 10, 2015, on Page D4 of the New York edition with the headline: Everyone Chasing Harvick, Master of Must-Win Races.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.