AdvertisementSupported byGrizzlies 103, Nets 92By Andrew KehLionel Hollins summoned the Nets to the team’s practice center in East Rutherford, N.J., to go through a shootaround Wednesday morning before a night game against the Memphis Grizzlies.At first glance, this was not particularly noteworthy. Most N.B.A. teams hold these morning workouts on game days, at home and on the road. But this was the first time that Hollins and the Nets had conducted one before a home game this season.Hollins said he was “just changing it up,” trying something new to alter the atmosphere around the team.“We’ve had some struggles lately,” he said, “and we’ll see if it helps change the mentality.”Hollins may have to keep tweaking his team’s routine. The Nets continued their recent free fall and dropped their seventh consecutive game, 103-92. In another lukewarm performance at Barclays Center, the game was less competitive than the score suggested, and the defeat lowered the Nets’ record to 16-23.“It’s tough, man,” said Mason Plumlee, who had a team-high 15 points and 9 rebounds. “No one’s feeling sorry for us. We have to get it together and get a win.”The Nets, who put together some bright performances earlier this season, have not approached the levels of absurdity achieved by the Knicks, the train-wreck team across the river. But they have become a different type of mess. They are not quite spilling off the rails, but they have stalled.This week, it was reported that Mikhail D. Prokhorov, who bought the Nets in 2010, was seeking potential buyers for the club. (A spokeswoman for Prokhorov said he was exploring all options, but she added that no sale was imminent.)A run of disjointed, uninspired play has exacerbated the feelings of uncertainty and instability in the organization. Hollins has shuffled his lineups, to no avail. There does not seem to be a winning combination on the roster. This, in turn, has put essentially every Nets player on the merry-go-round of trade rumors.Hollins said it was important for players to block out the distractions and do their jobs.“I just say that no matter where you are, you have to give all you have until you’re not there anymore, because that’s the business we’re in,” he said about the specter of personnel moves.The game Wednesday was the first meeting this season between Hollins and the Grizzlies, whom Hollins coached from 2009 to 2013. Hollins did not have his contract renewed in Memphis, despite advancing to the postseason in his final three seasons there. On Wednesday afternoon, he said he was looking forward to the game, if only to move beyond it, since so many people were asking him about it.Before the game, some of Hollins’s former players and colleagues went over to him for quick greetings.“It was nice,” said Hollins, who stays in touch with many of them. “I expected it. I wasn’t overly emotional.”The Grizzlies proved too strong for the Nets. Jeff Green, acquired from the Boston Celtics on Monday, made his debut with the Grizzlies, coming off the bench to score 10 points while shooting 3 for 11 from the field. He was only a minor contributor to the demolition, most of which took place beneath the basket.Memphis scored 66 points in the paint. Zach Randolph led the way with 20 points and 14 rebounds. Marc Gasol added 18 points and 8 rebounds.“They got a lot of easy looks down there,” said Brook Lopez, who had 11 points and 4 rebounds in just over 27 minutes. “The numbers tell the story.”The Nets were even less equipped to handle the Grizzlies’ big men because Kevin Garnett was serving a one-game suspension for striking Dwight Howard of the Houston Rockets with his forehead in the Nets’ 113-99 loss on Monday.Besides the struggle to contain the Memphis front line, Lopez said, the Nets had too many “empty possessions” and turnovers. The Nets committed 19 turnovers, compared with the Grizzlies’ nine.“Life is about making decisions,” Hollins said about the team’s failure to take care of the ball, “and making good ones.”Hollins said it was encouraging to see Mirza Teletovic shoot 4 for 7 from long distance. But he said, “Everybody else was still not that great.”The Nets’ Joe Johnson made 3 of 12 field-goal attempts, and Jarrett Jack made 4 of 12.The change of routine in the morning, it was clear, did not have much of a positive effect. Before the game, Hollins said that the Nets might continue to have morning shootarounds before home games, and that he was considering holding them at Barclays Center so his players could have more opportunities to practice shooting at the arena’s baskets.With the Nets continuing to flail, big changes seem like a clear possibility. Until then, Hollins can only continue to experiment, hoping something will get his catatonic team going.Advertisement