AdvertisementSupported byTV SportsBy Richard SandomirTo announce the return of boxing to network television, NBC staged a media event without bellowing promoters, snarling fighters, eccentric fight camp hangers-on or bitten ears. It was oddly civilized, with sushi for lunch.A glorious past was represented by Sugar Ray Leonard, Roberto Duran and Thomas Hearns, totems of an era when many big fights were still free on TV.“I’m an old-fashioned guy,” Leonard said Wednesday as he sat on a chair inside a faux boxing ring at the “Saturday Night Live” studio.There is something old-fashioned about boxing’s returning to network TV with regularity; it’s as quaint as, well, watching college bowl games on ABC. But this news conference was about invoking history to give boxing a boost in the present for the masses, wherever they may be. With the first fight set for March 7, the question for NBC is, Can it take us back to a future in which boxing is not a niche sport — or is it impossible to resurrect the heralded past?Here, as NBC executives tell you, we must trust the press-averse Al Haymon, who manages or advises more than 150 fighters and who sat quietly in the back of the studio Wednesday, letting others speak for him.Floyd Mayweather Jr., Haymon’s richest and most famous client, calls him the Ghost. (Mayweather will not fight for NBC. He is a pay-per-view machine betrothed to Showtime.)Mark Lazarus, the chairman of the NBC Sports Group, believes in Haymon, whose boxing outfit will pay at least $20 million annually during a multiyear deal to buy the time to put the bouts on NBC and NBCSN. “Al’s a very low-key, straightforward, honest, direct person to deal with,” Lazarus said. “We did all our talks in quiet, private places.”Lazarus said there were three executives inside NBC with enough boxing knowledge to judge the quality of Haymon’s matchmaking, “and the rest of us have gotten up to speed in the last six months,” he added.Lazarus has to trust Haymon to create competitive matchups for 20 Saturday cards: five in prime time and six in the afternoon on NBC, and nine in prime time on NBCSN. The proof will be in what we see starting March 7, with what looks like a promising pair of fights on NBC: Keith Thurman (24-0) versus Robert Guerrero (32-2-1) and Adrien Broner (29-1) versus John Molina Jr. (27-5) at the MGM Grand in Las Vegas. The next scheduled fight will be on April 11, most likely in New York, between two 140-pound titleholders, Danny Garcia and Lamont Peterson. Boxing’s scandals, promoter battles and sanctioning body inanities long ago distanced the sport from the embrace of broadcast networks and advertisers. And the best fighters — if not always the best fights — found their way to HBO and Showtime and their pay-per-view arms. Basic cable picked up the slack. Still, an audience exists for boxing, even if it resides on the margins of major sports, save for the occasional mega-bout. HBO’s and Showtime’s championship bouts last year averaged 1.2 million and 734,000 viewers. ESPN2’s fights averaged 393,000 viewers last year, and Fox Sports 1’s 33 bouts have brought in 170,000 viewers since the network’s inception in 2013.NBC and NBCSN, which recently carried boxing from the promoter Main Events, last year averaged 763,000 viewers for one broadcast fight and 221,000 on cable.Pay-per-view suffered last year, with no single bout shattering the magical level of one million buys. A Manny Pacquiao fight generated fewer than 400,000, a flop by his standards.“Boxing has the eyeballs,” said Lou DiBella, who will promote some of the NBC fights. “But a lot of the top boxers could walk through Times Square, and most people wouldn’t know who they are.”More people are likely to watch a heavily promoted and marketed NBC fight than the universe of fans buying a pay-per-view fight for $70.And NBC’s production effort includes something unusual in boxing shows: theme music by an Oscar-winning film composer, Hans Zimmer, a fight fan.Broadcasters have rarely, and gingerly, ventured into boxing in the past 20 years or so. Fox carried some bouts in the mid-1990s, most notably Mike Tyson’s 1995 third-round knockout of Buster Mathis Jr. in prime time, which was seen by 26.5 million viewers. Fox has since cast its combat sport lot with the Ultimate Fighting Championship. CBS has rebroadcast some Showtime fights but last televised a live fight in 2012.“Once you’ve been off TV for a while, network ad sales guys don’t have a precedent for how to sell it, and they can’t set ad rates if they don’t know what the ratings will be,” Stephen Espinoza, an executive vice president of Showtime Sports, said during a telephone interview. “You have to reprove yourself in order to establish your credibility.” Asked if he had protested Haymon’s NBC deal, Espinoza said: “If I’d put my foot down on all the fights, we might have had a problem. There could have been a dispute.”Haymon’s considerable leverage — with the threat that he could move some of his best fighters, however temporarily, from Showtime — gives a publicity-minded boxer like Broner the exposure he covets before a broad audience.“People will see the greatness in Adrien Broner,” Broner said. “More homes to see me, more popularity and more exposure.” He added: “It’s only right. I’ve got the most flavor in the game.”Email: sandor@nytimes.comAdvertisement