By TOM PEDULLAJAN. 14, 2015
Woody Johnson was hardly alone in believing Todd Bowles possessed N.F.L. head coaching potential. But Johnson, the Jets’ owner, was the first person to test that conviction, hiring Bowles to lead the team at what Johnson has defined as a critical time in its history.The former quarterback Doug Williams thought Bowles was destined to coach when they played together on the Washington Redskins and won Super Bowl XXII to close the 1987 season. Williams saw a work ethic that enabled Bowles to emerge as a starting safety a year after he went undrafted out of Temple.Williams also saw how quickly the youngster earned the respect of veterans.“He ran the defense,” Williams said Wednesday in a telephone interview. “He was like a coach on the field.”The former Dallas Cowboys executive Gil Brandt recalled that Bill Parcells had told him that Bowles would be a future head coach after Parcells hired Bowles to coach Dallas’s secondary from 2005 to 2007. Roy Williams, Ken Hamlin and Terence Newman combined for five Pro Bowl appearances in that span, with Williams accounting for three of them.AdvertisementWhen Bruce Arians hired Bowles to be his defensive coordinator with the Arizona Cardinals two years ago, he suggested that Bowles would not remain a coordinator for long. In an effort to retain Bowles, the Cardinals gave him a contract extension this season that raised his salary to nearly $2 million a year.AdvertisementThat did not keep the Jets, the Atlanta Falcons, the Chicago Bears and the San Francisco 49ers from placing Bowles high on their lists as they began searches for a new coach.As much as the Jets were thought to have Dan Quinn, the Seattle Seahawks’ defensive coordinator, as their primary target, their interest in Bowles to succeed the defense-oriented Rex Ryan intensified after their initial interview last week. The creation of an unexpected but desirable opening with the Denver Broncos on Monday, when John Fox departed, may have accelerated their process.The Jets invited Bowles for a second interview on Tuesday with Johnson, his consultants Charley Casserly and Ron Wolf, and the about-to-be-named general manager Mike Maccagnan that was apparently so convincing that it turned into news that Bowles’s quest for an N.F.L. head coaching job was finally over after eight coaching stops. He never made it to Atlanta on Wednesday for a second interview.According to a person familiar with negotiations, Bowles will be given a four-year contract worth more than $16 million.The high regard that members of the Cardinals have for Bowles, 51, is readily apparent.“I wouldn’t be surprised if he has success early,” Calais Campbell, a defensive end, said during a phone interview.Antonio Cromartie, a veteran cornerback who played for Ryan with the Jets before the short-lived general manager John Idzik allowed him to leave as a free agent, wrote on Twitter: “Coach Bowles is a very smart coach. 1 of the smartest coaches I’ve been around. Has a very similar scheme 2 Rex so the defense won’t change.”Tony Jefferson, a safety, wrote on Twitter: “Great two years with one of the best in the game. Congrats Coach Bowles jets are lucky to have him represent them.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Bowles, from Elizabeth, N.J., distinguished himself in each of his two seasons with Arizona. The Cardinals ranked sixth in total defense in 2013 and set a franchise record for a 16-game regular season by allowing only 1,351 rushing yards with 47 sacks (third in team history).AdvertisementArizona was forced to rely heavily on its defense in 2014 after injuries claimed its top two quarterbacks, Carson Palmer and Drew Stanton. The Cardinals still finished 11-5 and qualified for the playoffs as Bowles, unflappable amid the adversity, made countless adjustments. Although they slipped to 24th in total defense this season, they ranked fifth in allowing 19.5 points per game the last two years.“He never panicked,” Campbell said. “He always came up with something for us.”Williams gave Bowles his first coaching opportunity at the end of Bowles’s eight-year playing career when he hired him as his defensive coordinator at Morehouse College in 1997. He kept him in that capacity the following two seasons after he moved to Grambling State. Bowles made the first of six coaching stops as an N.F.L. assistant when he worked with Jets defensive backs in 2000.“Players are going to love him because of his cool demeanor, and they are going to realize how smart he is,” Williams said. “He knows what he’s talking about.”Bowles is viewed as the antithesis of the outspoken and excitable Ryan. No one should expect that to change, no matter how bright the spotlight that now falls on him.“Todd Bowles is not going to change his persona; I can tell you that now,” Williams said. “He’s a quiet, very confident individual.”According to several people, Bowles will hire Chan Gailey as his offensive coordinator. Gailey was able to coax some strong performances out of the journeyman Ryan Fitzpatrick when he served as the Buffalo Bills’ coach from 2010 to 2012.Whether Gailey can work well with the erratic second-year passer Geno Smith or with a rookie drafted by Maccagnan may determine how Bowles fares in inheriting a 4-12 team that missed the playoffs each of the last four years. Ryan never stabilized the quarterback position as Mark Sanchez floundered before Smith.“I don’t care if you are Don Shula or Tom Landry; this becomes more of a quarterback league every day,” Brandt said. “Do you have a quarterback? That’s the whole thing.”EXTRA POINTSDefensive tackle Sheldon Richardson is replacing the injured Tampa Bay Buccaneers defensive tackle Gerald McCoy in the Pro Bowl. Richardson joins center Nick Mangold. Richardson led the Jets with eight sacks.A version of this article appears in print on January 15, 2015, on Page B17 of the New York edition with the headline: Bowles Had Aura of Head Coach Long Before Joining Jets.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.