JAN. 14, 2015
Minutes after reaching the top of El Capitan, after the hugs and the sprays of sparkling wine, the rock climbers Tommy Caldwell and Kevin Jorgeson spoke exclusively with John Branch of The New York Times.Q. Did you have a sense of how much of the world was watching? You just heard that President Obama wants to call you.CALDWELL I had a small sense. Luckily a week ago I dropped my phone. I’ve been sheltered by some of it. But you see all the cars in the meadow, and at 4 a.m. every day, there’s some big light down there. We’ve gotten little tidbits of information about what’s been going down.Q. What do you hope this does for climbing?CALDWELL I would love for this to open people’s minds to what an amazing sport this is. I think the larger audience’s conception is that we’re thrill seekers, out there for an adrenaline rush. We really aren’t at all. It’s about spending our lives in these beautiful places and forming these incredible bonds with friends and family. It’s really a lifestyle. It’s superhealthy, and the climbing world is some of the most psyched, great people around. And if that love can spread, that’s really a great thing.AdvertisementJORGESON I would echo all of those things for sure. I hope it inspires people to find their own Dawn Wall, if you will. We’ve been working on this thing a long time, slowly and surely. I think everyone has their own secret Dawn Wall to complete one day, and maybe they can put this project in their own context.AdvertisementQ. What does this say about perseverance? A lot of people wouldn’t have thought of doing this, and many would not have kept at it the way you did.Tommy Caldwell and Kevin Jorgeson spoke after their 19-day climb of the Dawn Wall on El Capitan in Yosemite National Park, Calif.JORGESON I’m pretty stubborn to begin with.CALDWELL I asked Kevin that question myself, and he said, “I just didn’t want to give up.” And I’m too much of an optimist.Q. Any times on the wall that you thought it was not going to happen?CALDWELL For me, it went really, really well, actually. I was flying high from the beginning. It felt like a new climb compared to the last seven years. But it’s so much, and it’s such a daunting thing, so you never know what’s going to happen. I never had a moment like, I’m losing it; it’s slipping away.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.JORGESON You try not to linger too long on the doubts, but I definitely had them. But I also operate better as a climber when I frame myself as an underdog and get the pressure off a little bit. It really helps. Even this morning, the fourth-to-last pitch, the method that Tommy used was not going to work for me, and I didn’t know if there was another way. I was like, I’m not going to climb the Dawn Wall because of a 5.12 flare. I started to lose it a little bit. But I found my own way and made it work. It wasn’t until the base of the last pitch that I really felt it was in the bag.Q. What now? What’s the comedown after all this?CALDWELL We’re going to stay here in Yosemite. My family came out, and we’re going to enjoy this place a little longer. Go hang out with my little boy. I’m pretty excited to see everyone.Q. When the climber Warren Harding reached the top of the Dawn Wall in 1970 and was asked why he did it, he said, “Because we’re insane!” Why did you do it?CALDWELL For me, I love to dream big, and I love to find ways to be a bit of an explorer. These days it seems like everything is padded and comes with warning labels. This just lights a fire under me, and that’s a really exciting way to live. And this has driven me for a really long time.JORGESON I wanted to see what I was capable of, and this was the biggest canvas and the most audacious project I could join and see to the finish. Like Tommy, I don’t know what is next.An answer in the Q. and A. column on Thursday about the experiences of Tommy Caldwell and Kevin Jorgeson when they climbed the 3,000-foot Dawn Wall of El Capitan in a single expedition misstated the rating of a part of the Dawn Wall that Jorgeson said caused him difficulty. It is a 5.12 flare, not a 51.2 flair.A version of this article appears in print on January 15, 2015, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: ‘I Would Love for This to Open People’s Minds’.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.