AdvertisementSupported byN.F.L. RoundupBy The Associated PressThe San Francisco 49ers promoted the longtime defensive line coach Jim Tomsula to head coach, going with a familiar face after a national search that took more than two weeks but ended in house.Tomsula was set to be formally introduced Thursday in a news conference at Levi’s Stadium.Tomsula replaces Jim Harbaugh, who parted ways with the 49ers on Dec. 28 in what the team called a mutual decision. Harbaugh was introduced as Michigan’s new coach two days later, after a four-year run with San Francisco during which the team reached three straight N.F.C. championship games and a Super Bowl.“Jim Tomsula clearly is the right man to lead this team,” Jed York, the 49ers’ chief executive, said in a statement. “Jim is a great teacher and a tremendous mentor who conducts himself with great class and integrity.”San Francisco went 8-8 this season and missed the playoffs.DEL RIO REPORTEDLY HIRED The Oakland Raiders hired the Denver Broncos’ defensive coordinator, Jack Del Rio, to become their coach, according to multiple media reports. The hope would be that Del Rio, a Bay Area native who grew up cheering for the Raiders, can return the team to its glory days.Del Rio would become Oakland’s ninth head coach since the start of the 2003 season. The Raiders have the N.F.L.’s worst record in that span.Del Rio would replace Tony Sparano, who was elevated from offensive-line coach this season to replace the fired Dennis Allen and had hoped to keep the job.MARIOTA TO ENTER DRAFT Marcus Mariota, the Oregon Ducks’ quarterback and this season’s Heisman Trophy winner, declared his eligibility for the N.F.L. draft, announcing on Oregon’s website that he would forgo his senior season.Mariota was the humble leader of the high-flying offense of the Ducks, who fell, 42-20, to Ohio State in Monday night’s national championship game. Mariota set a Pacific-12 Conference record for most touchdowns in a single season with 58: 42 passing, 15 rushing and one receiving.FOX INTERVIEWS WITH BEARS John Fox interviewed for Chicago’s coaching job, two days after parting ways with the Broncos. He is widely seen as a strong possibility given his record and his ties to the Bears consultant Ernie Accorsi and their new general manager, Ryan Pace.COLTS BACKUP FACES CHARGES Prosecutors filed charges of rape, criminal confinement with bodily injury, and battery resulting in bodily injury against the Indianapolis Colts backup linebacker Josh McNary. According to the probable cause affidavit, two Indianapolis police officers said a 29-year-old woman accused an unknown man they later determined to be McNary of attacking her in the early-morning hours of Dec. 1.Advertisement