By PAT BORZIOCT. 9, 2015
KANSAS CITY, Mo. —  The day before his first postseason start with the Royals, Johnny Cueto — the former Cincinnati Reds right-hander acquired just before the trade deadline — dismissed his lackluster final two months of the season cavalierly, as if some less capable look-alike had parachuted in to pitch in his place.“That season is over,” Cueto said, as interpreted by Pedro Grifol, the Royals’ hitting coach. “This is a new season. And you’ll get to see what Johnny Cueto is all about.”At first, Johnny Cueto pitched no differently from the other one, giving up four runs through the first three innings of Game 2 of an American League division series against the Houston Astros. After that, Cueto — the real one, presumably — pitched scoreless ball through the sixth.The Royals, meanwhile, rallied to tie the game and then won it, 5-4, on Ben Zobrist’s run-scoring single in the seventh. That tied the best-of-five series at one game apiece. Kansas City avoided falling behind two games to none before heading to Houston, where the 20-game winner Dallas Keuchel, who eliminated the Yankees in the wild-card game and has been unbeatable at home (15-0, 1.46 E.R.A.), is set to start Game 3 on Sunday at Minute Maid Park.Advertisement“Obviously you don’t want to go down, 0-2, going to Houston,” Cueto said. “Thank God we were able to pull this out. Now we can go down to Houston and play baseball.”Cueto was neither fabulous nor awful, running into some bad luck in the second before finally settling in. Charged with four runs on seven hits in a no-decision, he pitched well enough to keep his team in the game.Advertisement“When he got done, I looked at Dave and said, ‘What do you think of his outing?’ ” Kansas City Manager Ned Yost said, referring to the pitching coach Dave Eiland. “Dave said, ‘He pitched good enough to win.’ I said, ‘I agree with this.’ ”Cueto arrived in Kansas City in a deal for three pitching prospects, the delayed replacement for the departed free agent James Shields. Cueto, who turns his back to the hitter in mid-windup the way Luis Tiant did, shut out Detroit in his third start after the trade, then beat the Angels with a strong eight innings. But he lost five consecutive starts between Aug. 21 and Sept. 13, allowing an alarming 28 earned runs in 261/3 innings, before winning two of his last three.Yost slotted Cueto for Game 2 on his normal rest. Cueto last pitched on Sunday in Minnesota, allowing one run in five innings to a lineup sprinkled with backups and young players. Cueto never won a postseason game in three starts for the Reds, but Yost preferred an experienced arm as a fallback if Houston won the series opener.“I didn’t feel any pressure at all,” Cueto said. “I know the magnitude of the trade. I know why I was brought here. I take a lot of pride in myself, and a lot of pride in helping this club win.”Early on, Cueto struggled. Colby Rasmus doubled in a run in the first, becoming the first major leaguer with an extra-base hit in each of his first six postseason games. George Springer softly singled home two more in the second, an inning that began with a broken-bat single, a walk, and a Jake Marisnick bunt hit as third baseman Mike Moustakas saw Cueto point to third and hesitated. Salvador Perez homered to make the score 3-1, but Rasmus homered in the third for a 4-1 lead, his sixth homer in six games going back to the regular season.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Then Cueto retired 12 of 14 batters, allowing only a walk to Rasmus in the fifth and Luis Valbuena’s single in the sixth.Advertisement“The way he bounced back and shut down those guys in the fifth and sixth inning there was huge,” Royals first baseman Eric Hosmer said.Kansas City got one run back on a double play in the third inning. In the sixth, with Lorenzo Cain at second with a double, Houston starter Scott Kazmir departed for Oliver Perez, one former Mets pitcher replacing another. Perez jumped ahead of Hosmer with two strikes and then badly fooled him with a pitch away, only to have Hosmer one-hand it softly into left for a run. Perez seemed stunned.“It’s a tribute to how talented of a hitter he is,” Moustakas said. “You don’t see many guys able to do that, throw the bat out there when your entire body is out of the box pretty much, get a barrel on it and get a hit.”With the Astros’ infielders overshifted to the left side, the switch hitter Kendrys Morales, batting right-handed, dribbled a single through the opening where second baseman Jose Altuve normally plays. Instead of an inning-ending double play, the Royals had runners on first and third. Perez walked Moustakas, his final batter, to load the bases, and Josh Fields walked Salvador Perez on four pitches to force in the tying run.Zobrist followed Alcides Escobar’s leadoff triple in the seventh with the game-deciding single. Three Royals relievers combined for three scoreless innings. Wade Davis, who succeeded the injured Greg Holland as the closer, finished it off, picking off pinch-runner Carlos Gomez at first for the second out after a review.“We had to win today,” Zobrist said. “On Sunday, with Keuchel on the mound, it’s going to be a big challenge.”A version of this article appears in print on October 10, 2015, on Page D3 of the New York edition with the headline: Royals and Cueto Rally to Pull Even With Astros.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.