By MATT HIGGINSJAN. 14, 2015
ORCHARD PARK, N.Y. —  The Buffalo Bills on Wednesday introduced their new coach, a man who needed no introduction.Rex Ryan, whose colorful, outsize and occasionally profane personality endeared him to fans, was known as many things during his six seasons as the Jets’ coach — an exotic defensive schemer, a bold predictor and an exchanger of unconditional loyalty with his players.“Is this thing on?” Ryan said into a microphone at the news conference. “Because it’s getting ready to be on.”Buffalo signed Ryan after a two-week search following the abrupt resignation on Dec. 31 of Doug Marrone, who invoked an opt-out clause in his contract. Marrone compiled a 15-17 record over two seasons.AdvertisementThe team’s president, Russ Brandon, and General Manager Doug Whaley met at the home of the Bills’ owners, Terry and Kim Pegula, in Boca Raton, Fla., during the search, which included interviews with a dozen candidates.Advertisement“A lot of arguing, a lot of debating, which is always healthy,” Terry Pegula said. “It’s not a sign of dysfunction.”After two interviews with Ryan, the Bills had their man.“We want the Buffalo Bills to be a nightmare to play against,” Pegula said. “That’s our objective.”Ryan concealed none of his trademark swagger during Wednesday’s gathering, also attended by the Bills Hall of Famers Jim Kelly and Thurman Thomas, and local politicians and business leaders.“I know we will lead the league in defense,” Ryan said.He also promised, “We’re going to build a bully,” and added, “We’re not afraid of anybody.”Buffalo hired Ryan for more than tough talk, though. The Bills have not made the playoffs in 15 seasons, the longest drought in the N.F.L.“It’s not about winning press conferences,” Brandon said. “It’s about winning football games.”But Ryan has already begun winning over his new team, Thomas said.“I talk to a lot of the players,” Thomas said. “I got a lot of texts after the last coach opted out, and let me tell you something: I said to Doug Whaley, They need a coach who’s going to come in there and motivate them and get them to channel that anger right now onto the football field.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Ryan’s larger-than-life persona should help bestow an identity on a franchise that has lacked one since quarterback Doug Flutie departed following the 2000 season.Advertisement“When you look at a town, and look at a team, you kind of see a fit,” Thomas said. “Rex is a guy who will say: ‘They haven’t been to the playoffs in 15 years. Let me be the guy that turns it around.’ That’s what you get out of him — he wants to turn it around. He wants to win a championship.”Landing in Buffalo is a homecoming of sorts for Ryan. He and his twin brother, Rob — the defensive coordinator for the New Orleans Saints — were born while their father, Buddy, was working as an assistant coach at the University at Buffalo. Buddy Ryan, who went on to serve as the coach of the Philadelphia Eagles and the Arizona Cardinals, is considered the creator of the 46 defense, a system he taught his sons.While growing up, Rex Ryan lived with his mother for eight years in Toronto, a 90-minute drive from Buffalo. He said he watched Bills games, and he rattled off the names of several players from the 1970s. He later traveled to Buffalo to watch games when his father was a defensive coach for the Jets from 1968 to ’75.Ryan inherits a defensive line with three Pro Bowl selections — Marcell Dareus, Kyle Williams and Mario Williams — and the Bills’ 54 sacks this season led the league.But Ryan has already begun making the Bills his own. The contract of the team’s defensive coordinator, Jim Schwartz, was terminated Tuesday, and Dennis Thurman, Ryan’s coordinator with the Jets, is expected to take over. The offensive coordinator Nathaniel Hackett has been replaced by Greg Roman, who held the same position with San Francisco the past four seasons. During that span, the 49ers had a 49-22-1 record, the third-best in the league.Yet Buffalo has glaring holes on offense. Quarterback Kyle Orton announced his retirement after the season, leaving E. J. Manuel, a first-round draft pick in 2013 who was benched after four games this season, as the presumed starter.Perhaps owing to the Bills’ shortcomings, Ryan demonstrated some restraint, refusing to guarantee a Super Bowl title as he had done while with the Jets.“I will guarantee pursuit of it,” he said.Some things have not changed, though. Asked if he would most relish a chance to defeat the team that fired him, Ryan said no. Instead, he mentioned the A.F.C. East’s standard-bearers, the New England Patriots, coached by his nemesis Bill Belichick.“I’ll be honest,” Ryan said. “It’s still the Patriots I want the most.”A version of this article appears in print on January 15, 2015, on Page B17 of the New York edition with the headline: With Familiar Bluster, Ryan Signals Change Is Ahead for Bills.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.