By DAVID WALDSTEINOCT. 9, 2015
TORONTO —  A giant, glittering belt with the inscription “Heavyweight Champion of the World” sat in the locker of Hanser Alberto, a little known rookie infielder making only his sixth start for the Texas Rangers.The belt is awarded by the Rangers to the star of each win in a brief postgame ceremony in the clubhouse. After a drawn-out, 14-round bout with the Toronto Blue Jays, Alberto truly earned the honor.Alberto was in the lineup because Adrian Beltre, the leader and best player on the team, was unable to contribute because of a back injury he sustained in Game 1 on Thursday. So it was left to Alberto to deliver the knockout punch.After making a costly error in the second inning, Alebrto singled home the winning run as the Rangers beat the staggering Blue Jays, 6-4, at the Rogers Centre. Toronto’s season is on the brink, while the Rangers headed home brimming with confidence.Advertisement“I felt pretty sour in the moment because that cost like a couple runs,” Alberto said of his error, “but you know, we fight until the last out.”AdvertisementThe Blue Jays were the favorites to win the American League division series and the World Series. But the Rangers, who were eight games back in the A.L. West when July turned to August, are within a win of the League Championship Series.They lead the Jays, 2-0, in the best-of-five series, with the next two games in Arlington, Tex., beginning with Game 3 on Sunday.In a 4-hour-57-minute epic, the Rangers trailed by a run in the eighth inning and were only four outs from defeat when they tied the game. From there both teams struggled to get hits at key moments until the Rangers broke through in the 14th to send the sellout crowd of 49,716 into a stony silence.“Somebody had to get something at some point,” Josh Hamilton said, “and I’m glad it was us.”That some point came with two outs in the 14th and the bottom of the order coming up. Rougned Odor, the pesky No. 7 hitter who seemed to be at the center of most of the action, singled against LaTroy Hawkins, and then Chris Gimenez did the same with a line drive to right.Jose Bautista scooped up the ball and threw behind Odor at second base, but Odor, who seemed to misjudge the urgency of Bautista’s throw, managed to slip back just ahead of the tag.Toronto asked for a review of the call, and the fans made it known they thought Odor was out as they watched replays on the big screen. But the call on the field was upheld.AdvertisementAlberto, batting ninth and using Delino DeShields Jr.’s bat, then punched a single to center. Odor tagged the plate ahead of the throw. It was the second time in the game that he scored on a daring slide, and the Rangers added an insurance run on an infield single by DeShields.“I was just trying to get home safe,” Odor said. “And I did a pretty good job.”The game began nearly five hours earlier with a wild stretch of miscues and unlucky bounces. But as the game proceeded from day into evening, the scoring rate fell to a trickle as improved defensive play, sharp pitching and overanxious swings became the norm.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The errors that pockmarked the first two innings were replaced by defensive gems: Ryan Goins’s cross-body throw for the last out of the top of the 13th, Bautista’s diving catch for the third out in the seventh and his catch while in a full-out sprint in the 14th.What the Blue Jays defenders were doing in the field in the latter innings, the Rangers pitchers were doing on the mound. The Texas bullpen, in relief of Cole Hamels, threw seven scoreless innings and made critical pitches in high-pressure moments to strand runners (Shawn Tolleson getting Goins to ground out with a runner on third base and two outs in the 12th).“It was a great game all around,” said Beltre, who was uncertain if his back would improve enough so he could join the fray in Game 3. “Our bullpen is unbelievable, and they showed it again.”The proceedings became so tense that it even featured a bench-clearing incident in the 13th when Texas reliever Keone Kela got into a shouting match with Josh Donaldson, who had homered in the first. Kela threw a quick pitch that Donaldson hit for a towering drive that went foul by a few feet.Donaldson turned and spouted invective at Kela, who responded in kind, and the players ran out onto the field from the dugouts and bullpens, though no real punches were thrown. To have the benches clear in a playoff game is unusual. But in the 13th inning of a playoff game it is quite rare.“Kela, he likes to quick pitch,” said Mike Napoli, whose pinch-hit single in the eighth pushed DeShields home with the tying run. “It’s part of the game.”An inning later, after the Rangers finally seized the lead, Ross Ohlendorf closed it, despite hitting Russell Martin with a two-out pitch. But he struck out Kevin Pillar, and the Rangers poured out of the dugout to celebrate.AdvertisementThe unhappy local fans, many of whom waited 22 years for the Blue Jays to return to the playoffs, filed out into the twilight. They were hoping to see their team come off the ropes, but were uncertain if the next game here would be Game 5, or in 2016.A version of this article appears in print on October 10, 2015, on Page D3 of the New York edition with the headline: Rookie Grabs Spotlight With Hit That Gives Rangers a Commanding Lead.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.