By KAREN CROUSEJAN. 14, 2015
PHOENIX —  The eye was inexorably drawn to LeBron James during his return to the Cleveland Cavaliers’ lineup on Tuesday night. In a 107-100 loss to the Phoenix Suns — Cleveland’s sixth straight defeat and ninth in 10 games — James played so many roles it was as if he were channeling the actor Alan Cumming in his 2013 one-man Broadway show, “Macbeth.”Except no Cavaliers fans were applauding at the end. Their team is now below .500, with a 19-20 record no one could have foreseen before the season began. James’s homecoming has clearly run aground.Of course, in his first game back since a strained left knee and a sore lower back sidelined him for two weeks, James did do a decent impersonation of his kingly self. He played 37 minutes and finished with 33 points on 11 for 18 shooting while collecting seven rebounds and five assists.James’s first points at US Airways Center even came on a reverse dunk. That was heartening news because before he was sidelined, he seemed to have lost a step and, with it, a gear of aggression. In all, James, who was averaging less than a dunk a game before his injuries, had three against the Suns, a formidable team with a 23-18 record.AdvertisementAfterward, David Blatt, the embattled Cavaliers coach, described James’s performance as “terrific” and added, “I just thought he laid it out there.”AdvertisementThe same, however, could not be said of James’s teammates, who seemed disoriented during the game, with expressions as dull as old pennies. In the fourth quarter, as the James-led Cavaliers whittled the Suns’ double-digit lead to sawdust, the Cleveland reserves looked on passively as if it had no dog in the fight. The only time the Cavaliers really looked in sync was during their ritualistic exchange of elaborate pregame handshakes.So on a night when James did everything but steal the trumpet out of Jesse McGuire’s hands and play the national anthem, the loss amplified the general sense of unease over the team’s composition and its compatibility with Blatt, a rookie N.B.A. coach. His extended success overseas seems to be lost in translation with many of his players, who may not care what he achieved in Russia or Israel.The Cavaliers were trailing late in the third quarter when James essentially took on Blatt’s role and coordinated a comeback. With few glances in his coach’s direction, he guided the Cavaliers on an 18-3 run. He even got help from the unpredictable J. R. Smith, recently traded from the Knicks, who produced 15 points in the third quarter and 29 for the game.Playing the entire fourth quarter, James made 5 of 7 shots and in the final minutes played the role of shutdown defender on the Suns’ Markieff Morris, whose last basket came with 4 minutes 15 seconds to go.But in the end, none of it led to a victory. Nor did the fact that James acted as the team doctor in the second quarter after he was elbowed in the head. He dropped to the floor and was on his hands and knees for several seconds before rolling onto his back, where he remained for a while longer.“I just wanted to sit down and make sure I wasn’t going through any concussion symptoms or anything of that nature,” James said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Nor, for that matter, did a victory result from James’s decision at one point to act like an assistant coach and push Blatt away from the officials and toward the team bench. At the time, Blatt was embroiled in an argument over an offensive foul called on James.“Just protecting my coach,” James said afterward, adding, “I was talking to one of the other refs, and Coach Blatt was getting a little fired up about it, too, and he was on his way to a technical.”AdvertisementThe little push by James triggered memories of his first season with the Miami Heat, when he bumped his coach, Erik Spoelstra, during an early rough patch. But Spoelstra’s boss, Pat Riley, had Spoelstra’s back — and James’s respect.Blatt acted quickly to stomp on any sparks ignited by James’s action.“I thought my guy was taking a lot of hard hits, and I didn’t like it, and I was expressing my opinion,” he said. “And LeBron stepped in to sort of protect me in that situation, which is more than fine.”Star player, coach, assistant coach, medical expert. James even found time to impersonate a statistician during the game, approaching the officials during a first-quarter timeout and arguing that a 2-point basket credited to his teammate Kevin Love should have been a 3-pointer. After reviewing the play, the officials made the change. But Love did not make another 3, shot 3 for 11 from the field and, not for the first time, spent the fourth quarter on the bench.Indeed, James’s return could not fix what ails Love or point guard Kyrie Irving, whose ragged performance produced six assists and eight turnovers. The Cavaliers lost the ball 19 times, and their defense was again missing in action for too much of the game. In choosing to leave Miami and return to Cleveland, James publicly preached patience but seemed intent on winning another title as soon as possible. It seems to be slowly dawning on him that not every player on the Cavaliers is going to take to his mentoring like a seedling to sunlight.“We’re not ready to win a seven-game series,” James said after a team practice on Monday. “We’re nowhere near ready to even think about the postseason.”James does know about a young Ohio team whose players stuck together through adversity and played with grit and guts. Not his Cavaliers, mind you, but the Ohio State Buckeyes. Between Monday’s practice and Tuesday’s game, James traveled to and from Texas in a private jet to attend the College Football Playoff championship game.“I’m a big supporter of the university,” James said. “What that school does for the state of Ohio you would only understand if you’re from the state of Ohio.”But you do not have to be from that state to understand that the Cavaliers, at least for the moment, are something of a mess.A version of this article appears in print on January 15, 2015, on Page B15 of the New York edition with the headline: Returning to a Mix That’s Hard to Unscramble.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.