AdvertisementSupported byBy Tim CaseyHARTFORD — During the Cincinnati-Connecticut men’s basketball game on Saturday, Hep Cronin sat in the front row behind the Bearcats’ bench, just as he had done dozens of times. Cronin, a fixture at games and practices and on the team’s charter flights, has maintained his routine despite trying family circumstances.Cincinnati Coach Mick Cronin, Hep’s youngest child, could not join his father on the trip because he was 800 miles away at home in Ohio, watching on television and recovering from a serious medical condition he initially feared could end his coaching career, or possibly his life.Last month, Mick Cronin, 43, was told he had an arterial dissection in his brain. He said he now feels as good as ever, but he is being cautious, taking medications and adhering to doctors’ orders to keep his blood pressure in check.Although he is not attending practices and games because they are too stressful, Cronin is still involved with the team. He watches film, speaks with the interim coach Larry Davis every day, devises game plans and drives to high school games to recruit players.He jokes that he is like Pat Riley, the president of the Miami Heat, overseeing the program without making decisions during games. Still, he cannot wait to return to the sideline. Although the university has announced that Cronin will not coach again until next season, he has a different plan. He expects to meet with his physicians again in March, and he is optimistic he may be able to coach if the Bearcats play in the postseason.“In my mind, I’ll be back full-go in March,” Cronin said in a telephone interview Jan. 9. “Hopefully, my team will still be playing. That’s a secret goal of mine that obviously could get shot down by my doctors. I can’t remember who said it — hope is the best motivator people can have. I’m going to stay hopeful, because I already feel 100 percent, to be honest with you.”For now, Cronin is grateful to even be considering a comeback. On the flight home from a 1-point, double-overtime loss to Nebraska on Dec. 13, Hep Cronin noticed that his son had an ice pack on the back of his head. Mick complained of headaches in the rear of his skull, but he was not too concerned. Then, when the pain lingered a few days, he knew something was wrong. Sitting in the locker room after an overtime victory over San Diego State on Dec. 17, Cronin told his father that the team physician Michael Donaworth had recommended he have a series of exams. The situation surprised Hep Cronin because his son maintained a healthy diet, exercised and knew about his family’s medical history. Hep Cronin had quintuple bypass surgery 15 years ago when he was a scout for the Atlanta Braves and had three stents inserted into arteries last January. Hep’s father died of a heart attack when Hep was a year old.Shortly before facing Virginia Commonwealth on Dec. 20, Cronin told his team that he would not be coaching that game. Doctors had initially diagnosed a brain aneurysm, and his family was fearful. Hep Cronin and his daughter, Kelly, spent the night at Mick’s house on a few occasions. They did not want to leave his side.After Cronin had an angiogram on Dec. 22, the diagnosis was changed to an arterial dissection, considered less severe than an aneurysm. He was also told he did not need brain surgery.“We were all relieved,” Hep Cronin said. “They could have walked over there and said, ‘You can never coach again.’ We were very, very thankful and happy.”Cronin returned to work on Dec. 26, though in a different role from the one he has had since his alma mater hired him nine years ago. During his recovery, he has turned the program over to Davis, whom Cronin has known since the early 1990s, when Davis was an assistant at Ball State and recruited a player Cronin coached at Woodward High School in Cincinnati. Davis, who is 15 years older than Cronin, left his job as Furman’s head coach in 2006 to become Cronin’s top assistant.The Bearcats had only one scholarship player when Cronin and Davis arrived, and in each of their first two seasons the team finished below .500. Together, however, Cronin and Davis have rebuilt the program. The Bearcats are 11-5 over all and 2-2 in the American Athletic Conference after losing Thursday night at Memphis and hope to make the N.C.A.A. tournament for a fifth consecutive season. Cronin meets with players before and after each practice and helps Davis by watching videos of Cincinnati’s games and future opponents. At halftime of each game, he sends Davis a text message with his thoughts. Davis said he welcomed the feedback.“Everybody’s a little different,” Davis said. “That’s what makes the world go ’round. That’s what makes coaches, coaches. But our foundation of things — defense, toughness, kind of the foundation we built the program on — we’re on the same page, for sure.”The support Cronin has received from family members, friends and colleagues has been overwhelming, he said. He has been asked if he has had an epiphany since the diagnosis, or if he has changed his perspective. But ever since he was a child, he said, he has lived by words his father constantly repeated to him: People do not realize that we are just passing through life.“Health is a gift, and life is a gift,” Cronin said. “I’ve always tried to make the most of my life. I already knew that I was fortunate. I’ve had a great run. It’s not like I’m having some wake-up call that I need to be nicer or be a better dad or stop and smell the roses. I’ve always known.”One of the most animated coaches in college basketball, Cronin said he did not know if he would change his behavior after his return. Doctors told him his intense sideline demeanor did not necessarily contribute to his medical problem. They are not sure what caused it. Although he was recently cleared to start walking again, Cronin remains prohibited from running on a treadmill or doing anything physically strenuous.This is the longest break he has had from coaching since he was a high school assistant as an undergraduate at Cincinnati. As a result, he is eager to return.“At first, as I was getting my bearings together and getting situated medically, I was distracted enough,” Cronin said. “But now I feel 100 percent. They might have to put a chain around my chair to keep me in the office.”Advertisement