AdvertisementSupported byBucks 95, Knicks 79By Sam BordenLONDON — About 90 minutes before the Knicks’ game against the Milwaukee Bucks here Thursday night, Coach Derek Fisher was asked a difficult question: If he could go back to the beginning of this season, a season that has been as wretched as the English winter weather, what would he change?Standing at a lectern in the news conference room of O2 Arena, Fisher hesitated. Then he stammered. Then he stepped back and rubbed his chin.His indecision was understandable. This season has been a disaster for the Knicks, a calamitous compilation of somnolence and stupor that, after their 95-79 loss to the Bucks, has beaten down players, executives and fans who have watched the team lose in three countries (the Knicks are also 0-1 in Canada this season).What would Fisher change? What wouldn’t he?The possibilities seem endless. Perhaps Fisher would consider importing English audiences to the United States — he and the Knicks at least found a friendly reception here Thursday. There were no spectators wearing paper bags on their heads and few boos, even though the Knicks stumbled to their 16th consecutive loss and their 26th in 27 games, and midway through the first quarter were trailing, 14-0.They are now 5-36 halfway through the season and have become realistic challengers for the worst record in N.B.A. history, currently held by the 1972-73 Philadelphia 76ers, who were 9-73.“We done dug ourselves a deep hole right now,” Carmelo Anthony said. Noting that the season was only half over, he added, “It feels like it’s March already.”Despite the disaster that the Knicks’ season has become, the mood in the pro-Knicks crowd was mostly festive and upbeat, a vibe that was not very surprising given that the game had sold out just an hour after tickets went on sale. Yes, those tickets were bought when it was presumed that the Knicks would resemble a competitive team, but the British fans nonetheless cheered loudly for the team’s best-known players, Anthony and Amar’e Stoudemire, both of whom returned from injuries to provide what Fisher had called an important “presence” on the court.Unfortunately, that seemed to be all that Stoudemire, who has had a swollen right knee and had not played since Christmas, could provide. He finished with two rebounds and did not score in eight minutes of action.Anthony, on the other hand, scored 25 points on 7-for-12 shooting, moving decently if somewhat gingerly. Problems with his left knee had kept him out since New Year’s Eve, and it is generally expected that he will try to stay somewhat active through the All-Star Game, which will be played in New York next month, before having an operation that seems increasingly inevitable. In a lost season, it seems fitting that an exhibition game appears to be motivating Anthony the most.“I thought my body responded very well,” Anthony said. He said he expected to play against New Orleans on Monday, when the Knicks, for better or worse, will be back in New York, where they have not won a game in nearly two months.Adam Silver, the N.B.A. commissioner, was on hand and held a news conference with the international media in which he described the difficulties of the Knicks and the Nets — whose 16-23 record looks good only in comparison to the Knicks’ mark — as the “ebb and flow” of N.B.A. basketball. In some ways, it was one of the nicer things anyone had said about the Knicks lately.Silver touched on several other topics. He reiterated his thinking that it was not feasible for the league to put a single team in Europe (an entire division would be necessary); said he was intrigued by the soccer concept of having a knockout tournament, similar to the F.A. Cup, contested during the season; and affirmed that Mikhail D. Prokhorov, the Nets’ owner, was listening to potential offers to buy his team.When it was suggested that two of the league’s best-known teams, the Knicks and the Los Angeles Lakers, were more blights than lights for the N.B.A. this season, Silver said it was “not a concern at all” because he was happy to see parity in the league.Certainly the Bucks, who are 21-19 after a league-worst 15-67 record last season, are proof of that. They are coached by Jason Kidd, who at 41 still looks fitter than some players in the league, and who played for the Knicks just two seasons ago.Asked before Thursday’s game if he thought he might be able to play on this current Knicks team — why not? — he smiled and said: “Me? No.” But he added, “That’s a good question.”In truth, the Knicks on Thursday probably could have used Kidd or Fisher, who is newly retired, or, frankly, any of the former N.B.A. stars who were in the crowd, including Dikembe Mutombo, Hakeem Olajuwon and John Starks.For that matter, some of the notable soccer players in attendance — a group that included Thierry Henry, Didier Drogba, Cesc Fábregas and DeAndre Yedlin, the young American who recently joined Tottenham — might have helped, too. Maybe they could have scored on a header.The story of the game was familiar to those who courageously follow the Knicks: The Bucks jumped out early, pushing their initial 14-0 margin to a 31-13 lead at the end of the first quarter and to a 56-37 advantage at the half. The Knicks made a halfhearted run in the fourth quarter — with Anthony and Stoudemire on the bench — to cut the lead to 11, but they never truly threatened.The statistics sheet was depressing for the Knicks, who were — as usual — outplayed in just about every facet of the game. The season is over, yet it is only halfway done.Perhaps that was why, after careful contemplation of the question regarding what he would change if he could have a do-over, Fisher finally settled on the simplest answer possible.“I guess,” he said, “I would change our won-loss record.”Advertisement