By MARC TRACYJAN. 15, 2015
Ohio State quarterback Cardale Jones, fresh off leading the Buckeyes to victory in the inaugural College Football Playoff national championship game, announced Thursday that he would return to the university instead of declaring for the N.F.L. draft.Jones, a redshirt sophomore who at one point was the team’s third-string quarterback, completed 16 of 23 passes for 242 yards and a touchdown as the Buckeyes upset Oregon, 42-20, on Monday night in Arlington, Tex. He also had 21 carries for 38 yards and a touchdown.Jones, who wore a scarlet-and-gray T-shirt that referred to his nickname, 12 Gauge, given because of his strong arm and his number, called the decision “simple.” He added, “Most important for me is to graduate.”A large news media contingent gathered at a high school he attended, Ginn Academy in Cleveland, and the announcement was broadcast live on ESPN.AdvertisementAfter he announced his plans, Jones joked, “I don’t know why you guys made it such a big deal.”AdvertisementThursday was the deadline for underclassmen to declare for the draft, which begins April 30.If Jones had chosen to turn professional, it would have been an extraordinary decision because he has started just three games in his college career. Before the season, Ohio State’s first-choice quarterback, Braxton Miller, widely considered a Heisman Trophy favorite, sustained a shoulder injury. J. T. Barrett stepped in and grew into a Heisman contender himself, but he broke his ankle in the regular-season finale against Michigan.Jones took over the Buckeyes (14-1) and led them to a shutout rout of Wisconsin in the Big Ten championship game, which convinced the playoff selection committee of their worthiness. Ohio State then upset Alabama, 42-35, in the Sugar Bowl on Jan. 1 to advance to the title game.Jones passed for 742 yards and five touchdowns with two interceptions in the wins over Wisconsin, Alabama and Oregon, and he rushed for 90 yards and another touchdown.Gil Brandt, who was the Dallas Cowboys’ player personnel director for 28 years and is now a draft analyst, said he thought Jones’s decision was wise.“It’s getting harder and harder to play quarterback in the National Football League,” Brandt said. “The offensive game plan is more complicated than ever before. It’s not like it was 10 years ago, when a quarterback could come into this league that didn’t have a lot of college experience and play well, because what’s happening now is the defenses are, like, taking courses in graduate school in M.I.T.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.At 6 feet 5 inches and 250 pounds, Jones has the body of a tight end, but his arm has received the most attention.“He has a tremendous arm,” Alabama Coach Nick Saban said of Jones after the Sugar Bowl. Ohio State wide receiver Evan Spencer said last week that he had seen Jones throw the ball 65 yards on one knee.Before the Buckeyes’ run, Jones was perhaps best known for a message he posted on Twitter: “Why should we have to go to class if we came here to play FOOTBALL, we ain’t come to play SCHOOL, classes are POINTLESS.”AdvertisementOn Thursday he said, “Of course I want to play in the N.F.L., but I want the time to be right.”With all three quarterbacks expected to be healthy entering next season, Ohio State will have to decide which one to start.In recent days, Ohio State Coach Urban Meyer has used Jones as an example of a young athlete who has matured quickly.“Some guys change when they’re 50 years old; it’s too late,” Meyer said Tuesday. “Other guys change when they’re going through the journey like we all did when we’re 17 to 21 years old, 22 years old in his case. Very proud of him.”A version of this article appears in print on January 16, 2015, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Quarterback Who Led Title Run Stays at Ohio State, Forgoing N.F.L. Draft.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.