

 Scott Cacciola
 

NOT THE KNICKS
JAN. 15, 2015

CreditLuke Sharrett for The New York Times        LOUISVILLE, Ky. —  The hardest job at Knights Hall on Tuesday morning belonged to the student managers who were charting the points.The Bellarmine University men’s basketball team was engaged in one of its more familiar segments of practice, a two-minute drill that featured players running and passing and shooting from different areas of the court: 3-pointers, bank shots and layups.Coach Scott Davenport considers a final score of 90 to be respectable. The goal with his roster this season is 120. On Tuesday, the Knights seldom missed — no surprise given the program’s reputation for having the most adept shooters in Division II. The buzzer sounded: 142.“Might be the highest total ever,” the assistant coach Michael Scott said.Bellarmine, which is ranked No. 2 and No. 4 in the two major Division II polls, fell to 12-2 on Thursday after losing to No. 3 Indianapolis, 66-62. The Knights were shooting 51.1 percent ahead of the game and have ranked among the top 10 in field-goal percentage in each of the past seven seasons.AdvertisementLast season, Bellarmine led Division II by shooting 52.9 percent — a figure better than the one compiled by the Miami Heat, who led the N.B.A. at 50.1 percent. And after shooting 73.9 percent last season to lead all Division II players, the senior forward Jake Thelen again ranks among the top five at 68.3 percent.“Whenever we shoot,” Thelen said, “we all feel like it’s going down.”Yet the secret to the Knights’ torrid shooting — their willingness to pass — might come as a surprise.Advertisement“The mentality of everyone on the floor is, I may have a good shot, but there’s always a chance to get a better one for someone else,” the junior forward George Suggs said.Bellarmine shoots well because the players take high-percentage shots. Thelen, who was averaging a team-leading 17.8 points through Wednesday, relies on a diet of crafty layups. The Knights are allergic to contested jumpers. During games, members of Davenport’s staff track inside-out passes and ball reversals.“Every player thinks they’re passing,” Davenport said, “but it helps to show them what’s really happening.”Davenport, 58, who claims to have never had a sip of coffee, nonetheless emits a low hum wherever he goes. Those who have been around him for a while tend to hear him in their sleep. He does not lack energy, and he makes sure to indoctrinate players who are new to his system.For the first month of practice each season, every shot Davenport’s team takes is a bad shot — or at least that is what he tells his players. It could be an open 3-pointer. It could be an easy 10-footer. It makes no difference. If only his players had continued to move the ball, he says, they would have gotten an even better look at the basket.It is often nonsense, of course. Many of the shots were terrific shots, and Davenport would be pleased to see his players attempt them in games. But he wants to send an early message: to value ball movement above all.Advertisement“Passing is a lost art,” Davenport said. “It’s never taught. But don’t get me started. I sound like the old man yelling, ‘Get off my grass!’ ”Davenport is easy with words. Rather than use a whistle at practice — he has never worn one — he exercises his vocal cords. Away from the court, he sometimes tells stories about himself telling stories. They begin like, “Coach Pitino and I were jogging on treadmills at the Final Four in 2005 and I was telling him how ...” And then you might as well get comfortable.He might talk about growing up in Louisville and going to Freedom Hall for the first time at age 10 and collecting autographs from all of the players. Or keeping a daily basketball diary as a teenager and jotting down everything he had done in practice. Or taking a date to a basketball game when he was a high school senior. (His coach, who was also present, spent the evening passing him notes about strategy. His date was not amused. “It was one-and-done,” Davenport recalled.)But there is more, because there is always more. About coaching Allan Houston at Louisville’s Ballard High School. About his time under Denny Crum and Rick Pitino as a longtime assistant at Louisville. About leaving Louisville for Bellarmine in 2005 and Pitino asking him to stay — the ultimate compliment. About how his two best friends from elementary school attend every home game. About inviting Archbishop Joseph E. Kurtz of Louisville to visit with his players — but only before big games.Davenport tends to wax most nostalgic about his family as well as winning the Division II national title in 2011 and being attached to his players. He hates to see his seniors go.“I could cry at a grocery store closing,” he said.Davenport said his basketball philosophy was rooted in a book he first read when he was 13 years old: “The Open Man: The Championship Diary of the N.Y. Knicks,” by Dave DeBusschere. The book chronicled the 1969-70 season and celebrated the team’s selfless style of play. Davenport has a dog-eared copy somewhere at home.“I honestly think that book is why we pass so much,” he said. “Every kid should read that book.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Davenport has his team practice the same things every day — the same cuts, the same five-man passing drills, the same emphasis on the same basics. The challenge, he said, is concocting new practice plans so that the material feels fresh to the players.“Otherwise it’s just monotonous,” he said. “But really, it’s all the same.”A bit of a basketball hoarder, Davenport has kept all of his practice plans for the past 30 seasons. Some of the rubber bands have rotted.AdvertisementHe sticks with what works. Bellarmine’s offense produces an inordinate number of backdoor layups. Davenport tells his players who run the baseline to watch their defenders’ heads. If a defender turns to locate the ball along the perimeter, it operates as an instant cue for the offensive player to cut to the basket.None of this is to suggest that the players do not hone their shooting stroke, because they do. Like Pitino, Davenport devises individual workouts for his players. For 30 to 45 minutes three times a week, each player receives tailored instruction from the coaching staff. Corbin Maynard, a senior guard, recalled how he had a slight hitch in his shot as a freshman. For 10 straight sessions, the coaches filmed him and effectively drilled the bad habit out of him.“Coach’s big thing is, don’t be a lazy shooter,” Maynard said. “Always be ready. Step into your shot. I’ve probably heard that hundreds of times.”Thelen estimated that he takes 1,000 shots a week during the season and nearly 600 a day during the summer, when the players live in dormitories and work as counselors at the university’s basketball camps. They augment their off-season work by playing pickup games with players from Louisville. For Thelen, that meant regular matchups last summer with Louisville’s Montrezl Harrell, a 6-foot-8 forward who offered stiff competition.Maynard said, “A lot of teams don’t have that advantage.”The team also has a sponsorship deal with TruMoo chocolate milk, which Davenport described as “the latest craze” in energy replacement drinks. Given Bellarmine’s throwback style, the milk deal seems appropriate.“The players treat it like liquid gold,” Davenport said.At practice this week, Davenport watched his team’s old-fashioned fundamentals at work — passing, cutting, shooting. He noticed everything, even the occasional miscue.“Get a stick and kill that thing!” he shouted when a player lost control of the ball.Each drill led to the next. Two hours went fast.“That,” Davenport said, “is when you know you love your team.”Not the Knicks: Articles in this series are chronicling Scott
Cacciola’s sabbatical from covering the woeful
Knicks. He will check out some of the good
basketball around the country, recommended
by readers of The New York Times.A version of this article appears in print on January 16, 2015, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: Pass to the Open Man! Not Him! The Other One!.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »