By BILL PENNINGTON and THE ASSOCIATED PRESSJAN. 15, 2015
Coach Tom Coughlin is both loyal and impatient. Under pressure to turn around the Giants this year after successive losing seasons, Coughlin reached out to a familiar colleague Thursday to help resurrect the dysfunctional defense.Steve Spagnuolo, the defensive mastermind behind the Giants’ stunning upset of the previously unbeaten New England Patriots in Super Bowl XLII, was reunited with Coughlin as the new defensive coordinator. Spagnuolo became a rising star in coaching circles after his defense held the high-flying Patriots to 14 points in the Giants’ Super Bowl victory after the 2007 season. In 2009, he left the Giants to become the head coach of the St. Louis Rams.But Spagnuolo remained a popular figure within the Giants organization, and he immediately became the likely replacement last week when Coughlin dismissed Perry Fewell, the defensive coordinator since Spagnuolo’s exit. The Giants defense ranked 29th in the N.F.L. during the 2014 season.“The energy, enthusiasm and strong personality that we saw before in Steve Spagnuolo — all of that was very evident again,” Coughlin said in a statement from the team Thursday. “His desire to be a Giant again was very, very obvious.”AdvertisementSpagnuolo said: “This is both new and familiar at the same time. We’re going to work our butts off, and hopefully we will do great things together.”The Giants also hired Tim Walton as their cornerbacks coach. Walton was the Rams’ defensive coordinator in 2013.Spagnuolo has encountered bumps since leaving the Giants. He had a 10-28 record with the Rams and was fired after the 2011 season. He spent one disappointing year as defensive coordinator of the New Orleans Saints. For the 2014 season, however, he drew praise as the Baltimore Ravens’ cornerbacks coach and assistant head coach.Coughlin said the Giants were not just reaching back in time with the hiring of Spagnuolo.“His defense has changed since he was last here,” Coughlin said. “He worked in Baltimore with John Harbaugh and Dean Pees, and they are outstanding defensive coaches. He has studied defenses. Steve visited colleges and talked to college coaches, including Urban Meyer, to learn how to defend the spread offenses that have become so popular.”JETS ASSISTANT JOINS RYAN Bills Coach Rex Ryan is wasting little time in assembling his new staff, which will include his longtime assistant Dennis Thurman as defensive coordinator.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Thurman held the same role under Ryan with the Jets the last two years. The two have worked together since 2002, when they were members of the Ravens’ defensive staff.AdvertisementRyan was hired on Monday. Thurman replaced Jim Schwartz, whose contract was terminated.Among those also hired by Buffalo on Thursday were Bobby April III, who will coach the linebackers; Karl Dunbar (defensive line); Tim McDonald (defensive backs); and Tony Sparano Jr. (tight ends). (AP)LINEBACKER ON EXEMPT LIST The Indianapolis Colts placed the backup linebacker Josh McNary on the commissioner’s exempt list, a move that came less than 24 hours after prosecutors charged McNary with rape, criminal confinement with bodily injury and battery resulting in bodily injury.(AP)NEW COMBINE FOR VETERANS The N.F.L. is adding a combine for veteran players to go with the huge event it holds for potential draftees.The veterans’ combine is scheduled for March 22 at the Cardinals’ training complex in Phoenix.  (AP) COWBOYS RETAIN PLAY-CALLER The Dallas assistant Scott Linehan will add the title of offensive coordinator after one season as the Cowboys’ play-caller. (AP)A version of this article appears in print on January 16, 2015, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: Giants Return Defense to Spagnuolo’s Control.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.