By KELLEY McMILLANJAN. 15, 2015
BOSTON — After skiing a dazzling run in last Saturday’s giant slalom in Adelboden, Switzerland, Alexis Pinturault of France swooped through the finish area, came to a stop, looked into a television camera and pointed solemnly to the words emblazoned on his helmet: “Je Suis Charlie.”The gesture made his run, which earned him second place, a tribute to his country and to the victims of last week’s attack in Paris on the satirical newspaper Charlie Hebdo.“I was interested in a podium as way to honor the memory of these people,” said Pinturault, who delivered his first top-three result at the Swiss venue, finishing a little over a second behind Marcel Hirscher of Austria.“I wasn’t disappointed at all. It was a good homage and a pleasure to be on the podium,” Pinturault said.AdvertisementThe 2014 Olympic bronze medalist in giant slalom, Pinturault, 23, now has his eyes on a podium finish in this weekend’s races in Wengen, Switzerland, where he has a history of success. Last year, he won the slalom and took second in the super-combined. In 2013, he won the super-combined victory.AdvertisementThose are just a few of the highlights on Pinturault’s résumé. His star has been on the rise since he won his first World Cup podium in 2011 at age 19 in only his second full season on the World Cup.Since then, he has collected 26 top three finishes, seven victories, an Olympic medal and the attention of some of ski racing’s highest profile sponsors, including Red Bull, the energy drink goliath that picked up Pinturault in 2013.He has also caught the eye of ski racing’s top stars. Hirscher, Kjetil Jansrud and Ted Ligety have all pegged Pinturault as a threat for the overall title, ski racing’s biggest award.“He is skiing great and could be in the fight for the overall,” said Hirscher, who currently leads the slalom, giant slalom and overall standings.What makes Pinturault, who sits fifth in the overall rankings, such a promising young skier and a threat for the sport’s top prize is his versatility. In addition to consistently top results in the technical events — slalom and giant slalom — he also has the ability to reach the podium in the super-combined and super-G, a speed discipline. This breadth is rare and affords him more opportunities to collect points toward the overall title, which measures a racer’s performance in all events over the course of a season.And Pinturault has his eye on the overall title this season after finishing third last year.“The goal is to for sure be strong in each event and to earn many, many points toward winning the overall,” Pinturault said in an interview in Beaver Creek in Colorado in late November.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Pinturault’s efforts this season have been undermined by his slalom results, however. He is 21st in the slalom standings and has successfully completed only one race in the discipline, with a fifth in Madonna di Campiglio, Italy, in December.“Alexis has started the season well. He has a lot of skill, physically and technically, but he must progress in slalom,” said Claude Crétier, the technical coach for the French ski team.AdvertisementAt 23, Pinturault appears to have the best years of his career in front of him. His path toward ski racing’s upper echelon began at just two years old, when his parents first put him on skis on the slopes of Courchevel, the ski resort in the French Alps where his family owns a hotel. He climbed the ranks through ski school and regional ski clubs before joining the French national team in 2008 at 17.Although he dominated the junior circuit in slalom and giant slalom as a teenager, it wasn’t until 2009 that he realized he had an excellent shot at racing on the World Cup.“There is no international race when you are young, so you don’t really know if you are strong or not,” Pinturault said. “I realized I was good when I won the world junior championship in 2009. I beat Marcel, who was already one of the top athletes in G.S. and slalom,” he said, referring to Hirscher.It took only five years for Pinturault to rise from junior world champion to Olympic bronze medalist, though the 2014 Olympics were full of mixed emotions for him. Going into the Games, reporters billed Pinturault as a multiple medal contender. Ultimately, he fell short after making mistakes that disqualified him from the second runs of the slalom and super combined.“I was satisfied, but it could have been better,” he said. “In the super combined, I had a really good chance at getting a medal, but in the end, I didn’t. I got only one medal, but that’s a good start, a good start for the future, Pyeongchang and the world championships in Beaver Creek.” (The 2018 Games will be held in Pyeongchang South Korea.)Going into February’s world championships in Beaver Creek, where he achieved back-to-back podiums in the giant slalom and super-G in December, he is a favorite to win multiple medals, but he has his eyes on bigger goals.“My biggest dream is to win a gold medal at the Olympics and then second is to win the overall.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.