AdvertisementSupported byBy Christopher ClareyAs another tennis season begins in earnest with next week’s Australian Open, the cards may or may not have been reshuffled but the support staffs definitely have been.This year, for a change, the women are leading the way, and success in 2014 was no impediment to firing and hiring. The two newcomers who made the biggest impacts at the top level — Eugenie Bouchard of Canada and Simona Halep of Romania — both split with their coaches.Bouchard separated from Nick Saviano, whose technical acumen and tough-love approach had helped her make a surprisingly quick transition from junior success to the top 10 in 2014, when she reached the semifinals of the Australian and French Opens and the final of Wimbledon.Halep dismissed Wim Fissette, the Belgian who had helped her reach the final of the French Open and the WTA Championships and rise as high as No.2 in the rankings.Halep said she wanted to work with a fellow Romanian for a change and soon hired Victor Ionita. Bouchard and Saviano have yet to fill in much of the back story to their unexpected split. But Saviano will still be in Australia, coaching Sloane Stephens, the American whose game he also has helped shape and who had a difficult season in 2014.“It’s been a merry-go-round,” said Tracy Austin, the former United States Open champion who is that increasingly rare former No.1 who has yet to take a coaching job on tour.“To be honest, I don’t really care about that,” said Victoria Azarenka, who has stuck with her longtime coach, Sam Sumyk. “To me, it all feels trendy.”The trend leaped from the men’s game to the women’s game this off-season, with Lindsay Davenport agreeing to help the young and for now erratic American Madison Keys and Martina Navratilova agreeing to help Agnieszka Radwanska, the perennial Grand Slam contender from Poland who has yet to break through to victory.“I think the reason Lindsay and Martina take it on is because it’s exciting to see someone who has the talent and you feel you could make a real difference,” said Austin, who is close to Davenport. “Someday I would love to do it and help someone, but not right now. My kids are still a big-time job.”Amélie Mauresmo, another former women’s No.1, continues to coach Andy Murray after replacing the departed Ivan Lendl last year. But Murray has still tinkered with his staff: He split with his longtime assistant coach, Dani Vallverdu, and fitness trainer, Jez Green.Vallverdu is now working for Tomas Berdych, the Czech with so much easy power who has yet to convince Lendl to come work for him and who remains one of the best players in the men’s game not to win a Grand Slam title.After years of trophy hoarding by Roger Federer, Rafael Nadal and Novak Djokovic, with Murray playing a less consistent role, the Grand Slam club expanded surprisingly quickly in 2014 .Stan Wawrinka broke up the cartel by winning the Australian Open and Marin Cilic kept the proletarian revolt going by winning the U.S. Open, beating Tomas Berdych, Federer and Kei Nishikori along the way without losing a set. But Cilic will miss the Australian Open this year with a shoulder problem.Jo-Wilfried Tsonga will miss it, too, because of the right forearm pain that continues to trouble him, and continues to make one wonder why he deigned to play in the inaugural International Premier Tennis League in Asia last month in what could have otherwise been a true off-season.Meanwhile, other stars have returned to health if not yet top form. Juan Martín del Potro is back from a nearly 11-month layoff after wrist surgery and Nadal is returning after a year in which he had back and wrist problems and appendicitis.He was beaten, 6-2, 6-0, by Murray in an exhibition in Abu Dhabi this month and was then upset in the second round of a real tournament in Doha by the German journeyman Michael Berrer.In Nadal’s last six official events, stretching back to last year’s grass-court event in Halle, Germany, he has been beaten by Dustin Brown, Nick Kyrgios, Martin Klizan, Feliciano López, Borna Coric and Berrer.That is quite a list, peppered with teenagers and players outside the top 100. But counting out Nadal, particularly if he is healthy, still seems foolhardy in light of his internal drive and body of work.“He’s obviously started the season slow losing to Berrer, but I wouldn’t put it past him winning the Aussie Open,” said Jim Courier, the former Australian Open champion and world No.1. “Best of five sets gives Rafa time to problem solve, and if he’s not the best problem solver, he’s among them. Rafa, if the guy’s healthy, is, other than Novak, my favorite. Give him one or two matches and he’s off to the races.”But Courier also senses that this could be the year when the younger generation steps up to challenge the establishment.“I think the specter of back injury that hangs over three of the top four guys, the big four, that’s always present now on a go-forward basis,” he said. “Because once a back patient always a back patient. Other than Novak, the other three guys have all suffered some back problems that have been at times serious. That makes them more vulnerable, and the younger guys not facing those issues are gaining in confidence and their games are getting better.”Federer, at the end of a resurgent season in 2014, had his chronic back problems resurface at the ATP World Tour Finals, where he had to default before the final against Djokovic. But he recovered quickly enough to clinch Switzerland’s first Davis Cup victory only a week later.Clearly, even at 33, he can bounce back quickly. He started the new season by winning the Brisbane tournament after beating two of the leaders of the next generation, Grigor Dimitrov and, in the final, Milos Raonic.There are other young threats, including Nishikori, who reached the U.S. Open final last year, and Kyrgios, still just 19, whose live arm and lively personality quickly turned him into a star in his native Australia last year when he upset Nadal at Wimbledon. He will be watched closely next week, even if he, too, is not 100 percent healthy.“I would say the thing I’m looking forward to the most in the men’s games is to see what Kyrgios did with his time off,” Courier said. “Because he didn’t really play after the U.S. Open. Other than team tennis, he didn’t play at all, so I’m curious to see if he’s made some strides forward and developed some consistency. Because his high level last year sure looked as good as anybody’s.”Advertisement