AdvertisementSupported bySpecial Report: Australian OpenBy Christopher ClareySome wishful thinking became reality in 2014. Those of us who craved variety in the Grand Slam honor roll for a change got just that, with eight different singles champions, including Stan Wawrinka and Marin Cilic. Those of us who wanted a stirring Davis Cup final for a change got that, too, with Roger Federer and Wawrinka giving the struggling event a lift and the Swiss their first title, in a grand setting in Lille, France.But the tennis carousel keeps spinning and so does this annual tradition. One man’s wishlist for 2015:A true tennis version of the NFL RedZone, an American television channel that shows the critical phases of professional football games, bouncing from stadium to stadium when teams get within scoring range or a big play is made. The American network ESPN, which will have the U.S. rights to all four Grand Slam tournaments in 2015, already takes a stab at this in its regular tennis coverage, as its senior director, Jason Bernstein, made clear in an interview. Some networks, including ESPN, also offer digital access to a large number of televised courts. There will be a record 13 available from the Australian Open, allowing fans to scan the scoreboard and click on the match of their choice.But there is still a need for something slicker, quicker and wider in scope to cater to the younger generation and to shorter attention spans and to cast more light on lesser-known players, however briefly. Have the early-round moxie to shift courts more frequently during coverage of all events, the Grand Slams included. Zoom in for a big break point and then switch to another court for a tiebreaker and to another if someone serves for the match or is arguing with the chair umpire (or HawkEye).“On ESPN3 we could have one spot dedicated to the business ends of every set,” said Brad Gilbert, the longtime coach and ESPN analyst. “I think it would be great, and if we could do that, it means we’ve broken away a little bit from just stars. It’s sometimes not about Fed and Rafa in the first week. It’s about the drama of somebody changing their life by getting to the third round.”An end to matches finishing in the wee hours, such as Angelique Kerber’s victory over Daria Gavrilova this week in Sydney, which was not completed until 3:10 a.m. Television viewers in some distant time zone might get the chance to watch such matches in prime time, but they are brutal on the players, organizers, spectators, ball kids and everybody else on site. How about tour-wide moratoriums on starting singles matches after 11 p.m.?A return to 16 seeds instead of 32 at the Grand Slam tournaments. Yes, there have been first-week shockers in recent years (see Virginie Razzano’s first-round upset of Serena Williams at the 2012 French Open or Sergiy Stakhovsky’s second-round victory over Federer at Wimbledon in 2013). But in a Darwinian sports landscape, tennis could still use more consistently compelling early matchups and going back to 16 seeds is one of the easiest ways to provide them.Further efforts to speed up play. Chair umpires in the men’s game began cracking down on the dallying between points in 2014. But they need to get stricter still, and the clock is still ticking on other enforcement measures at a moment when other sports are picking up the pace. “The five-minute warmup has turned into the 12-minute warmup,” complained the coach and analyst Darren Cahill. That is too often true. There should be a hard-and-fast start time for the opening match on any court. There should be a crackdown on calling for the towel, and, in the interest of pace and fairness, there should be an automatic point penalty if a player stops for an injury timeout during a game.A return to bonus points for beating a highly ranked player. Those who upset the biggest stars pique the public interest and giving them a reward in the rankings race increases the odds of the public getting to see them in action again soon.Good health for Rafael Nadal, Juan Martín del Potro, Nicolas Almagro, Victoria Azarenka and Laura Robson, players the game missed for too much of 2014 and who are still young and driven enough to roar back.A deep run by Australia in the Davis Cup, which is now the aging Lleyton Hewitt’s only chance to hustle into the sunset with a big title. That would be a fitting reward for a true competitor who has played for his sunbaked country no matter what his ranking.A top 100 men’s player — perhaps Elias Ymer — for Sweden, a great tennis nation that has fallen too far.A top 100 women’s player for South America, the continent that produced Maria Bueno and Gabriela Sabatini.A top 10 men’s player for the United States, which has never gone this long without one.A true rivalry in a women’s game that has long lacked one in the age of Serena Williams, who has a 62-7 tour record against the other current top-10 players.Another Nadal-Djokovic final at Roland Garros as Nadal goes for his 10th French Open title and Djokovic goes — once more — for his first.A classic match at the U.S. Open on the Grandstand court before it is torn down.More drop shots, squat shots, topspin lobs and backhand overheads. Fewer swing volleys and selfies. More witty tweets and fewer on-court shrieks. More down the line and less cross-court.Advertisement