By ALLAN KREDAJAN. 16, 2015
UNIONDALE, N.Y. —  Stephanie Beige, an Islanders fan since 1979, loves this kind of hockey week.Beige, a Manhattan-based lawyer, savored her team’s 3-0 smothering of the Rangers at Madison Square Garden on Tuesday. Another Islanders nemesis, Pittsburgh, made its final regular-season visit to Nassau Coliseum on Friday.Sidney Crosby’s Penguins are battling the Islanders for first place in the Metropolitan Division, territory the Islanders have not seen this late in a season in decades. Pittsburgh seemed poised to take back the top spot, but the Islanders — paced by four goals from Kyle Okposo — rallied to stun the Penguins, 6-3.“The Ranger rivalry is unique because it involves our neighbors, co-workers and family members,” Beige said. “There is no team Isles fans hate more than the Rangers. But the Penguins are different. The rivalry is there because of that playoff series, and we want our revenge.”Beige was referring mainly to the six-game battle the Islanders and the Penguins waged in the opening round of the 2013 playoffs.AdvertisementThe teams met three other times in the postseason — 1975, 1982 and 1993 — and each series went the distance, with the Islanders winning.AdvertisementFriday’s game added another dose of drama to the increasingly intense rivalry. Penguins goaltender Marc-Andre Fleury — so rattled by the Islanders in their playoff series he was eventually benched — smashed his stick against the boards as he left the Coliseum ice after the final buzzer.“As players, we really get up for these games” Okposo said afterward. “It was a very exciting night, that’s for sure. I’m pretty pumped.”Okposo has 13 regular-season goals against Pittsburgh, more than against any other opponent. Steve Cotrone, 25, from Manorville, on Long Island, said that the rivalry was a driving force for the Islanders during their final season at the Coliseum before moving to Barclays Center in Brooklyn.“Playoffs simply breed rivalries and that series with the Penguins two years ago set the tone for what the Islanders want to achieve,” Cotrone said before the Islanders legend Bryan Trottier dropped the ceremonial opening puck in front of another sellout crowd.The teams played a brisk game from the start, with the Penguins taking a 2-0 lead midway through the first period on goals by Crosby and David Perron before Okposo narrowed the gap at 16 minutes 21 seconds.Ryan Strome tied the score at 12:31 of the second period, but Crosby scored again with five seconds left on a delayed penalty call to give the Penguins a 3-2 lead entering the third.The Islanders shone in the third period. Okposo tied the score at 3-3 at 6:21, and then put the Islanders ahead for the first time with his third goal of the game at 11:51. He scored his fourth at 17:29, and Michael Grabner added an empty-net goal.Advertisement“Good things happen when you work hard,” Islanders Coach Jack Capuano said. “I’m happy for Kyle.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Penguins are having another strong regular season, but they have lost three of four to the Islanders and are 3 points behind them with a game in hand.The Islanders lead the division with 30 wins in their first 44 games, a first half on the level of the teams that won four straight Stanley Cups from 1980 to 1983. “To be the best, you want to beat the best,” Cotrone said.The Islanders sent a clear message to the Penguins in late November when they swept a home-and-home series, after Pittsburgh had won an October game, 3-1, at home.  The teams meet once more, in Pittsburgh on April 10.Howie Meshel, 52, of Staten Island, said: “The Rangers will always be the hated rival because it is for bragging rights of New York. But the Penguins gave us a bad taste two years ago, so we need to beat them.”Crosby, who has 88 points in 49 career games against the Islanders, seemed to be thinking of the playoffs as he spoke before the game about his memories of the closing arena.“I remember playing on the same line with Mario Lemieux here my first year; that was pretty special,” Crosby, 27, said. “And I remember how loud it was in the playoffs a couple of years ago. But it may not necessarily be our last trip here. We’ll see what happens.”After her team’s dramatic comeback win to give the Islanders the best record in the Eastern Conference, Beige seemed to speak for many fans with one word.“Wow!” she said.A version of this article appears in print on January 17, 2015, on Page D5 of the New York edition with the headline: Postseason Feel Comes Early as Isles Rally to Top a Rival.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.