AdvertisementSupported byBy Tom PedullaHALLANDALE BEACH, Fla. — California Chrome, the winner of last year’s Kentucky Derby and Preakness Stakes, was not the same scintillating performer in the second half of the season that he was in the first. Bayern won a controversial Breeders’ Cup Classic and faltered in other key races. Main Sequence had a perfect record in four races, but all of them came on grass.One of those finalists will be named horse of the year when the Eclipse Awards are announced Saturday at Gulfstream Park after a dissatisfying season that led industry members to question whether racing’s highest honor might be deteriorating into a popularity contest influenced by social media.“I’ve always been told the horse of the year is supposed to be the fastest horse that can go a mile and a quarter on dirt,” said Bob Baffert, the Hall of Fame trainer of Bayern. “They have strayed away from that definition a little bit.”Curlin, in 2008, was the last male to fit the traditional profile. He was followed by three fillies — Rachel Alexandra, Zenyatta and Havre de Grace — none of whom won the Classic during their horse of the year campaigns. Rachel Alexandra was kept out of the race by her owner, Jess Jackson, who cited his disdain for what was then a synthetic surface at Santa Anita Park. Zenyatta finished second in the Classic, and Havre de Grace was fourth. Wise Dan, a gritty turf star, was selected as horse of the year the past two seasons.“The power of popularity, the power of celebrity, has distorted the Eclipse Awards,” said Gary West, who covers racing for ESPN and votes in the Eclipse Awards.West described Zenyatta as a “very dubious selection.” “I’m not questioning her greatness,” he said, “but she got beaten by Blame, and some of the races she ran earlier in the year weren’t as good as races she ran the previous year.”The Eclipse Awards, created in 1971, are named after Eclipse, an 18th-century British racehorse and sire. They are voted on by members of the National Thoroughbred Racing Association, The Daily Racing Form, and the National Turf Writers and Broadcasters. Baffert also noted the popularity factor in the horse of the year contest. “I think the biggest thing with Bayern was he didn’t have that following the way California Chrome did,” he said. Main Sequence defeated a high-caliber international field in the $3 million Breeders’ Cup Turf to conclude a season in which he swept four Grade I contests at four different tracks. He received 20 first-place votes in the National Thoroughbred Racing Association weekly poll of 48 industry experts immediately after the Breeders’ Cup. Bayern got 13 votes and California Chrome five.Little buzz surrounds Main Sequence now. His trainer, Graham Motion, views California Chrome, a California-bred with modest bloodlines and connections, as the likely choice. “He won the Kentucky Derby and Preakness, which carries a lot of weight in this country, and it should,” he said. “He’s a very well-liked horse, probably much better known than my horse, so I can understand that he’s got a pretty good push behind him.”Some of California Chrome’s appeal stems from the affable Art Sherman, who at 77 is the oldest trainer to saddle a Derby winner. Sherman last participated in the Derby in 1955, when he rode with eventual winner Swaps in a boxcar from the West Coast to Louisville as a teenage assistant.Sherman said of California Chrome: “He’s sure got a fan base. I haven’t seen it since Zenyatta and Cigar. It’s been great for us.”Past performances reflect well on Bayern. He defeated California Chrome in two of their three meetings, rebounding from an abysmal Preakness to beat him in the Pennsylvania Derby, where he broke a 40-year-old track record, and in the Classic. The Classic troubled many voters and fans. Bayern broke inside at the start, smashing into Shared Belief. When Shared Belief collided with the speedy Moreno, it allowed the front-running Bayern to enjoy a comfortable lead for much of the mile-and-a-quarter contest. Stewards exonerated Bayern after an inquiry, noting how early the contact had occurred. “I thought Bayern should have been disqualified,” said Mike Watchmaker of The Daily Racing Form, who is an Eclipse voter. “What he did out of the gate seriously influenced the complexion of the race.” Toast of New York, the runner-up, was involved in later contact, making the matter thornier.Sherman, a former jockey, disagreed with the stewards’ decision to allow the result to stand. “After riding for 23 years, I know when you stop a horse in the first 70 yards out of the gate, it’s a big difference,” he said. California Chrome kept clear of trouble and finished third in the Classic. “It’s going to be close,” Sherman said of their horse of the year prospects. “I’ve got a good feeling about it.”Advertisement