By KEN BELSONJAN. 16, 2015
SEATTLE —  For the second straight season, the Seahawks had the N.F.L.’s best defense. And for the second straight season, Kam Chancellor was perhaps the third-best player in the team’s vaunted secondary.Cornerback Richard Sherman and free safety Earl Thomas get a lot of accolades, and for good reason. Both were first-team All-Pro selections the past two years.But in the Seahawks’ N.F.C. divisional playoff game against the Carolina Panthers last weekend, Chancellor showed why he may be the most versatile strong safety in the league, and why the Green Bay Packers will face an uphill battle Sunday in the N.F.C. championship game in Seattle.In the game against the Panthers, which the Seahawks won, 31-17, Chancellor had a team-high eight tackles, including a hard-nosed hit that left Panthers fullback Mike Tolbert reeling; a backbreaking interception that he returned 90 yards for a touchdown; and two acrobatic leaps over the Panthers’ line to try to block field-goal attempts.AdvertisementHis all-around display generated comparisons with Troy Polamalu, Ronnie Lott and other great safeties. But Chancellor, who is in his fifth season, is carving out his own reputation.Part of Chancellor’s ability stems from his unusual size — he is 6 feet 3 inches and 232 pounds — combined with his quickness and strength. This lets Seahawks Coach Pete Carroll play Chancellor in a variety of roles, including close to the line to defend the run as well as in the middle of the field to cover larger tight ends and receivers.“They’ve come in all different sizes and shapes,” Carroll said of Chancellor. “There are ways to utilize their uniqueness if you allow for that.”Chancellor’s signature moment came just before the end of the first half. With the Seahawks leading, 14-7, Chancellor jumped over the players at the line of scrimmage and headed for Carolina kicker Graham Gano, but Panthers offensive lineman Chris Scott was called for a false start. Chancellor did it again on the second attempt, but he missed the ball, and Gano sent the kick wide left. After Chancellor was flagged for running into the kicker, Gano made the final attempt, from 35 yards.Bud Foster, the defensive coordinator at Virginia Tech, where Chancellor went to college, was not surprised by Chancellor’s play, even his leaps over the line to block kicks. Chancellor, he said, played intramural basketball in college and often took part in dunking contests at Virginia Tech basketball games.AdvertisementChancellor is also known for his ferocity. His nickname, Bam Bam Kam, is a reference to his hard hits, something that referees have noticed. Chancellor was penalized 20 times during his first four seasons, including seven times for unnecessary roughness. This year, he has been penalized only twice, with no unnecessary-roughness infractions.Chancellor, who gave Packers running back Eddie Lacy a concussion in the season-opening game, acknowledged his reputation, but he does not believe receivers are afraid of him.“I wouldn’t call it fear,” he said of his opponents. “These are grown men. I call it respect.”In a numbers-mad sport like football, statistics can provide a measure of respect, too. But weighing Chancellor against other safeties is not easy.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Safety is perhaps the most difficult position to evaluate because its responsibilities vary so widely, and without knowing their assignment from play to play, it is hard to know whether they are doing their job, said Aaron Schatz, who runs the website FootballOutsiders.com.“Whether a safety makes a tackle down the field is not so much about him as his role,” Schatz said.Still, from 2011 to 2013, Chancellor’s numbers compared favorably with Polamalu’s from 2004 to 2006, three of Polamalu’s most productive years, Schatz said.According to more traditional statistics, Chancellor’s numbers look ordinary. He has had only two interceptions this season (including the one against the Panthers). But that may be because Chancellor has often been positioned close to the line, like a linebacker, rather than asked to guard wide receivers farther down the field.Chancellor is deployed against the run because Thomas and Sherman are so good at their positions. Seattle allowed a league-low 267 yards a game during the regular season. The Detroit Lions were a distant second at 300 yards per game. Seattle gave up 185 passing yards per game, also best in the league.AdvertisementTackles, too, do not tell the full story. Chancellor had 69 tackles and 20 assists during the regular season, which was not even in the top 10 among safeties, according to the Elias Sports Bureau. But tackles by safeties are as much a reflection of the defenders in front of them, and because the Seahawks have top-ranked linebackers like Bobby Wagner, Chancellor has fewer chances than other safeties.“Tackles are a mark of a bad defense for safeties because if they make more, it means more passes are completed in front of them and more running backs are getting deeper into the defense,” said Brian Burke, who runs AdvancedFootballAnalytics.com.Burke said that Chancellor ranked an impressive sixth among safeties ranked by total number of tackles, assists, tackles for losses, forced fumbles, sacks, interceptions and other plays.“Wagner, Chancellor, Thomas — they’re the biggest playmakers,” he said.Chancellor’s knack for playing well in key games is one of the intangibles that others have observed. His performance during the Seahawks’ Super Bowl run last season was widely noted, as were his plays against the Panthers last weekend.“Kam seems to have the propensity to turn it up during the playoffs,” said John Lynch, who played safety for the Tampa Bay Buccaneers and the Denver Broncos and was an analyst for Fox during the Seahawks-Panthers game. “He’s starting to enter the prime of his career, when his skill is matching his intellect.”Chancellor, who played quarterback in high school in Virginia, was not highly recruited. At Virginia Tech, he backed up Brandon Flowers, another outstanding defensive player, now with the San Diego Chargers. But perhaps because of his unusual size, he was drafted in the fifth round by the Seahawks.This, Foster said, may have given Chancellor extra motivation to prove himself.“The N.F.L. people, they didn’t know where he would fit because when you see him, he looks like a defensive end or a linebacker,” Foster said. But, he added, “they found the right guy with the speed and mentality — it’s neat he’s getting the national exposure he deserves.”A version of this article appears in print on January 17, 2015, on Page D1 of the New York edition with the headline: Unpredictable? Count on It.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.