By PETER MAYJAN. 16, 2015
FOXBOROUGH, Mass. —  Like millions of football fans, Doug Martin saw the play. Unlike those millions, Martin had an investment of sorts in Julian Edelman, the Patriots wide receiver who threw the surprising 51-yard touchdown pass to Danny Amendola in New England’s A.F.C. divisional playoff game against the Baltimore Ravens last Saturday.On vacation with his wife in North Carolina, Martin, who had coached Edelman at Kent State, was equal parts proud mentor and dazzled spectator.“I’m not surprised he did it,” said Martin, now the head coach at New Mexico State. “Nothing Julian does ever surprises me. What would have surprised me is if he hadn’t made the perfect pass.”After the Patriots’ 35-31 victory, Edelman, in an on-field interview with NBC, gave credit to Martin and his junior college, saying: “Thanks, Coach Martin, my Golden Flash coach, and the College of San Mateo. They all helped me out with that one.”AdvertisementThat was when Martin’s cellphone exploded. One of the many texts he received was from Edelman, reiterating his thanks.Advertisement“With all that had to be going on, he found the time,” Martin said in a telephone interview. “How many guys are appreciative like that?”Edelman, a quarterback at Kent State, threw for nearly 5,000 yards and 30 touchdowns in three years under Martin, but his pass against the Ravens was the first of his six-year N.F.L. career. Coach Bill Belichick played down the quirkiness of the call, saying the Patriots had done it before — in 2001. Edelman became the third receiver in N.F.L. history to throw a touchdown pass in the playoffs.The Ravens were clearly caught off guard by what Edelman called “a fun play.” Amendola was wide open and an easy target on the play, which knotted the game, 28-28, with 4 minutes 28 seconds remaining in the third quarter.But that was not the only example of Belichickian subterfuge. Before the Edelman sleight of hand, Belichick rattled the Ravens by designating running back Shane Vereen as an ineligible receiver on two of three plays during a critical third-quarter drive that cut Baltimore’s lead to 28-21. The three plays resulted in pass completions of 16, 11 and 14 yards, two to tight end Michael Hoomanawanui, who was lined up as a left tackle, and a third to Edelman.“No one is surprised at anything around here; it’s crazy,” Edelman said three years ago as the Patriots prepared for Super Bowl XLVI. But it is just as appropriate in 2015.The trickery — all legal — prompted Baltimore Coach John Harbaugh, confused and angry, to take a penalty to get an explanation from the officials. Harbaugh called the substitutions “deceptive” after the game, but he has since said his problem was with the officials, not with Belichick or the Patriots.The Patriots knew they had fooled the Ravens. Vereen said, “That was the design.”Normally, a player designates himself as an eligible receiver. The Patriots did that frequently with linebacker Mike Vrabel. The Houston Texans have done it with J. J. Watt. Vereen did the opposite and said he was ineligible, even though he lined up all the while appearing to be ready to run a route.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.On the first play, however, he dropped back on a fake, and Tom Brady found a wide-open Hoomanawanui for 16 yards.AdvertisementBelichick said it was situation he had seen before, though he would not be more specific. He added: “We talked about ways to put some pressure on the defense with that concept of having more receivers on the field than were actually eligible. To make them ineligible instead of making an ineligible guys eligible, to go the other way around.”The Patriots’ offensive coordinator, Josh McDaniels, said: “Everything is a part of the rules, and if there is a way that maybe you can give yourself an opportunity to get a positive play in a different situation, it’s worth doing. Definitely have seen it before, and I’m sure it won’t be the last time.”What had to be equally shocking to the Ravens was to see Hoomanawanui on the receiving end. In 16 regular-season games, Hoomanawanui, who started 12 games at tight end, had three receptions for 44 yards. In the Ravens game, Hoomanawanui had four receptions for 43 yards.“I’m sure they were surprised,” Hoomanawanui said. He smiled and added, “but I’m eligible.”He did report as ineligible on the 11-yard completion to Edelman, the second of the three plays. The drive ended with a 5-yard touchdown pass from Brady to Rob Gronkowski to pull the Patriots to 28-21.The only question on Martin’s mind after the Edelman play was why his former quarterback had waited so long to try his first pass as a professional. Edelman has done some unusual things as a Patriot; in the 2011 A.F.C. championship game against Baltimore, he was in on 54 snaps, 27 on offense and 27 on defense. He returns punts. He has returned kickoffs.He ran a spread offense at Kent State and, Martin said, “had everything going for him to be a pro quarterback — except he was too small.” Edelman is generously listed at 5 feet 10 inches, and that was the main reason he was largely unrecruited out of high school and junior college. He went to Kent State not knowing where the college was or that it had had two winning seasons in the previous 25.He took a shot when Martin promised him a chance to play — and promptly unseated the incumbent quarterback. Asked about his unconventional route to the N.F.L. — he was a seventh-round pick in 2009 — Edelman said, “My dad used to always ask when I was training, ‘Did you outwork those guys?’ ” He said his father was referring to the players yet to come, players who might steal Edelman’s job the same way he had displaced the quarterback at Kent State.“I always try to think about that kind of stuff,” Edelman said.The Patriots said that Edelman joined Pittsburgh’s Antwaan Randle El (2006) and Detroit’s Jerry Reichow (1957) as the only receivers to throw touchdown passes in the playoffs. Randle El, a college quarterback at Indiana, threw a 43-yarder to Hines Ward in Super Bowl XL against Seattle. Reichow’s 17-yard pass to Howard Cassady in the 1957 N.F.L. championship game accounted for the final touchdown in Detroit’s 59-14 victory over the Cleveland Browns.A version of this article appears in print on January 17, 2015, on Page D1 of the New York edition with the headline: Patriots, Using Full Extent of Rules and Players’ Skills, Surprise (Almost) Everyone.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.