AdvertisementSupported byBy Richard GoldsteinFor Ray Lumpp, the biggest moment in his long and varied sports career came when he was selected for the United States Olympic basketball team that went on to win a gold medal at the 1948 London Games. But if that was the pinnacle, there were plenty of other moments that rank high in the collective memory of New York City’s sports scene. Lumpp, who died on Friday at 91 in Mineola, N.Y., was a basketball star at New York University in the late 1940s, played for the Knicks in the early 1950s and was the athletic director of the venerable New York Athletic Club for nearly half a century, running track and field meets that attracted the sport’s top competitors.He ran the club’s prestigious annual track and field meet at the Garden in the 1960s and later organized the Vitalis/United States Olympic Invitational indoor meet at the Meadowlands.It was a heady career for a kid from Queens, who recalled shooting at a basket that his father, Fred, a contractor, had erected in the family’s backyard in Forest Hills. “I never dreamed I’d be a professional athlete,” he said of those days. But playing forward — though he was only 6 feet 1 — Lumpp teamed with Dolph Schayes, the 6-foot-8 future N.B.A. star and Hall of Famer, to take N.Y.U. to the final of the National Invitation Tournament in 1948 (a loss to St. Louis University) and was named to the New York metropolitan area’s all-star team for that season. He was chosen afterward for the Olympic basketball squad.“The greatest thrill in my life was when I was selected for the team,” he told The Associated Press when he returned to London for the 2012 Olympics.The 1948 Games were held while the British were struggling to recover from the German bombardment of World War II. “I remember being at St. Paul’s Cathedral and there was rubble all around,” Lumpp said. “I have to admire the English people. Everything they had, they shared with us.”The American basketball team went undefeated and captured gold in a 65-21 romp over France in the final.Raymond George Lumpp was born on July 11, 1923, in Brooklyn and grew up in Queens. Howard Cann, the longtime N.Y.U. basketball coach, saw him play for the N.Y.A.C. in the early 1940s and recruited him. He spent three years in the Army Air Forces before returning to N.Y.U.Lumpp joined the pros with the Indianapolis Jets in the 1948-49 season, but they traded him to the Knicks midway through his rookie year. He played in a backcourt that included Dick McGuire, Max Zaslofsky and Ernie Vandeweghe (Carl Braun was in military service) when the Knicks made it to the playoff finals in 1951 and ’52, losing to the Rochester Royals and then the Minneapolis Lakers. He retired after a stint with the Baltimore Bullets in the 1952-53 season and had a career average of 8.2 points a game. Lumpp was named athletic director of the N.Y.A.C. in 1959 when it was still influential in amateur sports, its athletes having won dozens of Olympic medals.The first indoor track meet he ever saw was in 1960. “I had nightmares,” he told The New York Times long afterward. “I looked around at all the runways and hurdles and landing pits and said, ‘How does it work?’ ”He came to master the intricacies of putting on a major meet like the N.Y.A.C. event. But as the modern civil rights movement emerged, Lumpp and the club faced challenges going beyond the logistics of running a track meet.Jackie Robinson and The Amsterdam News urged that black and Jewish athletes boycott the N.Y.A.C.’s 1962 meet at the Garden, accusing the club of racial and religious discrimination in admitting new members. Leading black and Jewish organizations also voiced protests. The N.Y.A.C., housed on Central Park South, was among the most prestigious private clubs in New York City and, like most of them, was considered to be an exclusionary bastion of privilege, almost entirely Christian and mainly attracting white businessmen and socially prominent people. Mayor Robert F. Wagner resigned his N.Y.A.C. membership over the allegations, but the boycott did not materialize. Denying it discriminated, the club said at the time that it had some Jews among its 9,500 members, though it knew of no black members.When the club’s 100th anniversary meet was about to get underway in February 1968, the sociologist and civil rights activist Harry Edwards renewed a call for an athletes’ boycott.Nine black athletes competed in that meet. But more than a dozen others stayed away after having entered, as did several colleges. This time, the N.Y.A.C. did not comment on the allegations of discrimination, but Lumpp said that it had long provided “tickets to the meet to underprivileged kids from all kinds of groups.” The N.Y.A.C.’s 1968 track meet was its last one. As endorsement deals for star athletes arose, it faded as a force in track and field though it has continued to send athletes to the Olympics.Reflecting on the allegations surrounding the ’68 meet, Lumpp told The Times in a 1996 interview that “we have changed” and he lamented how “we divided the city” and “it was terrible.” The club did not provide specifics on its racial and ethnic composition in 1996, but said it had an increasing number of black and Jewish members.The N.Y.A.C.’s current athletic director, Cedric Jones, a former pro football receiver and administrator, who succeeded Lumpp when he retired in 2007, is an African-American.Lumpp, who lived in East Williston, on Long Island, died from complications of pneumonia at Winthrop-University Hospital, said Michael McKeon, a family member. Lumpp is survived by his sons William and John; his daughters Joanne Imundo and Mary O’Hara; his brother, Wilbur; 14 grandchildren and 11 great-grandchildren. His wife, Anne, died in 2001. Lumpp attended the 2012 Olympics at the invitation of Duke’s Mike Krzyzewski, the coach of the United States basketball team, who said he hoped that Lumpp’s achievements in his life after the Olympics could set an example for his players.As Krzyzewski told The Associated Press: “I do think it will help our players understand that at some time in their lives, they will be Ray Lumpp.”Frank Litsky contributed reporting.Advertisement