By THE ASSOCIATED PRESS and BEN SHPIGELJAN. 16, 2015
John Fox was hired as the Chicago Bears’ coach on Friday, four days after he and the Denver Broncos parted ways.Fox was widely seen as a strong candidate to replace the fired Marc Trestman, given his record and his ties to the consultant Ernie Accorsi and the Bears’ new general manager, Ryan Pace.Fox was the defensive coordinator for the Giants from 1997 to 2001, when Accorsi was the general manager. Saints Coach Sean Payton was the offensive coordinator for part of that time, and he is close to Pace, who was hired from the front office of New Orleans.Fox had a 119-89 regular-season record in 13 years with Carolina (2002-10) and Denver (2011-14), with six division titles and seven playoff appearances. He is 0-2 in Super Bowls but is one of six coaches to lead two franchises to Super Bowl appearances, joining Don Shula, Bill Parcells, Dan Reeves, Dick Vermeil and Mike Holmgren.AdvertisementFox comes to Chicago with a reputation for overseeing turnarounds, and he will try to do just that after the Bears went 5-11 and missed the playoffs for the seventh time in eight years.AdvertisementRAVENS AND RICE HAVE DEAL The Baltimore Ravens have settled their grievance with their former running back Ray Rice after terminating his $35 million contract five months ago in the midst of his domestic abuse case, the team said.The deal was struck just before the beginning of a scheduled grievance hearing before the arbitrator Shyam Das.Rice, 27, was seeking $3.5 million in back pay, the amount he was due before he was cut by the Ravens on Sept. 8 when video surfaced of him knocking out his fiancée, Janay Palmer, who is now his wife, in a casino elevator in Atlantic City.Terms of the deal were not disclosed. (REUTERS)THE MANNING QUESTION As John Elway, the general manager of the Broncos, looks for a new coach after parting ways with John Fox, he says he knows that the candidates will want to know quarterback Peyton Manning’s intentions. But he has asked Manning not to make a rash decision and to take a month or so to clear his head.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.So the contenders Elway is interviewing this weekend — Vance Joseph on Friday and Gary Kubiak on Sunday — will not know if they would be taking over an offense run by Manning or possibly by Brock Osweiler, Manning’s backup, a 6-foot-8-inch passer Elway selected in the second round of the 2012 draft out of Arizona State.(AP)JETS FIRE TWO COLLEGE SCOUTS The new general manager Mike Maccagnan began reshaping the Jets’ personnel department, firing two of the team’s top scouting executives. Gone are Terry Bradway, the senior director of college scouting and the Jets’ general manager from 2001 to 2006, and Jeff Bauer, who had been the director of college scouting for the last three seasons.Maccagnan, who had been the Texans’ director of college scouting before joining the Jets on Tuesday, had insisted on hiring his own scouting staff. BEN SHPIGELNEW FILINGS ON PETERSON The N.F.L. has asked a federal court to reject the petition by the N.F.L. Players Association on behalf of running back Adrian Peterson to have his suspension overturned.AdvertisementLawyers for the league, in filings Friday, wrote that United States labor law should prevent the court from handling a dispute already ruled on by the arbitrator for Peterson’s appeal. The hearing is scheduled for Feb. 6 in front of Judge David Doty in United States District Court.  (AP)SOULFUL VOICE AT SUPER BOWL The soul star John Legend will sing “America the Beautiful” at the Super Bowl on Feb. 1, the N.F.L. said. Legend, a Grammy winner who topped the charts with his 2013 piano ballad “All of Me,” will perform before kickoff.  (AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE)SEATTLE LINEMAN IN QUESTION Justin Britt, the Seattle Seahawks’ starting right tackle, is questionable for Sunday’s N.F.C. championship game against Green Bay with a sore knee.Seattle Coach Pete Carroll said Britt developed soreness in his knee on Monday.  (AP)A version of this article appears in print on January 17, 2015, on Page D3 of the New York edition with the headline: Bears Hire Fox as Coach; Ravens Settle With Rice.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.