AdvertisementSupported byBy Huw RichardsLondon — The equation is a simple one, as the Irish province Munster looks toward its European Champions Cup match on Saturday against Saracens in London.“If we lose, we’re out,” said Ian Costello, Munster’s assistant coach. “And we know we face a battle. Saracens are an extremely good side, and it is a tough place to go.”Failure, though, will not be on the minds of the thousands of red-shirted fans — known throughout European club rugby for their vocal support, warm humor and uncanny ability to find tickets whatever their nominal allocation — who follow their club wherever they play.“They give us wonderful support, and they expect us to be in the playoffs,” said Costello, acknowledging that the expectation was both a motivator for the players and perfectly reasonable: After all, Munster has reached the final eight in 15 of the past 16 seasons.But those expectations are being tested this year. Munster is third in the pool with two matches to go. It visits Saracens after consecutive defeats by the French giant Clermont Auvergne, the first team to beat Munster both at home and away in the same season in this competition since Cardiff in 1998. “Clermont is a quality team with a lot of depth in its squad and it is very, very hard to win there — they’ve lost only twice in about their last 90 matches there,” Costello said. But the loss on home soil at Thomond Park, Limerick, was harder to take, he said. “We got off to a very poor start. They were able to get on top, take a lead and then close the game down.”He pointed out, however, that Munster would still have needed wins in its remaining pool matches — today at Saracens and next week at home to another English club, Sale — to progress, even if it had beaten Clermont in Limerick.A victory on Saturday would be Munster’s 100th in the tournament — which was known until this season as the Heineken European Cup — second only to the record of the four-time winner Toulouse. So, if Munster can win this weekend and earn its 101st victory in the following week, it will still have a shot at progressing deeper into the playoff campaign.“Nobody has mentioned Sale this week,” said Costello. All the talk has been of the challenge of facing Saracens, which was runner-up last season to the repeat champion, Toulon.“They have a very strong, physical defense with great line speed, very good at forcing turnovers and extremely dangerous in unstructured play,” said Costello, adding that he was impressed by the mauling Saracens displayed in losing to Gloucester, 24-23, in an English Premiership thriller last week. “They scored three tries from mauls, so we’ll need to find a way of counteracting that.”Saracens may also have found a way to quiet the Irish province’s ebullient fans. The last time Munster played at Saracens, “They put the music on very loud to try and drown them out.”Munster, which should be stronger with the return from injury of two Irish international players — Keith Earls, a versatile back, and James Cronin, a prop forward — has players accustomed to rising to challenges.Peter O’Mahony, Munster’s second-year captain, has developed into one of the most effective all-round forwards in Europe, while 35-year-old Paul O’Connell continues to provide formidable support.“Pauly’s still a huge influence, on and off the field, and a setter of standards,” Costello said of the veteran lock forward, whose achievements include 96 matches for Ireland and several triumphs as captain, having led Munster to the second of its two Heineken triumphs, the British and Irish Lions in South Africa and Ireland to last year’s European Six Nations championship. “Not being captain means he has more time to do things, like mentor younger players, and he’s an important leader whoever is captaining the side.”There are hints that the era of Irish success in European club rugby could be waning. While Munster, Ulster and Leinster all topped their pools last season, Ulster is already out and Leinster is only second in its group.One factor in the reorganization of the tournament this season was an argument made by some English critics and others that the previous format gave the Irish teams an unfair advantage. Results so far might seem to support that view, although Costello offered an alternative explanation.“That’s only one season, and there are still two rounds of the pool stage to come. All of the Irish teams have had serious injury problems this season,” he said. “Let’s see what happens over a couple of seasons before we draw any conclusions.”And he is similarly judicious about another possible harbinger of shifting geographic momentum, the decision by Munster’s highly promising midfield back, J.J. Hanrahan, to take up a lucrative contract next season with the English club Northampton.“We’re obviously disappointed to lose somebody of his quality who has come through the age groups here,” Costello said. “But we also had a lot of interest in three or four other players and managed to hang on to them.”Hanging on has been a Munster strength over the years. It may go out, but not without a huge fight and a promise to return as a contender next year.Advertisement