AdvertisementSupported byBy Harvey AratonWHITE PLAINS — In the summer of 1975, during the Wimbledon of Arthur Ashe, 6-year-old Katrina Adams watched her first professional tennis on a small black-and-white screen, newly fascinated by a sport that, with rare exceptions like Ashe, was anything but a stronghold for minorities. “I remember saying, you can be on TV doing this?” she said.That July, Ashe became the first (and only) black man to win Wimbledon. Adams, the persistent daughter of public school educators on Chicago’s West Side, hit her way into the Martin Luther King Jr. Boys Club summer program for children who were at least three years older. She got there by tagging along with her teenage brothers, sitting on the side and pleading for a chance to pick up a racket for the first time.“I’m a visual learner, so with hand-eye coordination, I was a natural,” she said.Adams did not come to her sport by privilege or design. “I stumbled into tennis,” she said. But her ascension to the top of the United States Tennis Association this month as its chairman, chief executive and president is the culmination of a decade-long climb as a U.S.T.A. board volunteer. Adams, who is succeeding Dave Haggerty, is the first African-American and former professional player to lead the association. The top position, which is unpaid, comes with a two-year term. At 46, Adams is also the youngest person to occupy the office in the U.S.T.A.’s headquarters in the Westchester County suburbs, north of New York. The organization, the country’s nonprofit governing body of tennis, owns and operates the United States Open and other tournaments. In recent years, the dearth of new American stars, especially on the men’s side, has made the U.S.T.A. a target of derision.It is difficult to tell how much this situation relates to what the rest of the world has been doing right and what the United States has been doing wrong. Adams is most certain of the U.S.T.A.’s need, with her leadership, to continue pushing to make the game more available to children whose earliest years, like her own, were spent outside tennis’s developmental bubble. “I can say, I’ve been there, I know what it looks like, I know what it takes,” she said in a recent interview, before she headed to Melbourne for the Australian Open, which begins Monday.The odds for Adams to have a playing career that took her to the fourth round in singles at Wimbledon and to 20 career Women’s Tennis Association doubles titles from 1988 to 1999 may have been greater in one respect than they were for Venus and Serena Williams to reach the tour out of Compton, Calif. Adams did not grow up poor; she called her family middle class and said her community was “a decent neighborhood at the time.” In urban Chicago, that did not make her — or anyone growing up under similar circumstances — a likely candidate to become even a recreational player.Her parents, James and Yvonne Adams, were on the board of the Boys Club, which would feature an outdoor activity for neighborhood children every summer. That is how Katrina came to hit her first tennis balls, in a neighborhood park with fence nets. She startled coaches with her strokes and was soon receiving free lessons in another program, this time on a wood gymnasium floor. One year later, she was playing in her first 10-and-under national tournament, in New Orleans. Unlike Venus and Serena, Adams had no guiding tennis parent, no Richard Williams at home to help fulfill a dream. “We knew nothing about tennis,” Yvonne Adams said by telephone. “I would ask her, Why do you want to play with that little ball? She would just smile. And after Arthur Ashe won Wimbledon, she said, ‘I’m going there one day.’ I told her she had a lot of work to do. She said, ‘I’m going.’ The only condition we ever set was that books came first.”Long drives to save money were routine, and Yvonne and James made financial sacrifices. “We never told Katrina; didn’t want her to worry about that,” Yvonne said. Eventually, after the family met other parents of Chicago-area players with similar backgrounds, fund-raisers helped defray tournament travel costs. Katrina won the Illinois state singles title in high school and became a two-time all-American at Northwestern. She moved to Houston after turning professional and developed friendships with Zina Garrison and Lori McNeil, African-American players who reached the top 10 in singles and played doubles with Adams. They were rarities of their time, but there is no longer a shortage of ranked black American women. “When you look at the African-American community as a whole, those numbers pretty much shot through the roof with the success of Venus and Serena over the last 10 to 15 years,” Adams said. “It goes to show you that if there’s someone out there that looks like you that you can see and hear, it kind of motivates you.”She added that U.S.T.A. grass-roots programs targeting minorities had made inroads with Asian-Americans, but had struggled to do so in the Hispanic community.“That’s the fastest growing population in the country,” Adams said. “We’re way behind, with the percentages, the amount of Hispanics versus the players involved. I really want to go after this community.”Two years may not be much time to create a legacy, but Adams may come to the position readier to “reach back and pull someone else up” than her predecessors were. While she has been a national coach for the U.S.T.A., moonlighted as a commentator on Tennis Channel and, more recently, on CBS Sports Network’s all-female sports discussion show, “We Need to Talk,” her day job for the past decade has been executive director of the Harlem Junior Tennis and Education Program.Tennis has long been known for industry-entrenched people wearing multiple hats and creating potential conflicts of interest. Last summer, in an article detailing the U.S.T.A.’s finances, The New York Times reported that several of the Harlem program’s current and recent board members had benefited from organizational grants and contracts.Since Adams joined the U.S.T.A. board in 2005, the Harlem program had received at least $217,550 from the U.S.T.A. and its charitable operations, according to the article. But Adams said the program had existed since 1972 and its relationship with the U.S.T.A. “was established well before my arrival.” She said that 90 percent of the participants at the high school level had gone on to college and added that “our mission and purpose to growing tennis in urban communities as well as our educational components” had matched U.S.T.A. objectives. Andre Benjamin, a board member of the Harlem program and its treasurer, said of Adams, “I’ve watched her speak about the program to business people and can tell that her experiences — where she comes from and how she came to compete at those highest levels — brings immediate respect.” Like Adams, Benjamin — the son of a single mother who worked as a nurse — did not grow up in an impoverished home. He learned to play tennis in a public park before finding an athletic home: the Harlem after-school program. He wound up playing in college and now works at Goldman Sachs. When he married, three members of his wedding party were old Harlem tennis friends.The program, he said, “fostered a sense of family.” These are the stories that Adams wants to share, the seeds she is promising to sow. Her term will coincide with the construction of the U.S.T.A’s new complex for its community tennis and player development programs in Orlando, Fla., scheduled to open in the last quarter of 2016.Believing, or hoping, that more American champions are already coming from the junior ranks, she cited Stefan Kozlov and Francis Tiafoe, both 16, as young players to watch.What will separate the great from the very good? It is not, in the end, what the parents and coaches want, no matter how well-off or connected they are.With six days on the job, Adams sat in an office with few personal touches beyond photos of her with the cast of “We Need to Talk” and another of a group meeting President Obama at the White House. She patted her chest and said: “It has to come from the heart. There are too many kids that have so much pressure on them to win, not for them but from everyone around them, that they say, ‘You know what? I can’t take this anymore. I don’t want this anymore. I never wanted it. I wanted it for you, not me.’ ”She shook her head. “That’s what we see in the sport because of the pressure from the top down — the media, the agents, the parents,” she said.She added: “I do think we are in a great position moving forward in American tennis. But it’s all through the eyes of the beholder, what you think is successful, and too often we’re just looking for that Grand Slam player without looking at all the obstacles just to get to a Grand Slam event, into that top 100. I was eighth in the world in doubles, 67th in singles. Could I have achieved more? Yes, perhaps, but I did it my way. And now I’m sitting in this seat.”Adams is sitting atop the U.S.T.A., No. 1, and is the first African-American to preside over the sport. She has come a long way from the Boys Club in Chicago. Advertisement