AdvertisementSupported byBy Marc TracyDALLAS — Don Garber, the commissioner of Major League Soccer who was previously head of the N.F.L.’s international division, recalled watching Oliver Luck, at the time in charge of N.F.L. Europe, at work in the 1990s in Germany.“There was no better feeling I had than meeting with mayors and civic leaders and having Oliver Luck, this all-American football player from West Virginia and Houston, with that toothy grin, speaking German with a perfect accent,” Garber said.Luck, whose mother was born in Karlsruhe, Germany, will require all his powers of translation as he leaves his job as West Virginia’s athletic director and begins his new one as a top executive at the N.C.A.A. On Thursday, at the annual N.C.A.A. convention, held this year just across the Potomac River from Washington, the association’s president, Mark Emmert, introduced Luck as “our newest employee.”The five most prominent conferences, acting with the governing autonomy the N.C.A.A. granted them in August, are expected Saturday to approve a measure that will provide athletes with the full cost of attendance, which is several thousand dollars higher than typical scholarships.It may fall above all to Luck, as executive vice president for regulatory affairs, to negotiate the myriad competing interests in intercollegiate athletics. There are dozens of conferences across three divisions; a multitude of sports; university presidents, athletic directors and athletes; and even the N.C.A.A. itself, which has been accused of being out of touch with members’ concerns and the new realities of college sports, some of which generate billions of dollars.“He brings to us wide-ranging, hands-on experience from across athletic, academic and business worlds,” Emmert said in a statement last month, when the move was announced.Luck, 54, said that before he agreed to take the job, Emmert told him, “The next 36 to 48 months will be a defining time period for intercollegiate athletics.”Luck’s résumé is extensive: college and professional athlete; Rhodes Scholar finalist; lawyer; professional sports executive; university trustee; athletic director; and member of the College Football Playoff’s selection committee.He also is a sports parent. His older daughter, Mary Ellen, played women’s volleyball at Stanford and majored in biology. His younger son, Addison, is a standout high school soccer player who is expected to compete in college. It was his older son, though, who perhaps had the biggest impact on his decision to take a job with the N.C.A.A., which is headquartered in Indianapolis. Andrew Luck, who played at Stanford and majored in architecture before being selected No. 1 over all in the N.F.L. draft, is now the star quarterback for the Indianapolis Colts. The team plays the New England Patriots in Sunday’s A.F.C. championship game.That experience, Oliver Luck said, has made him especially sensitive to athletes’ issues. He recalled Andrew’s missing nearly a week of classes at the beginning of one semester because he was in Miami playing Virginia Tech in the Orange Bowl.While admitting he can be “Pollyannaish,” he said, “If there’s anything my kids have taught me, it’s that my general belief in the good qualities of college athletics is alive and well,” adding, “Andrew, if he didn’t have the right arm that he has, could easily go walk into an architecture firm.” Although, Luck added, “I don’t think he will do that for a little while.” During an interview in Dallas before the College Football Playoff national championship game Monday, Luck — trim, tan and silver-haired — articulated a greater amenability to professionalization than is typical for an N.C.A.A. executive. Last month, Luck made waves by saying athletes had a “fundamental right” to their names, images and likenesses, even though the N.C.A.A. prevents athletes from cashing in on them. A federal judge ruled in the Ed O’Bannon case in August that this was a violation of antitrust law.“Meryl Streep didn’t sign away her name if she got a scholarship to Yale Drama School,” Luck said. “Musicians perform. You can write software, or for college newspapers.”He added: “Is it a free market? Do we let a kid sell his name, image and likeness? Do we allow the schools to buy them, or reimburse a student-athlete for them?”“I don’t have the answers,” he said, “but I do believe it’s worthy of a very strong debate.”Luck is essentially replacing the recently departed chief operating officer Jim Isch, who was viewed as Emmert’s right-hand man. Luck was sought out to provide the voice of an athletic director — a “practitioner,” in N.C.A.A. argot — at an association dominated by university presidents, including leaders like Emmert, who was the president of the University of Washington and the chancellor of Louisiana State University, and his predecessor Myles Brand, who had been president of the University of Oregon.“It’s quite a significant step historically,” Rodney Fort, a sports economist at the University of Michigan, said of Luck’s hiring. Kevin White, Duke’s athletic director, said he was pleased with the move.“Speaking on behalf of the athletic-director community, we are excited to have a franchise operator transition to the senior management team in Indianapolis,” White said. “In particular, we’re very excited Oliver Luck has accepted the new role. His very unique background will lend itself to this environment.”The turmoil in college sports is well known: High-profile lawsuits, public criticism and a unionization drive have challenged the premise that athletes participating in big-business sports are getting a fair deal. But it is also a precarious moment for the N.C.A.A., which has had both its rules and its impartiality questioned in cases that have included accusations of a star Georgia running back signing merchandise and the Jerry Sandusky scandal at Penn State.“Emmert is a university president and a facilitator, whereas Oliver gets things done, is not afraid of change, and not afraid to think outside of the box,” said B. David Ridpath, an associate professor of sports administration at Ohio University and a member of the Drake Group, which pushes for educational reform in college athletics. He added, “Oliver can be a positive catalyst to help intercollegiate sport evolve before it collapses on itself.”After starting nine games over four seasons for the Houston Oilers in the 1980s, Luck received a law degree and worked for the league, including as president of N.F.L. Europe. While abroad, he developed a passion for soccer — he roots for Eintracht Frankfurt — and later helped found M.L.S.’s Houston Dynamo, for which he was general manager.Several years ago, he watched with worry as West Virginia, his alma mater on whose board he served, searched for a life raft amid the stormy seas of realignment. He became athletic director and guided the Mountaineers from the imploding former Big East to the Big 12.“The A.D.s — we’re businesspeople,” Luck said. “I’ve got a balance sheet. Every year I have to figure out how much I generate and what I spend, and keep those two somewhat in relationship.”He added: “I imagine my experience on the business side will help — I think that probably was attractive to the N.C.A.A.”One sign of Luck’s interest in raising revenue was his decision to sell beer at home football games, a perk prohibited at most universities as well as at all N.C.A.A. championships (although not at the football playoff). “My C.F.O. told me that through five football seasons, we had netted something like $2.4 million from beer sales,” Luck said. “That can endow five scholarships. Or whatever — whatever you want to use the money for.”Luck’s business background is notable because the N.C.A.A. does not present itself as a professional sports league. Although dozens of its members’ athletic departments bring in tens of millions of dollars each year — mainly via football and men’s basketball — and although the association has a 14-year, $10.8 billion contract for rights to broadcast the Division I men’s basketball tournament, its mission statement makes no mention of business. And, of course, its athletes are barred from making money off their collegiate athletic pursuits.Still, there is some indication that Luck’s hiring may be part of a trend. The N.C.A.A. has lately displayed a more reformist and responsive side, including loosening restrictions last year on how many meals universities could provide to athletes, allowing the football playoff to provide travel reimbursements to athletes’ families and promising to do the same for the men’s and women’s Final Fours.The hardest transition for Luck, whose wife, Kathy, also is a lawyer, will not be moving from Morgantown, W.Va., to Indianapolis, where the N.C.A.A.’s headquarters on the bank of the White River are a few blocks north of the Colts’ stadium. Rather, it will be making the transition from dealing with one athletic department — with a popular football team and an operating profit to boot — to the N.C.A.A.’s roughly 1,000 members.Here, Luck may draw on an unlikely source of expertise: In the early 1990s, while on a fellowship, he studied Europe’s international legal system and remains a close follower of European politics.“I find the sovereignty issue fascinating,” he said. “How much sovereignty does Germany give up to the European Union?”He completed the analogy, saying: “I think we need to trust campuses in terms of business decisions and academic decisions. Because schools are different. There’s a thousand schools in the N.C.A.A., and West Virginia University is a fundamentally different place than the University of Texas or Middlebury College or Baldwin Wallace or the University of Dallas.”Even among Division I’s 32 conferences and approximately 350 colleges, there is wide financial disparity and broad disagreement over whether institutions should and could afford to provide more resources to athletes.“Our business is very solid,” Luck said. “I’m a believer that we’ve got a very strong industry right now.” He added: “The student-athlete of today is different than I was, and certainly different than back in the 1940s and ’50s. John Wayne said something like, ‘Change is tough, but you’ve still got to saddle up.’ ”Advertisement