By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSJAN. 17, 2015
Tomas Plekanec had two goals and two assists to lead the Montreal Canadiens to a 6-4 victory over the visiting Islanders on Saturday night.The Islanders, who lead the Metropolitan Division, had won four straight. Tampa Bay jumped over the Islanders for first place in the Eastern Conference by beating Colorado.P. K. Subban, Dale Weise, Alex Galchenyuk and David Desharnais also scored for Montreal, and goaltender Dustin Tokarski made 27 saves.Kyle Okposo, Nikolay Kulemin, Anders Lee and John Tavares scored for the Islanders. Goaltender Jaroslav Halak, a former Canadien, stopped 27 shots. After Montreal’s sixth goal, Halak was replaced by Chad Johnson, who faced just two shots.AdvertisementRED WINGS 5, PREDATORS 2 Tomas Tatar scored twice, and Henrik Zetterberg added a clever goal from behind the goal line to help host Detroit snap Nashville’s five-game winning streak. Gustav Nyquist, Kyle Quincey and Tatar scored in the first period for the Red Wings.AdvertisementBLUES 3, MAPLE LEAFS 0 Brian Elliott stopped 27 shots for his third shutout of the season as St. Louis beat visiting Toronto. After allowing three goals in each of his last two games, Elliott got back on track with his 19th shutout at home. Alexander Steen, Kevin Shattenkirk and T. J. Oshie scored for the Blues.STARS 5, CAPITALS 4 Antoine Roussel and Jamie Benn scored 16 seconds apart in the third period, and host Dallas edged Washington despite giving up a 3-0 lead. Roussel broke a 3-3 tie early in the third period, and Benn added to the Stars’ lead.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.BLUE JACKETS 3, BRUINS 1 Matt Calvert scored the go-ahead goal with 3 minutes 3 seconds left in the third period and added an empty-net goal in the final minute as visiting Columbus topped Boston to end a four-game skid. Ryan Johansen had a goal and an assist for the Blue Jackets, who ended the Bruins’ five-game winning streak.LIGHTNING 3, AVALANCHE 2 Ryan Callahan scored in regulation and had the decisive goal in a shootout to lift host Tampa Bay over Colorado. Anton Stralman also scored in regulation for the Lightning, and Ben Bishop made 40 saves. Ryan O’Reilly and Nathan MacKinnon scored for the Avalanche, and Semyon Varlamov had 29 saves. MacKinnon tied the score with 6.8 seconds left.FLYERS 4, SABRES 3 Chris VandeVelde scored on a third-period breakaway to help visiting Philadelphia snap a six-game road losing streak and send the Sabres to a 10th straight regulation defeat. R. J. Umberger and Mark Streit scored power-play goals, and Mike Raffl also scored for the Flyers, who won their fourth straight against the Sabres.WILD 3, COYOTES 1 Devan Dubnyk stopped 25 shots against his former team, and Jason Zucker and Zach Parise each scored their 16th goal of the season to lead host Minnesota past Arizona. Charlie Coyle also scored for the Wild, who won their second straight after dropping seven of eight.OILERS 3, PANTHERS 2 Nail Yakupov scored the winning goal in a shootout as Edmonton edged host Florida. Yakupov scored past Roberto Luongo in the first round, and Oilers goaltender Viktor Fasth was perfect in the shootout. Matt Hendricks and Jordan Eberle scored in regulation for Edmonton.HURRICANES 3, SENATORS 2 Nathan Gerbe and Justin Faulk each had a goal and an assist to lift visiting Carolina over Ottawa. Brad Malone also scored for the Hurricanes.A version of this article appears in print on January 18, 2015, on Page SP10 of the New York edition with the headline: Trading Salvos, Canadiens Top Islanders.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.