AdvertisementSupported byWizards 99, Nets 90By Andrew KehThe Wizards have one of the most feared backcourts in the league, but on Saturday night it was their burly big men who gave the Nets most of their problems. Nene had 20 points, and Marcin Gortat had a season-high 16 rebounds to lead the Wizards to a 99-90 victory at Barclays Center, extending the Nets’ losing streak at home to six games.The big men’s play helped the Wizards overcome a combined 12-for-36 shooting performance by John Wall, Bradley Beal and Paul Pierce, who was playing his first game in Brooklyn since the Nets declined to keep him on last summer. “Me and Nene, we believe we are some of the most dominant big men in this league,” Gortat said. He added of Nene, “The guy’s a beast, an offensive beast.”With the defeat, the Nets officially reached the midway point of their 82-game schedule. They will approach the remaining 41 with a host of questions. Will the owner, Mikhail D. Prokhorov, sell the team? Who on the roster will be traded before the deadline? Should the Nets even be wondering about the playoffs?The Nets had beaten the Wizards by 22 points on Friday night in Washington, ending a seven-game losing streak. The Wizards started Saturday with the second-best record in the Eastern Conference. The Nets, despite all their troubles of late, were in eighth place.The Nets led by 51-50 after the first half, as Brook Lopez led the way with 13 points and 4 rebounds through the first two periods. But the Nets went cold coming out of the halftime break, and the Wizards went on an 18-2 run in the third quarter to seize the momentum of the game.Nene was a force inside, shooting 8 for 12 from the field while notching several thunderous dunks. Gortat had 10 points to go with his strong rebounding performance.Nene’s strength and physicality manifested themselves again with 2 minutes 29 seconds remaining in the game, with the Nets trailing by 5 points, when he crashed in midair into Mason Plumlee, who was trying to finish an alley-oop dunk. There was no whistle as Plumlee went crashing to the court, drawing a hail of boos from the sellout crowd. Of that play, Nets Coach Lionel Hollins said, “That one call didn’t lose us the game.” Hollins said his players had been tired at the end of the game, adding, “I thought we played courageously, and we battled, and eventually we went to empty.”The Nets made only one field goal after that as the Wizards slipped away.The game was Pierce’s first at Barclays Center since joining the Wizards last summer. Pierce helped lead the Nets to the second round of the playoffs last season, but he said the return to Brooklyn had not been particularly emotional, since he had only spent one year with the team. He shot just 2 for 9 and finished with 7 points.Jarrett Jack led the Nets with 22 points, while Joe Johnson and Brook Lopez contributed 15 each. It was the 10th time this season that the Nets played two games in two nights — and just the third time that Kevin Garnett played in both games in such a situation. Garnett had 8 points and 10 rebounds in 27 minutes.Advertisement