By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSJAN. 17, 2015
MINNEAPOLIS — Andre Hollins scored a season-high 31 points on 7-for-10 shooting from 3-point range, a much-needed breakout game for the senior and his struggling team that spurred Minnesota to an 89-80 victory over Rutgers on Saturday.Mo Walker had 16 points and nine rebounds for the Golden Gophers (12-7, 1-5), who got their first Big Ten win behind 26 points off 19 turnovers by the Scarlet Knights (10-9, 2-4). Minnesota, which entered the week second in the nation in steals, matched its season average with 11 takeaways.Carlos Morris added 12 points for the Gophers, who had only eight turnovers.Myles Mack had 26 points and eight assists for Rutgers, which owned a 39-28 edge in rebounding.Whether squaring up from the wing or the corner behind the arc or driving toward the lane for a head-fake pull-up jump shot, Hollins was finally back in form after a quiet couple of weeks. This was the most points he’s scored and 3-point shots he’s made in a Big Ten game in his career. He finished 11 for 18 from the field.AdvertisementRutgers was within a single-digit deficit for much of the game, but Hollins hit 3-pointers on consecutive possessions to give the Gophers a 66-55 lead near the midpoint of the second half. After the second one, he pivoted back to play defense with a big smile on his face as he flashed three fingers near his forehead.AdvertisementThe Gophers lost four of their first five Big Ten games by five points or fewer, including a 77-75 decision here on Tuesday against Iowa, lacking that clutch steal or timely jumper to close out a victory or two. Confidence can go a long way toward masking weaknesses, so a milder stretch of the schedule over the next month could help them climb back into relevancy in the confidence race.The Scarlet Knights needed only two weeks to post their first signature win as a Big Ten team, taking down seventh-ranked Wisconsin 67-62 last weekend. They had a six-point lead at 14th-ranked Maryland with less than eight minutes left on Wednesday, too, before fading down the stretch. So coach Eddie Jordan’s team, ranked in the top 10 nationally in strength of schedule, has already proven to be a tough opponent despite owning the conference’s worst scoring average and shooting percentage.The rhyming outside-inside tandem of seniors Mack and Kadeem Jack had another productive performance, with Jack finishing with 19 points and five rebounds. Junior Etou added nine points and 10 rebounds and Bishop Daniels scored 13 points.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Hollins and Nate Mason hit 3-pointers on Minnesota’s first two possessions, and the lead reached 25-12 before the midpoint of the first half. Then the Gophers became stagnant with the ball, while coach Richard Pitino fiddled with some new lineup combinations, and settled for several contested shots from the perimeter.Rutgers used a 17-4 run to tie the game for the first time, and during a stretch that lasted a little beyond that surge by the Scarlet Knights Morris took nine of 14 shots by the Gophers. Hollins swished a pair of 3-pointers in the final 2 minutes before the break to give them a bit more space, but Etou snagged a rebound behind Bakary Konate and drew a foul on the freshman for a three-point play with five seconds left to whittle back the lead to 42-37.Hollins made just 12 of his 58 field-goal attempts (20.7 percent) over the first five Big Ten games, including 8 for 36 from 3-point range.This was the first time these teams played since 1979.TIP-INSRutgers: The Scarlet Knights averaged only 55.6 points over their first five Big Ten games. This was the first time they reached 80 points all season.Minnesota: Mason, the freshman, started at point guard for the second straight game ahead of senior DeAndre Mathieu. Mason shot just 3 for 10 from the field, but he had five steals, five assists and just one turnover. Mathieu finished with eight points and three assists.UP NEXTRutgers hosts Michigan on Tuesday.Minnesota visits Nebraska on Tuesday.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.