By MARC TRACYJAN. 17, 2015
OXON HILL, Md. —  In a milestone, the five most prominent conferences in college sports voted on Saturday to increase their scholarships to cover athletes’ full cost of attendance, which is typically several thousand dollars more than colleges currently provide.The vote was 79-1, with the sole opposing vote coming from Boston College, a member of the Atlantic Coast Conference.“This legislation further segregates student-athletes from the general student population by increasing aid without need-based consideration,” Chris Cameron, Boston College’s associate director of athletics, said in a statement.The conferences, acting for the first time under autonomy they were granted by the N.C.A.A. last August, also passed a concussion safety policy, prohibited colleges from withdrawing athletic scholarships for solely athletic reasons and granted athletes the ability to borrow against future earnings to buy loss-of-value insurance, which reimburses athletes if playing in college ends up harming their future earning power in professional sports.AdvertisementThe resolutions are binding on the 65 colleges in the so-called Big 5, which include the Atlantic Coast, the Big Ten, the Big 12, the Pacific-12 and the Southeastern conferences. The 27 other Division I conferences — or the nearly 300 other Division I colleges themselves, if they receive their conferences’ permission — may adopt the measures if they choose.AdvertisementCost of attendance in particular was seen as a foregone conclusion after the autonomy vote last year.Gene Block, U.C.L.A.’s chancellor and an N.C.A.A. board member, said, “The slate of reforms starts us down a path that strikes the right balance between providing better support for scholarship athletes and provisions that ensure academics come first.”Jim Delany, the Big Ten’s commissioner, added: “We got what we wanted. It was great to have five conferences singing off the same sheet of music.”As much as the substance of the resolutions marked a new era for top-tier collegiate athletics, also notable was the conferences’ ability to set policies for themselves, by themselves, although still under the N.C.A.A. rubric.Greg Sankey, executive associate commissioner of the SEC, said, “This was a really important day in the N.C.A.A.’s journey, and a significant step.”The legislative session Saturday afternoon at the annual N.C.A.A. convention in Oxon Hill, just south of Washington, was led by Nathan Hatch, the president of Wake Forest, who was instrumental in crafting the autonomy structure for the five conferences. Mark Emmert, the N.C.A.A.’s president, was on the dais before the voting, but he hardly spoke and was not available for comment afterward.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“This is in many ways a historic gathering,” Emmert said in his brief opening statement. “The change in governing was something I was delighted to see.”Saturday was also the first instance in the N.C.A.A.’s modern era in which students had a substantial say. Three athletes from each conference, one football player among each set of three, accounted for 15 votes of the total of 80; the other 65 came from representatives from each university in the Big 5.AdvertisementStudents’ questions, objections and arguments dominated a discussion period before the vote.“What we showed here today was, we’re not here symbolically,” Ty Darlington, who started at center this season for Oklahoma’s football team, said in an interview.Several students opposed the resolution to ban colleges from removing scholarships for solely athletic reasons.Josh Tobias, a baseball player at Florida, said: “College sports prepare you for professional sports. In professional sports, if you don’t play well, you get cut.”Two resolutions failed. One, sponsored by the SEC, would have required colleges to report to the N.C.A.A. when students’ costs of attendance increased during the year. The other, sponsored by the A.C.C., would have loosened restrictions on how much universities could contribute to the cost of course books as part of newly approved financial aid packages.One of the most divisive resolutions was the concussion safety policy, which requires each college to have practices in place that include mandatory examinations of players by medical personnel. Several Big 12 members said that it did not go far enough and noted that language in an earlier version of the resolution that would have granted medical personnel “unchallengeable authority” had been taken out.In an implicit challenge to the SEC, which sponsored the resolution and whose bloc sat behind the Big 12 representatives on one side of the large ballroom, Steve Patterson, Texas’s athletic director, said: “We’ve been straight-armed the whole time. It starts to raise questions as to why. Why can’t we get it clear that the medical personnel are in charge?”As Sankey, the SEC official, presented the concussion resolution, he enlisted the testimony of Brian Hainline, the N.C.A.A.’s chief medical officer.“This is an imperfect yet exceptionally important start,” Hainline told the gathering. “And I would much rather have an imperfect start than a perfect pause.”A version of this article appears in print on January 18, 2015, on Page SP8 of the New York edition with the headline: Top Conferences to Allow Aid for Athletes’ Full Bills.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.