By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSJAN. 17, 2015
Chelsea routed Swansea, 5-0, on Saturday for its most lopsided win of the Premier League season, while Manchester United defeated Queens Park Rangers for only its third road victory.Diego Costa and Oscar each scored twice as Chelsea, the league leader, moved 5 points ahead of Manchester City, which will host Arsenal on Sunday. It was Swansea’s worst home defeat in 24 years.United labored through the first half at Q.P.R., but the substitutes Marouane Fellaini and James Wilson scored to help United remain in fourth with a 2-0 victory.Elsewhere, third-place Southampton won, 2-0, at Newcastle; Tottenham moved up to fifth with a 2-1 home victory over Sunderland; and Liverpool won, 2-0, at Aston Villa.AdvertisementROMA STUMBLES TO A TIE Roma was held to a 1-1 tie at Palermo, another slip-up in its quest for the Serie A title in Italy. The team was left 2 points behind Juventus, which was to host Hellas Verona on Sunday.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.DRAW IN AFRICA CUP OPENER The Republic of Congo rallied for a 1-1 draw against host Equatorial Guinea in the opening game of the Africa Cup of Nations. In a later game in Bata, Gabon beat Burkina Faso, 2-0.CLAIMS OF DUTCH MATCH FIXING The Dutch soccer association called for a criminal inquiry into detailed allegations of match fixing published by the newspaper De Volkskrant. The association also said it was opening its own investigation.AdvertisementINJURY RAISES QUESTIONS The Bayern Munich winger Arjen Robben offered a bizarre explanation for a hand injury he sustained at the team’s training base in Qatar, saying he had been bitten by a crocodile. The club offered no explanation for the injury. Crocodiles are not a native species in Qatar. (REUTERS)A version of this article appears in print on January 18, 2015, on Page SP10 of the New York edition with the headline: Chelsea Wins by Five and Widens League Lead.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.