By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSJAN. 17, 2015
Packers linebacker Julius Peppers will turn 35 on Sunday, the day his team takes on the Seattle Seahawks for the N.F.C. championship. Not even to the midpoint of the average American life span, 35 is a relatively ancient milestone in a game in which the typical player is 26.Peppers has hardly been showing his age. A few other grizzled veterans — including Kevin Williams, Reggie Wayne and Vince Wilfork — will also be in action this weekend, still making meaningful contributions to their teams heading into the conference championship games.But none are usually among the most dominant player on the field, as Peppers was in Green Bay’s victory against the Dallas Cowboys last week, matching the team high with six tackles, drawing a holding penalty and forcing two fumbles.One of the fumbles came during a sack, with the Cowboys recovering the ball. The other might have been the game’s pivotal play until the replay reversal of Dez Bryant’s fourth-down grab near the goal line near the end of the game.AdvertisementDeMarco Murray burst through a big hole that Peppers was being pushed away from, but Peppers, an eight-time Pro Bowl selection at defensive end, escaped his block and knocked the ball free just as Murray approached the secondary with plenty of room to run.AdvertisementThe Packers fell on the ball near midfield and drove the other way for a field goal to pull within 14-13. Until that point early in the third quarter, the Cowboys were beginning to pull away.“You need all hands on deck right now and everybody making these plays at crucial times,” Peppers said.The soft-spoken Peppers, who has played outside linebacker this season for the first time in his career, has been just as valuable as an adviser for his younger teammates.Coach Mike McCarthy mentioned a conversation between Peppers and his teammate David Bakhtiari, a 23-year-old left tackle, in which Peppers, who had faced Bakhtiari last season when Peppers played for the Chicago Bears, offered some valuable insight about what he thought were Bakhtiari’s strengths and weaknesses.“I know David was thankful for that,” McCarthy said.The Seahawks have been grateful they took a chance on Williams, who considered retirement after Minnesota let him become a free agent after 11 years with the Vikings. Williams, 34, was moved to nose tackle after Brandon Mebane sustained a season-ending injury. Williams, like Peppers, is the oldest player on his team.“He’s such a savvy player that it just made sense to him because he’s been around so long,” Seahawks Coach Pete Carroll said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.That’s the great advantage these players have, of course: that first-hand experience and those tricks of the trade accumulated throughout the years. Age can give a player an edge despite the natural decline in his strength and speed.Indianapolis, which plays New England on Sunday for the A.F.C. championship, has a third of the players 30 and older on the four teams still alive.AdvertisementThe Colts have the oldest team in the N.F.L., with an active roster averaging 27 years 256 days based on the most recent game played by each club, according to Stats research.The Patriots are 14th at 26 years 303 days, and the Seahawks are 22nd at 26 years 236 days.The Packers, 28th at 26 years 148 days, are the fifth-youngest team in the league.Wayne, who has been selected to six Pro Bowls and has had six seasons of 1,200 or more receiving yards, has been relatively quiet at age 36, with T. Y. Hilton taking over as quarterback Andrew Luck’s top option. Wayne has been playing with a torn left triceps.But like Adam Vinatieri, the team’s 42-year-old place-kicker, and defensive end Cory Redding, 34, Wayne still plays a useful role. Maybe it is making a key block downfield or a first-down catch in the fourth quarter to help the Colts drain the clock, as he did in the game against the Cincinnati Bengals during the wild-card round.This is the 12th time in 14 seasons that Wayne has been in the playoffs.“Let’s live in this moment,” he said. “Let’s not worry about what goes on afterward.”On the other side of the ball for the Patriots will be Wilfork, the 33-year-old, five-time Pro Bowl defensive tackle who has recovered well from an injury-filled 2013 season.“I worked my tail off just to get back and play football like I know how to play,” he said, “and I never take nothing for granted.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.