AdvertisementSupported byInboxInching Upward Toward a DreamTo the Sports Editor:Re “Pursuing the Impossible, and Coming Out on Top,” Jan. 15: Climbing the Dawn Wall is the perfect physical metaphor. The 19-day ascent captured our attention and imagination in a way few if any conquests have in the world of sport. In its highest and best form, sport elevates not only the participant, but also all those who witness the achievement and absorb its message.Inch by inch and day by day, Tommy Caldwell and Kevin Jorgeson demonstrated that the human capacity is far greater than we perceive. The relentlessness of pursuit, the unwillingness to contemplate defeat, the sheer and utter determination to accomplish what could not be done, such is the message that emanated from the Dawn Wall.Within each of us is an impossible dream that we have now been shown may not be out of reach if only we dare to believe.ROBERT S. NUSSBAUM, Fort Lee, N.J.To the Sports Editor:Congratulations to Tommy Caldwell and Kevin Jorgeson, the intrepid climbers of El Capitan’s Dawn Wall. Notwithstanding the skill and physical difficulty involved in this free climb, meriting every proper appreciation, how free is any climb when a rope will catch you every time you fall?The only element this climb was free of was a great deal of risk and rivets. More precisely defined, this was a rope- and team-assisted climb, not the free solo climb (without any safety measures or help) an overwhelming majority of uninitiated people perceive a free climb to be.MICHAEL E. WHITE, Oxford, Mass.A Question of RetirementTo the Sports Editor:Re “A Quarterback’s Future Begins to Waver as Passes Miss the Mark,” Jan. 12: Denver quarterback Peyton Manning’s season ended Sunday, when he was outplayed by the young and talented Indianapolis quarterback Andrew Luck.We can only hope that Manning does not succumb to the lure of a big payday and follow Brett Favre down the steep path to retirement.CHARLES H. GESSNER, Marblehead, Mass.Advertisement