AdvertisementSupported byOn BaseballBy Tyler KepnerEvery five games during the baseball season, Jerry Howarth gets to travel back in time. Howarth settles in behind his microphone in the Toronto Blue Jays’ radio booth and watches Mark Buehrle move briskly through the innings, the way the old guys did.“He told me the last time he shook off his catcher was 11 years ago, and someone lined a shot off his shoulder,” Howarth said. “So it’s, ‘Give me the ball, let me see the sign, and I’ll throw the pitch.’ ”Baseball would never need to consider pitch clocks if everyone played as crisply as Buehrle, a veteran left-hander. But games are taking longer than ever, and owners are eager to quicken the pace for a generation that hates to wait for anything. Buehrle’s approach is the exception, not the rule.The rules are changing in the minors this season — or, at least, the rules will finally be enforced, with a digital reminder ticking down to each pitch. Class AA and Class AAA ballparks will include countdown clocks, with pitchers required to deliver within the specified time or be charged with a ball. Hitters must stay in the box for the duration of the countdown, or pitchers can toss a free strike.As Commissioner Bud Selig leaves office next weekend, to be succeeded by Rob Manfred, pace of play is a serious concern in an industry of relative calm. Baseball has labor peace, rising revenue, a strong drug-testing program and stable attendance. But nine-inning games in 2014 lasted, on average, a record 3 hours 2 minutes — 27 minutes more than the average length in 1984.The arrival of expanded replay had an impact last season, and while replay can be streamlined, the innovation was widely accepted and long overdue. The tedious dawdling between pitches, by batters and by pitchers, can perhaps be addressed by a clock.“I’m glad they’re exploring the idea, because so many games just drag on and on,” said Howarth, a Blue Jays broadcaster since 1981. “There’s so much wasted time, and that hurts the game from a fan’s perspective.”Yet some of that seemingly frivolous time, Howarth acknowledged, could be what a player needs to feel comfortable. Todd Hollandsworth, a major league outfielder from 1995 through 2006, said the best stretches of his career occurred when he took the time to walk around a bit and gather himself at the plate. Otherwise, he felt rushed, simply reacting to pitches instead of using a plan.“This generation of players is much more educated than even my generation,” said Hollandsworth, now a morning host on MLB Network Radio. “These guys have information coming out of their ears. It’s dripping all over the place. People really don’t realize the thought that goes into each moment of a big league game.”Hollandsworth said he would be stunned if the union agreed to institute a pitch clock in the majors, and Major League Baseball is treading lightly. Tony Clark, the head of the players’ association, is on the league’s pace-of-play committee, and by testing the clock in minor league games, baseball is experimenting where it is possible to do so, following an initial test at one ballpark in the Arizona Fall League.There, pitchers were given 20 seconds to deliver each pitch, a modified version of the rarely enforced Rule 8.04, which limits the pitcher to 12 seconds with the bases unoccupied. M.L.B. was encouraged by the quicker pace in Arizona, but some prospects, like the Diamondbacks minor-league pitcher Archie Bradley, said that while they respected the concept, they simply needed more time at critical points in a game.M.L.B. is still working out the specific times and procedures for this year’s minor league rules, which are also expected to emphasize efficient pitching changes. But the independent Atlantic League offered a helpful lesson plan last season with several initiatives in the second half, when its average game time fell by seven minutes, to 2:54.Rick White, the Atlantic League’s president, explained that three facets of that plan had already become part of the rules: delivering a pitch within 12 seconds; keeping hitters in the batter’s box; and calling the regulation strike zone. The league also limited teams to three 45-second defensive “timeouts” in the first nine innings — excluding pitching changes — and sent batters directly to first base on an intentional walk.“Nobody wanted to be standing around while someone was throwing four intentional balls,” said White, who hopes to shave an additional 10 minutes off the average game time this season. “We could live without that one out of every thousand times when a pitcher would throw a wild pitch.”White also said that ballpark loudspeakers had stopped playing music when a batter was within three steps of the plate. The league lacked money for pitch clocks last season, but that might not be a problem anymore.“We’re finding a keen amount of sponsor interest in a countdown clock,” he said.Hollandsworth said he supported the idea of enacting changes in the minors, so players would be conditioned to work at a quicker pace. But the idea of forcing a clock at the highest level, he said, should never be an option.Clocks are for other sports, he said. Baseball’s timelessness is part of its appeal.“It would be all about the clock, and it should be all about the players and the moment the players create,” Hollandsworth said. “If it takes an extra second or two to create it, so be it.”Advertisement