

 Benjamin Hoffman
 

KEEPING SCORE
JAN. 17, 2015
In terms of travel expenses, Max Scherzer and James Shields may have reached the point of costing themselves money. The two aces remain unsigned, and with pitchers and catchers scheduled to report to spring training on Feb. 19, they have missed the 54-day advance purchase that a study of four million flights by CheapAir.com found was necessary to maximize savings.More important for Scherzer and Shields, they are entering somewhat uncharted territory for high-profile free-agent pitchers, who do not usually have to wait this long to pick a new club.Of the 15 pitchers who have signed a contract for $100 million or more, nine were free agents, not players signing extensions with the same team. Of the nine, only Masahiro Tanaka, last year, signed after Jan. 1, and his case was unusual because he was coming from Japan and could negotiate with only one team. Among true free agents, Barry Zito signed the latest when he agreed to a seven-year, $126 million contract with the San Francisco Giants on Dec. 28, 2006.But more than a month after Jon Lester agreed to terms on a $155 million deal with the Chicago Cubs, setting the market for the other top free-agent starters, Scherzer and Shields are still playing the waiting game. Their agents are trying to find a team that wants to take on such a huge contract for a player who by the nature of his position carries a great deal of risk.AdvertisementFor Scherzer, there is a minimum he needs to reach. After his Cy Young Award season in 2013, the Detroit Tigers offered him a $144 million contract extension. He turned it down, making a bet on himself that he could exceed that total when he hit the open market. Scherzer did his part by producing a second consecutive season in which he compiled at least 6 Wins Above Replacement, finishing fifth in the American League Cy Young balloting.AdvertisementSince then, however, many teams have declared themselves out of the running for his services. So Scherzer’s agent, Scott Boras, is probably appealing directly to owners in hopes of finding one willing to go above $150 million, thus saving face after spurning the Tigers’ generous offer.Shields, who has a longer track record of success than Scherzer and has proved far more consistent than Lester, is not expected to command as high a salary.The ace of last season’s American League champion Kansas City Royals, Shields had 15.3 Wins Above Replacement over the last four seasons, which trails Scherzer’s 18.2 but exceeds Lester’s 12.7. With eight consecutive seasons of 200 or more innings, Shields is considered the safer alternative, but he may have to wait for Scherzer to sign before a team will commit to him.It is not just high-profile free agents who are generally signed by mid-January; most teams prefer to have a working roster in place well before spring training. A look at the remaining free agents shows that just a few can offer much value. With Nori Aoki reportedly agreeing to a one-year contract with the Giants on Friday, the best remaining position player is Colby Rasmus, a talented underachiever with enough question marks about his potential to give teams pause.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Rosters have filled out to the point that players who seemingly offer no value have found homes. Jim Johnson was perhaps baseball’s worst pitcher in 2014 as he compiled a 7.09 earned run average in 54 appearances with the Oakland Athletics and the Tigers, but he was signed by the rebuilding Atlanta Braves.The website FanGraphs has a system for estimating a player’s worth based on performance, and according to that methodology, Johnson was worth minus $3.7 million. But that did not stop the Braves from signing him to a $1.6 million deal in hopes that regression to the mean can bring him back to a productive level.For Scherzer and Shields, the stakes are much higher. Contracts like the ones they are expected to sign have been notoriously bad for the teams. So until their agents find the right fit, they will remain unsigned, costing them any chance of getting a cheap flight to Florida or Arizona for spring training.Since Scherzer and Shields will probably wind up making closer to $1 million a start than $1 million a season, they can probably afford to wait.An article last Sunday about top free-agent pitchers who had not yet signed with teams erroneously included a player among the top position players available in free agency. Asdrubal Cabrera was not one of them because he had signed with the Tampa Bay Rays.A version of this article appears in print on January 18, 2015, on Page SP2 of the New York edition with the headline: Two Unsigned Aces Play a Waiting Game.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »