AdvertisementSupported byWinter Sports RoundupBy The Associated PressFelix Neureuther took advantage of a rare mistake by Marcel Hirscher of Austria to win a World Cup slalom on Saturday in Wengen, Switzerland, and retake the discipline standings lead from Hirscher, his top rival.Neureuther seized his chance after Hirscher, the world champion, skied out of a slalom event for the first time in three seasons.Neureuther, of Germany, rose from fifth after the first run by racing down a tricky slope in steadily falling snow to beat Stefano Gross of Italy by 0.20 of a second.WOMEN’S DOWNHILL DELAYED A women’s World Cup downhill was postponed by heavy snowfall in Cortina d’Ampezzo, Italy, delaying Lindsey Vonn’s pursuit for the victory record.Organizers announced the decision early Saturday, moving the downhill to Sunday and a super-G that had been scheduled for Sunday to Monday. Vonn needs one win to match Annemarie Moser-Proell’s record of 62 victories. SWISS TAKE BOBSLED LEAD Beat Hefti and Alex Baumann of Switzerland claimed their second bobsled World Cup victory of the season, winning in Königssee, Germany, to take the overall lead in the standings.Hefti and Baumann, the Olympic silver medalists, were fastest in both runs, and they beat Nico Walther and Marko Hübenbecker of Germany by 0.52 of a second for their second successive win.AUSTRALIAN WINS HALFPIPE The Australian snowboarder Scotty James won the halfpipe world title in Kreischberg, Austria, while Cai Xuetong of China won the women’s competition. James earned 91.50 points in his first run of the final. That score remained unmatched by his competitors, and James was assured of the gold medal before his final run, which he used to exchange high-fives with spectators along the pipe.  RUSSIAN WINS IN SKELETON Alexander Tretiakov of Russia won a skeleton World Cup in Königssee, Germany. Tretiakov clocked a combined time of 1:42.98 over two runs, beating the five-time overall champion Martins Dukurs of Latvia by 0.17 of a second. SPRINT CLINCHES BIATHLON Johannes Thingnes Boe of Norway shot cleanly and raced superbly to win a men’s 10-kilometer sprint in Ruhpolding, Germany, for his second biathlon World Cup victory of the season.Boe, 21, finished in 23:59.2, beating Simon Schempp of Germany by 24.5 seconds. Another German, Arnd Peiffer, was 57.9 seconds back in third. A STREAK IN NORDIC COMBINED Eric Frenzel of Germany, the Olympic champion, won his second Nordic combined World Cup event in two days in Seefeld, Austria, after beating Bernhard Gruber of Austria on the final 100 meters of the 10-kilometer cross-country race. Frenzel accelerated with the finish in sight and clocked 25:54.7 to beat Gruber by 2.9 seconds.  GERMANS WIN LUGE Tobias Wendl and Tobias Arlt of Germany edged their compatriots Toni Eggert and Sascha Benecken by 17-thousandths of a second in doubles in Oberhof, Germany, for their third successive luge World Cup victory.Wendl and Arlt, the Olympic champions, were fastest in the first run and set a track record of 41.368 seconds in the second run, finishing in a combined time of 1:22.762.SKI JUMP VICTORY FOR GERMANY The Olympic champion, Germany, won its second World Cup ski jumping team event in a tight duel with Austria in Zakopane, Poland. The German quartet, led by Richard Freitag and Severin Freund, scored 1,050.6 points to finish ahead of an Austrian team led by the Four Hills champion Stefan Kraft (1,035.7). (AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE) Advertisement