By BECKLEY MASONJAN. 17, 2015
Only two teams in the N.B.A. rank in the top six in both offense and defense. One is the Golden State Warriors (31-5 entering Friday), a talented team with seven players who were drafted with lottery picks. The other is the Atlanta Hawks, who have only three such players, and one is the 35-year-old Elton Brand. Still, the Hawks are the hottest team in the league; entering Saturday, they were 32-8, had won 25 of their last 27 games and led the Eastern Conference by five games.Even before their success this season, the Hawks were frequently referred to as Spurs East because Coach Mike Budenholzer and General Manager Danny Ferry, who is on leave after making a racially charged comment about a player, are former San Antonio Spurs employees. The influence of Gregg Popovich, the Spurs’ coach and team president, is evident in the construction of the Hawks’ roster and how the team plays. While there are no superstars, the Hawks are loaded with highly skilled, smart players who are committed to making the game easier for one another.The backcourt pairing of Jeff Teague, an elite speedster with the ball, and Kyle Korver, a great shooter, applies intense pressure to an opposition’s entire defense. The Hawks like to run the pick-and-roll, often with Teague at the controls. Teague, 26, first showed promise as a rim-seeking missile in the 2011 playoffs, but it was not until this season that he tempered pace with patience. Along with his deft scoop shots and blistering speed, it is Teague’s uncommon ability to survey the entire floor, even at full speed, that gives defenses fits. If he finishes the season on his current pace, he will become only the sixth player in the last 14 seasons to post a true shooting percentage of .600 and average seven assists or more.But Teague’s admirable scoring efficiency pales in comparison with Korver’s. According to NBA.com, Korver, who is leading the league in 3-point shooting (52.7 percent heading into Saturday) for the second straight season, is so accurate that an open spot-up 3-pointer is about as valuable for him as layups are for the rest of the league.AdvertisementTeams have to do so much to stay in front of Teague or swarm Korver that the Hawks have no need for intricate plays. A simple pick-and-roll or staggered screen is enough to send defenses scrambling, and once the Hawks have the advantage, they move the ball rapidly to the open man. They are second in the league in assists per game, and 74.4 percent of their starting lineup’s baskets are assisted.It is simple stuff: Use a screen. Draw a crowd. Pass out of it. Repeat until a good shot presents itself.It certainly helps to have big men who are as skilled and savvy as Paul Millsap and Al Horford, who missed 50 games last season with a torn pectoral muscle. Millsap and Horford are comfortable handling the ball and making quick decisions away from the rim. Their reliable jump shots make them threats to score from distance, which creates pristine spacing (there is almost never more than one Hawk near the rim) and allows the big men to exploit their quickness advantage. When a one-on-one move is necessary, both are capable of scoring.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Before the season, one could look at the Hawks’ roster, which is replete with shooters and skill, and see a top offense in the making. But the Hawks are even better on defense, operating with a fundamentally conservative philosophy.AdvertisementThe Hawks are at the top of the league in fewest transition points allowed, and they give up fewer points close to the basket than all but three teams. On top of that, they hardly foul. They wall off the paint, anticipate well and force teams to beat them by shooting over the top.Their execution demands precision and rigor and a front line that, though short, is long on toughness and quickness.Millsap, a power forward, is listed at 6 feet 8 inches. Horford, the center, is barely 6-10. Usually a small front line means poor rim protection, but the Hawks’ defense does a great job of keeping driving players from reaching the rim. Horford and Millsap are gifted with exceptional lateral quickness and often keep their chests in front of threatening ballhandlers. They also have well-earned reputations as battlers going back to their college days, when Millsap led the N.C.A.A. in rebounding three straight years at Louisiana Tech and Horford was known for doing the dirty work on a Florida team with Joakim Noah.Despite packing the paint, the Hawks still give up a lot of second-chance points. All the skill and strategy cannot fully compensate for their lack of size. There are concerns about how their smallish front line will hold up in the playoffs against teams with multiple rebounders, like the Washington Wizards or the Chicago Bulls. But so far, the Hawks are a combined 3-0 against those Eastern Conference foes and 6-1 against the top eight teams in the West.It is fitting that a team with so many reclaimed and undervalued parts would thrive by perfecting the fundamentals of team play: setting great screens, moving the ball quickly and with purpose, anticipating where and when to help a teammate on defense. Still, until they perform in the playoffs, there will be questions about whether this team is truly a title threat, though there is little doubt the once-unheralded Hawks will be happy to confront any lingering doubts.A version of this article appears in print on January 18, 2015, on Page SP7 of the New York edition with the headline: Unselfish Hawks Resemble Winners, Namely, the Spurs.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.