By BRENDAN PRUNTYJAN. 17, 2015
Chris Holtmann had played horribly. Here was a senior guard for Taylor University, a small N.A.I.A. school in Upland, Ind., and his team had won the game, but that was not enough. Holtmann’s performance was beneath his standards, with turnovers, poor shot selection and porous defense. Teammates and coaches chalked it up to an off night.Once the team broke after the game, Holtmann disappeared.“When we got back to practice on Monday, one of my assistants said, ‘You’ve got to talk to Chris,’ ” Paul Patterson, Taylor’s former head coach, recalled. “Turns out, he had packed his things, went right out of the locker room, got in his car and drove to Marion, which is about 20 miles away. And he got a hotel room and stayed by himself the whole weekend. Just so he could work it out by himself.”Patterson thought Holtmann, then 20, was being too hard on himself. In hindsight, he now realizes it was a classic Holtmann move — the first instance of a basketball junkie who would not burden anyone with his troubles. He did not do it as a player; not when he struggled moving up the coaching ladder; not when he was hired for his first head coaching job, inheriting a Gardner-Webb team that won eight games the season before.And he did not do it when he was thrust into his latest job, with the Butler Bulldogs. In October, after a year as an assistant, he was asked to take over for Brandon Miller, who was taking a medical leave of absence for unspecified reasons.Advertisement“I don’t think I or we have had all the answers on how to navigate a situation like this,” Holtmann said in a quiet moment last week after Butler beat No. 21 Seton Hall on the road. “You wonder at times, ‘Have I said the right things?’ Or, ‘Have I handled it the right way?’ ”AdvertisementHoltmann acknowledges that winning has helped the transition. Butler, one season after finishing 14-17 and winning only four conference games in its first year in the Big East, is 13-6 over all and 3-3 in the conference after a 61-59 loss to Georgetown on Saturday.Butler shocked North Carolina, then No. 5, in its fourth game of the season and rose to No. 15 in the Associated Press Top 25 poll.“He’s had success as an assistant at Ohio and as a head coach at Gardner-Webb,” said Alex Barlow, a senior guard. “I don’t think it was a big surprise to us. He gets it. He gets what Butler is trying to do.”Under Coach Brad Stevens, Butler, a small Indianapolis college, captured the national spotlight five years ago, reaching the N.C.A.A. championship game, where it fell to Duke. The Bulldogs returned to the championship game a year later.Stevens was lured away to coach the Boston Celtics in 2013. The program was turned over to Miller, a former Bulldog player and assistant. Last year’s downturn under Miller was viewed as a minor setback, in large part because of injuries to key players.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But Miller’s departure from the program came as a shock. Butler would not disclose the reason behind Miller’s exit from the team, or if he has been in contact with players or coaches.Butler granted Miller, 35, 12 weeks of leave, mandated by the Family and Medical Leave Act. If he had returned before those 12 weeks had passed, he would have kept his coaching job. But once the legal protection lapsed and Miller chose not to return, Butler Athletic Director Barry Collier felt it was in the best interest of the program to move on. He removed the interim tag from Holtmann and announced on Jan. 2 that he had given him a multiyear contract.Collier said “it’s still hard” not seeing Miller around Hinkle Fieldhouse and on campus, but he is glad the program is in good hands.Advertisement“I think he’s a guy that wants to be at Butler,” Collier said of Holtmann. “So we’ll march ahead. I’m very optimistic. He’s an extremely hard worker and very humble. He’s all the things you need from a head coach.”Holtmann, 43, has never been a coach who has landed in perfect situations. When he took over Gardner-Webb in 2010, the Runnin’ Bulldogs had fallen to the bottom of the Big South Conference.By his third season, the team won 21 games and made the postseason, earning a bid to the College Insider Tournament.When Holtmann left to become an assistant at Butler, some questioned the move. And when he was asked to take over the program, it was a tricky situation for Holtmann, who counts Miller as one of his closest friends.“I’ve just tried to do today well,” he said. “And I’ve tried to keep in mind here that I’m a steward of what I think is an outstanding college basketball program. And I’m excited in the coming years, to try and do that.”A version of this article appears in print on January 18, 2015, on Page SP8 of the New York edition with the headline: Even as a Player, Butler’s Unlikely Coach Did Things His Own Way.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.