By MIKE CHAPPELLJAN. 17, 2015
INDIANAPOLIS —  The owner Jim Irsay laid the foundation for a new beginning for the Indianapolis Colts on April 26, 2012.Having released one franchise cornerstone seven weeks earlier — Peyton Manning — Irsay set about acquiring another, when the team selected Stanford quarterback Andrew Luck with the first overall pick in the N.F.L. draft.Luck, Irsay believed, would lead his franchise out of the abyss created by its 2-14 record in 2011 and subsequent roster purge.Fast forward to last Sunday and the visitors’ locker room at Sports Authority Field at Mile High in Denver. The Colts were in full celebratory mode after quieting a sellout crowd and stunning the heavily favored Broncos, 24-13, in an A.F.C. divisional playoff game.AdvertisementIrsay interrupted Coach Chuck Pagano in midsentence. He had a message for his quarterback, who contributed 265 passing yards and 2 touchdowns.Advertisement“Where’s Andrew?” Irsay asked, scanning the room for Luck. “What a job, man. You can take us anywhere, Andrew, and we will follow.”As the Colts head to Gillette Stadium in Foxborough, Mass., on Sunday for a showdown with Tom Brady and the New England Patriots for the A.F.C. championship, credit a defense that has regained its swagger and a special-teams unit that features the All-Pro tandem of place-kicker Adam Vinatieri and punter Pat McAfee.But also credit Luck, who was given the enormous task of picking up where Manning left off and, so far, has not faltered.There have been disappointments, none greater than Luck’s Colts being 0-3 against Brady’s Patriots, including last January in an A.F.C. divisional-round game. In those three games, Luck passed for 968 yards and 6 touchdowns but also threw 8 interceptions, 2 of which were returned for touchdowns. The Colts have been on the receiving end of 22-, 21- and 35-point drubbings.But following Luck’s lead, the Colts have advanced to the postseason in each of the past three years with identical 11-5 records. And they have gone deeper each year — a wild-card loss at Baltimore in 2012, a dramatic first-round win over Kansas City followed by the loss to the Patriots in 2013, and wins the past two weeks against the Cincinnati Bengals and Denver that have delivered them to their fifth A.F.C. title game since their relocation to Indianapolis in 1984.Luck is 3-2 as a starter in the postseason. Manning opened his career with three one-and-done playoff experiences before winning his first postseason game in his sixth season.“Ultimately, we’re all judged at the end of the day by one thing, and that’s probably how many rings you won,” Pagano said. “So winning is really important because it will get you to the final game, which is his goal and which is our goal.”AdvertisementHe continued: “All the numbers, all the stats, all the wins, this, that and the other, they look good and they may get you into something at the end of the day. But we’re here to win championships, multiple championships. When we got together in 2012, we wanted to build a program for sustained success, so he’s obviously a huge, huge part of that.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Luck prefers the spotlight to be elsewhere. He credits his offensive line, his running backs, his tight ends, his receivers. He credits the offensive coordinator Pep Hamilton, with whom he began working at Stanford.Luck was asked if finally getting the better of Brady would serve as a benchmark. But he would not bite.“In my mind, that’s not a benchmark,” he said. “It’s about the Colts hopefully beating the Patriots. It is a team game. I’ve never viewed it as quarterback versus quarterback.”He continued: “Obviously, he’s a stud. I have the utmost respect for what he does, what he’s done and what he still does. He’s a great role model for any quarterback at any level. But it’s a team game. It’s as simple as that.”Yet there is no denying Luck’s effect on the successes reaped by his team. He has passed for 12,957 yards in the regular season, the most by a quarterback in his first three seasons. He has thrown for 1,703 yards in the postseason, the most by a quarterback in his first five games.Luck has orchestrated 12 game-winning drives in the fourth quarter or overtime, including the second-largest comeback in postseason history. The Colts trailed the Chiefs, 38-10, in the third quarter during last year’s wild-card round, but followed Luck’s lead to a 45-44 victory.The Patriots have been able to handle Luck, but they realize the task at hand.“The passes he throws, the way he runs the offense, kind of looks like Peyton Manning all over again,” New England cornerback Darrelle Revis said.Patriots Coach Bill Belichick added: “He was pretty good when he came in, and he’s even better now. He’s a great player. He’s got strengths, no weaknesses.”AdvertisementNew England defensive end Chandler Jones described Luck as “a phenomenal player.”No one has a better grasp of Luck than Hamilton. He worked with Luck during Luck’s final two seasons at Stanford and has been his coordinator the past two seasons with the Colts.“He was a dominant college football player,” Hamilton said. “Now I think he’s evolving to the point where he’s consistently controlling football games and making plays that a lot of quarterbacks can’t make. I would say he’s gotten better as he’s gained experience in this league.”Hamilton continued: “I think the expectations for Andrew once he was drafted by the Colts and he became the starter Day One was that he would be a special player in this league. I think you’ve got to think he’s ahead of schedule. He hasn’t realized his full potential just yet.”A version of this article appears in print on January 18, 2015, on Page SP4 of the New York edition with the headline: Replacing a Colts Legend, and Not Missing a Beat.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.