

 Michael Powell
 

SPORTS OF THE TIMES
JAN. 17, 2015
LOS ANGELES — To go wheels down at LAX and travel the practice and game circuit with the Cleveland Cavaliers as they clashed with the Clippers and the Lakers in the past week was to observe a near perfect cosmology of talent, ego and insecurity, rumor and anxiety.Not to mention two young men, Kobe Bryant and LeBron James, meditating on and raging against the betrayals of their flesh.This was King Lear with diamond ear studs and fine Italian suits — uneasy coaches and comic interludes courtesy of a Lakers guard known as Swaggy P and the reliably adolescent J. R. Smith.At Thursday’s practice, James came walking across the gymnasium where Lew Alcindor honed his skyhook at U.C.L.A. James had been gabbing with teammates; as he approached members of the news media, however, his smile became a pool of water fast evaporating.AdvertisementHe sat down and adjusted his yellow headband and disappeared inside a scrum of reporters and cameramen. James’s brow was a fixed furrow; his eyes focused on the floor; his voice was a whisper.Advertisement“This year, it’s been ups and downs, obviously,” he said.It was 9:40 on a cloudless morning. Italian pines rose outside and snow glistened on the distant San Gabriels. James looked as if someone had just burned down his garage. The Cavaliers had lost six straight games, all but one while he recuperated from a sore back and a sore knee.ESPN, and the press that follows the team like a hound to the hunt, had embraced gleeful panic. David Blatt, the novice Cavaliers coach, was in job danger! Power forward Kevin Love might leave! What about LeBron? The players are in rebellion. Or they will be.Yahoo reported that possibly — who knows? — James’s agent was conspiring to have Blatt replaced.What, a reporter asked James, do the Cavaliers need now?James smiled, faintly. “Trust, man,” he said. “We need trust.”That’s like looking for water in the Central Valley. Nothing to be found but dry riverbeds.When James decided to return home last summer, he spoke of playing Uncle LeBron to the Cavaliers’ talented, unruly and barely post-adolescent collection of talent. That heartwarming narrative lasted 63 hours or so. The Cavs, at his agent’s urging, traded the No. 1 draft pick, Andrew Wiggins, for Love, a scoring and rebounding machine.With Love and Kyrie Irving, a whirling, spinning, shoot-first young point guard, James had a new Big 3, but with sand in the gears. To watch Love in practice is to see a fellow perhaps too eager to fit in. To watch him during games is to see a player not quite sure where he fits in. Irving and James dribble and pass, and Love stands in the corner, his hands extended for a ball that might, or might not, come his way.Chris Bosh, with his elastic arms and quick feet, was well suited to play defensive sideman to James. Love, whose Minnesota teams never reached the playoffs, has played a defense so clueless that Blatt has benched him at times.AdvertisementJames has breached his 30th birthday. Like Bryant, James entered the league as a buoyant teenage wunderkind and has played endless playoff rounds. His chassis looks powerful, but the odometer reflects another truth.Ask about Bryant, who at 36 sits two- and three-game stretches in deference to a precarious body, and James’s pronouns flit between second person and first person.“It’s sad to see,” James said. “Kobe’s played a lot of minutes. The playoffs put a lot more mileage on your body. On my body.”Is there anything to be done?“Yeah,” he said. “Rest.”On the West Coast trip, James took soaring flight for the first time in months. Against the Clippers on Friday, he jumped sideways past the hoop, reached back and, as if flipping a nickel, sent the ball spinning off the backboard and in.He has also played counselor. At practice, he put his arm around Love’s shoulder and walked off to a distant corner to deliver a pep talk.It has fallen to Blatt to manage the N.B.A.’s most expectation-laden team. His face has a sardonic, basset-hound aspect.He was the Marco Polo of international hoops. A Princeton graduate, he has coached Turks, Ukrainians and Russians, and won in all three nations. Last year he coached Maccabi Tel Aviv to a championship. College and high school coaches collect videos of Blatt’s innovative plays.“In Maccabi, we had a tough first half of the year,” he recalled. “Really tough.” Some called for his firing. Then Maccabi won the European and the Israeli championships.Advertisement“So yeah, I’ve been in that situation before, and the ending was pretty good.”That was an excellent perspective. And to spectacularly talented and — with notable exceptions — self-involved N.B.A. players, he was still just a bright 55-year-old rookie coach.No one knows that better than Blatt.Blow, winds, and crack your cheeks! rage! blow!You cataracts and hurricanoes, spout. — “King Lear”I DROVE SOUTH to El Segundo and walked into the Lakers’ practice center on Wednesday. There were all those championship banners, but no Kobe Bryant. It was like visiting Genghis Khan’s horde and discovering Genghis had taken the day off.This season has been the strangest of Bryant’s 19 in the N.B.A. Crippled the last few years by a blown knee, fractures and a torn Achilles’ tendon, he battled back with attitudinal fury. His coach, Byron Scott, predicted he would play 82 games; Bryant didn’t disagree. He shot and shot again. He screamed at point guard Jeremy Lin. He walked out of a practice, calling teammates toilet-tissue soft, a critique he larded with a magnificent helping of Anglo-Saxon obscenities.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.He had embraced competitive rage as his limousine driver for so many years, you wondered if it had taken him right over a cliff. He has averaged about 23 points a game, but his shooting percentage has plummeted to 37 percent. Scott has begun to rest him in hopes of reviving him.As forward Paul Pierce described it, Bryant’s genius as an offensive player was that he exhausted you before he exhausted his supremely conditioned self. That’s not as easy when you have played more than 46,000 minutes.Bryant had accepted a huge contract, which hobbled his team’s attempts to improve. His teammates talk of him as they would a cranky uncle. Is Bryant going to play against the Cavs, reporters asked Nick Young, who occupies the space between free and untethered spirit.“Like, I pretty much don’t think about it until the day comes,” Young said.Young, who calls himself Swaggy P, has cast himself as Bryant’s cheerful antagonist. He insists he could beat Bryant one on one.Bryant and Young often go at it in practice, like players from alien and uncomprehending planets. (James, a more naturally social creature than Bryant, has watched the Cavaliers import their own free spirit, the former Knick Smith. Smith hits 3-pointers and shoots air balls with equal nonchalance. He is carrying on a Twitter and Instagram feud with the singer Rihanna for reasons known only to him, and perhaps to Young.)AdvertisementYoung suggested we check out Sports Illustrated, which has profiled him and his collection of 500 sneakers.“The photos is dope,” he said. “I need to see myself looking good. Look good, play good. I been looking ugly.”O.K., then.The next night, Bryant remained AWOL in the locker room. He was being taped, and retaped, massaged and remassaged. When he appeared on court, he shot as teammates fed him the ball without looking at him.The game started and Bryant was electric and sinuous, spinning, passing, laser passes. He directed players when to cut and when to take his feeds for their shots.By game’s end, he had 19 points and a career-high 17 assists. He had almost willed his team to victory, except that James was as good, and he had Irving and Love, too. The Cavaliers played an even finer game Friday in a victory over the Clippers.Perhaps they are not so dead.During the game, James and Bryant exchanged smiles, and even a hand slap. Bryant’s self-chosen nickname is Black Mamba, Africa’s deadliest snake. Death from its bite is assuredly painful.Bryant has never done smiles on the court except in triumph.BRYANT SENT WORD after the game that he would hold court with the news media. An hour passed, and he strolled in wearing a white shirt, an Italian-cut gray suit and a black satin pocket square.Bryant sat and shrugged, as if to say, Ask me something. His sessions can be combative and obscure — he once compared the urgency of his shooting to the fight against crime — and honest and piercing.AdvertisementDid you ever think you’d have this many assists?Yes, honestly, yes, he replied.He softened, and returned to that smile on court. We seem to have become friends, he said of James.“When we were competing for championships, it was a little different, a lot more moody,” he added.Asked about the applause he gets on the road, the players who embrace him, Bryant said: “This is different for me, man. I am used to being hated. This is really unnatural.”He has surprised himself by how well he has tolerated sitting out games while his body recovers.“All those years, it looked like I was tuning Phil out,” he said of his former coach Phil Jackson. “I actually did listen to his Zen stuff. It’s something I joke about, but I am really serious.“It’s the ability to just be present. Be mindful.”As the hour turned to midnight, a reporter asked Bryant if he remembered as a young lion what it was like to face an old star like him. He shook his head; know thyself.“For me, it was always about chasing the wounded gazelle,” he said.With that, Bryant rose and stepped into the corridor. There, walking toward him was James, in a brown bowler, glasses and a jacket.Superstars past and present embraced, their hands lingering in a handshake.James congratulated Bryant on his game and told him they would have more matches.Bryant nodded. Then he walked down the shadowed corridor to his waiting car. He has another game Monday. With luck, his body will recuperate in time for him to play.Email: powellm@nytimes.com A version of this article appears in print on January 18, 2015, on Page SP1 of the New York edition with the headline: A Shakespearean Drama With Two Raging Heroes.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »