By JOE DRAPEJAN. 16, 2015
It was Shewreckstheplace’s 36th start, and second in seven days, and she had yet to win a race. In a bottom-level race at Aqueduct Racetrack in Queens on Jan. 4, she was pulled up at the eighth pole, taken away in a van and subsequently euthanized. Five days later, the gelding Apex, another old warhorse, broke a leg near the three-eighths pole and was put down on the track.On Thursday, You Take the Cake, after finishing third in a low-level sprint, fell to the ground and unseated her rider, Wilmer Garcia. The mare was taken to Ruffian Equine Medical Center in Elmont, N.Y., with a fractured neck, and she, too, was euthanized.You Take the Cake was the 12th horse in 22 days of racing to die at Aqueduct, a neighborhood track for working-class horsemen and horses at the sport’s lower levels. The Big A, as it is known, has never been one of the nation’s most glamorous tracks, but lately it has been among its deadliest.At its current meet, which started Dec. 3 on its winterized inner dirt track, the breakdown rate of 7.8 fatalities per 1,000 starts is more than four times the national average of 1.90, according to the Jockey Club’s Equine Injury Database.Advertisement“It is unacceptable,” said Dr. Scott Palmer, the equine medical director for the New York State Gaming Commission, which regulates racing in the state.AdvertisementOn Friday, the New York Racing Associationannounced emergency measures intended to prevent horsemen from running unaccomplished and at-risk horses indiscriminately. A horse is no longer allowed to be entered in a race if it has competed within 14 days. A “poor performance” list will be kept of horses that lose by 25 lengths or greater. To enter a future race, those horses must complete a half-mile workout in 53 seconds.The weekday racing card will be reduced to eight races from nine. The bottom level of maiden claimers — races for horses that have never won — will be raised to $16,000 from $12,500. In claiming races, horses are grouped by ability and price. In a $16,000 claiming race, for example, any horse can be “claimed” or bought for that price.The measures were announced after The New York Times filed a Freedom of Information request asking for the names of the more than 20 horses that the racing association said last week had been deemed noncompetitive and had been prohibited from competing at Aqueduct.“The safety of our equine athletes and jockeys at Aqueduct Racetrack is a high priority,” Christopher Kay, president of the racing association, said in a statement.Richard Violette Jr., president of the New York Thoroughbred Horsemen’s Association, declined requests to answer questions about the fatalities. On Jan. 10, he and a small group of New York-based trainers met for two hours with racing association officials. Afterward, Mr. Violette urged jockeys and his fellow trainers to be more vigilant.On Friday, after the death of You Take the Cake, Dr. Mick Peterson, executive director of the Racing Surfaces Testing Laboratory, examined the track for the fourth time since Dec. 1 and found nothing structurally wrong with the racing surface. Neither trainers nor jockeys have blamed the racetrack as the casualties have mounted.In the winter of 2011-12, not long after the Resorts World Casino opened next to Aqueduct and allowed it to offer vastly richer purses, 30 horses died at the track, a 100 percent increase in the fatality rate over the same period the previous year. Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo appointed a task force that found that many of the deaths could have been prevented if the racing authorities had more closely monitored the horses’ health and the liberal use of prescription drugs to keep them racing. The report also faulted racing officials and regulatory veterinarians for often ignoring signs that horses were ailing and allowing them to race for purses inflated with casino money.AdvertisementDr. Palmer was a member of that task force, and over the past two years, the New York Gaming Commission has enacted some of the most aggressive drug rules in horse racing. Still, Dr. Palmer said horsemen have been slow to embrace the changes.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The commission requires all trainers or veterinarians to log all injections of corticosteroids to ensure they are administered within the allowable time frame. For the past year, Dr. Palmer said, he has charted more than 6,000 injections.The commission also requires that the past 30 days of a horse’s corticosteroid history be passed from one trainer to another after a horse changes hands by a claim. That aspect has been less successful.“We did it on the honor system, and not a lot of trainers called and asked for the horses’ history,” Dr. Palmer said. So this month the data will be transferred automatically to a trainer who claims a horse.Regulators have also ruled that purses at Aqueduct, Belmont and Saratoga cannot be higher than double the claiming price. Still, the average daily purse given away at Aqueduct is $410,979, according to the Jockey Club Information Systems Inc., or more than 20 percent higher than the $334,552 average at Gulfstream Park in South Florida, where most high-end New York stables relocate over the winter.There is little doubt the claiming races are the lifeblood of Aqueduct. Since Oct. 29, more than 200 claims on horses have been made, and more than $5 million in horse flesh has changed hands.It may be a lucrative few months for horsemen, but the New York Racing Association has not fared well. It lost $22.7 million last year and $23 million in 2013, according to the association.State law and regulation require that 120 days of racing be scheduled at Aqueduct during the winter months, but racing association officials have said that they might ask the Legislature to cut back on winter racing or eliminate it all together.NYRA asked for and received two breaks in its Aqueduct schedule — one in December and one in March — in the hopes of resting a dwindling horse population. It also has canceled multiple days of racing because of cold weather.“Racing in the winter is difficult,” said Martin Panza, NYRA’s senior vice president for racing operations. “There are a lot of challenges.”A version of this article appears in print on January 18, 2015, on Page SP1 of the New York edition with the headline: Horses’ Deaths at Aqueduct Prompt New Rules.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.