By GEOFF MACDONALDJAN. 16, 2015
The Australian Open, which begins Monday, can be a springboard to success in 2015. Here are some players who are poised for a strong showing in Melbourne.TOMAS BERDYCH Berdych, 29, uses his powerful legs to generate tremendous pace with seaming ease. He plays with a concussive force that knocks opponents off the baseline, forcing them to defend and neutralize. Like David Ferrer, another perennial top-10 player, Berdych has struggled to break through at Grand Slam events, reaching only one final. In the off-season, on the advice of his fellow Czech Ivan Lendl, Berdych hired the coach Dani Vallverdu, who had recently parted ways with Andy Murray. Vallverdu, who witnessed Murray’s growth under Lendl’s tutelage, will try to help the seventh-ranked Berdych traverse the psychological minefield of a Grand Slam tournament.MILOS RAONIC Under the tutelage of Ivan Ljubicic and Riccardo Piatti, Raonic has climbed into the top 10, currently at No. 8, and he has significantly improved his weaknesses, chiefly his movement, backhand and return of serve. At the same time, Raonic has bolstered his strengths, using his forehand to bludgeon opponents with a game style that, while not terribly creative, is nonetheless ruthlessly effective. Raonic, a 24-year-old Canadian, also holds serve 91 percent of the time on the ATP Tour. Against Roger Federer in the Brisbane final Sunday, his game ascended to a new level, especially late in the second set and early in the third. For a transfixing span of 10 games, Raonic was every bit Federer’s equal. It was a glimpse into a possible future, as Raonic shed his often awkward, formulaic self.BORNA CORIC Not many 17-year-olds break into the top 100, and there are even fewer who do so with victories over Ernests Gulbis and Rafael Nadal. Coric defeated Nadal and Gulbis at the Swiss Indoors in October and earned recognition as the ATP’s Star of Tomorrow. But look for Coric, now 18, to blaze his way higher in the rankings. John McEnroe has predicted that Coric will be in the top 10 in three years. Unlike Australia’s talented future star Nick Kyrgios, Coric has a better handle on the expectations thrust on young talents. Coric, who is from Zagreb, Croatia, is the perfect storm of talent, desire, work ethic and unflagging emotional support from coaches, family and friends.GARBIÑE MUGURUZA The biggest upset in women’s tennis last year was the stunning 6-2, 6-2 drubbing that Muguruza gave to Serena Williams in May in the second round of the French Open. A tall athletic Spaniard, Muguruza, 21, has a powerful serve that she backs up with flat, cleanly struck groundstrokes, and she sets up for her shots with impeccable footwork. She upset sixth-ranked Agnieszka Radwanska in Sydney on Tuesday before falling to No. 9 Angelique Kerber in three sets. Muguruza, ranked 24th, excels when she plays first-strike tennis, but she can also grind out long points if she needs to, a skill honed on the slow red clay of Barcelona. Although comfortable on clay, Muguruza has the game for success on hardcourts.LUCIE SAFAROVA A year ago in Melbourne, Safarova had match point on the eventual champion Li Na in the third round and went for a huge winner with her lefty forehand. The ball missed by an inch and Li survived, but Safarova recovered to have her best year on the WTA Tour. She lost to her Czech countrywoman Petra Kvitova in the semifinals of Wimbledon, and, later in the year, the two led the Czech Republic to victory in the Fed Cup. Safarova has a beautiful all-court game, with a long, flowing forehand, a wicked slice serve and a solid two-handed backhand. Like Rafael Nadal, Safarova uses her slice serve to set up her forehand and keep her opponent on the run. If she hits her spots serving, Safarova, ranked 16th, is a difficult opponent for anyone in the draw, and with her renewed confidence after last year’s breakout season, she is a dangerous threat to upset one of the top seeds.ANGELIQUE KERBER A strong, physical left-hander, Kerber hits the ball flat with a low trajectory, but she makes very few unforced errors. She is one of the game’s toughest outs, eschewing the flashy winner for the solid, high-percentage shot. Although conservative in her shot selection, Kerber hits a heavy ball, generating a great deal of pace with her efficient, economical strokes. Against Garbiñe Muguruza in Sydney this week, Kerber changed tactics by taking the initiative after losing the first set, playing a more offensive, unpredictable style as she stormed back to win the match. If she can continue to add offense to her game, Kerber, a German who turns 27 Sunday, could go deep into the second week.Geoff Macdonald is the women’s tennis coach at Vanderbilt University.A version of this article appears in print on January 18, 2015, on Page SP3 of the New York edition with the headline: Players Who Are Ready to Soar at the Year’s First Grand Slam.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.