AdvertisementSupported byBy Pat BorziGREEN BAY, Wis. — The fans mean well, Aaron Rodgers said. On his Tuesday radio show and again at a Wednesday news conference at Lambeau Field, Rodgers thanked those who called, emailed and texted various suggestions for speeding the healing of his strained left calf.“I know people have the best intentions when they’re sending stuff in, whether it’s a phone call — which I have heard some of your messages, and thank you — or an email, which sometimes they pass along to me,” Rodgers, the Green Bay Packers’ starting quarterback, said Wednesday. “They want me to get back on the field. At this time of year, when there’s an injury, there are a lot of experts out there.”Especially in Wisconsin, where Packers fans are gearing up for Sunday’s N.F.C. championship game between the Packers and the Seahawks at CenturyLink Field in Seattle. The matchup between the conference’s top seeds is such a big deal that a Milwaukee radio station refused to play songs by bands based in Seattle, like Nirvana, Pearl Jam and Heart, until after the game.Packers fans are nervous because the Seahawks routed Green Bay, 36-16, in their season opener. Rodgers’s strained calf, sustained Dec. 21 on the second series of a 20-3 victory at Tampa Bay, has diminished his mobility, but not his effectiveness. Rodgers threw for 316 yards and 3 touchdowns in last week’s 26-21 divisional victory over Dallas. The Packers will need another big game from Rodgers to advance to their first Super Bowl since the 2010 season. “I’m counting on Aaron to keep playing the way he’s been playing,” Coach Mike McCarthy said.Just to be safe, Packers fans offered their help. Jason Wilde, the co-host of Rodgers’s radio show, said he fielded more than three dozen emails and texts with ideas — from stem-cell therapy to little-known homeopathic remedies — to help heal the calf. Other fans contacted the Packers directly. Jason Wahlers, a Packers spokesman, was not sure how many messages there were or what they contained. Most, he said, were forwarded to the trainers, who are not permitted to speak to members of the news media. When Rodgers was asked Wednesday to share a few of the more unusual notions, he revealed one, a technique called Tellington TTouch. According to its website, the technique — primarily for horses, dogs, cats and other domesticated animals — features a series of circular touches, lifts and slides. The website says the technique helps control various behaviors, including excessive barking and chewing, aggressiveness and car sickness. Rodgers did not say where that suggestion came from. A woman who answered the phone at TTouch’s office in Santa Fe, N.M., on Thursday said she never heard of Rodgers and doubted the company contacted him. She said the technique may be used on humans, but Rodgers was not so certain after watching an instructional video. “I didn’t see quite how it related to my calf,” he said. “But again, I appreciate all the suggestions.”Rodgers is using one alternative method: acupuncture. On his radio show, he said his girlfriend, the actress Olivia Munn, steered him to acupuncture this season to treat a sore hamstring. Though declining to go into specifics Wednesday, Rodgers has acknowledged that acupuncture augments his daily treatment from the Packers’ training staff, which includes deep-tissue massage.“I do everything that the medical staff tells me to do, and I supplement a little bit,” he said.Acupuncture is not a new treatment for N.F.L. players. It was used in the 1990s when the Kansas City Chiefs hired Dr. Evan Mladenoff, a chiropractor trained in acupuncture, as a consultant. Lisa Ripi, a traveling acupuncture specialist, began treating Jets players in 1998. By 2010 she had 40 clients on five teams.Matt Flynn, Rodgers’s backup and a former Seahawk, said he received one acupuncture treatment in 2012 for tendinitis in his right elbow. “In my case, it took quite a few needles and took probably about 30 minutes to an hour,” he said. “It’s not like it’s painful or anything.” He later switched to dry needling, a related technique that targets trigger points of pain. Scott Rodeo, a sports medicine surgeon at the Hospital for Special Surgery in Manhattan, and the associate team physician for the Giants, does not discount acupuncture as a possible source of relief. But he still recommends proven treatment methods: rest, ultrasound, muscle stimulation and inflammatory medication. Injections of platelet-rich plasma also may speed recovery, he said.“Acupuncture is not completely understood by people in the orthopedic community,” said Rodeo, who has not examined or treated Rodgers. “But I’ve known people, and had my own patients, use it effectively.”Depending on severity, Rodeo said a strained calf can heal in three to four days, or take as long as four weeks. “You’ve got to plant your left foot when you step into the throw, and I’m sure he feels it,” Rodeo said. Rodgers participated in parts of practice Wednesday and Thursday, a slight improvement over the previous week, when he missed practice on Wednesday. Playing with restricted mobility, he said, is no big deal. Rodgers has thrown for six touchdowns and no interceptions since the injury, and Seahawks cornerback Richard Sherman said he sees no drop-off in Rodgers’s accuracy. “He doesn’t always have to drive through his throws to get them where he wants them,” Sherman said Wednesday at a news conference in Seattle. Rodgers said: “It’s not real difficult. I didn’t really move a lot in college. I had a great offensive line at Cal and a lot of dropbacks, a lot of half-rolls and stuff, so it wasn’t like I was making a lot of plays outside of the pocket. A lot of times, I didn’t have to do a whole lot because of the protection. “It’s just a matter of playing within your limits with the injury, and I’ve been pretty smart about it,” he added. “I haven’t really caused a whole lot of extra damage to it, and hopefully it just keeps getting better until Sunday.”N.F.L. PLAYOFFS: CONFERENCE CHAMPIONSHIPS:
SUNDAY;
N.F.C. 3:05 p.m., Fox
Green Bay at Seattle;
A.F.C. 6:40 p.m., CBS
Indianapolis at New EnglandAdvertisement