By BENJAMIN HOFFMANJAN. 16, 2015
Packers at Seahawks3:05 p.m. Sunday, Line: Seahawks by 7 ½It is hard to imagine two stadiums less similar than Lambeau Field and CenturyLink Field. Lambeau, an aging stadium in a small Wisconsin community, is football’s answer to Wrigley Field; CenturyLink, a glass-and-steel marvel in Seattle, is as modern as they come. But one thing they have in common is the overwhelming home-field advantage each creates for its tenant.In 24 seasons at the Kingdome, the Seahawks hosted three playoff games. Then Paul Allen, the team’s owner, oversaw construction of a stadium that changed the franchise’s fortunes drastically. Engineered to amplify the sound of the team’s raucous home crowd, CenturyLink may not experience weather as bad as Lambeau’s, but visiting teams can find it every bit as hostile.In the 13 seasons since moving in, the Seahawks are 8-1 in home playoff games, losing only the first one in 2004. They are in the N.F.C. title game and on the verge of their third Super Bowl appearance since the move, which was unthinkable for a franchise that did not win a playoff game from the 1985 through the 2004 seasons.Keeping the home playoff winning streak alive will be difficult but not impossible against Green Bay, which has a balanced offense that is built to succeed in the playoffs. As good as the Seahawks’ defense is, the unit has not been tested much in the second half of the season against the likes of Drew Stanton, Ryan Lindley, Shaun Hill, Austin Davis and Colin Kaepernick, who seemed particularly incapable of handling Seattle’s crowd noise. Although Packers quarterback Aaron Rodgers’s mobility is limited by an injured calf, it is hard to imagine that he will have similar struggles.Yet the Seahawks showed in last year’s Super Bowl what happens when the best defense goes up against the best offense. If this game were in Green Bay, it would be a different story, but Seattle appears to have a clear path to the Super Bowl.Pick: SeahawksA version of this article appears in print on January 18, 2015, on Page SP5 of the New York edition with the headline: Green Bay Packers at Seattle Seahawks: N.F.C. Championship Matchup.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.