By JONAH BROMWICHJAN. 19, 2015
Every week, The New York Times will choose one essential game to watch, highlighting hot teams, winning and losing streaks and statistical intrigue in the N.B.A.Detroit at Atlanta, Monday, 2:30 p.m. Eastern, ESPNIt may feel unusual not to have a handle on a team by this point in the season, especially a team with a dismal record that is tied for ninth in the Eastern Conference. Yet the Detroit Pistons, since releasing forward Josh Smith, have become both a sudden success and a difficult puzzle. The team has won 11 of its last 13 games to improve to 16-25 over all.One of its two losses in that stretch, which began Dec. 26, came by 3 points against the Atlanta Hawks, who currently have a 12-game winning streak and have the second-best record in the N.B.A. The teams meet again on Monday, and while it may seem improbable that Detroit will halt Atlanta’s streak, the Pistons have produced no shortage of surprises of late. After all, in their last game, on Jan. 9, the Pistons had an opportunity to push the Hawks into overtime, but Kentavious Caldwell-Pope missed a 3-point attempt at the buzzer.What has changed in Detroit? The most concrete shift has been that the ball is finally out of Smith’s hands. With the Pistons, he had a high usage rate (24.9) — a statistic that uses shots, free throws and turnovers to estimate what percentage of a team’s possessions a player used while he was on the floor — and was making only 5.5 of the 14 field goals he was attempting per game, according to NBA.com data. With him gone, more shots have fallen to point guard Brandon Jennings, a more efficient player.Jennings had been shooting even worse than Smith, but since Smith’s departure, Jennings’s field-goal percentage has jumped by almost 4 percentage points on the season. He is just one of the Pistons who have benefited from the gamble to waive Smith. Greg Monroe is getting more time on the floor, and players like the 6-foot-10 forward Jonas Jerebko are getting more opportunities to prove themselves. Center Andre Drummond, only 21 and in his third season in the league, has more space to develop his game.AdvertisementAnother player giving the Pistons some space is Jodie Meeks — not through his absence but through his presence. Meeks, who missed the beginning of the season with a back injury, returned on Dec. 12, and even though he has not shot particularly well from 3 (37.3 percent), he has drawn opponents’ attention as a deep threat, opening up the Pistons’ offense.AdvertisementWhen they faced the Hawks on Jan. 9, the Pistons got a big game from Caldwell-Pope, a shooting guard, who scored 16 points in the fourth quarter. But the Pistons could easily improve on that night’s effort as a team: They shot relatively poorly from behind the arc, and Jennings and Drummond were held below their scoring averages.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.While fans in Detroit have to be optimistic about the recent direction of their team, their enthusiasm could not compare to the rapture that the Hawks are inspiring in Atlanta. On Friday, they beat the Eastern Conference’s third-place team, the Toronto Raptors, by 21 points; the previous Sunday, they beat the second-place Washington Wizards by 31. If the Pistons suddenly resemble the little engine that could, then the Hawks, with elite passing and solid defense, are rolling over the conference like a 200-ton locomotive.The Hawks are a little undersize in the frontcourt — some of their very big guys play very few minutes — and as a result they are not particularly strong on the glass. And while Atlanta is a fabulous 3-point-shooting team, a well-coached, disciplined defense with plenty of size could take away some of that advantage. The Hawks do not have many scorers who specialize in creating their own shots, so removing some of their long-range looks could limit their effectiveness.The Pistons are primed to capitalize on those weaknesses, which is one of the reasons they were able to stick with the Hawks in their last go-round. If Detroit is again able to keep things close on Monday, it may pull off an upset — a victory that, even more than previous wins over the San Antonio Spurs and the Dallas Mavericks, would show that the Pistons are a legitimate team with the potential to cause some chaos if they can slip into the playoffs.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.