By GARDINER HARRISJAN. 19, 2015
MELBOURNE, Australia — Ana Ivanovic of Serbia, who entered the Australian Open as a favorite after reaching the final of the Brisbane Open the week before, lost in the first round here Monday to Lucie Hradecka of the Czech Republic.Ivanovic won the first set, 6-1, and seemed to be breezing to victory until Hradecka took the second, 6-3. Ivanovic has long struggled with her concentration, and the second-set loss appeared to rattle her. She dropped the third set, 6-2.“It was really tough for me to find a rhythm,” Ivanovic said. “In the third set, she really raised her game.”She added that a first-round loss was a difficult way to begin her season.“But the year is young, and I really have to sit and work on a few things,” she said.AdvertisementAlso in the women’s draw, Simona Halep of Romania, the tournament’s third seed, cruised past Karin Knapp of Italy, 6-3, 6-2, as Knapp, a hard hitter, repeatedly sprayed balls long.AdvertisementIn the men’s draw, Andy Murray of Britain stumbled just once on his way to a three-set victory, when he allowed India’s Yuki Bhambri to break him back in the third set. Murray won the first two sets, 6-3, 6-4, and won the tiebreaker in the third set, 7-3.Grigor Dimitrov of Bulgaria easily won his first-round match, and Borna Coric, a teenage sensation from Croatia, lost to France’s Jérémy Chardy in four sets.Dimitrov defeated Dustin Brown, a hard-hitting hopeful from Germany who may have the longest hair in men’s tennis history, in straight sets, 6-2, 6-3, 6-2. The 10th-seeded Dimitrov is widely seen as part of a new generation of stars challenging the dominance of Roger Federer, after whom he has patterned his game, as well as Novak Djokovic and Rafael Nadal.Brown had few answers for Dimitrov’s precision and often resorted to drop shots that either fell short or were easily retrieved by Dimitrov.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Coric, who turned heads in October when he beat Nadal in Basel, Switzerland, was overwhelmed by Chardy’s blistering serves and powerful forehand, falling 3-6, 6-4, 7-5, 6-4.Serving at 5-5 in the third set, Coric found himself chasing shots from well behind the baseline as Chardy twice hit down-the-line forehand winners. Down a break point, Coric rushed the net, only to dump a volley wide.He responded by whacking the net with his racket as Chardy screamed in triumph. Chardy won the next game and then took the set with an ace.Lukas Lacko of Slovakia outlasted Máximo González of Argentina in five sets. The men were evenly matched through four sets, with González winning the fourth in a tiebreaker. Lacko rallied to win the fifth set, 6-1.A version of this article appears in print on January 19, 2015, on Page D4 of the New York edition with the headline: Ivanovic, a Favorite in the Women’s Field, Is Out.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.