By TYLER KEPNERJAN. 19, 2015
The protracted free agency of Max Scherzer may be nearing a resolution at last. Scherzer, the former American League Cy Young Award winner, has been engaged in contract talks with the Washington Nationals, who could have an overpowering rotation if he signs.News of the negotiations was first reported by CBSSports.com on Sunday, and confirmed by a baseball official with knowledge of the talks who requested anonymity because no agreement had yet been reached.Scherzer’s agent, Scott Boras, tends to negotiate major deals directly with owners, and this appears to be another example — in this case, with the Nationals’ Ted Lerner. Scherzer turned down a six-year, $144 million contract extension offer from the Detroit Tigers last spring, and it stands to reason that he would demand more than that now.Justin Verlander, another Tigers pitcher, holds the record for the richest contract given to a right-handed pitcher, at $180 million for seven years.AdvertisementScherzer, who turned 30 last July, is 70-24 with a 3.52 earned run average over the last four seasons. He would become another ace in a Washington rotation that includes Jordan Zimmermann, Stephen Strasburg, Doug Fister and Gio Gonzalez. The Nationals have been unable to agree on a contract extension with Zimmermann, who faces free agency after this season and could be traded.AdvertisementIf Zimmermann stays, the Nationals could use another solid starter, the right-hander Tanner Roark, in relief. The team traded its setup man, Tyler Clippard, to Oakland last week for infielder Yunel Escobar.The Nationals’ general manager, Mike Rizzo, drafted Scherzer in the first round for the Arizona Diamondbacks in 2006. Many of Washington’s top players are Boras clients, including Jayson Werth, Bryce Harper, Anthony Rendon and Strasburg.The Nationals finished the regular season with the best record in the National League in 2012 and 2014 but have not escaped the first round of the playoffs. Signing Scherzer, if it happens, would give them a better chance.A version of this article appears in print on January 19, 2015, on Page D6 of the New York edition with the headline: Scherzer and Nationals Said to Be Nearing Pact.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.