By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSJAN. 19, 2015
Henrik Zetterberg scored three goals in the third period to cap an impressive Detroit comeback, lifting the host Red Wings over Buffalo and handing the Sabres their 11th consecutive loss.It was the sixth career hat trick for Zetterberg, the Detroit captain, and it came after the Red Wings wiped out an early three-goal deficit. Detroit goalie Petr Mrazek was replaced after allowing three goals on seven shots, but the Sabres barely put any pressure on the Red Wings after that.Tom McCollum, who came in for Mrazek, was credited with just seven saves in more than 46 minutes of action.Tyler Ennis scored twice for Buffalo, including a goal in the third period that made it 5-4, but Zetterberg answered with his third goal of the period.AdvertisementSTAAL’S CONTRACT EXTENDED The Rangers and defenseman Marc Staal have agreed on a contract extension, keeping him off the free-agent market this summer.AdvertisementStaal, 28, has two goals and six assists in 43 games for the Rangers this season.Staal, an All-Star in 2011, is one of 12 defensemen in Rangers history who have played at least 500 games for the team.JETS 4, COYOTES 3 Bryan Little scored the only goal of the shootout after tallying in regulation, and host Winnipeg defeated Arizona for its fourth straight win.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Michael Frolik and Dustin Byfuglien also scored for the Jets, who wasted a late two-goal lead. Winnipeg has earned points in its past six games dating to Jan. 10 against the Los Angeles Kings.Lauri Korpikoski and Tobias Rieder scored for the Coyotes to force overtime.Oliver Ekman-Larsson also scored for Arizona, and Shane Doan had two assists.Ondrej Pavelec made 28 saves for the Jets. Mike Smith stopped 27 shots for the Coyotes.STARS 6, BLACKHAWKS 3 Cody Eakin, Erik Cole and Shawn Horcoff scored in the third period, leading visiting Dallas past Chicago.Eakin also had a short-handed goal in the first period as Dallas won for the third time in four games. The Stars also earned their first victory of the season against the Blackhawks after they dropped their first three meetings.Tyler Seguin had a goal and an assist for Dallas. Seguin is tied with the Rangers’ Rick Nash for the N.H.L. lead with 28 goals.Chicago lost consecutive games for the first time since Nov. 1-2 against Toronto and Winnipeg. The Blackhawks are 3-5 in January after they went 10-2-1 in December.A version of this article appears in print on January 19, 2015, on Page D4 of the New York edition with the headline: Staal's Contract Extended.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.