AdvertisementSupported byRangers 5, Penguins 2By The Associated PressA pair of shutout losses last week briefly cooled off the Rangers.A productive 48-hour span buoyed by the return of Rick Nash’s shooting touch made sure that the slip did not turn into a slump.Nash scored 26 seconds into the game, then added his N.H.L.-leading 28th goal early in the second period to lift the Rangers to a 5-2 win over the host Pittsburgh Penguins on Sunday.The Rangers backed up a 2-1 win over the Columbus Blue Jackets on Friday night with an opportunistic 60 minutes against the Penguins, converting repeated Pittsburgh mistakes and fortunate bounces into their 15th win in their past 18 games.“It shows the kind of character we have on this team, to bounce back after a tough home loss and another loss on the road to Boston,” Nash said. “To come back and get these two wins, and in a tough place to play in, it’s a huge deal.”Derek Stepan also scored twice for the Rangers, and Derick Brassard had a goal and an assist.The Rangers pulled within 2 points of second-place Pittsburgh in the Metropolitan Division standings after beating the Penguins three times in four meetings.Henrik Lundqvist made 32 saves for the Rangers but came away with a sore hand after slamming it into someone’s skate while he was trying to cover a loose puck.Not that it stopped Lundqvist from improving to 6-1 in his past seven starts against the Penguins, including three wins in the 2014 playoffs as the Rangers rallied from a 3-1 deficit to win in seven games. The momentum has barely slowed.“It’s a good challenge every time to come here and play them,” Lundqvist said. “A lot of times, it’s a fast game. Because we respect their skill, it looks like we try to play a smart game and make good decisions with the puck.”Sidney Crosby scored his 15th goal of the season, and David Perron added his fifth since coming to Pittsburgh in a trade with Edmonton two weeks ago. Marc-Andre Fleury stopped just 13 of the 17 shots he faced before being pulled early in the second period.The Rangers have climbed up the standings after a sluggish start, in large part because of Nash. The rally began with a 4-3 overtime win against the Penguins on Dec. 8.The Rangers trailed Pittsburgh by 11 points at the time, but they have quickly closed the gap, in part by dominating the rest of the Metropolitan Division. The Rangers are 13-3-1 against the rest of the division, while the Penguins are 6-8-3.That mark includes a 48-hour stretch in which Pittsburgh let a 3-2 third-period lead on the road against the Metropolitan-leading Islanders disappear on Friday night in one of its more sluggish performances of the season. The Penguins have been outscored, 9-2, during past 80 minutes.“You want to make sure you stop it as quick as possible,” Crosby said. “For whatever reason, our emotion and intensity level wasn’t there.”The Rangers wasted little time taking advantage of Pittsburgh’s sloppy play. Nash pounced when a crossing pass from the Penguins’ Brandon Sutter to Kris Letang slipped between Letang’s stick and his skates, leading to a two-on-one the other way. Fleury could not get a piece of Nash’s wrist shot over the blocker, and the Rangers were up, 1-0, 26 seconds in.Brassard made it a two-goal game less than six minutes later, collecting a rebound and beating Fleury to the glove side.Crosby briefly gave the Penguins a boost when he scored for the fourth time in his past seven games, poking home a rebound from in front on the power play to cut it to 2-1 with 4 minutes 52 seconds left in the first period.Pittsburgh would get no closer. Nash’s second goal came on a bounce off Pittsburgh defenseman Rob Scuderi’s stick, and Stepan’s blast made it 4-1 before the game reached its midway point.That was it for Fleury, who was replaced by Thomas Greiss.Slap ShotsThe Rangers and defenseman Marc Staal have agreed on a contract extension, keeping him off the free-agent market this summer.Staal, 28, has two goals and 6 assists in 43 games for the Rangers this season. He logged more than 18 minutes of ice time in the Rangers’ win over the Penguins on Sunday.Staal, an All-Star in 2011, is just one of 12 defensemen in Rangers history who have played at least 500 games for the team. He has not missed a game this season.Advertisement