AdvertisementSupported byBy Ken BelsonSEATTLE — Seahawks quarterback Russell Wilson scrambled madly as he tried to evade several Packers defenders. He ran to his right, whipsawed back and lofted the ball across the field. To the amazement of the record crowd at CenturyLink Field, tight end Luke Willson came down with the ball in the end zone.The desperation pass completed a 2-point conversion and gave the Seahawks an important 3-point cushion. Suddenly trailing by 22-19 after leading by 19-7, the Packers had their own moment of desperation, having to charge back down the field to tie the score with a field goal to send the game into overtime. Still, Wilson was not finished. He completed his improbable, if interrupted, comeback minutes later, hitting Jermaine Kearse with a 35-yard scoring pass to give Seattle a berth in the Super Bowl in Arizona in two weeks.But the 2-point play was indicative of Wilson’s legend-making redemptive story on Sunday. For the first 56 minutes, he was downright atrocious. He was 8 for 22 passing for 75 yards and tossed a personal-worst four interceptions. He lofted some passes into heavy traffic. At times his receivers dropped the ball. One of the game’s best running quarterbacks, Wilson had just 8 yards on the ground. With the Packers seemingly destined to win, some fans headed for the exits. They would regret it. With about four minutes left, Wilson became Fran Tarkenton, Joe Montana and John Elway rolled into one. He hit Doug Baldwin and Marshawn Lynch for long passes and scrambled several times with the Packers giving chase. He ran the ball into the end zone for a touchdown to draw the Seahawks to within 19-14 with 2 minutes 9 seconds left in regulation.After the Seahawks’ Chris Matthews recovered an onside kick at the Seattle 48-yard line, Wilson went back to work, scrambling for 15 yards and soon hitting Willson for 8 more yards. Then Lynch broke free for a 24-yard touchdown.After the 56th minute, Wilson completed six of seven passes for 133 yards, including the touchdown pass in overtime, his only one of the game.“If we were going to go down, I’m going to go down swinging, that’s for sure,” Wilson said. “When we went into halftime, I told the guys there’s no doubt. We didn’t make the plays in the first half, but we’re going to make them in the second half.”Even after winning the Super Bowl last year, Wilson has lived in the shadow of quarterbacks with gaudier numbers and more established reputations, namely Peyton Manning, Tom Brady, Aaron Rodgers and Andrew Luck.Yet before Sunday’s N.F.C. championship game, Wilson had the best career quarterback rating in the playoffs. Rodgers, on the other side of the field, had the second best. For most of the game, Rodgers looked as if he deserved to be on top of the list, and Wilson looked like a backup on a losing team.“Collectively as a group, we played pretty bad for three and a half quarters,” said Max Unger, the Seahawks’ center. “There was some doubt creeping in a little bit, and when we got the ball rolling again, we got our groove back on.”Wilson, Unger said, “never counted himself out” or lost his cool, despite his struggles to that point. The crowd was anxious and the clocking was ticking, but there was no yelling in the huddle, he said.“I didn’t think there was panic, which might sound weird because we were cutting it a little close there at the end,” Willson, the tight end, said.The Packers’ defenders certainly deserved their share of the credit. They intercepted Wilson four times, sacked him five times and forced him to scramble and throw the ball away on other occasions. For a time they even bottled up the explosive Lynch, though he finished the game with 157 yards on 25 carries.Wilson was also hit hard several times, including once on an interception return when he absorbed a blow to the head. He was evaluated on the sideline for a possible concussion but did not miss a play.Seattle’s defense gave Wilson just enough time to turn the game around. It stopped the Packers twice near the goal line in the first quarter, forcing Green Bay to settle for field goals. It had a tough time containing running back Eddie Lacy but kept receivers Jordy Nelson and Randall Cobb from breaking free.After taking a 16-0 lead into the locker room at halftime, the Packers scored just 6 points.Then the clock ran down to under four minutes. Wilson was on such a roll that after the Seahawks won the coin toss to begin overtime, he told Seattle’s offensive coordinator, Darrell Bevell, that he would hit Kearse with the game-winning touchdown pass. He did just that.Afterward, Wilson cried in the postgame interview. He said he was thinking of his late father and all “the ups and downs in life.”An hour after stunning the Packers and winning his 10th game against a Super Bowl-winning quarterback, Wilson reflected on his emerging image.“The game started off kind of ugly, huh?” he said. “But that last, what, three minutes and plus the overtime is probably as good a game as you can get.”Advertisement