
On College Basketball By                     
 HARVEY ARATON
 
JAN. 18, 2015
LOUISVILLE, Ky. — The arena was emptying and quiet, post-mortems of the game having concluded, when Mike Krzyzewski walked over to shake hands with Rick Pitino. In a clash of power coaches and premier college programs, Krzyzewski’s Duke Blue Devils had scored a surprisingly easy 63-52 victory Saturday over Pitino’s Louisville Cardinals.Pitino essentially knew why. Jahlil Okafor — the most intriguing player in the building — was on Krzyzewski’s side.“We couldn’t move him; he’s really good,” Pitino told the man informally and internationally known as Coach K.Krzyzewski nodded.“He’s the real deal,” he said. “He’s going to be a franchise player. And he’s going to be a franchise person.”AdvertisementFrom Krzyzewski’s mouth to the ears of executives at bottom-feeding, draft-lottery-bound N.B.A. teams: That scouting summary just may be enough to soothe their tortured souls and seasons.AdvertisementAt best, the team with the league’s worst record — Phil Jackson’s 5-36 Knicks, at the moment — will have a 25 percent chance of landing the first pick of the 2015 draft in June. Okafor, a 6-foot-11 center, is months away from a decision on leaving Duke after his freshman year. Nobody seems to be holding his breath, because the one-and-done drill has become a virtual afterthought for the college game’s most gifted and talented.It does not take long to see that Okafor, 19, is among them. He, in fact, was selected by The Associated Press for its preseason all-America team (with three juniors and a senior) before playing a game. The vexing question, for now, is whether Okafor will grow up to be a generationally transcendent player, a commodity so desirable that trading off assets and throwing away — or tanking — an N.B.A. season to have a better statistical chance of landing him is a justifiable, if not honorable, strategy.Often double-teamed, Okafor scored 13 of his 18 points in the second half Saturday on a variety of graceful moves that left Pitino — who had tried to recruit him out of Chicago’s Whitney M. Young Magnet High School in Chicago — raving about his ability to shoot over his right shoulder.“He’s right-handed, and you seldom see a kid able to turn that way,” Pitino said.In the front row behind the Duke bench at KFC Yum! Center, Okafor’s father, Chukwudi, who goes by Chucky, celebrated the end of Duke’s two-game losing streak with two of his son’s uncles. He explained to a reporter that much of what had been extolled as an old-school, low-post game was “natural for him, although Jahlil’s been working on it since he was 8 or 9.”But the father — who took his son, then 9 years old, to Chicago from Oklahoma after the death of Jahlil’s mother, Dacresha Benton, known as Dee — acknowledged that he had also schooled the son with video of several giants of low-post dexterity.“He idolizes Hakeem Olajuwon, Tim Duncan, Shaquille O’Neal,” Chucky Okafor said. “I think he’s like a combination of the three of them.” Realizing how premature that sounded, he added: “Jahlil knows he’s not the best player in the world. That keeps him working at it.”Duncan, San Antonio’s five-time N.B.A. champion, is the more tempting measure for Okafor because there is a resemblance in presence and demeanor, in addition to a fundamentalist approach to the game.AdvertisementLike Duncan, Okafor has soft facial features that obscure the intensity of his eyes. His expression seldom changed during the course of Saturday’s game, whether he was struggling to get the ball in the first half — and not overreacting — or dominating the lane in the second, or when the briefest of scrums broke out under the rim.After wrestling for the ball with Montrezl Harrell, a Louisville junior and Okafor’s teammate on the 2013 United States under-19 team, Okafor reached out for a hug and patted Harrell on the head. Okafor’s father said that was how he had played regardless of the opponent, not wasting energy on emotion.“You’ll never see how he’s feeling,” Chucky Okafor said. “He has the same demeanor, no matter what happens in the game — all business, like Duncan.”After making 8 of 10 shots Saturday, Okafor is converting on 67.5 percent of his field-goal attempts, averaging 18.9 points and 9.3 rebounds. He seldom shoots more than a few feet from the rim, but during warm-ups, he stepped away to the left side to launch soft jump shots, using the backboard.Again, like Duncan.“I played against Duncan, and Okafor, I think, is much more advanced as a freshman than Tim was,” said Jeff Capel, a Duke assistant and a former Blue Devils point guard. “I haven’t seen an offensive big guy in college basketball with gifts that Jahlil has at this age — and I recruited and coached Blake Griffin at Oklahoma.“Offensively, I think Jahlil is off the charts. Obviously, Duncan had an advantage in the areas of defense and rebounding.”Pitino said he believed that Okafor was stronger in the lower body than Duncan was at that stage of physical development but that Duncan, while at Wake Forest, had more of an impact on the game on defense. Krzyzewski’s use of a zone on Saturday, Pitino said, cleverly protected Okafor from having to defend the high screen and roll, an area Pitino said he believed Okafor was not yet comfortable with.N.B.A. people do not, by rule, comment on specific underclassmen. But R. C. Buford, the Spurs’ general manager throughout the Duncan years, said by telephone that “it’s unfair to create expectations that college players may not be able to live up to.”AdvertisementFran Fraschilla, an ESPN analyst who called Duke’s loss to Miami at home last week, agreed that it could be difficult to judge a player’s intangibles after one season in college.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“What you’re watching is basketball’s equivalent of AA baseball,” he said. “There’s a bigger gap between college and the N.B.A. than ever. People should slow down with all the hype. Okafor could very well be special, but he’s not ready for the rigors of the N.B.A. game.”Len Elmore, a former N.B.A. center who worked the Miami game with Fraschilla, said: “Our culture is about anointing people. With the speed of information passing, everyone is trying to be first to discover the next great thing. This kid is an excellent offensive player — great footwork, good hands, nice touch. But Billy Knight, my old teammate with the Indiana Pacers, used to say, ‘What happens to a kid when he tastes his own blood?’ What happens when he’s pushed around, bullied? To take him to the Tim Duncan area, I’m not ready to do that.”As Buford noted, when Duncan joined the Spurs as the No. 1 pick in 1997, he had played four college seasons. He also joined a team that was in the lottery only because David Robinson had sat out all but six of the previous season’s games, providing Duncan not only a stable group core but, in Robinson, a mentor at his own position.If he turns pro next season, Okafor is likely to make his debut on an asset-challenged team mired in a losing mentality. He may also be viewed as a savior, which would be wishful thinking. In his third season, Anthony Davis has achieved stardom, but his New Orleans Pelicans are still roughly a .500 team.The pressure could also be magnified in a big market like New York, although Tyrone Slaughter, who coached Okafor in high school, said by telephone, “Jahlil is not going to wither under the microscope, not after what he’s been through.”Okafor was with his mother at their home in Moffett, Okla., when she began having trouble breathing. A lung had collapsed. He and his sister ran next door for help. Their mother died of complications at a hospital, at 29.Slaughter called Okafor’s relationship with Chucky, who has worked for him as an assistant coach, “the inverse of the inner-city experience where a boy grows up without his father.”“It’s not new, or one made out of convenience because he’s a great basketball player,” Slaughter said.AdvertisementChucky Okafor moved to Chicago two years before Dee’s death and finished a college degree — and later a master’s — he had begun working on as a small-college basketball player whose career fell victim to behavioral issues.“I made mistakes, and I have no problem saying it,” he said. “But Jahlil, his experiences in life also make him who he is, shape his character. He could have gone in so many different directions based on what happened to him. But he’s been striving to be someone that I’m proud of, someone that his mother would have been proud of.”He attended Whitney M. Young — a select high school that was also attended by Michelle Obama — because, as his father said, “we wanted a place where it’s cool to be smart.”“In Chicago, you have too many inner-city schools where it’s not cool to be smart,” Chucky Okafor said. “At Whitney Young, kids ask, ‘What’s your G.P.A.?’ ”Similar questions are asked at Duke, but not in the N.B.A. If Okafor already has his mind on an environment where exams are passed or failed in the playoffs, he is not letting on just yet.In the locker room after the Louisville game, he held out his hand and repeated a reporter’s first name when he said, “Nice to meet you.” He listened carefully to the questions, but his answers were measured.“All I’m really worrying about is Duke, trying to win a national championship,” he said. “I can’t really control anything else.”He meant the hype about him, and the others — Kentucky’s seven-foot Karl-Anthony Towns or Emmanuel Mudiay, an 18-year-old guard from the Democratic Republic of Congo, who opted to play this season in China — currently catching the fancy of the N.B.A.’s down-and-out and desperate.“We’ll see when the time comes,” Jahlil Okafor said.Easy as it may be for him to bide his time, for the Knicks and those like them, it can’t come soon enough.A version of this article appears in print on January 19, 2015, on Page D1 of the New York edition with the headline: N.B.A.’s Have-Nots Watch the Clock as a Potential Star Bides His Time.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »