
Sports of The Times By                     
 JULIET MACUR
 
JAN. 18, 2015
FOXBOROUGH, Mass. — One man on my flight to the A.F.C. championship game Sunday was wearing a Tom Brady jersey that, like the player, had been through quite a bit. The fan had bought it not long after Brady became an N.F.L. star, back in 2002, after Brady won his first Super Bowl.Once a shining navy blue, the jersey had long ago faded into purple. The edges of the sleeves were frayed. The 2 in the No. 12 on the back was missing a few inches of stitches at the bottom, leaving part of the number unattached.But that jersey served a symbolic purpose. It has stood the test of time, just as Brady has.What a good investment. By that I mean both in the jersey and in Brady, who was drafted by the Patriots in the sixth round in 2000 yet has started in five Super Bowls.Now, after throwing three touchdown passes to lead the Patriots to a 45-7 victory over the Indianapolis Colts on Sunday, Brady is on his way to his sixth Super Bowl start, a record for a quarterback.AdvertisementAfter the game, Brady said he hadn’t had time to reflect on his accomplishments and, as usual, avoided preening. But his fans often preen for him.AdvertisementAs of this past fall, Brady’s No. 12 remained among the five best-selling N.F.L. jerseys. Some fans spend their money wisely. Buying a Brady jersey is like buying a tuxedo or a little black dress: always classic, never dated. Buying some other jerseys — Ray Rice’s No. 27 and Aaron Hernandez’s No. 81, for example — has proved to be a very bad idea.No one has ever had to hold a buyback program for good old No. 12.From the press box during Sunday’s game, I could see dozens upon dozens of those No. 12s. So many blue ones and white ones and red ones dotted the stadium that it seemed as if fans had been given them on their way in.Sure, there were other Patriots jerseys, like No. 87s for Rob Gronkowski and No. 75s for Vince Wilfork, the only current player besides Brady to be a part of the Patriots’ last Super Bowl-winning team, in 2005.But the tattered Brady jersey I saw on the plane was the best reminder, albeit a threadbare one, of how a Patriots fan who had invested in that jersey more than a decade ago never had to buy another, despite seemingly endless roster turnover.All that time, while Brady may have shown some cracks — like a season-ending knee injury in 2008 — he has always managed to rebuild himself, at times looking better than ever.Can Brady defy time, too? He already has.He was the most valuable player of that Super Bowl in 2002, when he was just 24, back before Andrew Luck started to shave and before Russell Wilson was out of middle school and when Aaron Rodgers was still trying to pick a college.Makes Brady sound ancient, doesn’t it? But in the N.F.L., he kind of is.At 37, despite three Super Bowl titles (and two recent Super Bowl losses), Brady is at an age when athletes start hearing their own eulogies. Peyton Manning — not for the first time — probably heard his being blasted from the loudspeakers after his Denver Broncos lost to Indianapolis in the A.F.C. divisional round last week.AdvertisementNot long ago, Manning seemed destined to end his career in Indianapolis, not in Denver. How quickly fans forgot about the old guy who used to be their guy. Many traded Manning’s worn No. 18 for Andrew Luck’s crisp No. 12, a jersey many Colts fans wore at Sunday’s game.Manning heard those whispers of his end coming near. Now it’s Brady’s turn. Again.Early this season, questions about Brady’s future popped up after a bad loss to the Kansas City Chiefs dropped the Patriots to 2-2. Brady fumed on the sidelines. Reporters wondered — once again — whether the Patriots might want to just move on without him.But Brady marched on — all the way to yet another A.F.C. championship game and to yet another Super Bowl. Against the Colts on Sunday, he was in command early, breaking the N.F.L.’s career record for postseason passing yards, with more than 6,800, even before some fans here had taken their seats. Take that, eulogists.Only a few athletes can keep their heads down and push ahead despite the inevitable march of time (and teams).John Elway was one of those few. Slow, sad songs of his imminent demise were the soundtrack to Elway’s final few years in the league, but he refused to hear them until he had his second Super Bowl trophy in his hand, at 38.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Even if Brady claims a fourth Super Bowl ring, he might keep going. Last year, he said he would retire only when he stunk on the field (though he used a much saltier word to describe it). So he might have a while.But those slow, sad songs have begun to play, albeit softly. A week after Brady set the league record for postseason touchdown passes, one commentator on NFL Network said on Sunday that Brady’s time was “nearing the end.”A quick glance at Brady on Sunday, though, and that end was hard to see. But the signs, however small, were there. Time has, in fact, changed him.It was impossible to see from the stands, and might even be tricky to spot on high-definition TV, but behind his face mask, Brady has some gray hair. At least a few pesky strands amid the stubble on his strong chin. And though it’s tough to say about a player who was never fleet-footed, he has probably slowed down some, too.AdvertisementOne thing is for sure: His chances to win more Super Bowls aren’t limitless, especially when his 40th birthday is so close that he now stands in its shadow.His Super Bowl victories came rapid-fire early in his career, but he probably knows how precious they are now. It has been a decade since he has won his last Super Bowl ring — so long ago that it might be difficult for him to remember how it feels to lift the trophy.And so long ago that some young Patriots fans might not truly know what Brady has done for their team.So much time has passed since the Patriots were at the very top of the league that if you listen closely after a slow start by the Patriots, or an ill-advised pass by Brady, you can hear a few voices at Gillette Stadium booing the best quarterback the team has ever known.But on Sunday, with about two minutes to go, they started to cheer: “Brady! Brady!” when he was finally taken out of the game — his ninth A.F.C. championship game, a league record.“I know we’ve had some ups and downs this year,” he told the crowd during the postgame ceremony. “But right now, we’re up, baby, and we’re going to try to stay up for one more game.”In the soaking rain, trusty Brady had delivered. Another Super Bowl title might be next.Too old? Fading? Old No. 12 jerseys, maybe.Tom Brady? Not yet.Email: juliet@nytimes.com A version of this article appears in print on January 19, 2015, on Page D2 of the New York edition with the headline: Frayed Around Edges, Brady Sews Up His Spot in History.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »