

 Scott Cacciola
 

NOT THE KNICKS
JAN. 18, 2015

CreditDaniel Acker for The New York Times        SPRINGFIELD, Ill. —  Tariq Toran, the coach of the Central Illinois Xpress basketball team, presented his players with matching mouth guards for Christmas. He had made sure they all came in fluorescent green.The Xpress were already drawing attention, having emerged as an unlikely force in the fifth-grade boys’ league at the Gym, a bustling basketball center here. In running their record to 8-1 through the first half of the season, the Xpress executed a motion offense and often overwhelmed the competition. But they really stood out for another reason.“We’d walk in, and all the boys would be like, ‘We’re playing girls?’ ” said Anne Rupnik, a point guard. “Then we’d beat them. Some of them cried.”The players go by nicknames like Koko, Beans and Flash. They try to color-coordinate their socks. And they have gone about the hard business of winning basketball games — as the only team of girls in the league — with the cool, calculated approach of tax auditors.Advertisement“I don’t think the other teams expected us to be as tough as we were,” forward Kortnee Walton, 11, said, “and fast and strong and aggressive.”AdvertisementSeveral players said their exploits had been the talk of Glenwood Intermediate School, and the Xpress, whose only loss came against a team called the Fighting Irish, hope to play just as well over the second half of their season, which is scheduled to begin Monday with a game against the Central Illinois Rebels.“Everybody thought they were going to kick our butts!” said Anna Chambers, an 11-year-old, 4-foot-8 point guard who goes by the nickname Banana.A core group of the Xpress has been playing together for four years, and the players say that those bonds have made them a stronger team. Great friends off the court, they know they can rely on one another during games.And then there are the boys, some of whom apparently make things hard on themselves.“They make such sloppy passes,” said Lily Randolph, one of several guards on the Xpress’s eight-player roster.For Mr. Toran, whose 10-year-old daughter, Kaleah, plays for the Xpress, having his team compete with boys is part of a larger strategy. He wants his players, at this early stage of their development, to challenge themselves, he said. So during the summer, when the Xpress venture out on the Amateur Athletic Union circuit, that means playing up a division, against slightly older girls. And this winter, for the first time, he decided to make a splash in Springfield.“People around here know who they are now; that’s for sure,” said Mike Hulligan, whose son Ryan plays for the Fighting Irish, one of two league teams that go by that name. “I think the thing that probably impresses me most is that they never look intimidated. They’re quick to the ball, they’re really disciplined, and they don’t back down.”Too many youth coaches, Mr. Toran said, spend their time designing intricate plays. He dispenses with that in favor of running a simple offense predicated on crisp passing and cutting. He wants his players to read their defenders, he said, and attack soft spots.“We practice hard,” said Meghan Wegner, a 10-year-old guard known to her teammates as Megatron. “I think some of the boys are scared of us.”AdvertisementOn Thursday night, the players convened for practice at Abundant Faith Christian Center, which houses a small gymnasium. The workout got underway, as usual, with a series of dribbling drills. Any idle chatter stopped. Wegner wore a T-shirt that read “Beast Mode” across its front.Practices are serious business. Mr. Toran closes them to parents. The players do push-ups and run sprints, and they work hard, Laura Kaiser, a 10-year-old forward, said. Five or six girls, after learning of the Xpress’s success, have attended a practice to get a feel for what goes on behind the scenes and potentially join the team.“They never come back,” said Chris Chambers, whose daughter, Anna, brings energy off the bench.Upbeat by nature, Mr. Toran can also be demanding. On Thursday, the Xpress were engaged in a two-on-one drill when 10-year-old Lily pulled up and buried a 15-foot jumper. Mr. Toran, who also coaches men’s basketball as an assistant at Benedictine, a small college in Springfield, saw room for improvement.“Great shot, Lily Pad,” he said, “but you should always get a layup on a two-on-one. Stay out of the peripheral vision of your defender.”His terminology was — what is the word? — advanced. During a 20-minute stretch of practice, he referred to dribble-drives, help-side defense and the importance of playing with a “high motor.” He also stressed the value of preventing opposing players from “taking the highway,” or getting into the middle of the court.Later, Mr. Toran gathered everyone in a semicircle and reiterated a goal for the second half of the season: improved man-to-man pressure.“We’re in the rectangle of what?” he asked, his voice rising.“War!” his players shouted in high-pitched unison.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“That’s right!” he said. “We’re in the rectangle of war, and we’re in it to win it!”Dan Schrage, whose 10-year-old daughter, Lauren, plays for the Xpress, said the team had created a language all its own. Most parents do not speak it.Advertisement“Lauren will come home and start talking about ‘the highway,’ and I’ll have no idea what she’s talking about,” he said.When Mr. Toran started coaching the Xpress two years ago, he viewed it as an opportunity to get involved with his daughter’s athletic development. At the time, he said, he was an assistant coach with a semipro men’s team and was eager to escape what he described as the “whining and complaining” of players who were resistant to coaching.In search of a more mature audience, he turned to a group of 9-year-old girls.“You can actually teach them basketball,” he said.A few of the parents expressed reservations when Mr. Toran broached the idea of entering the girls in a boys’ league. Dan Schrage said he was concerned that someone could be hurt; boys can be rough, after all. But Mr. Toran has seldom shielded his team from physical play, he said.Mr. Toran recalled a game over the summer against a group of older girls who were determined to push his players around. Mr. Toran challenged his team to do something about it.“Everybody go foul somebody on the next play,” he told the players in a huddle. “Really plaster them!”The Xpress did as they were told — and the officials, for whatever reason, let them play on. The Xpress, having untapped some latent aggression, went on to win the tournament championship, Mr. Toran said.This winter, the Xpress have been content to play much more methodical basketball than many of their opponents — boys who tend to jet up and down the court as if their shorts were on fire. It is not always a good thing.Advertisement“Boys just move faster,” Dan Schrage said. “As soon as they get a rebound, they turn around, and they’re gone. But with the girls, they almost seem to process everything in stages. Step 1: O.K., I’ve got the rebound. Step 2: Look for my teammates. Step 3: Advance the ball.”The Xpress operate with a kind of selflessness that has made believers of skeptics. Mr. Hulligan, the rival parent, said he had gotten the sense that the Xpress had inspired other girls to test their own limits. Not that the Xpress, with their ponytails and fluorescent sneakers, set out to crush gender barriers.“We know how to work together,” said 11-year-old Anne, still catching her breath after a series of sprints. “We’re a team.”Articles in this series are chronicling
Scott Cacciola’s sabbatical
from covering the woeful Knicks.
He will check out some of the good
basketball around the country,
recommended by readers of The
New York Times.A version of this article appears in print on January 19, 2015, on Page A1 of the New York edition with the headline: Team’s Mission: Beat the Boys (and Maybe Make Them Cry).  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »