By JAMES MONTAGUEJAN. 18, 2015
NANTES, France — Handball, virtually unknown in the United States as a team game, is one of the fastest-growing and most ostentatious sports in Europe, often drawing more fans than basketball. No one, though, loves it quite the way the French do.Moments before the recent Tournoi International’s final between Macedonia and France, the European and Olympic champion, the arena here dimmed to total darkness as an ominous Gothic-style soundtrack boomed. Two cannons fired flames eight feet into the air. Close to 11,000 fans screamed. And that was just for the entrance of the two referees.The teams followed, to the same fanfare. But the loudest cheer of all was reserved for the oldest player: Thierry Omeyer of France, who plays goalkeeper, one of the most frustrating and demanding positions in all of sports.“When I see a handball game, I think it’s crazy to play in goal,” Omeyer, 38, said. “But then I get into the zone and then I am not afraid anymore. I think I’m not crazy anymore.”AdvertisementThe indoor version of handball, with its roots in Scandinavia and Germany at the end of the 19th century, has appeared regularly in the Summer Olympics since 1972. The Tournoi International, a four-team tournament held this month, was a warm-up for the International Handball Federation’s world championship, which began last week in Qatar.AdvertisementHandball is fast, with continual turnovers like basketball; goals, nets and positioning like soccer; and an aesthetic reminiscent of dodgeball. Players advance by passing the ball or bouncing it every three steps. Their aim is to throw the ball into the opponent’s goal, past the goalkeeper, who, in one of the most enigmatic and Sisyphean positions in sports, can allow as many as 30 goals and still be thought to have had a good game.“You have to be very strong in your mind, because you concede a lot of goals,” said Omeyer, who is known as Titi.The position, he explained, requires great psychological discipline and fortitude.“Handball is a team game, but the goalkeeper is a little individual,” he said. “Alone. You are alone in your goal and you have to be alone and strong in your mind all the time.”Omeyer is one of the most recognizable athletes in France. A few days before the final in Nantes, he and the national team shot a commercial for a soft-drink company. He has more than 40,000 Twitter followers and is mobbed when he travels abroad. He said he fell in love with his position at a young age, embracing the responsibility it bestowed.“At the beginning, a lot of people don’t want to go in goal,” he said. “I was a goalkeeper when I was 12 and then I didn’t want to ever leave this position. You can help your team to win a game, and when you play bad your team loses.”Goalkeeper can be a dangerous position, too. Handballs weigh just over a pound. Opponents will jump into the goalkeeper’s D-Zone, equivalent to soccer’s penalty area, and while airborne hurl the handball at speeds approaching 100 miles an hour, at point-blank range.The goalkeeper’s job is to get something, anything, in the way: chest, legs, arms or face.It is expected that he will fail more than he will succeed. Saving a third of the shots faced is considered a good performance. In one of Omeyer’s best games, the 2008 Olympic final against Iceland, he saved almost half of them.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Referring to the save percentage, he said, “For a goalkeeper in handball, it’s very, very high.” But the risk of injury is also high. Omeyer missed three months last year after an operation to fix a ripped biceps sustained while making a close-range save.Advertisement“You train your speed, your reflexes, your suppleness,” said Omeyer, who studies video of opposing players to try to detect their tendencies. “You train the same move 100 times so in the game it will be automatic.”Omeyer is considered not just the best goalkeeper in the world, but also, perhaps, the best ever. He is one of only four goalkeepers to be named world player of the year by the I.H.F.“He is the best goalkeeper in history, a fighter, a complete lion,” said Philippe Bana, the French team’s technical director, who was once a goalkeeper himself. “We are owners of our land,” he added, referring to the position. “This is our country. We are defending it. One stop is more important than anything. In the last five minutes, saving the last two shots, it changes the whole game.”The frequency of injuries has prompted a continuing discussion about making the sport safer. Targeting the head results in an automatic ejection, but some want to see players forced to shoot from farther away. Others say a lighter ball should be used. But Bana dismissed these suggestions.“The goalkeeper knows they are a fighter,” he said. “This is the essence of the game.”In the final at Nantes, Omeyer was imposing, and by halftime he had stopped half of the 16 shots he faced. The French dominated, winning, 30-20.Afterward, several hundred female fans waited for the French players to walk back to the locker room.“The French team in handball is very famous,” said Sam Girard, a female goalkeeper who was among those waiting. “Football is not the same; it is hard to meet the players.”As the players signed autographs, Omeyer walked past.“He is our example,” Girard said. “I play handball, and he has a good mind. He has a special mind.”Outside the locker room, Omeyer said that he was happy to have won, but that he was also thinking about his opposite number.Advertisement“I think it was not so easy for the Macedonia goalkeeper,” he said. “He made some good saves. All the goalkeepers, we talk. Before the game, I check with them. It is very important, the connection between the goalkeepers.”Because of an editing error, a picture caption last Monday with an article about Thierry Omeyer, France’s goalkeeper in handball, misidentified the tournament at which he was competing. The photograph showed a semifinal match against Spain at the Euro 2014 handball championship, not at a semifinal match versus Spain in the recent Tournoi International in Nantes, France.A version of this article appears in print on January 19, 2015, on Page D5 of the New York edition with the headline: So He Let 20 Goals Past Him? In His Sport, That’s a Great Game.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.