AdvertisementSupported bySpecial Report: Russian Grand PrixBy Brad SpurgeonAlexander Saurin is deputy governor of the Krasnodar region in Russia, home of the Sochi Autodrom, where the Russian Grand Prix is running this weekend. He directs Sochi’s post-2014 Olympics plans and runs the legal department, property developments and wineries of the Krasnodar region. Saurin recently spoke with a group of journalists, including Brad Spurgeon of The International New York Times, through an interpreter, Sergey Vorobyev, chief executive of the Sochi Autodrom, about the developments of Russia’s Formula One race since its inaugural run last year.Q. Did the first Russian Grand Prix live up to your expectations?A. The results actually exceeded our expectations. We had an independent customer-experience service at the event, and the satisfaction ratings over all were 87 or 88 percent. So we looked at the 12 percent of the feedback where it says we have to improve and we have been working very hard to improve those areas for this year’s event.Q. Is there a particular region in Russia that is more enthusiastic about the race than another? And how is it seen locally? A. First, more generally, it must be understood that after the Olympic Games ended, this area had to live extensively. So it was very important for us to keep recurring events coming back to Sochi. In the end, the event is popular for the Krasnodar regional audience, and, at the same time, cities like Moscow, St. Petersburg and other big Russian cities are coming as well. Basically we have a three-way split in attendance: One third is the Krasnodar region, one third is Moscow/St. Petersburg and one third is other parts of Russia.Q. Are visitors coming from outside Russia to see the race?A. The event is mainly popular with the Russian audience. But now, especially with the current exchange rate, our event, compared to other events, is very affordable. So we believe that foreign spectators will come to the event with a guarantee of great quality, which we proved in the first year, but now it has become more affordable. Foreigners made up around 10 percent of spectators last year, so we will see how it changes.Q. New races often have difficulty maintaining interest in the second year, when the race is no longer a novelty. How do you plan to engage the Russian fan base?A. Actually, our trend is a bit different. Formula One in Russia did not become hugely popular because of the first event. And now, without having some specific global strategy on increasing Formula One’s popularity, we will see how the audience grows naturally.Q. Did the podium finish by Daniil Kvyat, the Russian driver for the Red Bull team, at the Hungarian Grand Prix in July make a difference?A. The day after Kvyat’s podium was one of the two biggest dates for ticket sales: Those dates were the first day of ticket sales and the day after Kvyat’s podium. So that does help.Q. Other than a boost in tourism, what has been the most positive impact of Formula One on the region?A. The main thing is that we have opened a racing academy at the circuit, and they are working closely to become the natural home of motorsport in Russia. For this year’s race, we will have more than 50 percent of sporting personnel local from the Krasnodar region. Over all, the circuit is in high demand: We have had more than 70 big corporate and sporting events. So the circuit is constantly working. This is a major legacy, and one that we are building up.Q. What other racing categories do you have? Are you planning to have more national or international racing?A. We are working on that, with the Russian racing federation and various partners, like the promoters of various racing series. With the circuit, we have a very simple economic model. The circuit has to be reasonably profitable, maybe with a small margin on the first year, but it has to show a reasonable profit. With national series it is difficult to find that, and if we have the proper collection of partners who will make the event at least break even, then we will have that. This year we had a touring car series and the T.C.R. International Series, which ran successfully. We are the home of a midget series; it is an amateur midget series, but it has a base at Sochi Autodrom, and we continue to grow. There is a big potential and we are developing that, keeping in mind the financials. We believe that in 2016 we will have one or two other international series coming to Sochi.Advertisement