AdvertisementSupported byWinter Sports RoundupBy The Associated PressLindsey Vonn matched the record for World Cup wins with a downhill victory Sunday in Cortina d’Ampezzo, Italy, rating the accomplishment “right below” her Olympic gold medal.“It’s hard to really compare the two,” Vonn said. “It’s one race over the span of my career.” The Olympic gold, she added, “means a lot to me because it was a childhood dream. I never thought that I would make it this far, as far as World Cup wins. This is kind of uncharted territory for me.”Vonn skied through thick fog and soft snow to win a demanding race and tied Annemarie Moser-Pröll’s 35-year-old record of 62 World Cup victories, capping a comeback from two knee operations that kept her out of the Sochi Olympics last year.She clocked a time of 1 minute 39.61 seconds to finish 0.32 of a second ahead of Elisabeth Görgl of Austria. Daniela Merighetti of Italy was third, 0.54 back.Vonn was on track to smash the record two years ago before she crashed at the world championships and damaged her right knee, requiring a major operation. She attempted to return for Sochi but reinjured her knee two months before the Games and had to have another operation.Vonn can break Moser-Pröll’s record in a super-G scheduled for Monday. Moser-Pröll, an Austrian great, established the record in 1980.CANADIAN WINS MOGULS TITLE The Canadian freestyle skier Justine Dufour-Lapointe added to her Olympic gold medal by winning the world moguls title in Kreischberg, Austria, while Anthony Benna of France won the men’s gold. Dufour-Lapointe scored 87.25 points in the final. The defending champion, Hannah Kearney of the United States, won silver with 85.66.GERMANS SWEEP IN LUGE Natalie Geisenberger led a German sweep of the top three positions to extend a commanding lead in the standings with a luge World Cup win in Oberhof, Germany.Geisenberger, the Olympic and World Cup champion, won in a combined time of 1:23.104, edging Tatjana Hüfner by 0.072 of a second and Dajana Eltberger by 0.255. Hüfner set a new track record with her second run.Later, Geisenberger helped Germany make a clean sweep across all competitions for the second weekend in a row with a victory in the team relay.OLYMPIC JUMPER PREVAILS Carina Vogt of Germany, the Olympic champion, won her first ski jumping World Cup event of the season in Zao, Japan.Vogt’s jump of 99 meters earned 117.7 points in a competition shortened to one round because of high winds. Irina Avvakumova of Russia was second, with a jump of 96.5 meters.POLE WINS IN HOMELAND Kamil Stoch won a World Cup ski jump event in Zakopane, Poland, in his home country.Stoch, a two-time Olympic gold medalist, had jumps of 134 and 133 meters to gain a total of 276.2 points, 2.3 points ahead of Stefan Kraft of Austria, who had 273.9.GERMANS TAKE BOBSLED RACE The four-time world champion Maximilian Arndt led his German teammates to victory in a four-man bobsled race in Königsee, Germany, a week after being injured in a crash.Arndt’s team won in a combined time of 1:37.72, edging his fellow German Nico Walther’s team by 0.02 of a second.TIGHT FINISH IN BIATHLON Simon Schempp of Germany beat Quentin Fillon Maillet of France and Michal Slesingr of the Czech Republic in a photo finish to win a 15-kilometer mass start for his first biathlon World Cup victory of the season in Ruhpolding, Germany.Advertisement