AdvertisementSupported byGlobal SoccerBy Rob HughesLONDON — The supply line of Dutch-Surinamese talent has not dried up — it just needs people to remember it, identify with it and take a chance on it.Eljero Elia, a winger whose parents were born in the former Dutch colony in South America, won the game for Southampton on Saturday. The quick-footed Elia was playing his second game for the Saints and scored both goals for Southampton in a hard-fought 2-1 victory at Newcastle United.“The first goal was like a dream to me,” he said immediately afterward on TV. “After the second, I didn’t feel my body, I was so happy. I ran to the coach because he was the only one who believed in me.”Ronald Koeman took over as Southampton coach last summer. He has recast the team by drawing heavily on his Dutch roots, so it was no surprise that when his squad was depleted by injuries and by players’ being called up to their national squads for the African and Asian Cups, “Big Ron” found another player from his own backyard, so to speak.Koeman doesn’t have Surinamese heritage, but he played with many who did during his time with Ajax, PSV Eindhoven, Barcelona and the Dutch national team. Those included Ruud Gullit, Frank Rijkaard and Aron Winter, and Koeman was still playing when the second wave of Dutch-Suriname talents emerged, including Clarence Seedorf and Patrick Kluivert. Elia has yet to prove himself in their class, though he was among the Dutch players who reached the final of the World Cup in 2010. His speed was electric, but his game was off-the-cuff and at times inconsistent. He bounced from Twente in the Netherlands to Hamburger in Germany to Juventus in Italy and then back to Germany, where the coach at Werder Bremen was the latest to lose confidence in him. Koeman called Elia. He suggested a loan deal until the end of the season could be good for the player and good for Southampton.The club, frankly, needs anyone it can get. Elia was thrown straight into the lineup Jan. 11 against Manchester United, and the Saints won there, 1-0. He was not able to play in the F.A. Cup match at Ipswich Town a few days later, but Koeman trusted him again from the start at Newcastle.There had been precious little time to rehearse anything. The Saints were playing their third road game in seven days. All three games were wins, eked out by a club that Koeman, a rock of a defender when he played, has quickly molded into having the tightest defense in the Premier League. It is worth remembering that what Koeman inherited upon arrival was a club abandoned by its former coach and left shorthanded after an exodus of senior players.Two things helped bring Southampton back into shape — the club’s remarkable youth system, along with Koeman’s knowledge of players he had either coached or had laid his eyes on in his previous job, with the Dutch club Feyenoord. Then there was a third factor: Koeman’s optimism and his relishing a challenge.He turned the situation to his advantage. Losing the core of a team that had taken Southampton to eighth place last season — quite an achievement for a club its size — allowed the Dutchman to rebuild it to his own specifications.But jumping from eighth to third this season — ahead of such teams as Manchester United, Arsenal, Liverpool and Tottenham Hotspur? “Yes, I think we can keep this position,” Koeman said Saturday. “We have a lot of confidence, and even after a quiet start to this game at Newcastle, we didn’t need a lot of chances to score. That makes a difference.”Finishing third would be a triumph and bring the riches of qualifying for the Champions League. Koeman is not deluded enough to presume that his little club could knock over Chelsea, which cruised to a 5-0 win at Swansea on Saturday, or Manchester City, with its overwhelming financial clout. But all the rest, Koeman thinks, can be beaten.His team had already bounced back from a run of four consecutive Premier League losses in the weeks leading up to Christmas. It turned things around Dec. 20, with a 3-0 victory at home over Everton and has not lost since in the league or the F.A. Cup. In some ways, victory had to be won twice at Newcastle. The Saints, without their powerhouse midfield duo of Morgan Schneiderlin and Victor Wanyama, were sometimes overrun, and they certainly were on their back feet for long spells.But they absorbed the pressure and broke through to score via Elia. Now 27 but a newcomer to this league, he stole between the defenders to shoot beneath a diving Tim Krul, the Newcastle goalkeeper who also happens to be Dutch.Historically, Newcastle is a far bigger club than the Saints, and its 50,000 fans were roaring the team forward. That led to an equalizer when Yoan Gouffran poked a hole through the central defense to score from a rebound.Newcastle then dominated possession and did most of the attacking. But Southampton, marshaled by the calm defensive organizer José Fonte, held firm. It bided its time until Elia was again in the right place at the right moment.This time, his chance (half a chance really) was won by a leaping Shane Long, who flicked the ball on with his head. Elia was there in a flash, his shot deflecting off the leg of defender Daryl Janmaat and past the goalkeeper.For the rest of the match, Newcastle huffed and it puffed, but it couldn’t break down the Saints’ house, nor could it exploit any tiredness the Saints were entitled to feel after their long week. Instead, only the width of a post prevented Graziano Pellè from scoring a third goal for Southampton.Pellè is Italian, but he came via the Netherlands, where he played first at AZ Alkmaar and then Feyenoord under a certain Mr. Ronald Koeman.Advertisement