AdvertisementSupported bySpecial Report: Russian Grand PrixBy Brad SpurgeonWhen teams, drivers and the Formula One retinue arrived at the Sochi Autodrom for the inaugural Russian Grand Prix last year, the general feeling among them was that they could have been at any other modern circuit on the racing calendar, somewhere like Abu Dhabi, Kuala Lumpur or Barcelona, or even Austin, the capital of Texas.The Russian hosts had met the challenge of transforming the 2014 Winter Olympics venue into a modern Formula One circuit half a year later.The pit and paddock area, which had been administrative buildings during the Olympics (although the plan had always been to transform them for use by Formula One), were comparable to those at other new tracks around the world.At 5.8 kilometers, or 3.6 miles, in length, the Sochi track is the third-longest circuit in use, behind Spa-Francorchamps, in Belgium, and Silverstone, in England.Adding to the mix, the circuit is in a region quickly being transformed as a leading vacation destination, with a backdrop of mountains on one side and the Black Sea on the other.Those attractions are a little far from the track, but that is also the case at many other Formula One sites where tourism is not always easily mixed with race attendance — such as in Istanbul, Suzuka in Japan or Mokpo in South Korea.For the series, though, the route to Russia was a long and torturous one. Formula One had been trying to establish a race in the country for more than 30 years, facing various obstacles in what became one of the longest and most dogged hunts for a venue in any country.President Vladimir V. Putin had personally helped to bring the race to Russia, and he has remained behind the continuing plans to develop the site of the 2014 Winter Games.But as with certain other Grand Prix locations — including Bahrain; the coming Azerbaijan race next year; and, to a smaller degree, China — critics pointed out the many political and humanitarian reasons the series should not be run in Russia.Before the first Grand Prix in Sochi, Russia had recently annexed Crimea and was accused of helping anti-government rebels in Ukraine. It had also been linked to the downing of a Malaysia Airlines flight over the Ukraine. And a Human Rights Watch report at the time said, “Since Putin’s return to the Kremlin in 2012, Russia has resorted to the worst repression of human rights since the end of the Soviet era.”So, not for the first time, Formula One was vilified for refusing to call off its race, with many of the series’s stakeholders arguing that sport and politics do not mix.In fact, politics had always lingered over a potential race in Russia. Bernie Ecclestone, the series promoter, made his first efforts to find a venue in the Soviet Union following the 1980 Moscow Olympics, which had been boycotted by the United States and other countries to protest the Soviet military intervention in Afghanistan.But it was not only political concerns that weighed on the inaugural Russian Grand Prix. Just days before, at the Japanese Grand Prix in Suzuka, Japan, Jules Bianchi, a 25-year-old French driver, had been involved in a horrendous accident, striking at high speed a recovery vehicle beside the track. He suffered a serious brain injury, from which he would die nine months later.Formula One was devastated. It turned its focus to safety issues, holding a long press conference in Sochi featuring officials from the International Automobile Federation, the sport’s governing body, including its president, Jean Todt. Questions about the political morality of staging the race were rare. Later, during the race, the appearance of Putin in the grandstand with Ecclestone barely raised an eyebrow.The race itself was another walkover by Lewis Hamilton and the Mercedes team. After making a failed attempt to pass Hamilton at the start and going off the track, his teammate Nico Rosberg had to make an immediate pit stop. He then dropped into the pack and spent the rest of the race climbing up again. The two drivers finished first and second, and the result assured that the Mercedes team would win its first constructors’ championship title. The relative lack of track action was just what the series needed after the tragedy of Suzuka.It would take the final three races of the season for Hamilton to secure his second drivers’ title.After the Russian Grand Prix, though, the Formula One circus had been happily persuaded that — politics aside — the series had found a new venue with its own character and personality.“Formula One is a global spectacle and it shows the strength of the sport that we race in Russia,” Federico Gastaldi, the Lotus team director, said last week. “We should be racing in the world’s biggest country. We have seen over the last 20 years or so, since the change from the Soviet Union, that the opportunities there are huge. The rapid expansion of the economy and the many big sporting events that are being held here over the next decade will make for great momentum in commercial opportunities.”Advertisement