AdvertisementSupported byBy Matt HigginsStowing his side projects as a mogul and a musician for a moment, Shaun White was back on his snowboard beneath the lights at Buttermilk Mountain in Aspen, Colo., on Monday night, launching himself from the halfpipe during practice for this week’s Winter X Games.A dominant and decorated competitor for a decade in a young sport, White, 28, is scheduled to compete in the superpipe final Thursday night to open the Games, which run through Sunday. It will be his first competition, and a chance to reaffirm his stature, since he finished a disappointing fourth in the men’s halfpipe final at the Sochi Olympics last February.“This season is not a big contest year for me,” said White, who has remained busy with his many outside interests, including playing guitar and touring with his band, Bad Things, which released a self-titled debut album last year on the Warner Bros. label.Last year, White bought a majority stake in Air & Style, a competitive snowboarding series and music festival with events in Austria and China. He has expanded the franchise to the United States, where it will take place at the Rose Bowl in Pasadena, Calif., on Feb. 21. He is also chief executive of Shaun White Enterprises, an umbrella organization for his sponsorships with Target, Burton Snowboards, Oakley sunglasses and others.“I haven’t been as motivated this season,” White said about entering contests, adding that he was planning to participate in more competitions next season in a push toward the 2018 Winter Games in Pyeongchang, South Korea. “I’m just pacing myself,” he said, citing his business and music interests, “because at this point in my career, you need those things to motivate you.”Still, White is renowned for his competitive instincts. As a two-sport star, in snowboarding and skateboarding, he has won a combined 15 X Games gold medals. And he has been riding his snowboard this season in Colorado, Europe and Calgary, Alberta, where he spent time training in a halfpipe.“The most exciting reason for me to be at X is to feel something,” said White, who withdrew from last year’s Winter X Games to focus on preparing for the Olympics. “I get to feel motivated. It’s been pretty unmotivating to come out of the Olympic season to want to try crazy stuff or progress.”The Olympics last year turned into a major disappointment for White. After winning gold medals in halfpipe in the two previous Olympics, he qualified to compete in halfpipe and the debut of slopestyle in Sochi. But at the last moment, White withdrew from slopestyle, citing worries about the risk of an injury in advance of the halfpipe competition.Then, in the halfpipe final, he struggled on both of his runs to land a yolo, or a switch-stance front-side double cork — a move that requires taking off backward and spinning through four off-axis rotations while soaring through the air. It was a maneuver he had command of in practice. The yolo twice threw him off in the final and affected his scores enough to knock him out of the medal standings.The gold went to the originator of the yolo, Iouri Podladtchikov, who competed for Switzerland.This week, Podladtchikov said that his run had been better at the Olympics but that White had had better runs at other competitions. And he said he was looking forward to facing White again at the X Games this week.“I love to compete with him,” Podladtchikov said. “It’s the most exciting thing to do for me, because he pushes the sport in another way.”He added, “If Shaun throws down his A game, and I would be able to beat his A game at X Games or anywhere else, that’s the whole aim of all this.”While training in November, Podladtchikov crashed and broke his left ankle, damaging tendons and ligaments as well. His first competition since the injury was last week in Kreischberg, Austria, where he finished fourth in the halfpipe at the F.I.S. freestyle ski and snowboard world championship.At Winter X, Podladtchikov will be joined in the men’s final by Danny Davis, the defending gold medal winner, and Taylor Gold, a rising rider who qualified for the United States team at the Sochi Games but did not win a medal.Still, Tim Reed, vice president of the X Games, said White was the one who moved the needle for ESPN, which creates and broadcasts the event.“Everyone is aware, when it comes to cultural awareness, or social awareness, he kind of transcends,” Reed said. “Those who don’t necessarily follow this stuff, they’re aware of Shaun. There’s more awareness and more desire to come watch what happens.”White will also be watching.“I’ll get to see my competitors,” he said. And perhaps they should watch out, too.“Maybe I’ll get to throw some runs I didn’t get to throw at Sochi,” he said.Advertisement