By ANDREW KEHJAN. 19, 2015
On Monday, Jan. 19, 2015, at Madison Square Garden, the Knicks won a basketball game.There were no champagne bottles popped inside the locker room. There will not be a ticker-tape parade up Broadway. But if the rapturous cheers inside the arena were any indication, it was a momentous occasion.After all, it was only the Knicks’ sixth win of the season and their first since Dec. 12. They had lost their previous 16 games. Defeat had become a foregone conclusion.So perhaps the Knicks and their fans could be forgiven for enjoying a 99-92 triumph over the New Orleans Pelicans, which bumped their winning percentage up to .143.The victory seemed like a rare treat, like an open seat in a rush-hour subway car or a cable guy who shows up at an appointed time — not something you expect to happen the next time around.AdvertisementFans fully embracing the race to secure position in the draft lottery may have left the game emotionally confused. But inside the locker room, the players were practically glowing.Advertisement“It’s good to experience that feeling once again,” Carmelo Anthony said.And it almost slipped away, even after the Knicks carried a 13-point lead into the fourth quarter.With 1 minute 55 seconds left, Tyreke Evans, who finished with 23 points and 9 rebounds, made a driving layup to cut the Knicks’ lead to 1 point. But after misses on both ends, Anthony (24 points, 9 rebounds) evaded double-team coverage and skipped the ball to Jose Calderon, who sank a corner 3-pointer with 32.7 seconds remaining.On the Pelicans’ next possession, Ryan Anderson had an open look at a 3-pointer, but the ball rattled out of the rim, essentially sealing the outcome.“We didn’t really talk about how many games we had lost,” Coach Derek Fisher said of what he told his players after the game. “We more so talked about how we had to act as though we expected this at some point.”There were times during the losing streak when it seemed as if a win would not come at any point.Anthony, who was playing his first game at the Garden since Dec. 25, said his teammates’ confidence had visibly dipped during the skid, which was the longest in franchise history. He agreed with Fisher’s assertion that his two-week absence — a break meant to mend his sore left knee — had allowed him to see the game from a different perspective and identify weak areas where he could apply himself once he returned.“Guys was second-guessing themselves, passing up open shots, just kind of being too laid back,” Anthony said.The game was Anthony’s second in a row — he first returned to the court last week in London — and he received a loud round of applause when he was introduced beforehand. Once the game began, he looked spry. With his help, the Knicks’ early play instilled the arena air with an unfamiliar aura: promise.Anthony scored all 12 of his first-half points in the opening quarter, making two 3-pointers and jabbing three fingers into his temple, one of his signature celebrations. The Knicks led by 11 points at one point in the first quarter and by 13 in the second, which placed something of an alien sight on the scoreboard: The team had not held a double-digit lead over any opponent in more than a month.Advertisement“Hopefully we can get used to this feeling, man, and kind of string some games together,” Anthony said. “It feels good coming into this locker room with a win. It’s a different energy. It’s a different vibe. I just want my teammates to understand what this feeling is.”The Knicks benefited from the Pelicans’ misfortune as Anthony Davis — who has averaged 24.2 points, 10.4 rebounds and 2.9 blocks per game this season — missed his third game in a row with a sore left foot. But it was a positive sign, nonetheless, that they were able to seize the chance.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In the Knicks’ 16 straight losses, from Dec. 14 to Jan. 15, they had a 41.8 shooting percentage and scored 90.2 points per game. Only the Philadelphia 76ers, the Knicks’ opponent on Wednesday, were worse in those categories within that span of time. But the Knicks shot 48.7 percent from the field Monday and committed just four turnovers.Langston Galloway, in his first start of the season, had his best N.B.A. game, scoring 21 points. His thrilling put-back dunk with 5:37 to play helped keep the Pelicans at bay while heightening the volume, and the sense of occasion, inside the arena.“They want something to cheer for,” Galloway, who is on his second 10-day contract, said of the fans.It may have merely been a win against a hobbled opponent in the 42nd game of a lost season. But for the team and its fans, it momentarily felt like more than that.A version of this article appears in print on January 20, 2015, on Page B7 of the New York edition with the headline: Knicks Interrupt the Losing, for a Night, Anyway.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.