By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSJAN. 19, 2015
The Islanders are headed into their All-Star break in first place in the Eastern Conference.Nikolay Kulemin had two goals and an assist as the Islanders reclaimed the top spot with a 7-4 home victory over the Philadelphia Flyers on Monday afternoon, their latest win over another Metropolitan Division team.Michael Grabner, John Tavares and Nick Leddy each had a goal and an assist.The Islanders are assured of having the divisional lead when play resumes next week. They are 15-2 against divisional foes and 16-4 over all at home.The Islanders were only 13-19-9 at home last season and missed the playoffs.Grabner gave the Islanders the lead on their first shot, and Kulemin, who scored later in the first period, made it 3-0 with a short-handed goal on the team’s first shot of the second.Mark Streit, Michael Del Zotto, Claude Giroux and Chris VandeVelde scored for the Flyers.The All-Star Jaroslav Halak made 25 saves for his 25th win this season for the Islanders (31-14-1), who have won five of six.AdvertisementThe Islanders bounced back from a 6-4 loss at Montreal on Saturday and lead Tampa Bay by a point in the East.AdvertisementHURRICANES 4, MAPLE LEAFS 1 Eric Staal scored twice, and Anton Khudobin stopped 34 shots to lead Carolina over host Toronto.Brad Malone and Elias Lindholm also scored for the Hurricanes, who improved to 6-2-1 this month.Nazem Kadri scored with 5 minutes 11 seconds remaining to end Khudobin’s shutout bid and end Toronto’s scoring drought at 162:14. The Maple Leafs, back home after a winless four-game trip, have lost five straight and fell to 1-6-0 under the interim coach Peter Horachek.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.CANUCKS 2, PANTHERS 1 Radim Vrbata and Bo Horvat scored, Ryan Miller stopped 23 shots, and Vancouver held on for a road win over Florida.Brandon Pirri spoiled Miller’s bid for a third straight shutout with 2:32 remaining, ending Miller’s career-best scoreless streak at 200:45.BLUE JACKETS 3, WILD 1 James Wisniewski scored the go-ahead goal, had two assists and made a critical defensive play in the crease late in the third period to help visiting Columbus top Minnesota.Sergei Bobrovsky made 25 saves in the win.BLUES 3, AVALANCHE 1 Jaden Schwartz had a goal and an assist, and host St. Louis stifled Colorado for a win.Brian Elliott made 17 saves for St. Louis, which is riding a 7-0-1 streak.CHICAGO FORWARD IS SUSPENDED The N.H.L. suspended Blackhawks forward Daniel Carcillo for six games for crosschecking Jets forward Mathieu Perreault across the back in Chicago’s loss to Winnipeg on Friday.Carcillo sat out a home loss to Dallas on Sunday as he awaited a hearing. He will miss five more games and lose $40,243.92 in salary.Because of an editing error, a report in the N.H.L. roundup on Tuesday about the Vancouver Canucks’ 2-1 victory misstated part of the name of their opponent in some editions. They are the Florida Panthers, not Carolina.A version of this article appears in print on January 20, 2015, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: With Win, Islanders Enter All-Star Break Sitting Atop the East.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.