By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSJAN. 19, 2015
CORTINA D’AMPEZZO, Italy —  Lindsey Vonn won a super-G on Monday, her record 63rd World Cup victory.She broke Annemarie Moser-Pröll’s 35-year-old record of 62 World Cup wins with a flawless run down the Olympia delle Tofane course, finishing 0.85 of a second ahead of Anna Fenninger of Austria, a huge gap. Tina Weirather of Liechtenstein was third, 0.92 back.“I know it’s a big achievement,” Vonn said. “But I have to focus on the skiing. I can’t let everyone else’s expectations get into my head. So that was my goal this weekend, just trying to ski my best. And I thought I did a really good job.”Moser-Pröll, an Austrian great, established her record between 1970 and 1980. The Swede Ingemar Stenmark holds the men’s record, 86 wins.AdvertisementBreathing heavily and gritting her teeth in the start house, Vonn attacked all the way down and increased her lead at every checkpoint to win by a large margin.“I was definitely pushing the limits the whole way down,” Vonn said. “Sometimes, I was a little bit out of control, but I maintained the speed, especially on the bottom of the course. I’m so happy to have finished the weekend with Win No. 63.”The victory was Vonn’s first in super-G this season and her fourth over all this campaign, in which she has showed a return to top form after two knee injuries kept her out of the Sochi Olympics last year.Perhaps more important, the win showed that Vonn, 30, was dominating again just weeks before the world championships, to be held in Vail and Beaver Creek, Colo.Vonn earned her ninth career victory in Cortina, where she had her first career podium result in 2004. That put her within one of the Austrian Renate Götschl’s record 10 wins at the resort.AdvertisementVonn was joined by her boyfriend, Tiger Woods. Wearing a mask, Woods wove through the crowd unnoticed until he shared an embrace with Vonn, who said she had no idea that he was coming.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“No way!” Vonn exclaimed when she spotted him.Woods’s agent, Mark Steinberg, said that after the race, a news media member with a shoulder-mounted video camera surged toward the stage, turned and hit Woods in the mouth with the camera.“Woods’s tooth was knocked out by the incident,” Steinberg said.Race organizers said this was not reported to them. They added that Woods did request extra security and a snowmobile to exit the finish area and that organizers met both requests.Steinberg did not say when Woods would have the tooth replaced. Woods is set to return to competition next week at the Phoenix Open.Woods was heading home immediately, Vonn said.A version of this article appears in print on January 20, 2015, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Vonn, ‘Pushing the Limits the Whole Way Down,’ Wins to Set a Career Mark.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.