By BEN ROTHENBERGJAN. 19, 2015
MELBOURNE, Australia — A year ago, Viktor Troicki was roughly halfway through a yearlong suspension for failing to provide a blood sample for a doping test.For a while, Troicki, a Serb, found ways to enjoy the time away from tennis, including activities his heavy tour schedule had prevented, like skiing and traveling with friends. But last January he was drawn back into intense training, and his forced absence redoubled his desire.“I had some fun time, and then I started missing it,” Troicki, 28, said Monday. “I knew I wanted to come back to be even better than I was, and I really worked hard. I think that work is paying off now, and I really was pumped and ready for the start of, let’s say, my second career.”Troicki returned to the tour in July ranked 847th because of his absence. By year’s end, he was inside the top 100. Last week he won the ATP tournament in Sydney as a qualifier, his second career title. On Monday he won his first-round match at the Australian Open against Jiri Vesely, who had won the title last week in Auckland, New Zealand. Troicki has now won nine consecutive matches, the longest streak by any player so far this season.AdvertisementTroicki’s coach, Jack Reader, used the extended time with his pupil to incorporate new facets into his game, making him a more complete player than he could have become if he had stayed on the treadmill of the tour.AdvertisementFrom his base in Monaco, Troicki was able to train with many other top players, including his close friend Novak Djokovic, whom he also traveled with during some of the season. But during his suspension, Troicki was not allowed onto the grounds of tournaments when they were underway.“Once it started, I’m not allowed; I’m like a terrorist,” he said. “That was a tough thing. But I took any chance that I could get to play with the big guys.”In July 2013, while ranked 53rd, Troicki was suspended for 18 months for not providing a blood sample after a loss at the tournament in Monte Carlo that April. He contended that he had received permission from the administrating doctor to postpone the test by one day. The International Tennis Federation ultimately reduced the suspension to one year after arbitration.“It was tough mentally,” said Troicki, who is currently ranked 54th. “If you’re injured, it’s a different story. But this, I felt what happened to me was unreal, and it was a shock, the biggest shock of my life. It was really hard. I took it really hard. When you feel innocent — and I know I’m innocent — it hurts you, you know? You’re being punished for something you didn’t do.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Troicki was inspired by the success of another player upon returning from an antidoping violation: Marin Cilic, who stunningly won the 2014 United States Open while seeded 14th, after serving a four-month suspension in 2013.“That was amazing from him,” Troicki said. “I saw a lot of things from him, and it gave me a lot of motivation also. It’s amazing, also, his comeback. He was out only four months. It’s a different thing, but he’s done great, and he also improved his game in that time. So I knew if he did it, why not me? It definitely pushed me a lot.”Troicki said he felt better than ever on the court, thanks to the intense physical training he was able to do.“Much better,” he said. “When you step on a court, and you’re playing some guy, you just feel stronger. I did a lot of fitness, and I just feel stronger. I’m doing more and more and more, and the work is paying off.”AdvertisementTime away from the tour led not only to a physical advantage, but also an improved mental state.“I’m definitely doing some things better, but the main thing is enjoying it on the court, and being looser and being more confident,” said Troicki, who plays No. 26 seed Leonardo Mayer in the second round Wednesday. “Of course, confidence comes with the wins, so that’s one of the good things right now. Winning the title, of course, helps. It’s been good, really. I started really well, and my first tournament I already did well. All of the comeback was pretty good and successful, so that’s a good thing.”Having had it taken away from him, Troicki said he better appreciated the opportunities and successes that have come in this phase of his career.“Ever since I was a kid, it was a dream to be playing tennis and to be a professional tennis player, and to play big tournaments against top players,” he said. “Over the years, maybe I just got used to it and I forgot about that dream. And after I got suspended I had some time to think about everything. When you don’t have something that you really love, you start missing it and you want to get back and be even better. That’s what pushed me to be better, and to work even harder, and that’s why I’m enjoying it more on the court.”Troicki’s next goal is to exceed his career-best ranking of No. 12 by breaking the top 10.“Let’s go,” he said. “I’m ready.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.