
Sports of The Times By                     
 WILLIAM C. RHODEN
 
JAN. 19, 2015
FOXBOROUGH, Mass. — Before Muhammad Ali fought the imposing George Foreman in their Rumble in the Jungle in 1974, one of Ali’s trainers told him that there comes a point in every champion’s life when he has to go into the lion’s den and snatch the meat from the lion’s jaw.Ali upset Foreman, regaining the heavyweight title and securing his legend as one of the greatest champions of all time.On Sunday, Andrew Luck faced a similar challenge. The lion’s den was Gillette Stadium in Foxborough, Mass., and the lion was Tom Brady and the New England Patriots. Unfortunately for Luck, he and his Indianapolis Colts were devoured once again.It was a humbling end for Luck and the Colts, who won 11 games in the regular season and two more in the playoffs but lost 45-7.AdvertisementAfterward, down a corridor near the Colts’ locker room, Luck huddled with his father, Oliver, who tried to help his son put the defeat in perspective.AdvertisementAfter father and son said their goodbyes, I asked Oliver Luck what he had been thinking as he watched the game slip away. Luck smiled. His son had just dropped to 0-4 in his career against Brady and Patriots Coach Bill Belichick.“What I realize,” Oliver Luck said, “is just how competitive the league is, how many great coaches there are in this league, and then maybe the greatest of all is Bill.”A few hours earlier, Luck had caught the end of the breathtaking N.F.C. championship game in Seattle. He had seen Russell Wilson, Seattle’s young quarterback, pick himself and his team up off the canvas and deliver a knockout blow against Aaron Rodgers and the Green Bay Packers.Wilson was a member of the illustrious quarterback class of 2012, along with Luck and Robert Griffin III. In the years since, the order — in terms of reverence — had always been Luck, who had been the first pick that year, and then Griffin, the No. 2 choice. Wilson, taken in the third round, was actually the sixth quarterback drafted, long after players like Brandon Weeden and Brock Osweiler.After an award-winning rookie year in Washington ended in injury and a playoff loss, Griffin has endured two nightmarish seasons. In that time, Luck and Wilson have risen above the other picks from 2012.Luck, who stepped seamlessly into Peyton Manning’s shoes with the Colts, has generally been regarded more highly than Wilson, who has been marginalized as a game manager blessed with a great team around him. Even after Wilson led Seattle to a Super Bowl victory last year in his second season, he was rarely mentioned in the discussion of the league’s so-called elite quarterbacks.Sunday’s performance — forgettable for 58 minutes and then flawless when it mattered most — may not change that, since most observers are likely to point out that Green Bay defeated itself.AdvertisementSo it goes.It has become a matter of course for experts discussing the hierarchy of N.F.L. quarterbacks to draw up a list with some ordering of Brady, Manning, Rodgers, Drew Brees and Philip Rivers.Luck, who plays half of his games under a dome in ideal conditions, is routinely acknowledged as the prince in waiting.But if Luck is the prince, what does that make Wilson?Wilson has as many Super Bowl rings as anyone on the above list except Brady. Wilson is also 10-0 against Super Bowl-winning quarterbacks: 3-0 against Rodgers; 2-0 against Brees and both Eli and Peyton Manning; and 1-0 against Brady.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Why has it been so difficult to change the Russell Wilson narrative? Is it because, at 5 feet 11, he is considered small for the position? Is it because he plays far from the East Coast’s major media markets? Are his achievements all overshadowed by the Seahawks’ outstanding defense?Or is it perhaps because — even in 2015 — experts still find it difficult to shower an undersize African-American quarterback with the heroic, Paul Bunyan-type accolades long reserved for traditional drop-back passers like Brady and Manning and, lately, Luck?Wilson, who led all passers in rushing yardage this season, is marginalized as a running quarterback, even though in Seattle’s offense he often looks to pass first, and his well-timed runs usually emerge from that.On Sunday, Wilson’s day started a lot like Luck’s. In fact, it might have been worse. While Luck has shown a tendency to throw interceptions (he had 16 in the regular season), Wilson (who had only seven) has not. Yet he had three in the first half against the Packers, and four over all.While New England pummeled the Colts with simple arithmetic, Green Bay forced Wilson to take a succession of calculus quizzes by dropping seven and sometimes eight defenders in coverage. For most of the afternoon, Wilson flunked those tests, but — unlike Luck — he was fortunate to have a defense that kept the game close.All comebacks require a bit of luck and a substantial amount of help from the opponent. Wilson and Seattle received both.AdvertisementHe cut into the deficit first with a 1-yard touchdown run. Then he got a boost when Green Bay, in quick succession, failed to field an onside kick; allowed a long touchdown run by Marshawn Lynch; and then failed to stop a 2-point conversion on a pass that could have been intercepted.Seattle then won the overtime coin toss — that’s the luck — and Wilson soon hit Jermaine Kearse for a 35-yard touchdown that sent Seattle back to the Super Bowl.In doing so, Wilson separated himself from contemporaries like Luck. He had found a way to snatch the meat from the lion’s jaw.For all the comparisons to Luck, Wilson has more in common with Brady. Both were second-level draft picks who had to prove themselves. Each has the gift of leadership and a knack for making the right decision at the right time.When it comes to collecting Super Bowl rings, Wilson has pulled even with the likes of Brees and Rodgers.He can close the gap on Brady in two weeks.Email: wcr@nytimes.comA version of this article appears in print on January 20, 2015, on Page B7 of the New York edition with the headline: Rising Above the Draft Class of 2012.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »