JAN. 19, 2015
The best-selling sports books in December 2014, according to the New York Times best-seller list.1. UNBROKEN, by Laura Hillenbrand (Random House). An Olympic runner’s story of survival as a prisoner in World War II.2. THE BOYS IN THE BOAT, by Daniel James Brown (Penguin). The University of Washington’s eight-oar crew and its quest for a gold medal at the 1936 Berlin Olympics.3. YOU CAN’T MAKE THIS UP, by Al Michaels with L. Jon Wertheim (Morrow/HarperCollins). The veteran sportscaster, the voice of “Sunday Night Football,” recalls players and games he has observed.4. JETER UNFILTERED, by Derek Jeter with Anthony Bozza (Jeter Publishing/Gallery Books). The former Yankees shortstop and captain looks back over his career, with photographs from his recently concluded final season, as well as older ones.Advertisement5. THE KEEPER, by Tim Howard with Ali Benjamin (Harper). The goalkeeper for the United States men’s national soccer team considers his life and career.Advertisement6. SPORTS ILLUSTRATED NFL QUARTERBACK, by the editors of Sports Illustrated (Sports Illustrated Books). Essays and interviews accompany a pictorial celebration of “the greatest position in sports” and those who have put their stamp on it through the years.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.7. THE TERRIBLE AND WONDERFUL REASONS WHY I RUN LONG DISTANCES, by The Oatmeal (Andrews McMeel). A confessional in comic form, from the website.8. THE GOLF BOOK, by Chris Millard (HarperDesign/HarperCollins). A 20-year retrospective of the players, top shots and moments of the sport, from masterly chips to meltdown milestones.9. SPORTS ILLUSTRATED FOOTBALL’S GREATEST, by the editors of Sports Illustrated (Sports Illustrated Books). Experts in the sport rank the top 10 football players in more than 20 categories; with photographs and anecdotes.10. MR. HOCKEY, by Gordie Howe (Putnam). The autobiography of the hockey player.And One:20. STRONG INSIDE, by Andrew Maraniss (Vanderbilt University Press). A biography of Perry Wallace, the first African-American basketball player in the Southeastern Conference and a look at the collision of race and sports in the South.Rankings reflect sales for December 2014. The sports titles ranked here are selected by the editors from among all adult nonfiction books in all print and electronic formats, as reported to the New York Times Best Seller Lists for the previous month. The definition of sports is deliberately broad and inclusive, to reflect all manner of the outdoor sports world, varying from the professional leagues to personal athleticism.A version of this list appears in print on January 21, 2015, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: The Best Sellers: Filed Under Sports.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.