
On Baseball By                     
 TYLER KEPNER
 
JAN. 19, 2015
A franchise can come a long way in a decade. Ten years ago, there had not been an official major league game played in Washington since 1971. Now, the team that plays there, the Nationals, has such high expectations that the regular season is only a prelude.The Nationals moved from Montreal in 2005, opened a new ballpark in 2008 and led their league in wins in 2012 and 2014. Yet for all that growth, the franchise still has not won a playoff series since Steve Rogers pitched the Expos to a division series victory in 1981.There is no certain formula for October success, but the Nationals are betting on starting pitching as the critical factor. Their new contract agreement with Max Scherzer, which establishes a record for a right-handed pitcher, gives them an overpowering rotation.Scherzer and the Nationals agreed on a seven-year deal that will pay him$210 million, although that includes significant deferrals. The deal was confirmed by a person with knowledge of the talks who requested anonymity because the contract has not been announced and is pending a physical.AdvertisementThe website for CBS Sports first reported Sunday that the sides had reached a seven-year agreement. Fox Sports reported Monday that while Scherzer is signed for seven years, the payouts will last for 14 years, at $15 million per year, for the $210 million total.AdvertisementThe left-hander Clayton Kershaw, a three-time Cy Young Award winner for the Los Angeles Dodgers, has the record contract for a pitcher at seven years and $215 million. But Scherzer’s deal eclipses Justin Verlander’s mark for a right-hander, which had been seven years and $180 million.Verlander’s performance has declined since he signed that deal before the 2013 season, when he was 30. Scherzer is also 30 but has thrown 3141/3 fewer innings than Verlander had at the same age. His lighter workload had been a public selling point for Scherzer’s agent, Scott Boras, who advised Scherzer to reject the Tigers’ six-year, $144 million contract offer last spring.It was a risk, but Scherzer made it a winning gamble by going 18-5 with a 3.15 earned run average and improving his appeal on the open market. He excelled in Detroit, winning the American League Cy Young Award in 2013 and compiling a 70-24 record the last four seasons despite just one career complete game.Before the Tigers, Scherzer played for the Arizona Diamondbacks, who drafted him in the first round in 2006. Their scouting director then was Mike Rizzo, the current Nationals general manager, who has stocked his team with Boras clients, including Jayson Werth, Stephen Strasburg and Bryce Harper.Boras typically negotiates high-level deals directly with ownership, and the Nationals’ owner, Ted Lerner, is 89 years old. The Tigers’ owner, Mike Ilitch, 85, has signed several Boras clients who have helped his team reach two of the last nine World Series.The Texas Rangers also have several Boras clients on lucrative contracts, including Adrian Beltre, Prince Fielder, Shin-Soo Choo and Elvis Andrus, but they finished in last place amid a barrage of injuries last season.With good health, Washington seems well positioned to repeat as the National League East champion. That might have been the case even without Scherzer, but his signing provides a long-term anchor for a rotation that could soon be in flux. Jordan Zimmermann and Doug Fister can be free agents after this season.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.For now, though, the Nationals have no plans to trade a starter, which gives them a rotation of Scherzer, Strasburg, Zimmermann, Fister and Gio Gonzalez. Another solid starter, Tanner Roark, could slide to the bullpen for a year to replace Tyler Clippard, a top setup man traded to Oakland last week for infielder Yunel Escobar.AdvertisementThat deal reflected what had been frugal maneuvering by the Nationals, who had tried and failed to sign Zimmermann and shortstop Ian Desmond to long-term extensions. The team had signed no free agents and took on little salary at the trading deadline last year, acquiring reliever Matt Thornton from the Yankees and infielder Asdrubal Cabrera from the Cleveland Indians, who paid his salary. The team has since allowed Cabrera to sign with Tampa Bay as a free agent.In adding Scherzer, the Nationals are doubling down on their established strength: a rotation whose 3.04 E.R.A. led the majors last season. The Philadelphia Phillies employed the same strategy for the 2011 season, signing Cliff Lee to form a super-rotation with Roy Halladay, Cole Hamels and Roy Oswalt.That group led the Phillies to a club-record 102 victories in the regular season but was knocked out by St. Louis in the first round of the playoffs. Last year’s Detroit team offers a similarly sobering parallel. The Tigers traded for David Price and lined up Scherzer, Verlander and Price for the playoffs, only to be swept in the first round by Baltimore.Gathering aces helps, of course, but, just like nine-figure contracts in general, all it does is improve a team’s chances in theory. Few nine-figure free-agent pitching contracts have worked out; the best is probably the Yankees’ original deal with C. C. Sabathia, who led the team to a title in 2009 and remained an elite starter for three more seasons.Sabathia is coming off serious knee surgery now and is most likely bound to the Yankees through 2017 because of an extension he signed in October 2011. The Yankees could have used Scherzer but stayed out of the negotiations, believing that with Sabathia and Masahiro Tanaka, two nine-figure starting pitchers were enough.The Nationals will be paying Scherzer through 2028. But if they are wearing championship rings while signing his checks, the payments will be much easier to make.A version of this article appears in print on January 20, 2015, on Page B7 of the New York edition with the headline: Looking Ahead to October, Nationals Bank on Pitching.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »