By TYLER KEPNERJAN. 19, 2015
The protracted free agency of Max Scherzer has reached a resolution at last. Scherzer, the former American League Cy Young Award winner, has an agreement with the Washington Nationals on a contract that will be the richest for a right-hander in baseball history.The deal is said to be for seven years and more than $200 million, although that includes significant deferrals. It was confirmed by a person with knowledge of the talks who requested anonymity because the agreement has not been announced and is likely pending a physical. The website for CBS Sports first reported Sunday that the sides were in serious talks and had reached a seven-year agreement.Scherzer’s former teammate with the Detroit Tigers, Justin Verlander, has the record contract for a right-hander, a seven-year, $180 million deal he signed before the 2013 season. Verlander’s performance has declined since then, but that did not scare off the Nationals in their pursuit of Scherzer.Scherzer’s agent, Scott Boras, tends to negotiate major deals directly with owners, and this appears to be another example — in this case, with the Nationals’ Ted Lerner. Scherzer turned down a six-year, $144 million contract extension offer from the Tigers last spring, then was 18-5 with a 3.15 earned run average, bolstering his standing on the open market.AdvertisementScherzer is 70-24 with a 3.52 earned run average over the last four seasons and turned 30 last July. He will become another ace in a Washington rotation that includes Jordan Zimmermann, Stephen Strasburg, Doug Fister and Gio Gonzalez. The Nationals have been unable to agree on a contract extension with Zimmermann, who faces free agency after this season and could be traded.
            If Nats get in another late jam in Game 4, facing elimination, hope Matt Williams recalls how Leyland used Scherzer: http://t.co/1ua4GGdDy4 If Zimmermann stays, the Nationals could use another solid starter, the right-hander Tanner Roark, in relief. The team traded its setup man, Tyler Clippard, to Oakland last week for infielder Yunel Escobar.The Nationals’ general manager, Mike Rizzo, drafted Scherzer in the first round for the Arizona Diamondbacks in 2006. Many of the Nationals’ top players are Boras clients, including Jayson Werth, Bryce Harper, Anthony Rendon and Strasburg.AdvertisementWashington finished the regular season with the best record in the National League in 2012 and 2014, but has not escaped the first round of the playoffs. Signing Scherzer gives them a better chance.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.