By KEN BELSONJAN. 19, 2015
SEATTLE —  Sometimes, the N.F.L. achieves the symmetry it wants in the Super Bowl: a great defense against a great offense, like last season’s matchup, or one star quarterback against another, like Terry Bradshaw against Roger Staubach.This year’s title game, on Feb. 1 in Glendale, Ariz., will have its own cosmic pairing: The Seattle Seahawks will try to become the first team in a decade to repeat as Super Bowl champions. Standing in the way are the New England Patriots, the last team to do so, in 2005.As in a three-dimensional game of chess, there will be plenty of individual matchups as well. Patriots quarterback Tom Brady, who won three Super Bowls in his first five seasons, will want to erase the sting of the two losses since. He will face Seahawks quarterback Russell Wilson, who hopes to win his second title in just his third season.There are other subplots: two of the best cornerbacks in the N.F.L., Richard Sherman of the Seahawks and Darrelle Revis of the Patriots; two top running backs in Marshawn Lynch of the Seahawks and LeGarrette Blount of the Patriots; and Seahawks Coach Pete Carroll against Patriots Coach Bill Belichick. The owner Robert K. Kraft has hired only two head coaches at New England: Carroll, who coached from 1997 to 1999, and Belichick, who has coached there since.AdvertisementFor good measure, each team started slow but steamrollered the competition as the season wore on and secured the No. 1 seed in its conference. Now there is little doubt that the two best teams in the N.F.L. are in the Super Bowl.“To be a champ, you got to beat the champs, and they’re sitting right there waiting for us,” New England defensive tackle Vince Wilfork said. “They are the defending champs, and they’re coming. They’re going to try to protect that, and our job is to go and try to take it away from them. I think you’ve got the best two teams playing in this game.”AdvertisementAs the two-week news media storm converges on the Patriots and the Seahawks, both teams will try to keep their focus on the game. The questions will be endless. The tension will build. The intrigue will increase.Wilson, now a veteran of intense scrutiny, insisted Sunday after the Seahawks engineered a thrilling comeback to beat the Packers, 28-22, in overtime, that he would treat the Super Bowl like any other game.“The game is still going to be 100 yards, and it’s still going to be 53 and a third, and it’s still going to be a great game to see,” Wilson said, referring to the dimensions of a football field. “The refs are still going to call the whistles the same way. There may be a great halftime show with Katy Perry, but other than that, the game is not going to be any different.”Good luck. With hundreds of millions of fans watching around the world, tickets going for thousands of dollars and billions wagered on the game’s outcome, the Super Bowl is different.Teams that have great records but fail to win championships are appreciated but hardly embraced, at least outside their hometowns. Even teams that win just one Super Bowl are remembered fondly. The 1985 Chicago Bears, for instance, the 2002 Tampa Bay Buccaneers and the 2009 New Orleans Saints all made a mark.The Seahawks will want to win again not only to bring another Vince Lombardi Trophy to Seattle, but to erase any talk that last year’s title was a fluke. Wilson’s heroics on Sunday aside, the Seahawks are built on a dominant defense that has given up the fewest points and fewest yards per game during the past two seasons. If Seattle wins another title, its defense may join the No-Name Defense of the Dolphins and the Steel Curtain of the Steelers in the 1970s as stout, defensive-minded champions.AdvertisementThe Patriots have already proved themselves. Belichick and Brady have formed the bedrock of one of the N.F.L.’s great dynasties. In addition to their three Super Bowl titles starting in the 2001 season, they have won 10 or more games 12 seasons in a row, including a 16-0 record in 2007.With the Patriots’ domination of the Indianapolis Colts on Sunday, 45-7, Belichick became the winningest coach in N.F.L. postseason history. Brady is the first quarterback to lead a team to six Super Bowls. Both want to burnish their legends.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“We’ve had a lot of good teams in the past,” Brady said. “This one is going to have to win a very important game to kind of leave our legacy.”But the Patriots have exited the playoffs quietly several times, and they were stunned by Eli Manning and the Giants twice in the Super Bowl. To manic competitors like Belichick and Brady, the near misses seem to sting as much as the victories feel good.“To make it this far is a great accomplishment for our team,” Brady said. “I hope the best is yet to come.”A version of this article appears in print on January 20, 2015, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: This Super Bowl Comes With a Script Written in the Stars.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.