
On Tennis By                     
 CHRISTOPHER CLAREY
 
JAN. 19, 2015
MELBOURNE, Australia — Rafael Nadal has long made a custom of sounding more worried than everybody else. But this time, there seemed to be legitimate cause for consternation all around.After a rough patch in 2014, full of aches and pains and absentee slips, he arrived Down Under without his appendix and without a victory this year after blowing a lead in his opening match of the season in Doha, Qatar, against the German Michael Berrer.Berrer, ranked 127th at age 34, was merely the latest member of the proletariat to get the better of Nadal, one of the greatest and most relentlessly competitive champions in tennis history.But there would be no more upheaval on Monday at the Australian Open. Facing a familiar, older foe in Mikhail Youzhny, Nadal played a shaky opening game and was then a rock the rest of the way as he closed out a convincing 6-3, 6-2, 6-2 victory.AdvertisementYouzhny, at 32 and coming back from health problems of his own, is not what he was. But Nadal certainly did a convincing impression of what he was: moving and striking the ball with hallmark energy and precision, finding power and the corners with his left-handed serve and facing just one break point, which he saved with an overhead.Advertisement“The timing on the backhand was significantly better,” said the coach and analyst Darren Cahill. “And as his confidence grew his movement started to return to the Rafa we know.”He produced consistent depth off both wings and several forehand passing shots that barely provided Youzhny time to flinch.By the end, as the winners and fist pumps piled up, it seemed high time that Nadal go back to being more worried than the rest of us.“It’s no surprise to me,” Youzhny said later. “Journalists talk about his health and his head, but the players know that he already won it here. And I think he’s had a good preparation and enough time to improve his game for the Grand Slam.”He is now likely to have more time to further improve his game and mood before the greater challenges to come. Youzhny, a former United States Open semifinalist who has beaten Nadal four times, was clearly a threat if Nadal was not in fine form. But Nadal’s next opponent will be Tim Smyczek, a 27-year-old American qualifier ranked 112th.Smyczek, not surprisingly, knows a great deal more about Nadal than Nadal knows about him.“I’m really looking forward to it,” Smyczek said. “It’s going to be a really cool experience. You don’t have too high expectations going into it, other than it’s going to be an opportunity for me to play a guy I’ve looked up to for a very long time. He’s an amazing champion, and he’ll go down as one of the greatest tennis players ever, so it’s going to be really a treat for me, and I’m going to try to squeeze every bit of fun I can out of it.”Was it more Nadal’s achievements or his character that he admired?“Both,” Smyczek said. “He’s one of the nicest guys in the locker room. He’ll always say hello to you, and he just seems like a really good guy, and obviously it’s hard to argue with his achievements, however many French Opens he’s won.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Nine,” said a reporter, helpfully.“Yeah, right,” Smyczek said.Nadal also has won two United States Opens and two Wimbledons, but he has won, for now, only one Australian Open. Rod Laver Arena, where he shined against Youzhny on Monday, has generated a particularly deep mix of emotions for him through the years.AdvertisementIt is the place where he fought past his Spanish compatriot Fernando Verdasco in a grueling semifinal in 2009 and then reduced Roger Federer to tears in the final. It is the place where he hustled and tussled for nearly six hours before losing the longest men’s Grand Slam singles final of the Open era to Novak Djokovic in 2012.It is the place where he beat Federer convincingly once more in the semifinals last year only to be upset in the final by the longtime Swiss No. 2 Stan Wawrinka.That final, a match in which Nadal’s back troubled him more than he conceded at the time, set the tone for his challenging season in which he would miss the United States Open with a wrist injury and the eight-man World Tour Finals because of an appendectomy.That was the tournament where Federer withdrew with back problems of his own before the final. On Monday in Melbourne, Federer revealed that he had also reinjured his back a week later during the decisive match of the Davis Cup final against Richard Gasquet of France that he would go on to win for Switzerland.“Happily it wasn’t as serious,” Federer said.Nadal, who has said he received stem-cell treatment on his back during his forced layoff, knows his own problems require constant maintenance, but he said that his back was not, for the moment, limiting him.“I needed a few more matches in Qatar, but that didn’t happen,” Nadal said of his loss to Berrer. “After the rough period of time with the injuries, you arrive here with doubts, and this first match was tough mentally for me.”He will certainly face more dangerous servers than Youzhny, men much closer to their peaks and their primes, but there was still much to feel good about Monday even if Nadal was far from prepared to revise his statement that he did not believe he was ready to win the Australian Open.“What I say the other day is the real thing,” he said. “I have one match. That’s better than two days ago, but I need more to feel that I am ready to do something very important here, no?”Perhaps. But as Nadal proved in 2013, when he returned from injury to reclaim the No. 1 ranking, he can get ready in a hurry.A version of this article appears in print on January 20, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »