By GARDINER HARRISJAN. 19, 2015
MELBOURNE, Australia — It was a day of high drama for the top female tennis players at the Australian Open, with eight of the top seeds losing, another vomiting on court before eventually winning, and a former champion announcing that she was pregnant.Having reached the finals of the Brisbane International the week before, Ana Ivanovic of Serbia came into the Open as one of the favorites. But she has proved unable to control her nerves in Grand Slam matches since winning the French Open in 2008, and the jitters seemed to undo her again on Monday on the first day of play.Ivanovic won the first set, 6-1, not so much because she was playing well but because her opponent, Lucie Hradecka of the Czech Republic, played worse, getting only 40 percent of her first serves in.But in the second set, an early error at the net seemed to undo Ivanovic. She began looping shots back to Hradecka, who started crushing the ball into the corners. Ivanovic lost one game in which she double-faulted three times.AdvertisementWith Ivanovic doing so poorly, Hradecka ran away with the third set, 6-2.“It was really tough for me to find a rhythm,” Ivanovic said. “In the third set, she really raised her game.”AdvertisementIvanovic said that a first-round loss was a difficult beginning for her season.“But the year is young, and I really have to sit and work on a few things,” she said.Later, Christina McHale became the second American player — the first being Pete Sampras in 1996 at the United States Open — to vomit and emerge triumphant during a Grand Slam match.“First I was feeling it in my shoulder. I was feeling some pain. Then I started not to feel well at all. So I threw up,” McHale said after the match. Actually, she threw up twice. “Once I did that, I felt much better.”McHale triumphed in the third set, 12-10, by crushing a forehand service return into the right corner and then slamming a short response into the left.“I would have preferred not to have thrown up on the court,” she said. “I told myself to keep fighting. The match wasn’t over.”At least eight seeded female players lost matches on Monday, including Belinda Bencic, Karolina Pliskova, Anastasia Pavlyuchenkova, Sabine Lisicki, Svetlana Kuznetsova, Lucie Safarova and Angelique Kerber.Simona Halep of Romania, the tournament’s No. 3 seed, easily beat Karin Knapp of Italy 6-3, 6-2.And Li Na, who recently retired, announced to the crowd that she was expecting a child.Advertisement“Dennis made just one ace,” she said of her husband and longtime coach, to laughter.In the men’s draw, Roger Federer won his match easily, 6-4, 6-2, 7-5, cruising through his own service games and suddenly breaking his opponent Yen-Hsun Lu at 5-5 in the third set with apparent ease. Earlier, Andy Murray won in three sets against a surprisingly tough qualifier, Yuki Bhambri of India.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Bhambri started pressuring Murray’s serve by crushing his returns, and he succeeded in breaking his serve early in the third set. Murray broke back and won the set and the match in a tiebreaker.“I thought it was a tricky match,” Murray said. “He got very close to the baseline and he was coming forward a lot.”Bhambri said later that he was thrilled with his performance but knew he had to improve his fitness to compete at the highest levels of tennis.“I was worried that it was going to go 6-0, 6-0 and 6-0,” Bhambri said. “But I definitely held my own, and as the match progressed, felt more and more comfortable.”Grigor Dimitrov of Bulgaria easily won his first-round match while Borna Coric, a teenage sensation from Croatia, was beaten by Jérémy Chardy of France in four sets.Dimitrov needed just three sets to defeat Dustin Brown, a hard-hitting hopeful from Germany who may have the longest hair in men’s tennis history. Ranked 10th, Dimitrov is widely seen as one of a new generation of stars challenging the dominance of Novak Djokovic, Rafael Nadal and Federer, after whom he has patterned his game.Brown had few answers for Dimitrov’s precision and often resorted to unfortunate drop shots that either fell short or that Dimitrov easily retrieved. Dimitrov won 6-2, 6-3, 6-2.Coric, who turned heads in October when he beat Nadal in Basel, Switzerland, was overwhelmed by Chardy’s blistering serves and powerful forehand in four sets.AdvertisementServing at 5-5 in the third set, Coric found himself chasing heavy baseline shots from Chardy, who twice hit down-the-line forehand winners. Down a break point, Coric finally rushed the net only to dump a volley wide.Coric responded by whacking the net with his racket while Chardy screamed in triumph. Chardy won the next game and the set with an ace.Lukas Lacko of Slovakia outlasted Máximo González, one of Argentina’s best hopes in this tournament after Juan Martín del Potro bowed out because of a wrist injury. The two men were evenly matched through four sets, with González winning the fourth in a tie break. Lacko came back to win the fifth set 6-1.Tomas Berdych of the Czech Republic won his match 6-3, 7-6, 6-3 against Alejandro Falla of Colombia, while James Duckworth, a great hope for Australia, won in five sets against Blaz Kavcic of Slovenia.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.