

      By WILSON ANDREWS, 
    
KEN BELSON and 
    
JOE WARD

JAN. 21, 2015

N.F.L. officials are investigating whether the Patriots violated league rules by using footballs that were not properly inflated during the A.F.C. championship game against the Colts on Sunday.
Related Article
The urethane bladder inside the ball must be inflated to between 12.5 and 13.5 pounds of pressure. The ball can weigh 14 to 15 ounces.21 to 21.25inches 21 to 21.25inches The urethane bladder inside the ball must be inflated to between 12.5 and 13.5 pounds of pressure. The ball can weigh 14 to 15 ounces.21 to 21.25inches The urethane bladder inside the ball must be inflated to between 12.5 and 13.5 pounds of pressure. The ball can weigh 14 to 15 ounces.The referees inspect the dozen game balls that each team selects 2 hours 15 minutes before the game. In inclement weather, teams also bring a dozen backup balls to be tested as well. The balls remain in the referee’s possession until just before the game, when they are delivered to each team’s ball boys on the sideline. Wilson Sporting Goods, the maker of N.F.L. footballs, said that the only way to inflate or deflate a ball quickly is to use an inflation needle.Many players find that deflated balls are easier to grip, throw and catch, particularly in wet weather. It rained for most of the game in question. One downside to deflated balls is that they don’t travel as far when thrown. This disadvantage would have been less important to the Patriots, whose offense relies on mostly short passes. The Colts, who would have used their own footballs, tend to throw more long balls.Yards the ball traveled in the air for passes beyond the line of scrimmage.

Incomplete pass

Completed pass
Illustration by Sergio PeçanhaTom Brady threw three touchdown passes as he and Coach Bill Belichick earned a trip to their sixth Super Bowl together, with a chance to win their fourth title.AdvertisementTom Brady threw three touchdown passes as he and Coach Bill Belichick earned a trip to their sixth Super Bowl together, with a chance to win their fourth title.