By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSJAN. 20, 2015
P. K. Subban scored on a power play 4 minutes 9 seconds into overtime, lifting the host Montreal Canadiens to a 2-1 victory over the Nashville Predators on Tuesday night in the final game for both teams before the All-Star break.Alex Galchenyuk also scored for Montreal, which was coming off a win Saturday against the Islanders.Mike Ribeiro scored for Nashville, which failed to win after a loss for the first time in 14 games this season. They were beaten, 5-2, by Detroit on Saturday.Carey Price was back in the Canadiens’ net after missing two games with an upper-body injury. He made 37 saves.LIGHTNING 4, CANUCKS 1 Alex Killorn had two goals, Valtteri Filppula added a goal and an assist, and host Tampa Bay took over the top spot in the Eastern Conference by beating Vancouver.AdvertisementBrian Boyle also scored for the Lightning, who lead the Islanders by 1 point in the East. Ben Bishop stopped 27 shots in Tampa Bay’s eighth straight home win.AdvertisementThe Canucks got 22 saves from Ryan Miller. Frank Corrado ruined Bishop’s shutout bid at 8 minutes 9 seconds of the third.BLACKHAWKS 6, COYOTES 1 Andrew Shaw broke out of a scoring slump with two goals, and host Chicago routed Arizona.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Patrick Kane had a goal and two assists, and the rookie Teuvo Teravainen had a goal and an assist for the Blackhawks. Kane’s goal in the second was No. 200 for his career.RED WINGS 5, WILD 4 Gustav Nyquist and Pavel Datsyuk scored in a shootout, and host Detroit outlasted Minnesota after the Wild rallied from three goals down in the third period.Nyquist also scored in regulation, but Detroit blew a 4-1 lead in the third period.Zach Parise scored twice for the Wild, but he missed his attempt at the beginning of the shootout.FLYERS 3, PENGUINS 2 Claude Giroux scored 3:57 into overtime, lifting host Philadelphia over Pittsburgh in a game that was filled with fights.This throwback clash featured one ejection and nearly 100 penalty minutes.OILERS 5, CAPITALS 4 Teddy Purcell scored the decisive goal in a shootout after Edmonton rallied from a two-goal deficit late in regulation, and the Oilers ended Washington’s seven-game home winning streak.Alex Ovechkin scored twice in the opening 14 minutes for the Capitals.A version of this article appears in print on January 21, 2015, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Canadiens Knock Off Predators as Price Returns to the Net.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.