AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated Press and Gardiner HarrisNo. 2-ranked Maria Sharapova saved two match points in a narrow escape against No. 150-ranked Alexandra Panova at the Australian Open in Melbourne on Wednesday, advancing to the third round with a 6-1, 4-6, 7-5 win.Sharapova made 51 unforced errors as she went for the lines, saving some of her high-risk winners for when she needed them most in the 10th game of the third set when Panova, who had to come through qualifying and had only one previous win at a major tournament, was serving for the match.“I was one point away twice today from going out of the tournament,” Sharapova said. “She played a pretty inspired match.”In men’s singles, Andy Murray did not let the parochial crowds in Margaret Court Arena bother him as he beat the Australian Marinko Matosevic, 6-1, 6-3, 6-2.Matosevic’s first-round opponent, Alexander Kudryavtsev, accused the boisterous Australian fans of behaving like “animals” after losing in five sets to the Melbourne resident.Murray beat Matosevic in straight sets in the second round of last year’s French Open and at this year’s Hopman Cup.IN OTHER MATCHES Tomas Berdych, ranked seventh, had a shaky start to his second-round match, losing an early break of serve to Jürgen Melzer of Austria on double fault. But he soon broke Melzer back and won the first set in a 7-0 tiebreak. Berdych broke Melzer in the sixth game of the second set after Melzer dumped a forehand into the net; Berdych won the set, 6-2. Melzer was broken at the same moment in the third set, this time when he hit a sliced backhand into the net. Berdych won 14 of 17 net points and won the match, 7-6, 6-2, 6-2.Christina McHale of the United States was crushed by Carina Witthöft of Germany, 6-3, 6-0, in the second round. McHale lost her first service game in part because Witthöft hit the top of the net twice, with the ball dribbling over, and things went downhill from there. McHale won only one service game the entire match because of blistering returns from Witthöft, and she failed to win a point in the second set until the third game.Ranked 105 in the world, Witthöft, 19, had never before advanced past the first round in a Grand Slam. GARDINER HARRISDEL POTRO HAS OPERATION The former United States Open champion Juan Martín del Potro had an operation on his left wrist at the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minn., just days after he pulled out of the Australian Open. (AP)WILLIAMS SISTERS WITHDRAW Serena and Venus Williams have pulled out of women’s doubles at the Australian Open. A tournament official confirmed the Williams sisters had withdrawn but did not specify a reason.  (AP)Advertisement