By BEN SHPIGELJAN. 20, 2015
For his most critical hire as the Jets’ new coach, Todd Bowles turned to Chan Gailey as offensive coordinator.Gailey, a former head coach in Dallas and Buffalo, will come out of quasi retirement to join a team with an unstable quarterback situation and take over one of the N.F.L.’s worst offenses. Gailey favors a spread offense, but it is unclear what system he intends to run with the Jets.Gailey’s mission will be to develop a quarterback and instill consistency in an offense that ranked 28th last season in scoring and yards per play, and threw for the fewest passing yards in the league. But he figures to serve another role, too, that of a sage for Bowles, who has never been a head coach. Gailey spent 11 seasons in that capacity with the Cowboys, the Bills and Georgia Tech.Gailey, 63, was out of the N.F.L. the last two seasons after coaching Buffalo for two years. This will be his fifth coordinator position.AdvertisementPATRIOTS BRUSH OFF BALL ISSUE  The Patriots are brushing off and even finding humor in questions about whether they used underinflated footballs in their A.F.C. championship game against the Colts.AdvertisementThe N.F.L. has not indicated how long its inquiry will last.Tom Brady says the investigation is the least of his worries. On Twitter, Rob Gronkowski posted a photo of one of his signature post-touchdown spikes with the words: “Warning: Gronking may cause deflation.” (AP)MARRONE BECOMES ASSISTANT Jacksonville has hired the former Buffalo head coach Doug Marrone as assistant head coach and offensive line coach. (AP)Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.RAVENS CHOOSE TRESTMAN Baltimore has hired Marc Trestman, the former Chicago coach, as offensive coordinator.Trestman was fired by the Bears last month after going 5-11 in his second season with the team. He interviewed for Cleveland’s offensive coordinator job before taking the position with the Ravens. (AP)BEARS SELECT 49ERS’ FANGIO Chicago hired the former San Francisco defensive coordinator Vic Fangio to run its struggling defense under its new coach, John Fox.  (AP)RAIDERS HIRE MUSGRAVE Oakland Coach Jack Del Rio picked Bill Musgrave as his offensive coordinator after choosing him more than a decade ago for the same position in Jacksonville.  (AP)WASHINGTON HAS COORDINATOR Washington hired the former San Diego linebackers coach Joe Barry to become its defensive coordinator. (AP)A version of this article appears in print on January 21, 2015, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Jets Hire Gailey as Offensive Coordinator.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.