By PAT PICKENSJAN. 20, 2015
Some critics believed Rick Nash was the reason the Rangers did not win the Stanley Cup last year.In his first full season in New York, Nash, the top-line left wing, posted weaker numbers than he did during the lockout-shortened 2012-13 campaign. Nash followed with an even more disappointing postseason last year, when he scored only three goals in 25 games, none in three of the four series, including the Stanley Cup final.Skeptics wondered if Nash, a two-time 40-goal scorer, was worth the high-priced, long-term commitment the Rangers made when they traded for him in the summer of 2012.But this season, Nash has silenced the critics. Through 44 games — the unofficial first half of the Rangers season — he leads the team in goals, points, shots and plus/minus and is probably a Hart Trophy candidate as the N.H.L.’s most valuable player.Nash was active again Tuesday night against the Ottawa Senators in the Rangers’ final game before the break — a 3-2 overtime win at Madison Square Garden. Although he was kept off the scoreboard, and nearly put the puck into his own net late in the second period, he took five shots on goal, drew a second-period penalty and narrowly missed on at least two other occasions.AdvertisementThe Rangers showcased scoring depth in the second period when Kevin Hayes picked up his sixth goal of the season at 9 minutes 29 seconds. But the Rangers surrendered two goals 1:03 apart in the second — including Erik Karlsson’s go-ahead goal on the power play at 14:41.Chris Kreider tied the game at 2:42 of the third with his 10th goal before Carl Hagelin won it at 2:55 of the extra session.AdvertisementCoach Alain Vigneault took Nash off a line with Derek Stepan and Martin St. Louis and matched him with Derick Brassard and Mats Zuccarello — who shared a line with Benoit Pouliot last season.“He’s really dynamic, plays in both ends, skates well, long reach,” Brassard said of Nash. “It’s been a lot of fun playing with him this year.”The move has also produced results. Nash entered play Tuesday night against Ottawa tied for the league lead in goals with 28 and was on pace for 54 — which would be a career best. He has recorded points in 30 games, and the Rangers have won 16 of the 22 games in which Nash has scored a goal.And as that new line has come together, so too have the Rangers. They have won 16 of their last 19 and enter the break 5 points behind the Islanders for the division lead.“We’re having a lot of success,” Brassard said. “He’s been really good for our team, and he’s one of the reasons why we’re at that stage right now.”Nash’s exploits earned him alternate captain status for Team Toews in this weekend’s All-Star Game in Columbus, where Nash played for nine seasons.Advertisement“He’s a star player,” Zuccarello said. “That’s what you expect. I don’t know how long he’s been in the league, but you’ve seen that every year. It’s not like it’s a surprise.”Still, Vigneault was unsatisfied by the effort of his top line, which was held off the scoresheet for the fourth time in five games.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I thought that line had some looks, but I definitely think with the skill level there and the compete level there that they can be better than what they showed tonight,” Vigneualt said. “They’re aware of that.”Zuccarello said: “I think our strength is our team. We have four lines rolling. Everyone can score, and everyone can defend, so I think we’re a good, solid team.”Yet, of all Nash’s gifts, one is particularly underrated, according to goalie Henrik Lundqvist.“He’s a pretty quiet guy, but he leads the way he plays,” Lundqvist said. “He plays hard, but the work ethic is so impressive to see. I think it’s inspiring for a lot of guys to see. It’s not all about scoring or points, it’s about working hard and doing what’s best for the team — and he shows that. It’s great to have a guy like that on the team.”A version of this article appears in print on January 21, 2015, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: With Nash Pacing Action, the Rangers Prevail in Overtime.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.