By GARDINER HARRISJAN. 20, 2015
MELBOURNE, Australia —  Wimbledon has Henman Hill, hallowed ground where thousands go to watch — nay, worship — Britain’s tennis greats. The Australian Open has a beer garden where many patrons barely noticed Tuesday night that Lleyton Hewitt, a local favorite, was battling to get into the tournament’s second round.“I turn around every 10 minutes or so to see how Lleyton’s doing,” said Prue Bauer, a saleswoman from Brisbane who was drinking wine and chatting amiably, with her back to beer garden’s giant video screens. “See? He’s doing fine.”Australia is one of the world’s great sports-loving nations, and fans here cheer their compatriots with a gusto rarely matched elsewhere. But they also like their beer and socials. This tournament is widely referred to as the Happy Open for a reason.A 10-minute walk or a five-minute tram ride from Melbourne’s business district, the grounds for these two weeks of tennis also serve as a watering hole for members of the city’s office crowd. Many arrive straight from work, stuffing ties into pockets and stashing work bags under tables after plunking down about $23 for a grounds pass. In the beer garden, performances by live rock bands compete for attention with the matches, turning the area into as much a music venue as a sports center.AdvertisementMany of those interviewed Tuesday night said they were keen tennis fans, but acknowledged they were not following Hewitt’s match closely.Advertisement“Look, you could have a ferret-racing competition on the TV here, and we’d all come anyway,” said Michael Doherty, a teacher. “The weather’s great, and there’s beer, music and good people.”Granted, Hewitt has broken this crowd’s heart many times. Although he has won two Grand Slam titles, he has never won the Australian Open. His closest call ended with a loss to Marat Safin in the 2005 final. Since then, Hewitt has not advanced past the fourth round in Melbourne, or past the quarterfinals in any Grand Slam tournament. For the past two years, he has failed even to survive the first round here.The crowd who watched him play inside Rod Laver Arena cheered him lustily, but those in the beer garden barely noticed when Hewitt secured a crucial service break in the eighth game of the first set when his opponent, Ze Zhang, double-faulted.“What?” asked Natalie Reid, who had come with four female friends from Echuca, which is about 100 miles north of Melbourne, to drink vodka and gossip. “Oh, I’m only mildly paying attention.”The Echuca five were all wearing neon-colored T-shirts with the words, “Aussie, Aussie, Aussie, Oi! Oi! Oi!” They have been coming to the Australian Open together for 10 years, leaving their children and husbands at home. They insisted they were huge tennis fans. But Reid, who gave her age as “40ish,” said the women let nothing get between them and their fun together, not even Hewitt.Bridget Brady, 21, a student at nearby Australian Catholic University, was lying on the grass, her head propped up with a sweater, watching the match closely. She groaned when, in the second game of the second set, Zhang returned Hewitt’s serve for a clean winner and a crucial break of serve.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Lleyton has been an icon ever since I can remember,” Brady said. “He may only win a few matches here, but everyone loves him.”So why were so few paying attention to his match?“Because most of the people here are drunk,” she said, glancing around. “It would be fun if it was more like Henman Hill in Wimbledon.”AdvertisementPete Woolley, who also watched the match closely, said he had moved to Melbourne from London only a week earlier. For three years straight, Woolley said, he had stood in line for hours but failed to secure tickets to Wimbledon. In Melbourne, he waited 15 minutes.“I’m missing Wimbledon’s strawberries and cream, but at least I’m in,” he said.Indeed, the Australian Open might be the most democratic of the Grand Slams, in part because Australia’s small population and relative isolation mean tournament organizers must attract far more than just avid tennis enthusiasts.The Australian Open is expected to host up to 700,000 visitors this year, more than any Grand Slam except the United States Open, said Tom Larner, the tournament’s events and facilities director. After play ends this year, a pedestrian bridge will be constructed to make the walk from downtown even easier by 2017, and next year, the tournament grounds will be expanded to include an area along the nearby Yarra River, Larner said.But the resulting crowds here are quite different from those who trek all the way from central London to Wimbledon. Still, some in the crowd finally cheered when Hewitt earned his first match point in the fourth set. And as Hewitt battled through four more match points — finally winning when Zhang hit a backhand long — most in the garden turned to watch and cheer.“In England, the average Joe just can’t go to Wimbledon or a lot of other sporting events,” said Sam Moloney, a 29-year-old teacher who saluted the giant screen with a beer. “Here, anyone can get in.”A version of this article appears in print on January 21, 2015, on Page B15 of the New York edition with the headline: Tournament Puts Its Lawn to an Unusual Use: Knocking the Froth Off.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.