By DAVID WALDSTEINJAN. 20, 2015
Todd Bowles had at least six interviews for N.F.L. head coaching jobs over the past five years. After each interview and rejection, he called an adviser to report who had been present, what questions had been asked, how long the interview had lasted and how he had performed.Mr. Bowles was operating under an N.F.L. diversity program that requires teams to interview at least one minority candidate when searching for a new head coach and requires that those interviews be conducted in good faith and to the same standards as those for other candidates.On Wednesday, when Mr. Bowles, 51, is introduced as the Jets’ coach, his long journey to the position will be the latest demonstration of the program, established under a regulation known as the Rooney Rule. The policy has been much admired, much emulated and much studied. Some, however, worry that it is merely tokenism in a league that is dominated by black players but has relatively few members of minority groups in leadership positions.Charles Ogletree, a professor at Harvard University’s law school and the founder of the Charles Hamilton Houston Institute for Race and Justice, embraces the rule. But he said that it had not corrected the wide disparity between the numbers of black players and black coaches.Advertisement“There is a big difference between interviewing and hiring,” Professor Ogletree said. “There has just been too little effort in that regard. There needs to be more hiring in a significant way, and not just because they are black, but because they are talented and do well when they get those jobs. There is no acceptable reason for this underrepresentation.”AdvertisementThere were two black coaches in the N.F.L. in 2001. After the Rooney Rule was enacted, in 2003, the number increased to a high of seven in 2006, later matched in 2011. There are currently six head coaches who have minority backgrounds, including one, Ron Rivera of the Carolina Panthers, who is of Puerto Rican and Mexican descent. The others, along with Mr. Bowles, are Marvin Lewis of the Cincinnati Bengals, Jim Caldwell of the Detroit Lions, Mike Tomlin of the Pittsburgh Steelers and Lovie Smith of the Tampa Bay Buccaneers.Among the league’s hundreds of assistant coaches, 16 percent were members of minority groups in 1991; that proportion increased to 36 percent in 2007 and 29 percent in 2013.Mr. Bowles gives the N.F.L. a net increase of one nonwhite head coach over last season, in a league where 67 percent of the players were African-American in 2013, according to data published by the Institute for Diversity and Ethics in Sport.“I think the rule is working well, and there are ways to reinforce it,” said Jeremi Duru, a law professor at American University in Washington who worked on the rule for the Fritz Pollard Alliance Foundation, a group that monitors the league’s minority hiring practices. “And I think you also see that over time, the culture of the league has changed a bit.”For much of its history, the N.F.L. floundered with diversity hiring in leadership positions, despite the legacy of Fritz Pollard, an African-American who in 1921 broke ground as the head coach of the Akron Pros of the American Professional Football League. A year later, the league changed its name to the National Football League.It was almost seven decades before the Los Angeles Raiders hired Art Shell as the league’s second African-American coach, in 1989. But other seemingly strong coaching candidates, like Tony Dungy, were routinely passed over.John Wooten, a former player and executive in the N.F.L. and now the chairman of the Fritz Pollard Alliance, said he had finally found an ally in Paul Tagliabue, the commissioner from 1989 to 2006. First, Tagliabue merely asked teams to interview members of minority groups. That approach did not work well.AdvertisementWhen Herman Edwards was an assistant coach with the Kansas City Chiefs in the early 1990s, his fellow assistant Mr. Dungy was thought to be head-coach material. But he and Mr. Edwards would lament the seemingly meaningless interviews that Mr. Dungy was given: perfunctory phone calls, for the most part, that would later be leaked to the news media so teams could claim they had interviewed a minority candidate.Mr. Edwards, who said he was named the Jets’ head coach in 2001 because the owner Woody Johnson had heard him speak at owners’ meetings, said he liked the intent of the Rooney Rule. But he cautioned that repeated interviews without a job offer could create a stigma. Other teams, he said, might wonder, Why isn’t anyone hiring this guy?“That’s what happened with Tony,” Mr. Edwards said about Mr. Dungy. “He would tell me: ‘Herm, I got a call asking if I would be interested. I’m reading about it in the paper, but I never heard back from the them.’ ”Eventually, Mr. Dungy was hired by the Buccaneers in 1996, and was then fired after his third consecutive winning season in 2001; he later won the Super Bowl as the Indianapolis Colts’ head coach. The same year, Dennis Green was fired by the Minnesota Vikings after his first losing season in 10 years. After those two dismissals, the lawyers Johnnie Cochran and Cyrus Mehri issued a report criticizing the lack of diversity in the league’s coaching ranks and threatened a lawsuit.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Mehri had won large settlements in discrimination cases against Texaco in 1996 and Coca-Cola in 2000. Those settlements created outside task forces to monitor and make suggestions about hiring practices and pay scales at the companies — precursors to the Rooney Rule. But according to Kenneth Shropshire, the director of the Wharton Sports Business Initiative at the University of Pennsylvania, the N.F.L. did not copy its rule from the corporate world.“If anything, it is the other way around,” Mr. Shropshire said. “Some business are looking at adopting similar rules.”In July, Robert L. Johnson, the founder of Black Entertainment Television, supported the passage of Senate Resolution 511, introduced by Tim Scott, Republican of South Carolina. The resolution follows Mr. Johnson’s so-called R.L.J. Rule, which asks companies to voluntarily interview at least two minority candidates for managerial jobs. The bill cites the Rooney Rule in its opening sentence.In 2002, within a month of Mr. Cochran and Mr. Mehri’s report, Mr. Tagliabue appointed a diversity committee, headed by Dan Rooney, the Steelers’ chairman.Professor Duru said the rule included procedural standards mandating that interviews be conducted at the same location as those for other candidates and for the same length of time and that they be conducted with people of the same rank. It also specified fines for lack of compliance.AdvertisementThe N.F.L. and the Pollard Alliance monitor the process, and Professor Duru said that after a $200,000 fine was levied on the Lions when they hired Steve Mariucci in 2003 without interviewing anyone else, there had been no further violations.The league has also expanded the rule to apply to general managers. (The Jets interviewed their own front-office assistant, Rod Graves, before hiring Mike Maccagnan as general manager.) There are seven minority general managers in the N.F.L.But in a sobering reversal in 2013, the league went 0 for 15. No minority candidates were hired for any of eight coaching vacancies or seven general manager positions. After that, the league introduced an advisory committee to help identify candidates and bolstered a training program to help candidates of all backgrounds move up the ladder, efforts applauded by the Pollard Alliance.Mr. Bowles, who grew up in Elizabeth, N.J., played in the N.F.L. from 1986 to 1993 and started as an assistant coach at Morehouse College in Atlanta in 1997. He eventually ascended to the N.F.L., where he held several assistant positions, including one in Dallas with Bill Parcells, who has urged teams to hire Mr. Bowles as a head coach.“I think he’ll do very well,” Mr. Parcells said. “Now, he’s not playing solitaire out there. He needs the full support of the organization to succeed.”In 2013, Mr. Bowles joined the Arizona Cardinals as defensive coordinator. Before the latest hiring period, Mr. Bowles was a candidate with the Kansas City Chiefs, the Lions, the Denver Broncos, the Oakland Raiders and — twice — the Miami Dolphins. None of those interviews led to jobs.“It was frustrating, sure,” said Mr. Wooten, the adviser who debriefed Mr. Bowles after interviews. “For all of us. But over all, the process has to help him. After the last round, we talked about making some changes in his approach, and to his credit, he did. He told me after his first interview with the Jets, he nailed it.”Attempts to reach Mr. Bowles through his agent were unsuccessful.Mr. Wooten acknowledged that some interviews might be token efforts, but he said the experience candidates gained even in those could be invaluable. Robert Gulliver, the league’s chief of human resources, has worked with Mr. Wooten to supplement the rule with the advisory board and the training program. He lauded the effectiveness of those efforts but added that the rule had not guaranteed that Mr. Bowles would be hired.“He got the job due to his own merits,” Mr. Gulliver said.Of the seven head coaching vacancies this year, six have been filled, and Mr. Bowles is the only minority to have been hired, leaving the N.F.L. with a total of 19 percent of head coaches who are from minority backgrounds. For some, that is not enough. Others say they believe Mr. Bowles represents what the Rooney Rule was designed to do.Advertisement“I am not an affirmative-action guy,” Mr. Wooten said. “I don’t believe 70 percent of the coaches should be black, or any percentage. I believe the best man should get the job, and for years, that wasn’t always true. In this case, it is. The hope is that one day we won’t even need a rule.”A version of this article appears in print on January 21, 2015, on Page A1 of the New York edition with the headline: Diversity Rule in N.F.L. Makes Unsteady Gains.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.