By GARY SANTANIELLOJAN. 20, 2015
In October 1953, after winning the Masters, the United States Open and the British Open in the same season, Ben Hogan wrote a letter to club pros, seeking their support for his fledgling line of golf clubs.“These clubs shall be as near perfect as modern day tools and instruments can perform,” he said.Hogan meant it. He stopped production of the first batch of his clubs in 1954 because they did not meet his standards. It cost his company more than $100,00, and it would be another year before the first sets came out.Over the next four decades, the Ben Hogan Company produced innovative and popular clubs, played by tour pros and skilled amateurs alike. As recently as 2003, Jim Furyk won the United States Open with Hogan clubs.But until Tuesday at the annual P.G.A. Merchandise Show in Orlando, Fla., golfers had not seen new clubs bearing the Hogan name in seven years.AdvertisementAfter Hogan’s death in 1997, the company strayed from its roots as an elite club maker. It went through a succession of owners after Hogan sold it to AMF in 1960. Callaway purchased the company out of bankruptcy from Top-Flite Golf for $125 million in 2003. Five years later, it ceased production of golf clubs. In 2012, Callaway sold the brand name to Perry Ellis International, which continued to sell Hogan golf balls, apparel and accessories.Terry Koehler, 62, grew up idolizing Hogan, a fellow Texan who had played golf with Koehler’s father before World War II. In the 1990s, Koehler was the marketing director for Hogan clubs.In 2012, Koehler was making specialty wedges for SCOR Golf in Victoria, Tex., when he approached Perry Ellis’s president, Oscar Feldenkreis, about buying the Hogan brand and resurrecting its club line. Koehler launched his company in 2014.In addition to financing for the venture, Koehler lined up former employees with more than 130 years of Hogan experience. He also announced the company would return to its roots, and name the first line of clubs the Ft. Worth 15 irons. The production site is less than 10 miles from the original Hogan plant on West Pafford Street in Fort Worth.Koehler said he was committed to making clubs as Hogan did, telling his employees, “If you don’t think Mr. Hogan would like it, don’t ask me to approve it.”AdvertisementRonnie McGraw was hired by Hogan in 1980. Koehler lured him out of retirement at age 78 to grind the master models for the new clubs.“I know if Mr. Hogan were still alive, he’d love this story,” McGraw said. “I’d almost work for free to do this, to make sure it gets done right.”Drawing on Hogan’s history as an innovator in club design, Koehler and his team introduced classic forged irons with a progressive weighting scheme around the club’s sweet spot, not its perimeter. “We think these clubs will be more forgiving than any blade out there,” he said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.According to the research firm Golf Datatech, equipment sales in 2014 were $2.4 billion, $540 million for irons. But Hogan is entering a golf equipment market dominated by Callaway, Titleist, TaylorMade and Ping.“A niche product, and in part a niche brand, with an iconic brand name, always has a place in the golf market,” said Tom Stine, a partner at Golf Datatech. Still, he termed the Hogan revival “a leap of faith.”There is keen expectation for the clubs at Shady Oaks Country Club in Fort Worth, where Hogan was a member. Hundreds of prototype clubs Hogan that designed reside there. Mike Wright, the director of golf, was close to Hogan in his later years and has many of them on display at the club.“I’ve got a list of members waiting to get their hands on the new clubs,” Wright said. “Way too many people have asked for the first set.”Wright and some members were among the few to test clubs as they were being developed. The clubs, which were unveiled Tuesday at the merchandise show in Orlando, will sell for $149 for a steel shaft, or $164 for a graphite shaft.“I think their biggest challenge is the potential for over-demand,” Wright said. “I hope people are patient as the first year rolls along.”AdvertisementJohn Lyberger Jr., the director of golf at Congressional Country Club in Bethesda, Md., said he grew up playing Hogan clubs and admired their craftsmanship when he repaired clubs.Yet he said reviving the brand could be an uphill battle.“The golf consumer has so many choices today, and nobody makes bad equipment,” he said. “They’re only going to have one chance to do it right.”Koehler said he remembered Hogan insisting that clubs bearing his name should look like a piece of expensive jewelry.“There’s a lot of pressure to do this right,” he said.Because of an editing error, an article on Wednesday about a new line of Ben Hogan golf clubs misidentified, in some copies, the company that previously produced his clubs. It was the Ben Hogan Company — not the Ben Hogan Golf Equipment Company, which is producing the new line of clubs.A version of this article appears in print on January 21, 2015, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: In Reviving Elite Club Maker, a Return to Its Roots.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.