By ROB HUGHESJAN. 20, 2015
LONDON —  Revolutions have to start somewhere, but who would have thought that the attempt to impose reform upon FIFA could take shape at the European Parliament in Brussels?A summit meeting of the “New FIFA Now” campaign will start Wednesday, drawing together a mix of politicians, educators, business leaders, fans and disaffected soccer officials intent on forcing FIFA to clean up its organization.“Change doesn’t happen overnight,” said Damian Collins, a British member of Parliament who leads this initiative. “We are in this for as long as it takes.“Our agenda is for real change in a new style of organization and with a new style of governance consistent with FIFA’s privileged position as custodians of the biggest sport in the world. People said the fall of the Berlin Wall would never happen. They thought the Olympic movement could never get past its corruption scandals, and that world cycling could not be cleaned up.Advertisement“Wednesday’s meeting is the first step in helping to see football governed by people who make decisions in a transparent manner and who are held accountable in the best interests of the sport in a civilized society.”AdvertisementRhetoric alone will not change the situation. By the end of May, Sepp Blatter, the man who has run FIFA since 1998 and has been associated with it for 40 years, will run for another term as president. No one doubts that he will be re-elected.There are, finally, challengers. Jérôme Champagne, a former French diplomat who once worked with Blatter, declared himself a candidate 12 months ago. Even though he will address Wednesday’s summit meeting and has produced a 26-page manifesto full of fresh ideas, Champagne admitted Monday that he had not been able to secure the minimum of five nominations needed from FIFA’s 209 member federations to even be on the ballot.Prince Ali bin al-Hussein of Jordan, one of the newer administrators within Asia, has also declared his candidacy and is more likely to garner the minimum five supporters. But the power brokers of his own continent — Sheik Salman bin Ibrahim Al-Khalifa, the Bahraini who heads the Asian soccer confederation, and Sheik Ahmad al-Fahad al-Sabah, the Kuwaiti who is the president of the Olympic Council of Asia — are backing Blatter.Their influence will weigh heavily against Prince Ali, meaning that at the very least Asia’s votes will be split during the FIFA presidential election.Blatter is assured of mass support from Africa, not the least because of the continued dependence of many African federations on the substantial, and legitimate, payouts that Blatter and his predecessor João Havelange have doled out from World Cup profits.Between them, Africa and Asia can deliver close to the majority needed to win the election at the end of May. Europe will be divided, which is one reason Michel Platini, the UEFA president, is not running for the FIFA role even though he has openly said it is time for change at the top.Platini, a Frenchman, brings to the sport the real experience of having played at the highest level. A surprise candidate — David Ginola, also of France — has thrown his name into the ring, though his aspirations need to be taken with a grain of salt.AdvertisementGinola was an exciting player before he retired in 2002, a winger who could get people out of their seats with his sorcery on the ball. He oozed Gallic charm too, and had no shortage of offers to be a fashion model. He advertised shampoo, briefly starred in movies and regularly appears on TV.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Frenchman insists he has been working for months on nine fresh initiatives that he will unveil this week and that he is serious about taking the responsibility to lead and to change FIFA. The first proposal, Ginola announced Monday, would be to make FIFA pay taxes on its sizable profits.“It is incredible, and wrong,” he said in Wales, where he stumped for support from its Football Association, “that FIFA takes $4 billion from the Wold Cup and gives nothing back to Brazil.”In terms of administrative experience or time spent with the federations whose trust he now seeks, Ginola is a novice. He has two things going for him — charm and the platform given him by Paddy Power, the publicity-hungry Irish betting company that promised to pay him 250,000 British pounds, about $375,000, up front to run in the election.Blatter has had little to smile about of late, but Champagne’s struggle to gain a handful of supporters for his numerous reforms, the discomfort with Prince Ali among those in his continental association, and the gimmickry surrounding Ginola’s celebrity entry might lighten the incumbent president’s mood.Any other contenders?Nominations remain open until Jan. 29, and Harold Mayne-Nicholls is mulling whether to run.Mayne-Nicholls has the hands-on experience and FIFA contacts that the others lack. He used to be the Chilean soccer federation president, and he toured the world as head of the FIFA inspection commission that assessed all of the bidders for the 2018 and 2022 World Cups that were awarded to Russia and Qatar, respectively.It is fair to say that Mayne-Nicholls’s conclusions got about as much consideration as Michael J. Garcia’s investigation into potential corruption in the World Cup bidding process. England was highly praised on all counts before the 2018 bid, yet Russia won the vote handily.Mayne-Nicholls’s report also spelled out the problems with Qatar, most notably the heat. Yet the Middle Eastern state was awarded the 2022 World Cup tournament that must now, FIFA admits, be moved to the cooler winter months for the safety of players and spectators alike.AdvertisementFIFA is still wrestling with when to stage that event, the one certainty being that it will not be in the June-July period designated for it when the bidding took place.Mayne-Nicholls is due to address the Brussels summit meeting. Prince Ali and Ginola have been invited to speak, but are not expected to do so.None of the six corporate partners of FIFA — Adidas, Coca-Cola, Gazprom, Hyundai, Sony and Visa — is scheduled to appear at the summit meeting.Nor is Blatter expected in Brussels. He is probably already working on his acceptance speech for another four-year term in office.A version of this article appears in print on January 21, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.