By BEN ROTHENBERGJAN. 20, 2015
MELBOURNE, Australia —  Andy Murray’s appreciation for women’s tennis is not limited to his decision to hire Amélie Mauresmo as his coach; he also regularly watches the women’s game. Last week, Karolina Pliskova, a lanky Czech with torpid footwork but impeccable timing, caught his eye during her run to the final in Sydney.“She served well; she had a big serve,” Murray said on Monday after his first-round victory at the Australian Open. “And then when the ball was in the middle of the court, she was really taking the ball on.“Yeah, from just watching a little bit, you could see that she is obviously a very dangerous player for any of the women to play against.”But if Murray wanted to pay the compliment to Pliskova in person, he would have to make sure that he was speaking to the right person. That’s because Pliskova, now ranked 20th, has an identical twin sister, Kristyna Pliskova, who is ranked 111 spots lower, at 131st.Advertisement“They are congratulating her if I win, and that’s not a really nice feeling,” said Karolina, who advanced to the second round of the Australian Open, while her sister lost in the first round of the qualifying tournament. “She’s losing, and I’m winning, and they say congrats to her. It’s tough, but it will be fine.”AdvertisementBoth twins were outstanding juniors, with Karolina, who is right-handed, winning the junior title at the Australian Open in 2010, and Kristyna, who is left-handed, winning the junior crown at Wimbledon that same year. Though they have won three doubles titles together, Karolina’s singles career has skyrocketed, while Kristyna’s has stalled.Other twins in tennis history have had disparate degrees of singles success. Tom Gullikson peaked at 34th while his brother, Tim, reached 15th. Before switching to doubles, Bob Bryan’s highest rank, of 116th, surpassed that of his twin, Mike, at 246th.Karolina, who has won three WTA singles titles to Kristyna’s none, remains confident that her sister will soon be able to join her in the higher tiers of the tour.“I’m sure she’s going to get up soon as well, but she’s just lost a little bit of confidence right now,” Karolina said. “So many matches which I won, she lost them in the third set. Some were from match point, which is really sad, and you just feel a little bit down. I just think she needs some matches to win, and then she will feel better and play better as well.”The twins, who used to share a coach and travel together to tournaments, text each other frequently. But they speak via Skype for their most important conversations.“Guys,” Karolina said with a laugh. “We have to talk about this every day. And then, of course, tennis.”The seventh-ranked Eugenie Bouchard of Canada, who competed against both Pliskova sisters as a junior, has a twin sister of her own, Beatrice. Their shared time in tennis was short-lived.Advertisement“My twin sister started with me when I was 5, and she retired at 6,” Eugenie Bouchard said. “I never had the chance to think about, ‘Oh, this would be cool if we could travel on tour together.’ It ended pretty quickly for her.”But she expressed relief, that she and her sister had not chosen the same track in life. “We already get compared to each other as it is,” she said. “So if we did the same work in life, it would be even worse. I think she would hate it just as much as I do.”Pliskova is not the only twin to have reached a final this year; Aljaz Bedene, a Slovene ranked 116th, reached the final of the ATP tournament in Chennai, India, losing to Stan Wawrinka. His identical twin, Andraz, plays sporadically after having peaked at a career high of No. 840 in 2011.Bedene qualified for the Australian Open and lost in straight sets Tuesday to top-seeded Novak Djokovic, who has two younger brothers with fledgling tennis careers.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“At the beginning, it was tough, because while he was still playing, he was trying to go higher up the rankings,” said Bedene, who has a career-high ranking of 71st. “But he didn’t really want to do it as much.”Though an identical twin, Andraz eventually realized that he could not mirror his brother’s commitment to the sport.“When he stopped, he said, ‘I don’t think everyone is made to do what you do, to play tennis professionally,’ ” Aljaz recalled. “He admitted he’s not ready to do that. It’s just how it is.”The second-seeded Roger Federer has no twin, but he has twin daughters as well as twin sons. After his first-round victory Monday, Federer was asked in an on-court interview what the chances were of seeing his 8-month-old sons, Leo and Lenny, follow his footsteps onto the court of Rod Laver Arena.“Very slim?” Federer guessed, smiling. “I’d love to see them play here one day, but they haven’t picked up their first racket yet. Still a bit too heavy for them.”A version of this article appears in print on January 21, 2015, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: For Tennis Twins, Sometimes Two Is Better Than One.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.