By BRIAN SCIARETTAOCT. 11, 2015
The United States lost to its archrival, Mexico, 3-2 in extra time, in the Concacaf Cup playoff game on a steamy Saturday night at the Rose Bowl in Pasadena, Calif.United States Coach Jurgen Klinsmann elected to use a widely experienced team with a starting lineup that had only two changes from the team’s opening game at the 2014 World Cup, but despite the close score, the game was played almost entirely inside the American team’s half.The ratings, from 1 (diabolical) to 10 (world-class):Starting LineupBrad Guzan: It was an important game for Guzan, who earned the start despite Tim Howard’s availability for the first time since he announced he was taking a break from international play after the World Cup. There was nothing Guzan could do on Javier Hernández’s opening goal, when the American defense was missing, or on Paul Aguilar’s winner. His best moment was his save off a Raul Jiménez shot in the 47th minute, and in the 93rd minute, he made a nice save on Oribe Peralta to keep his team in the game for a few more minutes. Rating: 6.0DaMarcus Beasley: Mexico made an effort to attack to Beasley’s side and had success: All three goals came from his side of the field. Beasley had a few nice attacking runs, but his job was primarily defensive, and that did not work out. Rating: 4.0AdvertisementMatt Besler: The Sporting Kansas City defender was at fault for being out of position on Hernández’s goal. He made several big blocks early in the second half to deny chances and got away with a handball in the penalty area late in the second half. An uneven game for a player who was under an extraordinary amount of pressure. Rating: 4.5AdvertisementGeoff Cameron: The Stoke City defender has not played much for the national team over the past year, but he had a strong game both on defense and with his terrific work to head home a Michael Bradley cross to tie the score, 1-1, early in the first half. Cameron was one of the few American players who could leave the game with his head held high. Rating: 6.5Fabian Johnson: It was an off night for the only American player currently involved in the UEFA Champions League. Johnson was caught out of possession a few times and was rarely a threat to attack from the right back position. Rating: 5.0Kyle Beckerman: Out of position for Hernández’s opener. He was scrappy as usual but not as involved as he often is. The pace of the game appeared too quick for him at times as Mexico owned the central part of the midfield. Rating: 4.5Jermaine Jones: The New England Revolution midfielder added some needed bite and grit to the game. On the ball, he was also among the more dangerous players through 70 minutes. But over the final 20 minutes he looked fatigued and was unable to stay involved. Rating: 5.0Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Michael Bradley: While the United States struggled with possession and was largely outplayed, Bradley, the captain, had a strong game. His free kick in the 15th minute assisted on Cameron’s goal, and in the 39th he played Beasley into a dangerous position. A few mistakes in the second half were also a result of the fatigue of his teammates, but Bradley’s work rate remained phenomenal. Rating: 6.5Gyasi Zardes: One of the team’s few newcomers in 2015, Zardes was timid at the start and looked lost in the moment. He gradually found his way into the game and hit a nice cross in the 40th minute to give Jozy Altidore a decent chance. In the second half, he was only sporadically involved. Rating: 5.0Clint Dempsey: Largely invisible for most of the night. Aside from a few occasional moments, he was not able to keep up with the pace of the game or get behind the defense on counterattacks. Mexico seemed focused on taking Dempsey out of the game, and it was successful. Rating: 4.0Jozy Altidore: It was a difficult game for Altidore to make an impact because the best opportunities came from counterattacks. Altidore’s hold-up play was not what the United States needed to build its offense. In the end, he was rarely dangerous. Rating: 4.0AdvertisementSubstitutes DeAndre Yedlin: The Seattle native replaced Zardes in the 77th minute, and after a few poor balls out of the back, he was able to use his speed to give the team’s offense some life. His assist on Bobby Wood’s goal was first-rate. Rating: 6.0Bobby Wood: The Union Berlin forward came on in the 98th minute and was immediately dangerous. His goal in the 108th minute seemed to save the day after his team had been outplayed. Rating: 6.5Brad Evans: Came on for Johnson after Wood’s goal but had no impact over the final 10 minutes. No ratingWe’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.