By CHRISTOPHER CLAREYJAN. 21, 2015
MELBOURNE, Australia — Venus and Serena Williams made their first long journey to the Australian Open in 1998 and played each other in the second round, with Venus, the big sister, coming out on top.Against the odds and the expectations, they are both here 17 years later, and on Thursday, a typically steamy day in Melbourne, they took turns winning their second-round matches in straight sets.Venus Williams, seeded 18th, played first, beating a fellow American, Lauren Davis, 6-2, 6-3, at Margaret Court Arena. Serena Williams, the top seed, went next, beating Vera Zvonareva of Russia, 7-5, 6-0, at Rod Laver Arena.“I’m just doing the best I can; I always was, even when it wasn’t what I wanted,” said Venus, who is in the midst of an upswing at 34. “I think as long as I’m doing my best, something good will come out of it. There is a scripture that says, ‘Faith without works is dead.’ So you have to have faith, but you have to work, too. So I’m doing both.”AdvertisementSerena had to work harder, or at least under more pressure. Zvonareva might be ranked 203rd this week, but before a shoulder injury and other ailments knocked her back, she was once No. 2. That was in 2010, the year she reached the finals at Wimbledon and the United States Open. She has beaten Serena twice, and it looked as if she might threaten her again when she twice broke her serve in the opening set.AdvertisementSerena, 33, was alternating spectacular winners and tight-armed errors and struggling to win points on her second serve and to deal with Zvonareva’s clever tactical shifts, including serving and volleying. But after Serena saved three set points on her own serve at 3-5, she did what she has done so often in her career: shift into a higher, smoother gear.Looking flushed, Zvonareva served for the set and was broken. Serena went on to win a total of 10 games in a row.“She started out really well; she was really aggressive, and I was a little too passive,” Serena said. “Once I got down, I thought: ‘Serena, you have done so well here. You have nothing to lose. Just have fun and enjoy yourself.’ And I started playing a lot better.”Novak Djokovic, the No. 1 men’s seed, played well from the start against Andrey Kuznetsov, rolling to a 6-0, 6-1, 6-4 win in the match that followed on Laver Arena. He was then asked about his rival Rafael Nadal, who had fought through dehydration, cramps and a tough opponent the previous night before defeating Tim Smyczek of the United States in five sets.Like Nadal, he said he was deeply impressed by Smyczek giving his opponent another chance to hit a first serve after a fan distracted him on his initial attempt.“I think that’s something that people should talk about,” Djokovic said. “This is something that is not very common in the sport today, you know, where media and people generally emphasize on the rivalries — feisty, aggressive kind of approach to matches. It’s nice to have something that is greater than sport itself: the sportsmanship and fair play.”The Williams sisters played well in general, but they will not play doubles together, having withdrawn Wednesday for reasons that remained unclear.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“According to the rules, you don’t have to give a reason,” Venus said. “I think we’ll stick with that.”AdvertisementWas it perhaps because of the heat that was correctly forecast for Thursday, heat that could have created more problems than usual for Venus, who has Sjogren’s syndrome?“It was warm,” she said. “I don’t think it was as warm as it could have been. But no, that wasn’t it.”Were doctors consulted?“No further questions on that; I object,” Venus said, grinning and raising an arm in the air.“Sustained,” she continued. “Thank you.”This was lighthearted to a degree but also one more reminder of the difficulty long inherent in reading the Williams tea leaves. Still, what is clear is that while other members of their generation have exited the Grand Slam scene, the sisters are here after all these years.“She came in as a new face, a black woman that was shaking up the world,” Serena said of her older sister, who reached No. 1 first. “She had all the pressure on her shoulders. I kind of came in behind her, you know, just snuck in there. There was no pressure on me at all. She dealt with it so amazing. She had a lot of confidence, and she had so much class and still does throughout everything. You can see that her personality is pretty much the same. She’s definitely grown, but she’s always been very mature and very regal.”Next up for Venus is Camila Giorgi of Italy. Next up for Serena is Elina Svitolina of Ukraine.A version of this article appears in print on January 22, 2015, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: Williams Sisters, in No Hurry to Retire, Dash Into the Third Round.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.