By ANDREW KEHJAN. 21, 2015
PHILADELPHIA —  What happens when an anemic force meets an infirm object? That premise was tested on Wednesday when the Knicks and the Philadelphia 76ers, who had combined for 14 wins, met at Wells Fargo Center.At best, the game had a perverse appeal: What sort of absurdity might materialize on the court? Who would win? Did either organization even want to win? In the end, the Knicks, whether they liked it or not, took home the victory, 98-91.With such doubts, the game brought into question the nature of its own existence.The Knicks improved their record to 7-36 and their winning percentage to .163, still the lowest in the N.B.A. Just a shade better were the Minnesota Timberwolves (7-34), who finished the day at .171. The 76ers (8-34) were third worst, at .190.The numbers, while comical, carry serious and potentially beneficial implications: The team that finishes with the league’s worst record has a 25 percent chance of winning the top pick in the draft lottery.Advertisement“I hear it, but I don’t listen to it,” Carmelo Anthony (27 points, 11 rebounds) said of the persistent debate over the benefits of losing. “Tonight the message was not to play the record on either side.”AdvertisementAnthony insisted that a team would never consciously try to lose. Still, both organizations have acknowledged that their visions, as far as employing competitive rosters, lie beyond this season.Interestingly, though the two organizations have had comparably poor seasons, they have walked differing routes to their current incompetence.The 76ers’ ineptitude, on one hand, has been finely cultivated on the cheap. They finished 19-63 a season ago, producing one of the ugliest 82-game runs in recent memory. By design, it has been more of the same this season, providing hope that they can continue to stockpile young talent.The Knicks seemed to begin earnestly carrying out a rebuilding plan — and truly adopting the language of a rebuilding team — only when they traded a pair of key rotation players, Iman Shumpert and J. R. Smith, to the Cleveland Cavaliers this month. The Knicks’ positioning for the lottery was not intentional, but now they threaten to undermine all of the 76ers’ hard work and planning.The Knicks, despite their struggles, have continued to draw sellout crowds to Madison Square Garden. But at Wells Fargo Center, the teams played before half-empty stands. The atmosphere had a shoddy charm. High above one sideline, the first four letters on a gigantic sign that was supposed to read “Welcome to Comcast Country” were malfunctioning, rendering it nonsense.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.All game long, the teams wallowed in their inelegance. In the first quarter, an errant Knicks pass went flying into the fifth row of the stands, nearly knocking a tray of food and drinks out of the hands of a server, who exhaled with relief as she walked back down the aisle. In the fourth, Amar’e Stoudemire and Tim Hardaway Jr. ran into each other on defense and fell down, opening the lane for Michael Carter-Williams (27 points, 7 assists) to dunk.With under a minute to go, the 76ers had the ball and trailed by 4 points, but Robert Covington dribbled down the court and inexplicably committed an out-of-control turnover. On the other end, Langston Galloway saved a broken possession with a wild 3-pointer as the shot clock expired, helping to secure the victory.“It’s a work in progress, but I think we’re getting better day by day,” Jason Smith said.The win was no great achievement. Their dearth of talent aside, the 76ers were extremely short-handed. Tony Wroten, the team’s leading scorer, missed his fifth straight game and was headed to California to see a specialist about a right knee injury. Nerlens Noel, the 76ers’ best rebounder, was ill. Luc Mbah a Moute was ruled out just before the game with a left knee contusion.AdvertisementBrett Brown, the 76ers’ coach, gave Furkan Aldemir, a 23-year-old forward from Turkey, his first N.B.A. start, saying he created a favorable matchup against the Knicks. Brown described Aldemir as having a “C-minus” body.It was a typically honest and colorful assessment from Brown, who has earned admiration around the league for the energy and enthusiasm with which he has approached his suboptimal situation.Before the game, Knicks Coach Derek Fisher voiced his own praise of Brown, appearing to view him as something of a kindred spirit.“I have a tremendous amount of respect for who he is — not just what he’s trying to do with this team, but just the way he approaches his job and the passion he has for the game,” Fisher said of Brown. “He appears, to me at least, to be a teacher, and he enjoys coaching, and that’s something I’m trying to learn here in my first year.”Both men have endured a difficult season, and on Wednesday, their paths collided — or at least clumsily intersected.REBOUNDSThe Knicks on Wednesday afternoon were hidden from yet another national television audience, as the N.B.A. announced that the team’s Feb. 1 game against the Lakers would no longer be broadcast on ESPN. The only remaining nationally televised Knicks game, as of Wednesday, is a March 12 meeting with the Lakers on TNT.A version of this article appears in print on January 22, 2015, on Page B17 of the New York edition with the headline: Facing 76ers, Knicks Earn a Win. Someone Had To.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.