By BRUCE WEBERJAN. 21, 2015
The Army-Navy game of 1963 was an important one in that season’s college football landscape. With a Heisman Trophy winner and future pro star at quarterback, Roger Staubach, Navy, the No. 2 team in the nation, won by 21-15 and went on to face top-ranked Texas in the Cotton Bowl. (Texas won.)The Army game is better known, however, as a somber occasion, an athletic contest between military service academies that served as a memorial to their commander in chief, President John F. Kennedy, who had been assassinated 15 days earlier. In the aftermath, the game had been postponed a week.Little recognized at the time, perhaps owing to the gravity of the national mood, was an innovation that changed the way sports — and other events — were televised, seen and, eventually, officiated. In the fourth quarter of the game, when Army quarterback Rollie Stichweh ran for a touchdown, CBS not only showed the play live but also showed it again immediately on tape. It was the first time that had happened.So striking was the innovation that Lindsey Nelson, the play-by-play announcer, exclaimed to viewers: “This is not live! Ladies and gentlemen, Army did not score again!”AdvertisementThe director of that broadcast, Tony Verna, who had puzzled out a method to rewind the videotape and run it before the offensive team came to the line of scrimmage again, essentially making him the inventor of what is widely known as instant replay, died on Sunday at his home in Palm Desert, Calif. He was 81.AdvertisementThe Associated Press reported that his daughter, Tracy Soiseth, said the cause was acute lymphoblastic leukemia.Videotape was not new in 1963, but the technology was unwieldy, and the machines were huge, neither terribly reliable nor easily portable. For the Army-Navy game, Mr. Verna transported equipment weighing a ton or more from New York to Philadelphia.When tapes were made, they could not be played back immediately. Two days after the Kennedy assassination, Jack Ruby shot Lee Harvey Oswald, the man arrested in the killing of the president, on live television, and it took nine minutes for the first tape of the event to be broadcast. Tapes of football plays were shown to fill halftimes.A large part of the problem was locating the exact moment on the tape where the replay should start; the tape machines of the day could not be precisely cued. When a machine began to replay a tape, it would show seven to 10 seconds of garbled mush, known as video hash, before a recognizable image would appear, although it was impossible to know at precisely which point in the action this would occur.As a director of football games, Mr. Verna had long been troubled by the time between plays; after a long incomplete pass, for example, there was nothing to show the viewer but the receiver loping back into the huddle. He was also frustrated because he was able to show viewers only one perspective on a play and not what he was seeing on alternate monitors.“I remember times when Tommy McDonald of the Philadelphia Eagles would miss one of quarterback Norm Van Brocklin’s bombs, but we didn’t see why he wasn’t there for the catch,” Mr. Verna wrote in a memoir, “Instant Replay: The Day That Changed Sports Forever” (2008). “All the viewers got to see was the players’ reactions, McDonald with his head down, and the Dutchman” — that is, Van Brocklin — “fuming. But the viewers didn’t see why the pass wasn’t caught. I wanted to show them what I had seen on another monitor, that McDonald had been tripped leaving the line of scrimmage.”The solution Mr. Verna came up with was a pattern of audio cues — that is, beeps transmitted to an unused audio track on the tape as it recorded live action — that would help him find the moment that a play on the tape was about to begin.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.He had decided that his first replay would focus on a quarterback, so he transmitted the first beep as the offensive team broke the huddle and a pair of beeps when the quarterback reached the line of scrimmage. Even so, on the day of the Army-Navy game, the machine was balky because it had been jostled during transport, the tape had been used before, and Mr. Verna was concerned that bits of a detergent commercial or an episode of “I Love Lucy” might appear on screen instead of a gang tackle.AdvertisementHe recalled in a 2004 interview with the Archive of American Television that it took 30 or so attempts to get the machinery working properly and the tape synced accurately before it finally worked in the fourth quarter.Mr. Verna deployed his innovation again a month later in the Cotton Bowl between Texas and Navy — technicians had improved the cuing system — and it was during that broadcast, he said in his book, that the announcer Pat Summerall first used the phrase “instant replay.”By the following football season, the National Football League was using instant replay for games when the right equipment was available, and it was not long afterward that instant replay became a staple of sports broadcasting. And for good or ill, major professional sports — including baseball, football, basketball and hockey — now use instant replay as a tool to aid officials.The Directors Guild of America gave Mr. Verna its lifetime achievement award in sports directing in 1995.“With the creation of instant replay 50 years ago, Tony changed the future of televised sports, and sports direction, forever,” the president of the guild, Paris Barclay, said in a statement.Anthony Verna was born in Philadelphia on Nov. 26, 1933, to Severino Verna, a portrait photographer, and the former Gilda Pellechia. He attended West Point but finished his formal education at the University of Pennsylvania. His first jobs in television were at local stations in and around his home city, and people soon started calling him Tony — TV for short.Besides his daughter Tracy, he is survived by his wife of 45 years, Carol; another daughter, Jenny Axelrod; a son, Eric Verna; and three grandchildren, The Associated Press reported.Mr. Verna had many other achievements in television. He directed myriad sporting events, among them the Kentucky Derby, the Super Bowl and the Olympics. He directed the Live Aid concert in 1985, which was held at stadiums in England and the United States to raise money to feed victims of the Ethiopian famine and was broadcast live around the world. And in 1987 he directed “Prayer for World Peace,” which sent Pope John II’s recitation of the rosary from the Basilica of St. Mary Major, with satellite connections all over the world, to more than 100 countries. An estimated one billion people viewed the event on television or listened to it on the radio.“The most elaborate and ambitious satellite interconnection in broadcast history,” TV Guide called it.AdvertisementBut even Mr. Verna understood his legacy.“What should it say on my tombstone?” he said in an interview in 2013 with Pacific Standard magazine. “ ‘Son of Italian immigrants. Invented instant replay.’ ”A version of this article appears in print on January 22, 2015, on Page B18 of the New York edition with the headline: Tony Verna, Who Started Instant Replay and Remade Sports Television, Dies at 81.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.