
Sports of The Times By                     
 WILLIAM C. RHODEN
 
JAN. 21, 2015
Just when you think that the N.F.L. has temporarily halted its descent into the maelstrom, here comes an old reliable, the New England Patriots.In an almost hilarious Keystone Cop-ish turn of events, the Patriots are being accused of deflating footballs. When the news broke early Monday morning, it sounded silly. We were still talking about Seattle’s miraculous victory over Green Bay and the Patriots’ 45-7 flogging of the Colts, a game in which New England could have probably used a medicine ball on offense and still won.But by Tuesday, no one was laughing, and the Patriots, the team found guilty of illegally videotaping the Jets in the Spygate scandal, were once again under suspicion of not abiding by the rules. Two news outlets — ESPN and The Boston Globe — reported that the N.F.L. had found that some of the balls the Patriots used during the A.F.C. championship game had in fact been partially deflated, the motivation apparently being that the balls would be easier to grip and throw and catch in the wet conditions on Sunday night in Foxborough.The Globe claims to have obtained a letter from the N.F.L. stating that officials inspected the balls used by the Patriots at halftime of Sunday’s game and found that some were improperly inflated. ESPN reported 11 of 12 balls were found to be underinflated.AdvertisementThe argument now being made on the Patriots’ behalf is that even if the balls were underinflated, it hardly matters because they won the game by such a substantial margin. But that point of view misses the larger point — whether New England, the pre-eminent N.F.L. team of the last 15 years, went into the game intending to cheat.AdvertisementWhen it comes to the N.F.L. these days, I am neither enraged nor surprised by any issues that arise as the league keeps its multibillion-dollar engine roaring. I am more or less numb. To a large extent, enjoying the N.F.L. these days requires one to put aside any high standards — which is just what plenty of people do every Sunday and will continue to do.Here is a league that deceived players and withheld information about long-term health risks involved in playing the game. The N.F.L. still has not come clean with an admission about just how stark the physical realities of the game are.Here is a league whose commissioner could watch a woman being dragged out of an elevator by a player and initially react by issuing a fine and a very modest two-game suspension. It was only after a full video account of what happened became available to the public that an embarrassed N.F.L was forced into doing what it initially should have done and punishing the player more harshly.Of course, by then it was too late; an arbitrator ruled that the double punishment was arbitrary and overturned it.
                N.F.L. officials are investigating whether the Patriots violated league rules by using footballs that were not properly inflated during the A.F.C. championship game against the Colts on Sunday.            You can argue that in comparison with head injuries on the field and domestic violence off it, the deflating of footballs — if indeed it happened — is a minor issue, maybe even a somewhat silly one. Yet even cheating on this level is just more evidence of the continuing erosion of the N.F.L.’s soul — and of ours, too, for being such enthusiastic consumers of this tarnished product.If the N.F.L. concludes that the Patriots did take air out of footballs, the question becomes what type of punishment Commissioner Roger Goodell should invoke.A fine levied against the Patriots and Coach Bill Belichick? Money is not an impediment. Belichick was fined $500,000 in the Spygate case, and the Patriots had to pay $250,000 and forfeit a first-round draft pick. But if the new allegations prove true, less than a decade later, that route apparently didn’t make much of a dent.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.If Goodell wants to make a forceful statement, he should suspend Belichick for the Super Bowl. If he doesn’t, Belichick wins. But more likely, the N.F.L. will turn to its familiar playbook, go for the wallets again and call it a day.AdvertisementAt what point does the Patriots’ owner, Robert K. Kraft, get tired of this? Or maybe that’s the point: He doesn’t get tired. Maybe he rather enjoys having a coach who will do anything to win, whether he has to or not.The Patriots have not won a Super Bowl since Spygate, although they came very close twice. After Sunday’s crushing victory over the Colts, Kraft must have been ecstatic, knowing that he was one game from holding up the championship trophy for the fourth time as an owner.Then Kraft woke up Monday to find his team accused of cheating in the most absurd sort of way. And why would the Patriots feel compelled to cheat like this? To what end? Because everybody does it?On Monday, I heard an interview on a local Boston radio station with Tom Brady, the Patriots’ revered quarterback, who laughed at the suggestion that air was intentionally let out of the balls he threw for completion after completion on Sunday night. “I think I’ve heard it all at this point,” Brady said.If the balls were deflated on purpose, what he should hear Goodell saying is, “You’re going to have to win the Super Bowl without Belichick.”For a change, let the joke be on New England.Email: wcr@nytimes.com A version of this article appears in print on January 22, 2015, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Patriots Drag the N.F.L. Back Into Turbulence.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »