By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSJAN. 21, 2015
Two former members of the Raiders’ coaching staff known for working with young quarterbacks were hired as offensive coordinators Wednesday.Greg Olson, who spent the past two seasons as Oakland’s offensive coordinator, was hired in the same role by the Jaguars. And the Cleveland Browns hired John DeFilippo, Oakland’s quarterbacks coach for the last three seasons, as their sixth offensive coordinator in six years.Olson, who replaces Jedd Fisch, is an experienced play caller with a history of mentoring quarterbacks.“He’s a really, really good developmental coach,” Jacksonville Coach Gus Bradley said. “I think that’s what impressed me.”AdvertisementOlson’s time in Oakland followed a one-year stint as Jacksonville’s assistant head coach and quarterbacks coach under Coach Mike Mularkey. He was fired along with Mularkey and several other assistants after a 2-14 season in 2012.AdvertisementThe Jaguars ranked at or near the bottom of the N.F.L. in most offensive categories the past two seasons. The Raiders ranked last in total offense under Olson’s direction this season, but the rookie quarterback Derek Carr threw for 3,270 yards and 21 touchdowns, with 12 interceptions.With the Browns, DeFilippo succeeds Kyle Shanahan, who resigned after one season, with two years left on his contract.DeFilippo, who has been a coordinator at the college level but never in the N.F.L., previously worked with Mike Pettine, now the Browns’ coach, for one season while they were on the Jets’ staff. DeFilippo inherits an offense with some talent but also great uncertainty at quarterback.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“He’s the total package,” Pettine said. “He’s very bright. He has great energy about him, great passion. Loves the game. Works extremely well with other people.”DeFilippo spent 2014 helping to groom Carr. In 2009, DeFilippo tutored Mark Sanchez, then a rookie, who led the Jets to the A.F.C. championship game.BEARS’ FOX HIRES COLLEAGUE Adam Gase, following Coach John Fox from Denver to Chicago, is the new offensive coordinator for the Bears.The Bears had interviewed Gase for their coach opening before selecting Fox for the job. Gase also had head-coaching interviews with San Francisco, Buffalo and Atlanta.Gase was Denver’s offensive coordinator for the past two seasons, and the Broncos led the N.F.L. in scoring offense, total offense and passing offense during that period. He joined the Broncos as their wide receivers coach in 2009.The Bears also hired Ed Donatell, who spent the last four seasons as the secondary coach for the 49ers, to coach defensive backs. Donatell replaces Jon Hoke, who was released Wednesday.AdvertisementSHERMAN PLANS TO PLAY The All-Pro cornerback Richard Sherman of the Seahawks said he expected to play in the Super Bowl despite injuring his left elbow in the N.F.C. title game Sunday.A version of this article appears in print on January 22, 2015, on Page B15 of the New York edition with the headline: Three Teams Choose Offensive Coordinators.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.