AdvertisementSupported byBy Brendan PruntyChris Carrawell knew he had to go far away when his time came. That was the way it was with all the former Duke players who had gone on to coaching roles at the university. Life in Durham, N.C., is so nice and cozy for the team’s assistant coaches — top talent, sustained national relevance and consistent job offers — that it is hard to find a reason to leave. While it is easy living the life of college basketball luxury, there is one thing that is not attainable — at least for the immediate future.“Being an assistant coach at Duke is the best job in the country,” Carrawell said. “There’s no pressure. To get away from Duke? You can’t come around. You’ve got to get out of North Carolina. You’ve got to get out of Durham. You’ve just got to get away.” Carrawell, in his first season as the top assistant at Marquette to the former longtime Duke assistant Steve Wojciechowski, could not help laughing as he discussed the Blue Devils before Wednesday’s game at Madison Square Garden. Wojciechowski, 38, still looks and acts like a player who could suit up at any moment.During Marquette’s 60-57 loss to St. John’s, he jumped up and down when Matt Carlino poured in all of his 21 points to lead the scoring for both teams. When Wojciechowski’s team lapsed on defense, he pounded the floor with both hands, the way he had done as a player. He is, all things considered, enjoying himself.“It was a perfect storm of great professional timing and great personal timing,” Wojciechowski said of the Marquette job. His departure from Durham, after he had spent 15 years as a Duke assistant, raises a question: If things are so good at Duke, why is everyone leaving?Because Mike Krzyzewski has no plans to.Wojciechowski and Carrawell left for Milwaukee last summer, becoming the latest Blue Devils to leave the nest and create another branch of Krzyzewski’s coaching tree. Krzyzewski is in his 35th season at Duke, one win shy of 1,000 for his career and showing no signs of slowing down. He will turn 68 next month, and for the better part of the last 20 years, many have wondered who will assume his role when he retires. Perhaps not surprisingly, as Krzyzewski continues to coach, his assistant coaches — highly coveted every spring for openings all over the country — have continued to leave and take over their own programs.“In my case, I got to the point where I wanted to be a head coach,” Northwestern Coach Chris Collins said. “It’s something that was a dream of mine once I got into coaching. And at some point, you just have to go for it.” Collins returned to Duke in 2000 after two years under Tommy Amaker at Seton Hall and stayed as Krzyzewski’s right-hand man for 13 seasons. (Amaker, now at Harvard, was once regarded as the heir apparent to Krzyzewski after serving nine seasons.) But as he reached his late 30s, Collins began to see jobs filled every off-season. Reflecting on the staff he worked on with Wojciechowski and Johnny Dawkins, Collins said: “We had an amazing dynamic as a staff. It was so good. But when jobs would come up and you’d get mentioned — you want people to know that as happy as you are with what you’re doing, your aspiration is to be a head coach.” Wojciehowski insisted that he had never wavered in his belief that he would end up the head coach of a top program, despite repeatedly turning down jobs. The list of would-be successors to Krzyzewski reads like a who’s who of some of college basketball’s most prominent coaches: Collins, Amaker, Wojciechowski, Dawkins at Stanford and Mike Brey at Notre Dame. Jeff Capel, who coached Virginia Commonwealth and Oklahoma before returning to Duke in 2011, is the team’s associate head coach.“It’s really safe,” Brey said, “and you can get into a comfort zone. As a head coach, you’ve got to fight that. But even after my fifth, sixth, seventh year there, I thought, ‘Man, maybe I’ve stayed here too long.’ ”Brey considers himself something of an outsider in the Duke coaching fraternity because he did not play for Krzyzewski. But he spent eight seasons on the coaching staff, and after the Blue Devils won back-to-back national championships in 1991 and 1992, he began getting calls for head coaching jobs. When Brey finally left in 1995 to take over at Delaware, Krzyzewski initially disapproved of the move, believing that Brey could have picked a better landing spot. Once Brey started winning, Krzyzewski realized that his former assistant had landed in a good situation.Now Brey serves as a second sounding board for Duke assistants looking to make the move to the head coaching ranks. “Wojo was worried about it,” Brey said. “He had turned down Dayton, and after six months began thinking, ‘Uh-oh, no one is ever going to come back to me because I’m turning them down.’ ”It remains to be seen whether Wojciechowski’s jump will prove successful. Wednesday’s loss to St. John’s (13-5, 2-4 Big East), which was led by 15 points each from Sir’Dominic Pointer and Rysheed Jordan, dropped Marquette’s record to 10-8 (2-4). Still, Carrawell said, “At the end of the day, if you’re an assistant coach, you eventually want to run your own program.”Advertisement