By ANDREW DASJAN. 21, 2015
U.S. Soccer suspended goalkeeper Hope Solo for 30 days on Wednesday after learning through news reports that she was present and arguing with the police when her husband was arrested on suspicion of driving under the influence early Monday.Solo’s husband, the former N.F.L. player Jerramy Stevens, was charged with driving under the influence on Monday morning in Manhattan Beach, Calif. The Manhattan Beach Police Department said Stevens was stopped about 1:30 a.m. for driving without his vehicle’s headlights turned on. Solo was in the car but was not arrested.The arrest was revealed Tuesday by the website TMZ, which quoted unnamed law enforcement sources saying Solo had been “acting belligerent” during the arrest of her husband.U.S. Soccer officials, including Coach Jill Ellis, learned of the incident through the TMZ report Tuesday afternoon. They met with Solo, who has been with the national team in Carson, Calif., for a three-week camp that began Jan. 5, and she gave her version of the events, according to a source with knowledge of the meeting.Advertisement“During our current national team camp, Hope made a poor decision that has resulted in a negative impact on U.S. Soccer and her teammates,” Ellis said in a statement released by U.S. Soccer. “We feel at this time it is best for her to step away from the team.”AdvertisementSolo accepted the 30-day suspension and left camp, the source said. After the suspension was announced, Solo issued an apology.“I apologize for disappointing my teammates, coaches and the federation, who have always supported me,” Solo said in a statement. “I think it’s best for me to take a break, decompress from the stress of the last several months, and come back mentally and physically ready to positively contribute to the team.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The ban is unrelated to Solo’s recent assault case, in which she was charged with two counts of misdemeanor assault after what the police in Kirkland, Wash., described as an alcohol-fueled confrontation with her half sister and nephew last June. A judge last week dismissed those charges.U.S. Soccer was criticized for not suspending Solo after her arrest last summer, a decision that allowed her to play for the Americans in the regional qualifying tournament that clinched their berth in this summer’s Women’s World Cup. At the time, U.S. Soccer officials emphasized that the facts in the assault case were disputed by Solo, whose lawyer had long contended that she was a victim in the altercation, not the aggressor.Solo called the dismissal of the charges the end of “what has been one of the most difficult and emotionally draining times of my life.”The 30-day suspension announced Wednesday means Solo will miss the national team’s February trip to Europe, where it will play exhibition games against two other World Cup qualifiers, France on Feb. 8 and England on Feb. 13. Her absence leaves the goalkeeping job in the hands of her backups, Nicole Barnhardt and Ashlyn Harris.The Americans will return home after that trip, then will gather to prepare for the Algarve Cup in early March in Portugal, a critical test before the World Cup. Whether Solo will be back with the team by then, or in time for the World Cup, is not certain; U.S. Soccer said Solo was merely “eligible for reinstatement to the team after the 30-day suspension, pending review and approval by U.S. Soccer and Ellis.”A version of this article appears in print on January 22, 2015, on Page B18 of the New York edition with the headline: Goalie Suspended After Arguing With Police.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.