AdvertisementSupported byBy Ben RothenbergMELBOURNE, Australia — Tim Smyczek, a qualifier from Milwaukee ranked 112th, wielded his racket exceptionally well Wednesday night, striking 64 winners and coming within one game of upsetting third-ranked Rafael Nadal in the second round of the Australian Open.But what left Nadal most impressed was Smyczek’s sportsmanship.As Nadal served for the match, ahead by 6-5, 30-0 in the fifth set, a fan hollered during the toss of his first serve, disrupting his motion. The serve sailed long.As the crowd began to boo, Smyczek caught the attention of the chair umpire and held up two fingers, indicating that Nadal should be able to have both of his serving opportunities. When the umpire announced that it would again be a first serve, Nadal gave Smyczek a thumbs-up sign and a small wave, and several members of Nadal’s team stood to applaud the gesture.Nadal’s second attempt at a first serve spun into Smyczek’s body, jamming him and forcing him to miss his forehand return, giving Nadal three match points. Smyczek saved all three and took the final game to deuce, but two more winners from Nadal gave him a 6-2, 3-6, 6-7 (2), 6-3, 7-5 victory.Nadal, who struggled with fatigue, dizziness and nausea for much of the match, celebrated as if he had won one of his 14 Grand Slam titles, falling to his knees and hands and covering his face.“I want to congratulate Tim — he’s a real gentleman for what he did in that last game,” Nadal said in his on-court interview. “Not a lot of people will do this at 6-5 in the fifth.”Despite clinging to ideals of gentlemanliness and fair play, tennis has had its low moments in sportsmanship. Justine Henin’s declining to give Serena Williams a second chance at a first serve after holding up her hand midway through Williams’s service motion at a 2003 French Open semifinal illustrates a counterpoint to Smyczek’s gesture. Medical timeouts, bathroom breaks and illegal coaching from the stands are common forms of gamesmanship.Hours after the match, Nadal and his team were still raving at Smyczek’s fair play.In the first question of his news conference, he was asked what he had done to prepare to play Smyczek, but Nadal steered his answer to praise Smyczek’s sportsmanship.“What he did at the end of the fifth is just amazing,” Nadal said, adding, “He’s a great example, what he did today.”Smyczek said he believed Nadal would have done the same thing if he were in the situation.“I couldn’t make out what the guy yelled, but it was really loud, and it was right when he was tossing,” Smyczek said. “It was just so blatant. It’s not like he hit an ace on the next ball or anything, but I think he probably would have done the same thing if it was reversed.”Nadal’s public relations manager, Benito Perez-Barbadillo, was among the members of Nadal’s team who had leapt to their feet at the moment.“I think he deserves the sportsmanship award for the next 10 years, and I’m going to be pushing for that,” Perez-Barbadillo said of Smyczek. “I’m sure that Rafa would agree and everybody would agree. I’ve never seen that, and I’ve been in tennis for 19 years. Unbelievable.”Perez-Barbadillo said the gesture exceeded anything else in the 4-hour-12-minute match.“The thing that really goes beyond anything else, beyond the comeback, the cramps, is how nice it is to see that sportsmanship is there at the top level,” he said. “And that’s what we have to show kids, and that’s what we had. It’s something to acknowledge. It doesn’t surprise me because he’s known as a very nice guy, but to do that in a match? Wow. There’s no words. Class act.”The tournament referee Wayne McEwen, who officiates year round, agreed.“It’s not something you see guys do very often,” he said. “You only see it 10 times in a whole year, maybe.”Craig Tiley, the Australian Open tournament director, has known Smyczek for a decade, since he tried to recruit Smyczek to play for the University of Illinois.Asked if the gesture surprised him, Tiley said: “Not from Timmy. That’s his makeup; that’s his character. Always a fighter, always had a great attitude, great sportsman, and played fair. You recruit them for character even over ability. He’s always been a class act. Graceful, smooth and a class act. And I think that more people like that in the game makes it a special place.”Smyczek’s current coach, his childhood friend Billy Heiser, also was not surprised.“I knew he was going to,” Heiser said. “He kind of glanced over at me, and I didn’t nod or say anything. I knew he was going to. That’s just who he is; he’s such a great guy. The one thing he can always leave the court with is the character he brings, and that’s just true to who he is, just him being himself.”Heiser also heaped praise on Nadal’s effort Wednesday night as he battled through apparent illness.“Rafa is one of the best in the world at that stuff,” Heiser said. “To have a guy that’s won 14 Grand Slams, has $200 million in his bank account, and he’s feeling like garbage and he’s pale in his face and barely getting up to hit serves — and yet there’s no drama in him whatsoever. He’s just business, and he’s going to figure out a way to gut it out. “It’s unbelievable to see that guy like that. It’s so cool. I can’t say enough about how cool it is to see a guy that has everything in the world and yet he’s laying it on the line, and then he wins and he’s on his knees, and it’s the biggest thing to him in the world.”Smyczek conceded that many players might not have done what he did, but he said he had his own considerations in mind.“I know my parents would have killed me if I didn’t,” he said with a sheepish grin. “It was the right thing to do.”Advertisement