AdvertisementSupported byOn TennisBy Christopher ClareyMELBOURNE, Australia — It was Rafael Nadal’s night at Melbourne Park on Wednesday, as he found a way to win when his body was sending him all the wrong signals.But it was also Australia’s night, and from the look of the talent pool, there could be plenty more big nights ahead as the years of Lleyton Hewitt carrying the flag and the load at the Australian Open give way to a group effort.There are no guarantees in men’s tennis: look at the Argentine star Juan Martín del Potro’s three wrist surgeries and the Swedish star Robin Soderling’s long-term absence after mononucleosis.But the Australians, who once produced generation after generation of world-class players, have — after a lull — managed to generate a new wave of great promise, one that began with Bernard Tomic, who has now been joined by the teenagers Nick Kyrgios and Thanasi Kokkinakis.All three were in action in the second round Wednesday and, when the last round of “Aussie, Aussie, Aussie, Oi, Oi, Oi” had been chanted, Kyrgios and Tomic had advanced and Kokkinakis’s five-set defeat had been softened by the fact that he had lost to another Australian, the huge-serving 27-year-old Sam Groth.“It was pretty rocking out there,” Groth said of the atmosphere in Hisense Arena, now the third most important show court at the Australian Open. “It’s interesting, because if you have an Aussie playing another guy, there’s those lulls between points when the other guy wins a point. Today, it was electric nonstop.”None of the Australian men are seeded, but they are knocking off the seeds. Tomic beat No. 22 seed Phillip Kohlschreiber, 6-7 (5-7), 6-4, 7-6 (8-6), 7-6 (7-5), in a high-quality match overstuffed with winners and touch shots. Kokkinakis upset No. 11 seed Ernests Gulbis in the first round Monday after saving four match points in what was Kokkinakis’s first career five-set match.Kyrgios, who upset Nadal on his way to the quarterfinals at Wimbledon last year, could face second-seeded Roger Federer in the fourth round if Kyrgios gets past Malek Jaziri of Tunisia and Federer gets past Andreas Seppi.A Federer-Kyrgios match would make quite a fuss Down Under, but Kyrgios has already generated plenty of buzz. To walk on Monday past a newsstand — yes, they still have those — was to walk past nothing but front-page photos of Kyrgios, with his big earring in his left ear and his hair spiked high on top and shaved closely on the sides. He has since shaved some lines in his eyebrows, too.“I guess it’s just youth,” he said. “You’re not going to see Roger or Novak doing things like this.”He added: “I got sort of known for having some lines in my hair at some stage last year. It’s my last Grand Slam as a teenager. I don’t think I’ll be doing this stuff when I’m 20.”Kyrgios is the highest-ranked Australian at No. 53 and might have been higher if he had not cut his breakthrough 2014 season short. Tomic, a 22-year-old once as high as No. 27, is now 66th as he works his way back from last January’s double hip surgery.Groth is No. 82; Kokkinakis, the youngest of the group at age 18 and by some learned estimations the most talented, is ranked 147th.They are all tall: Groth and Kyrgios are 6-foot-4; Kokkinakis and Tomic are 6-foot-5. They are all capable of generating great pace although Tomic, with his remarkable touch, is less inclined to force the issue.“Obviously, there’s a long way to go, but they are big, powerful guys, and that’s the way the game is going,” said Tony Roche, the former French Open champion from Australia, who has long been one of the game’s leading coaches. “They need to stay healthy and keep developing their games, but there are some good signs there.”The consensus is that it is a benefit to have several players to share the expectation and attention and also to feed off and compete with each other.“That’s very good,” Roche said. “That’s what used to happen in Australia. It’s how we were able to sustain the excellence.”The young Australians are unusually interactive and expressive in an era when players tend to conserve energy by keeping their emotions more tightly wrapped.On Wednesday, Tomic kept grinning through the vagaries, chuckling at Kohlschreiber’s most improbable winners and holding his arms wide after taking a set with a straight-legged half-volley drop shot winner.Kyrgios, faced with the enormous riddle of returning Ivo Karlovic’s serve Wednesday, decided to crowd source, consulting the fans on Show Court 3 for suggestions on where he should position himself when the 6-foot-10 Karlovic delivered.“They obviously think it’s pretty easy out there,” Kyrgios joked.Facing Karlovic, for whom aces and quick points are a way of life, is often more of a mental than physical challenge. Kyrgios handled it with impressive equanimity, winning by 7-6 (7-4), 6-4, 5-7, 6-4. But equanimity is hardly his trademark, and Pat Rafter, the former world No. 1 who is now Australia’s Davis Cup captain, has made it clear he sees that as an obstacle.“I think it’s important for him to be a bit more level; he’s still too emotional,” Rafter told the Melbourne newspaper The Age this week. “It really shows up on the court. His off-court demeanor will certainly affect his on-court behavior, as well, and I think that’s the whole package that he still needs to get a lot better at.”Informed of Rafter’s comments Wednesday night, Kyrgios’s expression hardened. “Jeez, I don’t know what to say to that,” he said. “He has his own opinion, I guess.”Kyrgios and Kokkinakis are called “the Ks” here. They are good friends with different personas. Kyrgios has an edge; Kokkinakis, who trained with Federer in the off-season in Dubai, already seems more polished.“They’re both highly marketable,” said Todd Woodbridge, the former Australian doubles star who is working at the Open as a television analyst. “And they’re being positioned very differently. It’s not artificial. It reflects who they are.”Woodbridge said he thought Kyrgios, with his superior firepower and backhand, was the greater tennis talent. Veteran players and coaches like Gunter Bresnik and Fred Stolle are leaning toward Kokkinakis.Both reflect the ethnic diversity of Australia. Kyrgios is the son of a Greek-Australian father and Malaysian mother, and the global management company WME/IMG, which has just reached agreement to represent him, intends to market him in Asia. Kokkinakis was born in the southern Australian city of Adelaide to parents of Greek origin.Greek flags have been a common sight in the stands this week, just as they once were for Mark Philippoussis when he was serving big for Australia. But only Hewitt, the former Wimbledon champion and world No. 1, plays on from that generation. At age 33, he has dropped to 87th and will play his second-round match against Benjamin Becker of Germany at Rod Laver Arena on Thursday night.On Friday against Jaziri, Kyrgios will probably play on the same court, which he calls simply “Rod.” Groth and Tomic will face each other.“A guaranteed Aussie in the fourth round, which is amazing,” Groth said.If the new Australian wave lives up to its potential, the fourth round won’t be considered much of an adrenaline rush.Advertisement