By ANDREW DASJAN. 21, 2015
A group of prominent women’s soccer players pressing FIFA to install natural grass for matches at this summer’s Women’s World Cup withdrew its complaint Wednesday, grudgingly accepting that the event will be played entirely on artificial turf.The players had filed their complaint last fall with the Human Rights Tribunal of Ontario. In it, they accused FIFA and the Canadian Soccer Association, which will host the World Cup, with gender discrimination, and charged that the organizations had repeatedly refused to discuss a resolution.But with FIFA and organizers unbending in their insistence that playing on artificial turf was allowed under FIFA rules, and with the tournament set to open in fewer than six months, the players dropped the case.“Our legal action has ended,” the American striker Abby Wambach said in a statement released by the players’ lawyers. “But I am hopeful that the players’ willingness to contest the unequal playing fields — and the tremendous public support we received during the effort — marks the start of even greater activism to ensure fair treatment when it comes to women’s sports.”AdvertisementThe players banded together in 2013 to protest the plan to use artificial turf at the World Cup, arguing that doing so was dangerous and discriminatory, and noting that major men’s competitions are always played on natural grass. Their campaign gained momentum on social media, with many of the players using their large Twitter followings — and support from celebrities like the Los Angeles Lakers star Kobe Bryant and the actor Tom Hanks — to draw attention to the issue.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In July, their lawyers threatened to sue, but again FIFA refused to budge. In September, the FIFA official in charge of women’s competitions, Tatjana Haenni, told reporters during a visit to Canada that “we play on artificial turf, and there’s no Plan B.”In October, the players followed through with their gender discrimination filing. This month, Wambach led one final bid for compromise when she and the Brazilian star Marta met with a FIFA delegation at FIFA’s annual awards ceremony in Zurich.Wambach later said that she and Marta talked “openly, candidly” with FIFA’s secretary general, Jérôme Valcke, at the meeting, and that the players proposed a last-ditch plan to have only the semifinals and finals played on grass. But in comments to reporters afterward, Wambach said that there had been little progress and implied that the women’s players were nearly out of time.“I think FIFA has made their decision and they are sticking to it,” she said.A version of this article appears in print on January 22, 2015, on Page B18 of the New York edition with the headline: Players Drop Turf Suit.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.