AdvertisementSupported byBy Ben ShpigelFLORHAM PARK, N.J. — For preseason football, the Elizabeth High School team would travel about 40 miles south along the New Jersey Turnpike to the Peddie School in Hightstown, where a football-loving teenager named Mike Maccagnan would watch practice. Elizabeth featured a savvy two-way star, Todd Bowles, who went on to play at Temple and with the Washington Redskins, with whom Maccagnan spent a summer as an intern. His jobs included checking players into training camp and picking them up from the airport, and one of those players, he figured, was Bowles. They did not interact much, if at all. But as their careers progressed — Maccagnan ascending through the Houston Texans’ personnel department, Bowles emerging as one of the N.F.L.’s more respected defensive coaches — each man started hearing about the other. “A great evaluator of talent,” Bowles said of Maccagnan.“Very genuine and real,” Maccagnan said of Bowles.They spoke Wednesday while sitting beside each other at Jets headquarters, a week after being reunited for the first time in 25 years.On the verge of being announced as the team’s new general manager last Tuesday, Maccagnan picked up Bowles, a top coaching candidate, at the airport. They passed signs for Elizabeth. After dinner they sat alone and chatted about their philosophies and experiences, a test of their compatibility. Maccagnan asked Bowles a few questions. Bowles had questions for Maccagnan.“I was just looking for the character of the guy,” Maccagnan said. Bowles said, “Each of us not having an ego, willing to help each other,” and added, “That’s what eased my mind.” They were introduced Wednesday by the Jets’ owner, Woody Johnson, as men capable of leading the Jets to a championship, something Bowles’s predecessor, Rex Ryan, promised but never accomplished. Sitting in the auditorium beneath one of Ryan’s favorite phrases, “Play Like a Jet,” Bowles and Maccagnan offered no predictions or guarantees beyond the Jets’ playing a smart and tough and physical brand of football. “We’re going to try to build a championship team here — that’s my only job,” Bowles said.He added: “We have to teach them our culture. Not that the other culture was bad, but they didn’t win. So our culture is going to be to try to instill different things in them from a winning organization, from a different point of view, to make us go forward and get to the playoffs.”The Jets, after tumbling to 4-12 this season, have not made the playoffs in four years, and neither Bowles nor Maccagnan felt comfortable saying when they could reasonably expect a return. “It’s not going to happen overnight,” Bowles said. Maccagnan said, “I do think there’s definitely parts and pieces in place for us to turn this thing around.” By “for us,” Maccagnan meant himself and Bowles. Maccagnan said if there was one prevailing lesson he had learned from his 15 seasons working in the Texans’ scouting department, it was the importance of a strong relationship between the head coach and the general manager. More than once he mentioned how he would work with Bowles “side by side” to identify and acquire the players they wanted. There was a disconnect concerning personnel last season between Maccagnan’s predecessor, John Idzik, and Ryan.Maccagnan also said he and Bowles would review last season’s games and evaluate personnel before deciding upon, and implementing, a rebuilding strategy. Asked to describe his style, Maccagnan said he believed that constructing a team through the draft was critical for long-term success. But, he added, he also expected to augment the Jets’ talent base through free agency. The team is projected to have at least $40 million in salary-cap space.In that sense, he distanced himself from Idzik, who, aside from Eric Decker’s contract last off-season, doled out few lavish free-agent deals. With the Jets mandated by the collective bargaining agreement to spend an average of 89 percent of their cap space between 2013 and 2016, Maccagnan must spend these next two off-seasons.Some money could be allocated toward a free-agent quarterback, someone like Ryan Fitzpatrick, whom Maccagnan knows from Houston and who was coached in Buffalo by the Jets’ new offensive coordinator, Chan Gailey. Maccagnan said they needed to discuss potential offensive schemes before deciding how to proceed at the position, whether to complement Geno Smith with a veteran or a high draft pick. But Bowles said that Gailey’s experience of getting “the most out of the least” in previous stops, including Buffalo and Miami, appealed to him.In detailing what impressed him most about Bowles, 51, Johnson made not-so-subtle allusions to Ryan’s shortcomings, primarily his intense focus on defense without paying as much attention to other areas. Although Bowles has coached only defense, most recently as the coordinator in Arizona, Johnson said Bowles articulated what he called a view of the Jets from 30,000 feet — a comprehensive perspective of their offense, defense and special teams. Bowles said that he would have strong input but that plays would be called by both coordinators — Gailey and, probably on defense, Kacy Rodgers, a former Dolphins defensive line coach.Bill Parcells shaped this approach, Bowles said, but mentors at every stop molded him. Arizona Coach Bruce Arians, who coached him at Temple, taught Bowles toughness and discipline. His former defensive coordinator Emmitt Thomas tutored him in fundamentals and technique. His former coach in Washington, Joe Gibbs, taught him determination. “I did things the right way to get me to this point,” Bowles said, adding: “I didn’t start out trying to be a head coach. I started out trying to be a good football coach.”By 2007, his final season in Dallas, Bowles knew he wanted to be a head coach. He worked, and then he waited for the chance that arrived last week, when he met with Johnson and Maccagnan, his once and future shadow, and outlined a plan to topple New England, their division rival and a conference behemoth. “I’m going to work on getting my own rings,” Bowles said. Advertisement