By GARDINER HARRISJAN. 21, 2015
MELBOURNE, Australia — His knees, back, wrist and appendix have all failed Rafael Nadal recently. On Wednesday, his stomach joined the list of ailments, but he gutted out a five-set victory, 6-2, 3-6, 6-7 (2), 6-3, 7-5, to reach the third round of the Australian Open.Nadal seemed fine in the first set, racing to a 4-1 lead over Tim Smyczek, a journeyman from Milwaukee who has never beaten a top player. But then he showed signs of sickness, bending at the waist and seeming to vomit on the court. His serve lost its zip, his groundstrokes their pop and his movements their blur.“I felt very tired,” Nadal, who is seeded third, said. “I don’t know, at end of the first set, I start to feel my body very bad. I was sweating like crazy.”Smyczek broke Nadal’s serve in the eighth game of the second set, then saved a break point on his own serve before winning the set. As he headed for his seat, Smyczek gave a disbelieving look to friends in the crowd. Winning that set against one of history’s greatest players was by far the best result he had ever experienced.AdvertisementThe next set went to a tiebreaker, which Smyczek won with an ace — one of 15 in the match.Aware of Nadal’s problems, Smyczek began playing conservatively, trying simply to rally with Nadal by hitting balls in the center of the court until Nadal tired — a normally unthinkable strategy against an indefatigable player. But Nadal’s forehand seemed to reawaken, and he won the fourth set, 6-3.AdvertisementIn the fifth set, Smyczek tried to get Nadal running, not by crushing balls but by safely hitting them side-to-side. Sometimes Nadal reached them and managed to generate the torque needed to crush winners. Sometimes he didn’t.At 5-5 and down, 0-15, Smyczek hit a swinging volley right at Nadal, and Nadal passed him. At 15-30, Smyczek rushed the net and again got passed. At break point, Smyczek hit an easy forehand into the net.Nadal won three straight points on his serve, including one in which Smyczek gave Nadal a do-over after a fan shouted during his service delivery. Nadal squandered three match points, seemed to gather himself, won the next two, and dropped to his knees.“What he did at the end of the fifth was just amazing,” Nadal said of Smyczek’s act of sportsmanship. “Very few players can do that after four hours something of a match. Thanks to him, because he’s a great example, what he did today.”In postmatch remarks, Smyczek said giving Nadal the do-over “was the right thing to do.”The day was the warmest so far of the tournament, and Nadal said his long layoff from competition, missing most of the last six months of 2014 because of a right wrist injury and an appendectomy, made the humid conditions harder to manage.“I should not be that tired after 40 minutes,” said Nadal, who added that he felt dizzy and nauseated and was close to quitting the match. “I feel luck to have the chance to finish the match and find a way to win.”In the third round, he will face Dudi Sela of Israel, who upset 28th-seeded Lukas Rosol, 7-6 (2), 5-7, 7-5, 6-3.AdvertisementEarlier Wednesday, facing match points against her, second-seeded Maria Sharapova banished her doubts with aggressive shot-making that salvaged her best chance in years to win a second Australian Open championship.Against Alexandra Panova, a 24-year-old Russian qualifier ranked 150th, Sharapova saved the first match point by stepping around her backhand and blistering a forehand service return that painted the left line. On the next point, she dumped her return in the net and faced doom again, this time ending a rally with a forehand that again painted the left-side line.Next point, she hit the right sideline with a backhand, finally ending the game with a cross-court forehand that — you guessed it — hit the line.Panova, who has never beaten a top-30 player, stared in shock.Panova had been crushing serves and forehands all day, but, clearly rattled, grew tentative, and Sharapova pounced. She won her next service game easily and broke Panova’s serve on a second break point after Panova sprayed a forehand wide. Sharapova won, 6-1, 4-6, 7-5.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I think I was dwelling too much on my mistakes, what I was doing wrong, not really being in the present, something that I’m really usually good at,” Sharapova said. “I just really tried to take it a point at a time, think positively and change my thought process a little bit.”With a parade of other seeded women having lost in the first round, Sharapova’s victory means that she will not face an opponent ranked in the top 20 until the quarterfinals at the earliest, if she continues to win. She agreed that her draw had suddenly become unusually easy.“Yet there are always girls coming up that are rising, doing well,” said Sharapova, who will play No. 31 seed Zarina Diyas in the third round. “But I don’t think the focus is really on the other side. I think especially after today’s match, I really just want to focus on what I have to do.”No. 3 seed Simona Halep and No. 7 Eugenie Bouchard, who are also in Sharapova’s half of the draw, won in straight sets Wednesday.On the men’s side, second-seeded Roger Federer and No. 6 Andy Murray advanced to the third round, with only Federer losing a set. Federer lost his second service game and then the first set after Simone Bolelli of Italy began the match playing extremely well. But Federer broke Bolelli in the first game of the second set and was never challenged again, winning by 3-6, 6-3, 6-2, 6-2.Advertisement“I’m happy I’m still in the tournament because there for a while today it wasn’t looking very good because Bolelli was playing very well,” Federer said. “But it’s always a good feeling fighting your way out of a match.”Federer served 15 aces and got in two-thirds of his first serves. He rushed the net 36 times, winning 21 of those points. He will next play Andreas Seppi, who beat No. 29 seed Jeremy Chardy in four sets.Tomas Berdych, the seventh-ranked Czech, had a shaky start to his second-round match Wednesday, losing an early service break to Jürgen Melzer of Austria by double-faulting. But he soon broke Melzer back and won the first set by blanking him, 7-0, in a tiebreaker. In the second set, Berdych broke Melzer in the sixth game after the Austrian dumped a forehand into the net and won the set, 6-2. Melzer was broken at the same point in the third set, this time by hitting a sliced backhand into the net. Berdych managed to win 14 of 17 net points and won the match, 7-6, 6-2, 6-2.Murray easily won his second-round match against Marinko Matosevic of Australia, 6-1, 6-3, 6-2. Murray all but apologized in an Australian newspaper before the match for the drubbing he was about to administer to one of their countrymen.“I was timing the ball well on the return and serving well from the beginning of the match, and it helped a lot because obviously the crowd were behind him,” Murray said later.He said the warm conditions allowed him to hit a lot of high bouncing balls that Matosevic had trouble handling.“So when the temperature’s like this, I quite like it,” he said.No. 10 Grigor Dimitrov also dropped a set, but advanced. He will meet Marcos Baghdatis, a former finalist here, who defeated No. 20 seed David Goffin of Belgium, 6-1, 6-4, 4-6, 6-0.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.