By JOHN DUERDENJAN. 21, 2015
CANBERRA, Australia — For Chinese soccer fans, the new year is already an unusual one. After years of frustration, disappointment and cynicism with the national team, the 2015 Asian Cup is becoming a big success, with China winning all three games so far and finishing first in Group B.First-round eliminations in the 2007 and 2011 Asian Cups, combined with complete failures to even come close to qualifying for any of the three World Cups since 2002, have made the national team something of a laughingstock among fans.Being the worst-performing team to qualify for the 2015 Asian Cup — it got in as the best third-place team in a group — deepened the gloom.The qualification campaign ended in March 2014 with a 3-1 loss against Iraq. It was Alain Perrin’s first game as head coach after he was appointed with little fanfare and excitement, with many wanting the 2006 World Cup winner Marcello Lippi to take over. The Italian coach had led the Chinese Super League club Guangzhou Evergrande to domestic and Asian Champions League titles.AdvertisementBut after winning what looked like a tough group, Perrin is now preparing for an Asian Cup quarterfinal on Thursday night against the host, Australia, in Brisbane, after victories over Saudi Arabia, Uzbekistan and North Korea.Advertisement“After three difficult matches, we have a new record for Chinese football,” said Perrin, a 58-year-old Frenchman who has coached two of his country’s biggest clubs, Lyon and Marseille. “We have nine points after the group stage, but now we are looking forward. We have to keep working hard. That is what we are doing. We have a good team spirit, we believe in each other, work hard for each other and we want to do as well as we can.”Going into the tournament, expectations were low, though the lack of pressure has perhaps helped China’s performance on the field. But with the improved results, Chinese fans who had become accustomed to failure and letdowns are learning to enjoy watching their national team.Here in the Australian capital on Sunday, passionate red-shirted supporters nearly filled the 25,000-capacity stadium for the final group game with North Korea. They were rewarded with a goal after just 45 seconds and a fine performance in the first half. The second half saw their team under serious pressure from North Korea, but it hung on for a 2-1 win.“You can see that the fans are happy and enjoying this,” said Yu Haijing, a reporter covering the Asian Cup for Xinhua, the state-run news agency. “It is the same back in China, with people starting to get behind the players and the coach. People are enjoying watching the team for the first time in years. It will be really hard to beat Australia, but fans are looking forward to it. There is nothing to lose now. There’s no pressure as the team is already successful.”Australia, one of the tournament favorites, beat Kuwait, 4-1, and Oman, 4-0, before losing to South Korea, 1-0.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Australia is a very strong team,” Sun Ke, a winger who has scored three goals in the tournament so far, said in Chinese. “It is also the host, and that makes the next match very difficult. But if we can focus on the game and prepare as well as possible and concentrate well, then we can leave the field with our heads high.”That is already the case. This new China team is more resolute than previous versions and does not come apart at the first setback. Despite falling behind against a highly rated Uzbekistan team in the second game, China kept calm, came back to take a 2-1 lead and played out the game with few problems, a departure from the past.“The coach trusts the players, and if we can follow his instructions and take our opportunities and keep our concentration, then we can get good results,” Sun added.AdvertisementThere has even been time for the team to win a few hearts in Australia. When Saudi Arabia was awarded a penalty kick during their group match, goalkeeper Wang Dalei asked Stephen White, an Australian ballboy who was behind the goal, which way he should dive. “Wang turned around and asked if I should jump left or right, so I said left, so he jumped left and saved it,” White told local media. “He celebrated with the team, but at the end of the game, he came and gave me a hug.” China went on to win, 1-0, and White went on to become a minor celebrity.It all helps. Soccer may be China’s most popular sport, but the country lags behind South Korea and Japan on the field, despite having a much larger population. Persuading parents to allow children to take up the game has been a significant challenge. Positive news coverage, good results and a national team that makes fans proud could be a major plus in persuading them to do so.“The national team was in need of a good international competition, and China winning their group has already shattered expectations,” Tom Byer, a soccer consultant who is advising the Education Ministry in China on how to introduce soccer into schools, said by email. “The Chinese government has just created a policy that makes football compulsory in schools. I believe we are about to see the long-awaited football boom in China. This policy and the good results could be the spark.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.