By BEN ROTHENBERGJAN. 23, 2015
MELBOURNE, Australia — Returning to the site of her breakout semifinal run last year, Eugenie Bouchard advanced to the fourth round of the Australian Open in straightforward fashion on Friday — and she did not even have to twirl.Bouchard, a 20-year-old Canadian seeded seventh, beat Caroline Garcia of France, 7-5, 6-0, pulling away by winning the last eight games. Bouchard won more than half of her points on Garcia’s unforced errors.“I don’t think it was the prettiest tennis out there today,” Bouchard said in her postmatch interview.Todd Woodbridge, who conducted the interview, kept the questions focused on Bouchard’s tennis, a clear tactic after a controversy that resulted from Bouchard’s previous on-court interview.After Bouchard won her second-round match on Wednesday over Kiki Bertens, she received a request from Ian Cohen, who is employed by Tennis Australia in its role as the host broadcaster.AdvertisementReferring to a tweet Bouchard had posted the night before in admiration of Serena Williams’s dress, Cohen asked Bouchard, “Can you give us a twirl and tell us about your outfit?”Advertisement“A twirl?” Bouchard asked.“A twirl, a pirouette,” Cohen said as the crowd began to whistle.Bouchard obliged with a nervous smile, then covered her face after completing the spin as the crowd hooted.In her postmatch news conference Wednesday, Bouchard said she had been confused by the request. “An old guy asking you to twirl?” she said. “It was funny.”It was not the first time one of Bouchard’s on-court interviews in Melbourne had drifted away from tennis. After winning her quarterfinal match over Ana Ivanovic last year to reach her first semifinal in a Grand Slam tournament, Bouchard was asked on court by the interviewer Sam Smith, a woman, who her dream date would be. Bouchard’s response, that she would choose her compatriot Justin Bieber, drew boos.Williams, who had begrudgingly obliged a twirl request from Cohen to show off her back-revealing dress, said there could be a double standard at work.“I wouldn’t ask Rafa or Roger to twirl,” she said, referring to Rafael Nadal and Roger Federer. “Whether it’s sexist or not, I don’t know. I don’t know. I can’t answer that.”Billie Jean King expressed her displeasure, posting on Twitter: “The Australian Open interviewer asking the women to ‘twirl’ on court is out of line. This is truly sexist. If you ask the women, you have to ask the guys to twirl as well. Let’s focus on competition and accomplishments of both genders and not our looks.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Bouchard will next face the unseeded Irina-Camelia Begu, who defeated Carina Witthoeft 6-4, 6-4. Another unseeded player, Julia Goerges, reached the fourth round in Melbourne for the third time in four years with a 7-6 (6), 7-5 win over the qualifier Lucie Hradecka. No. 14 Sara Errani lost in three sets to the unseeded Yanina Wickmayer.SHARAPOVA ADVANCES After having to fend off match points in her previous match, No. 2 Maria Sharapova made sure it was not close in the third round by beating No. 31 Zarina Diyas 6-1, 6-1 in 61 minutes. She next plays No. 21 Peng Shuai, who beat Yaroslava Shvedova, 7-6 (7), 6-3.Third-seeded Simona Halep, who lost the French Open final to Sharapova last year, advanced with a 6-4, 7-5 victory over Bethanie Mattek-Sands. No. 10 Ekaterina Makarova had a 6-4, 6-4 win over No. 22 Karolina Pliskova. (AP)A version of this article appears in print on January 23, 2015, on Page B15 of the New York edition with the headline: Twirling Only Her Racket, Bouchard Advances.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.