By BEN ROTHENBERGJAN. 23, 2015
MELBOURNE, Australia —  Caroline Wozniacki did not lose her second-round match at the Australian Open on Thursday because of any moment of bad luck. There was no stray bounce on break point, no broken string on a crucial volley, no clipped net cord that swung the momentum.But it was undeniably unfortunate for the eighth-seeded Wozniacki that the woman across the net was Victoria Azarenka, the champion here in 2012 and 2013.Azarenka, who was seeded first and second in Melbourne the previous two years, is ranked No. 44 and is well outside the range of 32 seeded players after a year of struggling to return from injury. But she appeared to be in vintage form against Wozniacki, cruising to a 6-4, 6-2 victory.A tennis player who might be on the verge of a breakout tournament can be stifled early on by a random draw. While the 32 seeded players are spaced in the draw so as not to play one another until the third round, the 96 unseeded players in a Grand Slam draw are put randomly into the remaining spots, either being pulled from a bowl as marked chips or placed with computer software (the Australian Open uses an IBM program).Advertisement“There’s always a little bit of luck in the draw,” Wozniacki, who reached the United States Open final last September, said. “Sometimes on paper it looks tougher, but it’s opponents you like to play. Sometimes it looks easy, but it’s someone maybe you don’t feel comfortable playing. In the end of the day, I mean, you can see there’s been so many upsets. There’s nothing that comes easy. But at the same time I’m sure I could have had it a little bit easier.”Wozniacki added that she took little consolation in losing to a player of Azarenka’s caliber.“It hurts to lose,” she said. “A win feels good. But it definitely feels much harder to lose this early, as well.”Wozniacki is not the first high-profile player that Azarenka has sent home this week: Sloane Stephens, who reached the semifinals here in 2013, lost to Azarenka for a third straight year, this time in the first round.Advertisement“The draw is rigged, I swear,” Stephens said with exaggerated exasperation after her loss.“I need to go talk to Craig Tiley, because this is ridiculous,” she added, referring to the Australian Open’s tournament director.But for every cluster of dangerous players, there is an opening elsewhere.“It’s not just the Grand Slams; you always see sections of the draw get blown up, with seeds going down with injuries, illness and stuff that happens,” said John Isner, who reached the third round Thursday. “Sections of draws open up, and when you’re in that draw to take advantage of it, it can happen.“Luck plays a huge role in our sport. If you’re not seeded at a Grand Slam, you could play anyone first round. Luck has to do with a lot of that. The important thing is being inside the top 32. That helps you out a lot.”The draw opened up for Isner, the No. 19 seed, when Roberto Bautista Agut, the No. 13 seed and a potential third-round opponent, lost to Gilles Müller, ranked 42nd in the world. Isner will face Müller for a chance to advance to the second week of the tournament. After that, though, might come top-seeded Novak Djokovic.Jarkko Nieminen, a Finnish veteran, said that tennis was ultimately a meritocracy, although he said there was one player he hoped he could avoid.“Everybody hopes to have a decent draw; it’s more in your hands,” he said. “I know I can lose against anyone in the draw if I have a bad day, but there are players where if I play well I know I have chances to win. There are some players, like Roger Federer — so far, a couple of times I have been playing close to my best tennis and he plays well as well, and it’s not enough to beat him because he’s a better player.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“There is obviously this kind of luck involved, but tennis is a fair game. It’s man against man, woman against woman; it’s not like in a team sport where somebody bad gets a contract with a good team, and somebody good has to play on a lower level. You have a chance to be proven better or worse.”Vera Zvonareva, who is on the comeback trail from injury after reaching a career-high ranking of No. 2 in 2011, said she believed luck could be controlled.“I think we all create our own luck,” she said. “That’s my opinion. If you put yourself in a situation to be lucky, you deserve it. First you have to put yourself in that situation. Luck just doesn’t come and show up and give everything to you. Luck is something that you deserve.”AdvertisementMany players would have considered Zvonareva’s draw unlucky. She held set points in the first set Thursday against top-seeded Serena Williams before losing the last 10 games in a 7-5, 6-0 loss.“I don’t think it’s bad luck or anything,” Zvonareva said. “If I’m looking at winning tournaments, I’ll face Serena, be it the first round or the final. If I want to win the tournament, I have to beat her; it doesn’t matter when.”Steve Johnson, ranked 38th, took advantage of a draw with no such roadblocks, beating the qualifier Kyle Edmund and 30th-seeded Santiago Giraldo to reach the third round of the Australian Open for the first time.“It’s huge,” he said of his good fortune in the draw. “I could have come here and played Novak, Fed, you name it. Any of those guys on Monday, and my great week just ended. Not saying that I couldn’t have won, but I had a good draw.”As nice as Johnson’s road has been, no one has had better luck in this tournament than Feliciano López, the No. 12 seed. After saving match points in his first-round match against the American wild card Denis Kudla, López found himself trailing by 6-4, 6-4, 4-0 in the second round against Adrian Mannarino of France.But Mannarino began to feel discomfort in his stomach and torso muscles, and his lead slipped away quickly. After López saved one match point at 5-3 with a backhand winner, Mannarino’s physical state deteriorated quickly. By the time the fourth set started, Mannarino could barely move, and he lost 16 straight points before retiring from the match with a two-sets-to-one lead.López, 33, said it was the luckiest he had been in his career. But he said that, in general, luck played little role in the sport.“Very little, I think,” he said. “There are so many things that you have to do in order to be successful. Luck is part of it — it happens once in a while, but only sometimes.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.