AdvertisementSupported byBy Andrew KehLou Amundson, a forward for the Knicks, calls himself an “aspiring minimalist.” The possessions that surround his life suggest he has been on a long vacation — a remarkable, itinerant trip that has lasted several years, crisscrossing the United States.His mother, Eloise Berg, said the seeds were planted a little over three years ago, when Amundson was playing for the Golden State Warriors. It was just before Christmas, and he had just moved into a high-rise apartment building in San Francisco overlooking the Palace Hotel. Amundson was busy playing basketball every day, so Berg decided to fly from Denver to help him unpack. Berg spent a few days opening boxes and arranging her son’s things. One night, as she was putting the finishing touches on the place, Amundson called to inform her that he had been traded to the Indiana Pacers. He asked, regrettably, if she could start putting his things back into boxes.It was a disorienting experience — but then moving kept happening. Again and again and again.When Amundson, 32, joined the Knicks this month, he became the 12th person in N.B.A. history to play for 10 teams. Since turning professional in 2006, he has signed 15 contracts. He has been waived five times. He has been traded twice. His posts have included a two-season stay with the Phoenix Suns, with whom he played 155 games, and a 10-day stay with the Chicago Bulls, with whom he played about two minutes. In the 2013 calendar year, he played for four organizations.Just to be safe, his Twitter biography now reads, “Professional basketball player for the _____.”“He’s kind of just stopped taking things places,” Berg, 65, a neurodiagnostic technologist, said. “It’s an interesting approach to life.”Today, most of Amundson’s belongings are locked in a storage facility in Centennial, Colo. His car, which he has considered selling, is in Cleveland, with its next destination undetermined.Amundson, who signed his second 10-day contract with the Knicks this week, has been staying at a room at the Ritz-Carlton in White Plains. He has just a few things with him: a few suitcases of clothes, a laptop and a guitar. A driver comes to get him whenever he needs to go to practice.His life has slipped into a familiar routine: meeting new teammates, learning a new playbook, trying to win a long-term job and finding decent places to eat.“I’ve gotten real good with the Yelp,” Amundson said.Many lament the increasing transience of modern sports. Stars these days have become more like journeyman.But Amundson’s journey is extreme: He has played for the Utah Jazz (one game), the Philadelphia 76ers (26 games), the Suns (155 games), the Golden State Warriors (46 games), the Pacers (60 games), the Minnesota Timberwolves (20 games), the Bulls (two games in two separate stints), the New Orleans Hornets/Pelicans (36 games), the Cleveland Cavaliers (12 games), and now the Knicks.Amundson, who was not drafted out of Nevada-Las Vegas, signed with the Sacramento Kings after college but was cut before he could play a game.Four N.B.A. players have played for 12 organizations, two have played for 11 teams, and six more, including Amundson, have played for 10. Drew Gooden of the Washington Wizards is the only other active player who is a member the 10-team club. “I’m not sure how I feel about it,” said Amundson, who learned he had joined the 10-team club after reading an ESPN article. “Obviously, when I came in the league, looking back, I had a different vision about what my career would be.”The perpetual motion of Amundson’s career has presented unusual challenges. He is continually renting cars and furnished apartments — sometimes paying rent long after a new job forces him to live elsewhere. The instability has created obstacles in his social life, with dating, in particular, becoming difficult.“You meet somebody — I’ll be in a place for a few months — and you can’t get into a relationship because you don’t know where you’ll be,” said Amundson, who has been dating a woman who lives in Los Angeles for about three months. The relationship has been encouraging, he said, partly because she is a musician who does not have a 9-to-5 schedule.Complicating matters has been that Amundson does not quite have a home base. He owns a home in Denver, but two winters ago, a broken pipe flooded the interior so badly that it remains uninhabitable. Since then, when he is not with a team, Amundson has been staying with his mother.“It can be a lonely path,” Berg said. “I think there’s a degree of melancholy there — with me as well. I hate to see him so unsettled.”Berg has tried to visit her son whenever he latches on with a team, and she was happy when he began to teach himself piano and guitar a few years ago to fill long nights in unfamiliar places.Berg recalled accompanying Amundson to the Timberwolves’ team Christmas party in 2012 and politely asking Rick Adelman, then the team’s coach, why her son was not playing very much. “I’m just worried that if he doesn’t get good stats, no one’s going to hire him,” she recalled telling Adelman. To Berg’s small relief, Adelman said that Amundson’s professional demeanor and work ethic would earn him many more jobs in the league and that she should be very proud of her son.Although being traded to the Knicks — and then being waived and signed by them in a matter of days — created a new headache for Amundson, he was excited to work with Coach Derek Fisher and the team’s president, Phil Jackson, whose books he has read.Berg joked that Jackson, who is somewhat active on social media, might get a message from her, too. “I’m thinking of Twittering to Phil to say, ‘Just keep him for another year so he doesn’t have to ship his car again,’ ” she said, laughing.The Knicks have praised the energy and positivity that Amundson and two other 10-day contract players — Langston Galloway and Lance Thomas — injected into the team toward the end of its 16-game losing streak. On Wednesday, after the Knicks’ second consecutive win, Fisher lauded Amundson’s team-first play and physicality. “I think he has a presence on the floor — he lets you know he’s out there,” Fisher said.This has been by design. Aside from all the logistical issues associating with being a nomad, Amundson — who has averaged 3.5 points, 3.5 rebounds and 0.7 blocks in 12.5 minutes per game — has to quickly learn the intricacies of each team’s playing style. Until he gets all the subtleties and absorbs the overriding philosophies, his effort level and attitude are the things he can fully control.“I think teams value my professionalism and my approach, and I think I have a good enough reputation for my work ethic,” Amundson said, “so teams feel like they can have me around.”With a short laugh, he added, “I just wish I could stay around.”Advertisement