AdvertisementSupported byOn BaseballBy Tyler KepnerHe has been honored in Arizona, Los Angeles and St. Louis, with a final farewell dinner set for Saturday night in Manhattan. In the middle of it all, back home in Milwaukee, 30 floors above his hometown, Bud Selig has somehow found time to pack his office.“I have notes from George I’ve been finding all over the place,” Selig said by phone the other day, referring to George Steinbrenner, the late Yankees patriarch, who had every reason to be the adversary of a commissioner from a small market. Instead, Steinbrenner was a friend — a buddy, really — of a man whose nickname always fit.“George had a rough period in the ’70s, and Bowie Kuhn or John Fetzer would say, ‘You’ve got to call George,’ ” Selig said, recalling when he owned the Brewers, long before his 22-year run as commissioner.“And every conversation would start out, ‘Well, the Golden Boy is calling me!’ He’d hang up, but he’d call back 10 minutes later. He loved talking to my secretary, Lori Keck, because she was Lombardi’s secretary.”This is vintage Selig, weaving long-ago commissioners (Kuhn) and owners (Fetzer, of the Detroit Tigers), with outsize figures of sports history, like Steinbrenner and Vince Lombardi, the fabled coach of the Green Bay Packers.Selig loves the Packers so much that one of their games played on a television in the back of his suite in San Francisco last October, during Game 5 of the World Series. But other than the Packers, Selig is all baseball. He famously eats the same lunch every day in Milwaukee — a hot dog, naturally, the ultimate ballpark fare.“Bud was baseball 24-7, and that’s what made him available for whoever needed him,” said David Montgomery, the chief executive of the Philadelphia Phillies. “If someone called him daily or monthly — or didn’t call him at all until he needed him — Bud was available.”One of the Steinbrenner notes, Selig said, was signed, “Your loyal friend.” Selig, who gives way to his top lieutenant, Rob Manfred, on Sunday, inspired loyalty from the owners, largely because he earned it. Their relationships often spanned decades.Lew Wolff, the Oakland Athletics’ owner, was a fraternity brother of Selig’s at Pi Lambda Phi at the University of Wisconsin in the 1950s. Wolff has been blocked by a territorial-rights dispute from moving his team to San Jose, where it could make more money. But he has accepted Selig’s inaction on the issue for a simple reason — without Selig, he said, he would not own the team.“Bud told me early on: ‘When you join this, try to put baseball first and your team a very close second,’ ” Wolff said. “And, secondly, ‘Don’t fall in love with any player.’ ”Selig, 80, fell in love with one player, in particular, as a boy in Milwaukee.“Hershel Martin!” he said, joyfully reciting the name of an outfielder who starred for a local minor league team. “I’m the only one on Earth left who remembers him. They sold him to the Yankees in 1945. I became a Yankee fan, and quickly became a Joe DiMaggio fan, because Hershel didn’t last too long. The war was over, and that was the end of Hershel.”Selig revels in the minutiae of the game. Last week he challenged the Phillies’ Bill Giles, another baseball lifer, on the names of long-ago players from the Cincinnati Reds. Wolff said he had never met a more passionate fan; at intramural games in college, he said, you could always count on Selig cheering wildly from the sideline.As a sophomore in 1953, Selig left campus for a day to see the first major league game in Milwaukee, after the Braves moved from Boston. He sat in the right-field grandstand at County Stadium with his mother and remembers how it ended: with a homer by Bill Bruton off the Cardinals’ Gerry Staley. The ball ticked off Enos Slaughter’s glove on its way over the fence.Years later, after the Braves had left and he had lured the Seattle Pilots to town, Selig would pace the ramps at the ballpark, too nervous to watch his Brewers. The night they lost Game 7 of the 1982 World Series, in St. Louis, Selig consoled tearful employees on the team plane.Yet Selig, of course, was much more than the fan who ran his hometown team. He was a skilled politician, from the time he persuaded his fraternity to integrate to his last months in office, when every major vote by the owners had to be unanimous.“His legacy is that he oversaw a period of tremendous change and did it in his own style, the pace of which, oftentimes, frustrated people, because he wanted to get everybody on board,” Montgomery said.“That was key. The pace of his decisions reflected the fact that he didn’t want to jam something down the throats of people who were against that change. It took longer, but there was greater buy-in, because people felt it wasn’t done in spite of them. Clubs knew he would work hard to convince them.”Selig became commissioner in September 1992, when the owners removed Fay Vincent on their way to a catastrophic clash with the players union. Vincent said the fairest way to view Selig’s legacy was in pieces, and by understanding the history that preceded him into office.The owners were fractured — small markets and big markets lined up against one another like polarized political parties — and their collusion against the players had created a toxic labor environment. The 1994 strike caused the cancellation of the World Series and taught Selig a lesson.“After ’94, he very wisely recognized that you can’t take on the union, that you have to make incremental, 5 percent adjustments in your dealings with them,” Vincent said. “It’s going to take a long time to get things where you want them, but the alternative — confrontation with the union — is totally unsupportable.”After the players returned, in 1995, the steroid era mushroomed. Selig has long disputed the criticism that he reacted too slowly, and Vincent noted that Selig could not have acted unilaterally. The union strongly opposed testing until cherished records had fallen.Some fans will never forgive Selig for those blemishes. The important thing now, it seems, is to consider how far baseball has advanced. At the start of Selig’s tenure, there was constant labor strife. Now, there is labor peace. At the start, there was no drug testing. Now, there is the strongest program of any North American sports league.Revenue, below $2 billion in 1992, has soared past $9 billion. Large-market teams still have inherent advantages, but now they share significant profits with small-market teams. Every club in the majors, except Toronto, has reached the playoffs since 2001, thanks to a more sensible economic system and the broader playoff field Selig endorsed.Selig said he was leaving office with no regrets. He looks forward to teaching at Marquette and Wisconsin, to writing his memoirs, to spending more time at his winter home in Arizona. He will be commissioner emeritus, an adviser to Manfred, forever in the game.“He’ll never really be out of baseball,” said Randy Levine, the Yankees’ president. “He loves it too much.”Advertisement