By KEN BELSONJAN. 22, 2015
SAN ANTONIO —  On a Thursday night in December, Brian Morgan stood at the 50-yard line on a community football field as two teams from the Outlaws, a youth organization, practiced to his left and right. Both teams — one with 6- and 7-year-olds and the other with 10- and 11-year-olds — were preparing for championship games in a few days.Unlike the coaches in track suits, Morgan, 43, wore a jacket and slacks, having just returned from a business trip to Houston. As the younger boys in full pads clanked off one another on one side of the field, Morgan took stock of the controversial Texas Youth Football Association, which he co-founded 15 years ago.The association, which contains 105 organizations that have up to five teams in different age groups, fueled a national debate about youth football and parenting after several teams were featured in the television series “Friday Night Tykes.”Coaches were shown screaming at young boys and leading them in risky drills. Parents were portrayed as overbearing. Children cried and vomited during practices in brutal heat. One stadium banned TYFA teams. USA Football, the N.F.L.-funded group that governs amateur football and promotes safe tackling, slammed the association because of coaches’ language.The reaction to the show thrust Morgan, a client services consultant by day and a volunteer league commissioner by night, into the role of defending the association and its tough-love, win-at-all-costs philosophy. He spoke on radio and television programs, was cornered by concerned parents and recently appeared on a panel in New York.AdvertisementHe acknowledged that there were bad apples in TYFA. Coaches were suspended for using foul language and encouraging their players to harm opponents. Parents who go on the field will now be barred from future games.Advertisement“The coaches, the ‘in your face,’ the intensity took people by surprise,” Morgan said. “Do they cross the line? Sure. The cameras caught some stuff that we had to tighten up, like scrimmaging younger players against older kids. That’s a no-no. And there’s no reason for parents to taunt other parents.”But by and large, he said, the show portrayed teams playing hard and learning life lessons. Besides, no one is forcing parents to have their sons play on TYFA teams, which have fewer weight and age restrictions and more practices than other youth football organizations like Pop Warner.For all the controversy it generated, the first season, which aired last year on the Esquire Network, was a boon to TYFA. (The first installment in the 10-part second season was broadcast Tuesday.) After several years of declining enrollment amid reports about the long-term effects of concussions, the number of players in TYFA rose by about 35 percent, to roughly 18,000, last season, which concluded in mid-December.This has only emboldened Morgan, who said he did not buy talk of the decline of youth football. The concussions, the violence on the field, and the manic parents and coaches who push children as young as 6 to play a dangerous game are part of the sport, he said, not omens of its demise.“Some people say it’s too young for them to learn how to win and lose,” Morgan said. “And I say, ‘When do you start?’ You want them to learn how to lose and how to pick yourself up after a loss, how do you win and win humbly? It’s a shame competition has become a kind of a bad word.”Morgan’s defense of the association comes as the N.F.L, the N.C.A.A., high schools, youth leagues and many others involved in the sport are rushing to address concerns that the game is too dangerous.They have embraced new helmet designs, safer tackling techniques, penalties for hitting defenseless players and rules that require players suspected of sustaining concussions to come out of games.AdvertisementMorgan does not dismiss these efforts. But it is better to admit that the sport will always have its risks, he said, adding that efforts to prevent those risks would dilute the game’s larger lessons, including the need for hard work, discipline and camaraderie.Either way, the show has raised questions about America’s obsession with sports and the increasing specialization for young athletes. It has also revitalized the debate over when, if ever, it is safe to let a child play tackle football.“When I was a kid, we were focused on winning, but the intensity I see now, both from my kids’ coaches and on this show, I don’t remember,” said Tiki Barber, a former Giants running back, whose 12-year-old son plays tackle football and has had a concussion. “I think it’s the evolution of sport and the desire for excellence and to move up to high school, college and the N.F.L.”Those involved with the show see it differently. The cameras followed them for months, so it was perhaps inevitable that they felt that they were misunderstood at times. They were especially upset that critics thought they cared little about the safety of their children.“They highlighted some of the bad stuff, but this is something that’s gone on for years,” said Kinton Armmer, whose son, Jaden, played for the San AntonioColts. “I don’t think there’s anyone in TYFA who is trying to hurt anybody. We have to teach our child that life is not fair, and the earlier he learns it, the more prepared he is for later in life.”Still, the show forced parents to confront some of their worst impulses. Lisa Connell, whose 9-year-old son, Colby, was shown throwing up, was shocked that she came across as a bossy parent.“It makes you think, Are my intentions pure?” said Connell, a teacher who volunteers as a manager for the Junior Broncos, her son’s team.“Here, this is normal,” she added. “I couldn’t figure out why people would want to watch it. Every part of the country has their crazy sports — gymnastics, soccer, basketball. I’m competitive on the treadmill and the grocery store.”Connell dismissed concerns that boys were forced to play in TYFA against their will. She gave Colby a choice to switch sports, she said, but he declined. She also thought it was unfair for people elsewhere in the United States to doubt her sincerity.Advertisement“That hurt the most, that people were questioning me as a parent,” she said. “At the end of the day, it’s our life.”A version of this article appears in print on January 23, 2015, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Knocked for Risks, League Plays Defense.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.