AdvertisementSupported byN.F.L. RoundupBy Ken BelsonTom Benson, the 87-year-old owner of the New Orleans Saints and the N.B.A.’s New Orleans Pelicans, said Thursday that his wife, Gayle, 67, will take control of the teams when he dies.The teams will continue to have the same management, which includes Dennis Lauscha as president and Mickey Loomis as executive vice president and general manager for the Saints and head of basketball operations for the Pelicans. “This is a good structure,” Benson said. “The only difference is that my wife, Gayle, will be in control of the Saints and Pelicans when I die, which I can assure you will not be anytime soon.” Benson bought the Saints in 1985 and the Pelicans, who were then called the Hornets, in 2012. However, Benson’s daughter, granddaughter and grandson have challenged the succession plan, saying that Benson’s wife has taken advantage of Benson’s ill health to shut them out of their inheritance. A judge in Texas has issued a temporary restraining order to prevent any liquidation of trust funds set up for Benson’s daughter and grandchildren.COACH’S BROTHER IS MOURNED Green Bay Packers fans took to Twitter to express condolences on the death of Coach Mike McCarthy’s brother, 47-year-old Joe McCarthy III. McCarthy died Wednesday at a hospital in McCandless, Pa., where he was taken after collapsing at a local gym. An autopsy was to be conducted Thursday.McCarthy ran his own law firm in the Pittsburgh area. (AP)LONDON GAMES TO START EARLY The kickoffs for all three N.F.L. games in London next season will be in the early afternoon there, meaning fans back in the United States will have to get up early to watch live.The three games will feature the Jets and the Miami Dolphins on Oct. 4, the Buffalo Bills and the Jacksonville Jaguars on Oct. 25 and the Detroit Lions and the Kansas City Chiefs on Nov. 1. They will all start at 9:30 a.m. for viewers on the East Coast.The first N.F.L. game played in London with an early afternoon kickoff was this season’s matchup between the Lions and the Atlanta Falcons on Oct. 26. All other London games had kicked off in the early evening, translating to a 1 p.m. start in the East. (AP)QUARTERBACK PUZZLE GOES ON  Cleveland’s new offensive coordinator, John DeFilippo, said that he accepted the job not knowing who would be the team’s starting quarterback in 2015 and that the Browns were not sure if their future quarterback was “in the building or not.” The Browns started Brian Hoyer in the first 13 games this season before benching him in favor of the celebrated rookie Johnny Manziel, who played poorly in two starts and made his biggest impression with some off-the-field antics.Coach Mike Pettine has described Cleveland’s quarterback situation as “muddy at best.” (AP)AWARD NAMED FOR ROONEY The N.F.L. has named an annual award recognizing outstanding sportsmanship on the field in honor of the founding owner of the Pittsburgh Steelers, Art Rooney Sr.The winner, selected by a player vote, will be announced at the “NFL Honors” show on NBC on Jan. 31, the night before the Super Bowl. The winner will receive a $25,000 donation from the NFL Foundation to a charity of his choice. (AP)NBC ADDS COMMENTATORS NBC will use the figure skating commentators Tara Lipinski and Johnny Weir on its pregame show for the Super Bowl.They will be based at the official N.F.L. pregame tailgate party, where they will interview celebrities — and also provide their own Super Bowl observations. (AP)Advertisement