By BEN STRAUSSJAN. 22, 2015
Two former University of North Carolina athletes filed a lawsuit against their alma mater and the N.C.A.A. on Thursday, accusing them of academic fraud and failing to fulfill their stated missions of educating athletes. The athletes, Rashanda McCants, a former women’s basketball star, and Devon Ramsay, a former football player, are the named plaintiffs in the suit, filed in North Carolina state court.The 100-page filing, which seeks class-action status, comes just months after a report prepared by Kenneth L. Wainstein, a former general counsel at the F.B.I., found that from 1993 to 2011, about 3,100 North Carolina students — about half of them athletes — took classes that sometimes did not take place or require any work.The suit seeks damages for athletes who took the classes and calls for changes in academic oversight, including a commission to examine academic integrity among the 65 largest athletic departments in the United States.“For at least a century, the N.C.A.A. has known there is academic fraud throughout Division I revenue sports,” said Michael Hausfeld, Ms. McCants’s lawyer, who successfully argued in federal court last summer that the N.C.A.A. had violated antitrust law by not allowing athletes to be paid for the use of their names and images in video games and on television. “They’ve known it, participated in it and facilitated it.”AdvertisementThe N.C.A.A. said that it had not been notified of the lawsuit and that it had no comment. North Carolina did not immediately respond to a request for comment.In the filing, Mr. Hausfeld noted specific N.C.A.A. policies that he said undermined academics, including a requirement that universities report grades for entire teams, potentially allowing teams to hide individual athletes’ lack of progress. The filing also said that the 20-hour rule — intended to cap sports participation at 20 hours a week — was unrealistic, and it cited administrators including Jim Delany, the Big Ten’s commissioner, who have questioned the efficacy of the rule. Last March, the former Northwestern football player Kain Colter testified during a National Labor Relations Board union hearing that he had spent as many as 60 hours a week with his team.According to Mr. Wainstein’s report, North Carolina’s African and Afro-American studies department offered what amounted to a “shadow curriculum,” which was used to help many athletes stay eligible to compete.AdvertisementMs. McCants, who played at North Carolina from 2005 to 2009 and then in the W.N.B.A., took at least two of the so-called “paper classes.” Her brother, Rashad, also played basketball at North Carolina. He told the ESPN news program “Outside the Lines” in June that he had taken fake classes at North Carolina and that Coach Roy Williams had been aware. According to the filing, Mr. Ramsay, who played football for North Carolina from 2008 to 2011, took at least one such class.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Hausfeld suggested that the damages for players who took the classes could include the opportunity to return to North Carolina to earn more substantial degrees, at no cost. The same privileges could be extended to their children, Mr. Hausfeld said. He said financial compensation could also be an option for the former students.“I don’t think it’s a slam dunk either way, but it’s pretty ambitious as a lawsuit because we haven’t seen anything like this,” Michael Carrier, a law professor at Rutgers, said. “College athletes know what they’re getting into, and they know there are going to be some corners cut. But the more light shed on the N.C.A.A. and these schools, the worse they’re going to look.”A large part of the filing is devoted to past academic scandals at other universities — including when faculty and staff members at Minnesota completed take-home exams for athletes, and when tutors wrote papers for players at Southern California. A number of academic fraud cases are continuing.The Chronicle of Higher Education reported this week that the N.C.A.A. was investigating 20 universities, 18 of which compete in Division I, on suspicion of academic fraud.At the recent N.C.A.A. convention outside Washington, where the most prominent conferences voted to increase scholarships by several thousand dollars, Mark Emmert, the N.C.A.A.’s president, said there were growing concerns over academic problems. He mentioned that participation limits for athletes and lowered admission standards had led to unprepared students.“We have to continue to emphasize the centrality of academic success as the touchstone for why we participate in collegiate athletics,” Mr. Emmert said during his opening remarks to the convention. He asked, “Do we need to consider new approaches — bolder, broader approaches?”A version of this article appears in print on January 23, 2015, on Page B16 of the New York edition with the headline: Claiming Academic Fraud, Ex-Athletes Sue North Carolina and N.C.A.A.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.