
On Tennis By                     
 CHRISTOPHER CLAREY
 
JAN. 22, 2015
MELBOURNE, Australia — For a former champion intent on becoming a future champion, Victoria Azarenka hardly had a welcome-back draw at this Australian Open: Sloane Stephens in the first round and Caroline Wozniacki in the second.But Azarenka is now clear of that early trouble without the loss of a set, and her 6-4, 6-2 victory Thursday night over the eighth-seeded Wozniacki was a deeply convincing display of all-court tennis and full-throated intensity.“I think tonight Vika was inspired,” her coach, Sam Sumyk, said. “I think she was happy to go play that match, because it feels good to play the best players in the world and see where you’re really at.”Her precise location remains to be determined in Melbourne. For now, Azarenka, a former No. 1 player who won the 2012 and 2013 Australian Open titles, has a third-round date with the 25th seed, Barbora Zahlavova Strycova of the Czech Republic.AdvertisementBut if Azarenka can maintain the level and controlled aggression she displayed against Wozniacki, a third title here is not out of the question, even with Serena Williams in her quarter of the draw.AdvertisementThat would be next week’s concern, however. This week, she is happy to be back in the arena and above all to be back playing pain free after a season spoiled by foot and knee injuries, which contributed to her arriving in Melbourne unseeded.“Sometimes there’s pressure, tough moments, but just to be able to go through all those emotions once again, it’s really fun,” she said. “For me, I enjoy it so much. I can’t wait to just keep working and keep playing, having more matches, more tournaments.”Azarenka, 25, and Wozniacki, 24, are friends with much in common. They have official residences in Monaco and secondary residences in the United States, and they went through romantic splits in 2014 that rocked their worlds: Wozniacki with the golfer Rory McIlroy and Azarenka with the musician Stefan Gordy.Azarenka said in a recent interview that she and Wozniacki had a teary dinner in Monaco together last year to talk it all over.“I didn’t care that she’s a tennis player; I care about Caroline as a person,” Azarenka said. “Nothing else mattered and from that point of view, I think it’s healthy. I think with our generation, with Caroline and with a lot of girls, we’ve kind of brought more, I don’t know, civility to the tour. There’s more people talking.“Somebody like Martina Navratilova or Chris Evert — and Martina likes to criticize a lot of the players today, I don’t understand why — but I watched the documentary about them. And they are very nice to each other now. But back then? Ooh, there was some stuff going on.”Azarenka and Wozniacki had adjacent lockers in Melbourne, but when they took to Margaret Court Arena, the refurbished show court that is the latest to feature a retractable roof, the mood was all business. The match often had the intensity, heft and quality of a late-round duel.AdvertisementIn tennis terms, Azarenka and Wozniacki are also similar in that they are tremendous athletes and competitors whose serves can be attacked and whose best weapons are their two-handed backhands.But Azarenka was the more successful baseliner and aggressor Thursday as she evened their career head-to-head record at four victories apiece. One of the elements she emphasized in her extended off-season as she recovered from her injuries was net play, and she rushed the net very effectively against Stephens and Wozniacki, winning 21 of 26 points there Thursday.“I think I took those chances and really went for it,” Azarenka said. “I’m mostly pleased about that today.”It was also a resurgent day for American tennis at Melbourne Park. There are seven American women in the round of 32: Serena Williams, Venus Williams, Varvara Lepchenko, Bethanie Mattek-Sands, Madison Keys, Madison Brengle and Coco Vandeweghe.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.They represent a wide range of profiles and ages: from the 34-year-old Venus Williams to the 19-year-old Keys, who overwhelmed the No. 29 seed, Casey Dellacqua of Australia, 2-6, 6-1, 6-1, after the sort of shaky start that is not atypical for the gifted, still-erratic Keys.“Once she got confident and once she got swinging, she’s pretty much top-10 material,” Dellacqua said. “I think the game’s always on Madison’s racket.”Keys will now face one of the few women who can rival her for raw power from the baseline: fourth-seeded Petra Kvitova, a two-time Wimbledon champion. Lepchenko, the No. 30 seed who was born in Uzbekistan but became an American citizen in 2011, will face sixth-seeded Agnieszka Radwanska. (Two American men, 19th-seeded John Isner and Steve Johnson, reached the third round as well.)Vandeweghe, a 23-year-old Californian with a big personality and one of the biggest serves in the women’s game, was the last American to advance.She defeated another Australian, 20th-seeded Samantha Stosur, 6-4, 6-4, in the final match of the night session at Rod Laver Arena.AdvertisementVandeweghe has played at Arthur Ashe Stadium at Flushing Meadows, but this was her first experience on the Australian Open’s main court, where the big crowd was understandably supporting Stosur, who won the United States Open in 2011 but has long struggled to play her best tennis at home.“It was fun to play against an Australian in Australia, just to have fans really engaged in a match,” Vandeweghe said. “Even though they were against me more so than with me, just the noise factor and the engagement, highs and lows with the fans, everything like that, that’s fun to play in.”She is now in the third round of a Grand Slam singles tournament for the first time and will face Brengle, a 24-year-old from Delaware who is also new to this stage of a major tournament.“It’s cool that all Americans are there in the third round because it means at least one American is going into the fourth round,” Vandeweghe said. “If she’s American, Czech, whatever, it doesn’t matter. I have to go out there and compete and win the match because that’s what I go out there to do.”It is what all singles players go out to do at this level, but there can be only one winner per match. While Azarenka exulted and danced on court, Wozniacki packed her bags and headed for the locker room, still searching for her first Grand Slam title.After reaching the United States Open final last year and rising back to the top 10, Wozniacki continued a trend of diminishing returns in Australia. She reached the semifinals here in 2011, the quarterfinals in 2012, the fourth round in 2013, the third round in 2014 and now the second round this year.“Hopefully I’m going to break that next year and start going the other way,” she said. “I love this tournament, and I’m so sad to be out already. Obviously it was a tough draw for both of us, but she came out on top and played better.”A version of this article appears in print on January 23, 2015, on Page B15 of the New York edition with the headline: Encouraging Day for a Former Champion and for U.S. Women.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »