By PETER MAYJAN. 22, 2015
New England Patriots Coach Bill Belichick denied that he had any prior knowledge about the deflation of Patriots footballs in Sunday’s A.F.C. championship game against the Indianapolis Colts.FOXBOROUGH, Mass. —  Coach Bill Belichick and quarterback Tom Brady said Thursday that they had no knowledge of how the New England Patriots came to use underinflated footballs in Sunday’s A.F.C. championship game against the Indianapolis Colts.In front of a sea of mostly unfamiliar faces at a morning news conference, Belichick addressed what he called “the football issue,” which had lured so many to Gillette Stadium and prompted Boston television stations to interrupt programming to carry the news conference live.He said he was “shocked” when he arrived at work Monday morning and heard the news that the Patriots were said to have used footballs that did not meet the N.F.L.’s inflation guidelines. Multiple news reports over the last few days indicated that the N.F.L. had found that as many as 11 of the 12 footballs the Patriots used were inflated significantly below league requirements.“I had no knowledge whatsoever of this situation until Monday morning,” Belichick said, adding: “I can tell you that in my entire coaching career, I have never talked to any player, staff member about football air pressure. That is not a subject that I have ever brought up.”AdvertisementWhen a ball is underinflated, it can be easier for a quarterback to grip in cold or wet conditions, and can also be easier for a receiver to catch.“I thought we won the game fair and square,” Patriots quarterback Tom Brady said of Sunday’s A.F.C. championship game against the Indianapolis Colts. New England used underinflated balls.Belichick acknowledged that individual players may have their own inflation preferences for game balls and deferred to Brady’s preferences.AdvertisementIn a sign that the Patriots may be trying to move on from this issue, the team moved Brady’s news conference from Friday to Thursday. He stepped to the same podium hours later and said he was as shocked as Belichick was Monday when he learned of the report that said the team’s game balls were underinflated. Brady said he followed all his normal routines Sunday and had no idea what occurred between the time he chose the game balls and the time they appeared on the field.“From the first half to the second half, I didn’t put one thought into the footballs,” Brady said. “I thought we won the game fair and square.”Brady said he would never break the rules. He added that he had not been contacted by the N.F.L., which said it was still investigating the issue.Belichick declined to answer repeated questions about how the incident occurred, telling persistent questioners that he had told them all he knew and that he had no explanation for what had happened. He said the Patriots were cooperating with the N.F.L., “fully, quickly and completely with every request they made.” He also said the Patriots would take the necessary steps from now on to make sure their footballs were properly inflated.
                N.F.L. officials are investigating whether the Patriots violated league rules by using footballs that were not properly inflated during the A.F.C. championship game against the Colts on Sunday.            Brady was more congenial than Belichick, but in the end, he had little to add, even though as a quarterback he is intimately involved in the selection of game-day footballs.Brady said he liked game balls inflated to 12.5 pounds per square inch of pressure, the minimum required. But he said he did not notice anything out of the ordinary during Sunday’s game, which the Patriots won, 45-7.Advertisement“Everyone’s trying to figure out what happened,” Brady said. “I was as surprised as anyone at what happened.”With none of the reporters apparently interested in how the Patriots would contain the Seattle Seahawks stars Marshawn Lynch and Russell Wilson in the Super Bowl, Belichick left the podium shortly after he had arrived.This was the most widely anticipated Belichick briefing since July 2013, when he talked about the arrest of tight end Aaron Hernandez, who was accused of murder in the June 2013 death of Odin Lloyd. Until Thursday, he had deflected questions about the footballs, saying he had been unaware of the issue until Monday morning and that the league was handling the matter.He said that he had learned more about pressure and inflation guidelines over the previous 72 hours than at any other time in his 40-year coaching career.“I had no knowledge of the various steps involved in the game balls and the process that happened between when they were prepared and went to the officials and went to the game,” he said. “So I’ve learned a lot about that.”He continued: “To me, the footballs are approved by the league and game officials pregame, and we play with what’s out there. And that’s the only thing I have ever thought about that.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.He said he could not remember even handling a football during a game.Matthew Slater, a team captain, said he viewed the Patriots as “a pillar of integrity in the community” and called the situation “unfortunate.”Slater added: “As an organization, and as a team, we try to do the right thing. It’s unfortunate this situation has presented itself, and we have to deal with it the best way we can. We will move forward. That is the message that has been relayed through this locker room.”Center Ryan Wendell snapped the ball 78 times in the victory over the Colts. “Just felt like any other game,” Wendell said. “Felt the same throughout the game. So I don’t know what the difference would be.”Wide receiver Brandon LaFell, in his first season with the Patriots, said: “We’ve had our backs to the wall before, but we always find a way. Around here, it’s ‘do your job’ and ‘only worry about what you can control.’ This is no different.”Ken Belson contributed reporting from New York.
 A version of this article appears in print on January 23, 2015, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Belichick and Brady Offer No Explanation.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.