By VIV BERNSTEINJAN. 22, 2015
Jeff Gordon was 13 when the longtime racing promoter Humpy Wheeler saw him compete in a race on a dirt track. Fools, Wheeler thought at the time. How could anyone put a kid that young out there?That was until Gordon won the race.“Every once in a while,” Wheeler said, “an athlete comes along and he’s just better than everyone else.”For most of his 22 years as a full-time driver in Nascar’s Cup series, Gordon has been among the best. He won 92 races and four championships and along the way helped change Nascar from a Southern fixation to a national powerhouse that could command billion-dollar television contracts.But after one last season behind the wheel of the famed No. 24 Chevrolet, Gordon will climb out of the driver’s seat. He announced on Thursday that 2015 would be his final year in the Sprint Cup Series. The decision comes after he had four victories in 2014 and seriously challenged for a fifth career title.Advertisement“This is the right time,” Gordon said Thursday after meeting with his race team at Hendrick Motorsports and breaking the news.AdvertisementGordon said he decided about halfway through last season — around the time a troublesome chronic back injury returned — that he would leave after 2015. His resurgence in the Nascar playoff, from which he was eliminated just one race before the season finale, did not sway him.“It wasn’t just one thing,” he said. “Yeah, the back thing played a role. I think that really more just confirmed things for me rather than anything else. Even the great stretch and the run that we had and how good we were last year confirmed things even more for me. I was like: ‘You know what? This is all I could ask for to be at this point in my career’ — 20-plus years into my career and be that competitive week in and week out. I was almost ready to walk away right then.”Gordon, 43, said he did not plan to compete as a part-time driver after 2015, though he intends to remain involved both personally and financially with Hendrick Motorsports and its owner, Rick Hendrick.Gordon is the latest of several veterans to choose to leave the sport in recent years, as Nascar transitions to younger talent like Kyle Larson, Chase Elliott, Darrell Wallace Jr., Ryan Blaney and others.Jeff Burton and Mark Martin, two mainstays for the last two decades in the sport, recently retired.“We’ve always seen a group of drivers come in, have a certain amount of success — and they run the course, and then they leave and other drivers come in.” said Burton, who will work as an analyst for NBC Sports. “There are a lot of Jeff Gordon fans that will try and figure out who they pull for and who’s their guy. They’ll miss Jeff being there. They’ll hate that. But they’ll probably find somebody else to pull for.”Perhaps it will be Elliott, who won the 2014 Nationwide Series championship as a rookie last season and is the son of the Nascar Hall of Famer Bill Elliott. Many believe Elliott will take over the full-time Cup ride from Gordon in 2016. Hendrick declined to address that possibility on Thursday.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But can any of the young drivers do for Nascar what Gordon did?“He is the father of the 8-year-old race driver,” Wheeler said. Indeed, Gordon changed the model for how the modern driver is developed. He was 5 when he started racing and 18 when he competed in his first lower-level Busch Series race in Nascar. Gordon was 21 when he became a full-time Cup driver in 1993. By 1995, he was a champion.“I never met anybody like him in my life that was that young that seemed to have that level of experience and confidence,” said Ray Evernham, who won three titles as Gordon’s crew chief in the 1990s.AdvertisementGordon, third on the career victory list behind Richard Petty (200) and David Pearson (105), helped make Nascar cool. Gordon hosted “Saturday Night Live,” served as a guest host on the “Regis and Kelly” morning show and became a marketing powerhouse and role model.“I think between Dale Earnhardt Jr. and Jeff Gordon, I think they were able to usher in an era of casual fans,” said David M. Carter, a sports marketing expert and the executive director of the Sports Business Institute at the University of Southern California. “I think they together were really instrumental in bringing Nascar into the mainstream and elevating it out of its historic roots.”No wonder the Nascar chairman Brian France called Gordon’s announcement “bittersweet.”“Jeff Gordon transcends Nascar and will be celebrated as one of the greatest drivers to ever race,” France said in a statement. “Today’s announcement is a bittersweet one. I’ll miss his competitive fire on a weekly basis, but I am also happy for Jeff and his family as they start a new chapter.”Gordon said he planned to spend time at the track in 2016. But he will no doubt have plenty of business opportunities away from it.John Bickford, Gordon’s stepfather and vice president of Jeff Gordon Inc. will help Gordon sort through all of that in the coming weeks and months. But Thursday was bittersweet for Bickford’s family, too. He was the one who put Gordon in a racecar at 5.“My wife is in tears, and they’re happy tears,” Bickford said. “It’s an emotional day.”A version of this article appears in print on January 23, 2015, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: Gordon, Winner of 4 Cups, Will Exit Series After ’15.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.