By CHRISTOPHER CLAREYJAN. 23, 2015
MELBOURNE, Australia — For the first time in nearly four years, Venus Williams is back in the second week of a Grand Slam singles tournament.This did not used to be noteworthy — not when Williams was at the peak of her powers, able to slam aces consistently on big points and gobble up court with her long strides.But it is reaffirming news for Williams, a 34-year-old former champion who has found a way to change her career arc despite struggling with Sjögren’s syndrome, an autoimmune disorder that has often left her lacking energy at tournaments in recent years.She looked strong and quick on Saturday, and she needed to be. Camila Giorgi, a small but quick and powerful Italian, set a torrid pace from the baseline and served for the match in the second set.AdvertisementBut Williams fought back in the midday sun at Margaret Court Arena to win her third-round match.When her 4-6, 7-6 (3), 6-1 victory was complete, Williams thrust her long arms in the air and flashed the grin that has not been a common sight on tour in recent seasons.Advertisement“Well, this old cat has a few tricks left in the bag,” Williams said.Billie Jean King posted on Twitter, “I am inspired by Venus Williams every time she takes the court. Great to see her healthy, competing and loving what she does.”The last time Williams reached the fourth round at a Grand Slam tournament in singles was at her favorite tournament, Wimbledon, in 2011.That was shortly before she was diagnosed as having Sjögren’s after struggling for years with symptoms that included chronic fatigue, swollen hands and joint problems.In 2011, Williams expressed relief that she finally had an explanation, but it has taken her more than three years to advance this far on her own at a major.“That feels fantastic, especially when things happen in your life, and it’s not in your control,” she said, referring to her health problems. “So it definitely feels awesome to be here, and I want to leave it at that and try to keep going.”Williams, who defeated Caroline Wozniacki to win the ASB Classic in Auckland, New Zealand, earlier this month, will face another top-10 player in the fourth round: Agnieszka Radwanska, the No. 6 seed, who recently added Martina Navratilova to her coaching staff.Navratilova was in the stands on Saturday as Radwanska, light on her feet as usual, defeated the American Varvara Lepchenko, 6-0, 7-5.AdvertisementNavratilova, 58, played singles into her 40s and won her last Grand Slam title in 2006 at the United States Open, in mixed doubles with Bob Bryan. She can surely appreciate Williams’s desire to play on even while facing questions about the possibility of retirement.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Williams has been consistent in her response: She is on her own timetable. Now, with her longtime hitting partner and adviser David Witt providing support, she has managed to regroup.She will not be the favorite in the fourth round, however. Radwanska trails their series, 4-5, but has won their last three matches in straight sets.“She’s really played well against me in the last matches,” Williams said. “I was hoping to maybe have an all-American round of 16 with Varvara. We’ve played some great matches in Fed Cup, and it didn’t work out.”Seven American women have reached the third round, the highest number in 11 years. But Williams was the first American to make it to the fourth round and the first of the Williams sisters.Serena Williams, who followed Venus’s progress during her match and used it for inspiration, had to produce a rally of her own in a 4-6, 6-2, 6-0 victory over Elina Svitolina of Ukraine, the No. 26 seed.“She’s one to watch,” Serena said of the 20-year-old Svitolina.Serena Williams will face another rising player in the fourth round: Garbiñe Muguruza, the 21-year-old Spaniard who beat her in the second round of last year’s French Open.Giorgi, ranked 33rd, just missed being seeded here. Her big-swinging game is reminiscent of the style deployed by Dominika Cibulkova, nicknamed the Pocket Rocket, who advanced to the fourth round with a 7-5, 6-2 victory over Alizé Cornet.Giorgi has one gear, and for most of the first two sets, she pounded returns and groundstrokes that Williams struggled to manage.Giorgi served for the match up, 5-4, in the second set, only to be broken at love.“She did nothing wrong,” Venus Williams said of Giorgi. “She just played so aggressive, and I just kept thinking, ‘O.K., I’ll have a chance at some point.’ I’ve never played her before, and to play someone of her level for the first time in a major is challenging because you don’t know what to expect. I felt like finally in the second set, deep into it, I kind of started to understand how to maybe compete against her.”A version of this article appears in print on January 24, 2015, on Page D2 of the New York edition with the headline: Looking More Energetic, Venus Williams Battles Her Way Into the Fourth Round.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.