By ZACH SCHONBRUNJAN. 23, 2015
Milestones for the Knicks this season have been nothing but negative, but finally, 44 games in, they can attach their names to something of relatively reasonable acclaim: The Knicks, for the first time this season, have won three in a row.They beat the New Orleans Pelicans to cast aside the misery of a 16-game losing streak.They won at Philadelphia, because somebody had to.But this, a 113-106 defeat of the Orlando Magic on Friday at Madison Square Garden — this felt somewhat more properly earned. Was it pretty? No. Memorable? Hardly. But it occurred without any presumption that the opponent was short-handed, fatigued or tanking in the Eastern Conference standings.In fact, the Knicks had to play without their point guard, Jose Calderon, for the final 18 minutes after he banged knees with Orlando’s Elfrid Payton as Channing Frye set a screen. Calderon crumpled to the floor and needed help from two assistants to reach the locker room. The injury was later said to be a left knee contusion.AdvertisementNo matter. These Knicks, suddenly resilient, brimming with self-assurance, faced down the adversity and closed out the win by shooting 53.5 percent from the field in the second half. They had five scorers in double figures. Carmelo Anthony (25 points) was good, but it was the play of Jason Smith (19), Lance Thomas (16) and Langston Galloway (15) that tipped the game in the Knicks’ favor.AdvertisementThomas and Galloway are playing with contracts that contain no guarantee beyond next weekend; Thomas was signed to a second 10-day contract on Jan. 21, and Galloway was signed to a second 10-day contract on Jan. 17. But their enthusiasm and energy has seemed to be infectious within the Knicks’ locker room.“We’ve brought fight,” Thomas said. “We’re playing for our livelihood in the N.B.A. When you only have that amount of time to do it, there’s no time to be hesitant.”He added: “I’ve been working for this my whole life. I’m not going to shy away from the opportunity.”While Orlando center Nikola Vucevic tormented the Knicks inside all night, finishing with 34 points and 18 rebounds, it was Thomas who provided perhaps the biggest play in the lane, soaring to the rim for a putback slam with 1 minute 56 seconds remaining to give the Knicks a 103-98 lead.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Thomas followed that up with a soft, left-handed hook shot, and then an assist to Galloway for a 3-pointer with 54.4 seconds remaining to push the lead to 6.“It’s just fun,” Galloway said. “I’m enjoying it. I’m just taking it moment by moment.”The Knicks have not lost since they returned from their trip to London, which Coach Derek Fisher pointed to as a bonding experience. But an even more sound explanation might be that the 10-day-contract guys have infused a sense of desire and competitiveness that had been lacking weeks earlier.Anthony said: “Guys are hungry. They’re showing it, they’re playing like it, they’re having a lot of fun, and we’re having a lot of fun out there. I think that comes with putting forth effort and energy and seeing the results of it.”AdvertisementBefore the game, Fisher said that the new crop was playing without “carrying the way the entire season has gone on their shoulders.”“There is more confidence and sureness in what they are trying to do out there,” Fisher said afterward. “We have mixed in some personalities and guys who have a core toughness about them.”The Knicks trailed by as much as 7 points in the first half, a margin that might have been too much to overcome earlier in the season. But on Friday — even without Amar’e Stoudemire, who rested during this game but is expected to play Saturday — they looked like a different team.Anthony said, “The number four does sound pretty good.”REBOUNDSCARMELO ANTHONY said before the game that it was “special” to have received enough votes from fans to be a starter in next month’s All-Star Game, which will be hosted jointly by the Knicks and the Nets. Anthony will make his eighth All-Star appearance, and with nearly 650,000 votes, he earned a nod as a starter for the seventh straight season, despite the Knicks’ record. “For them to still vote me in — it’s a big fan base, a great fan base,” Anthony said, “and they want to see me out there.” Anthony was the N.B.A.’s fifth-leading scorer (24.0) entering Friday, but he has been hobbled by knee and back trouble. He said the two weeks he missed around the New Year had helped make him ready to play. “For me, it was just a matter of getting back on the basketball court and ready to play with my teammates in the real games first,” he said. ... JOSE CALDERON said that he did not believe his injury was significant and that he would try to play Saturday.An article in some editions on Saturday about the Knicks’ 113-106 victory over the Orlando Magic misidentified, in some copies, the Orlando player who banged knees with Knicks point guard Jose Calderon in the third quarter. He is Elfrid Payton — not Channing Frye, who was setting a screen on the play.A version of this article appears in print on January 24, 2015, on Page D5 of the New York edition with the headline: In Unraveling Season, the Knicks String Together Reasons for Hope.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.