By JERRY GARRETTJAN. 23, 2015
Scott Pruett’s success as a racecar driver comes down to adaptability.He spent a decade in Indy cars and a few more years in Nascar stock cars. But Pruett, 54, has become North America’s leading sports car racer, with 59 major victories, showing himself to be versatile enough to handle the ever-changing capabilities of cars. He can add to his legacy this weekend with a record sixth victory in the Rolex 24, a daylong race at Daytona International Speedway.“I think Scott’s success and longevity as an endurance racer comes down to the type of person he is,” said the team owner Chip Ganassi, who has worked with Pruett for the past 12 years. “He’s not a Hollywood type — a Richard Sherman type — like a lot of some sports figures these days. I would say he is more of a Peyton Manning type — with a lot of off-track preparation.“He’s a grinder — very methodical. Very steady. A thinking man’s driver.”He added that Pruett “came up at a time when you could get in a lot of different kinds of cars.”Pruett has driven modified Mustangs and Mazdas and prototypes from Jaguar and Ford that go 200 miles per hour. He has won one- and two-hour races and six- and 12-hour ones.AdvertisementAt the Rolex 24, which begins Saturday afternoon, Pruett and three teammates will split driving shifts in a Ford prototype over 24 hours on a 3.56-mile road course. The winners typically travel more than 2,500 miles, with the average speed of laps around 130 m.p.h. Among the competitors in the race are the IndyCar stars Scott Dixon, Ryan Hunter-Reay and Tony Kanaan, as well as Jamie McMurray and Kyle Larson of Nascar.AdvertisementSuccess in endurance racing used to come from finding the delicate balance between the amount of speed a racing machine could handle without mechanical failure, and the patience and repetitive consistency of its drivers. Attrition rates decided most races.“What’s interesting in endurance racing, like this event at Daytona, is it has now turned into a 24-hour sprint race,” said Pruett, who has been competing at Daytona for more than 30 years. “Lately, the team that won did so without any problems. It used to be that you had to be careful with the car, and pace yourself.”After mastering that fine balancing act early in his career, Pruett has honed a different skill set in recent years.“Engineers used to tell you how fast you could go: ‘You must run this pace’ or parts will start failing or falling off,” he said. “The car was the weak link. The driving part of it was a lot easier then than now. Now, you have to run flat out from the green flag to the checkered.”Manufacturers competing today say that their engines can routinely finish endurance contests without failure; Audi says its engines will last a full season.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I remember the year I was racing here for Jaguar, and we were at one point 30 laps ahead — 30 laps!” Pruett said of a distance that measures out at close to 100 miles. “Now, it’s not uncommon to have six, seven, eight cars all on the same lap to the end of the race. You just have to continually push the pace.”With 53 cars in a variety of speed classes entered in this weekend’s race, Pruett noted, “The biggest challenge now is not to be caught up in someone else’s mistake.”Last year, Memo Gidley pulled out to make a routine pass of a slower car and ran square into the rear of an obscured car that had stopped on the track. Gidley, gravely injured, is still recovering.AdvertisementPruett knows firsthand the dangers of racing. In 1990, as an up-and-coming star in IndyCar racing, he sustained severe leg injuries in a crash. It was a time when cars were unstable, speeds were extreme, and safety considerations were minimal.“I still limp around from that,” Pruett said. “That was a bad time. A lot of drivers were hurt very badly. Many were not able to race again. Indy cars were very dangerous then; still are. My last IndyCar race, in 1999, the average lap speed was 236.”Ganassi, once an IndyCar racer, had his career cut short by injuries. While Ganassi reinvented himself as a car owner, Pruett refused to give up driving.“There’s something about these California guys,” Ganassi said of Pruett, who is from Roseville, Calif., outside Sacramento. “Scott and I used to be the same age. But as I’ve gotten older, he’s gotten younger.”Pruett was asked if retirement might be on the horizon.“It’s been great, but in a way it has gone by way too fast,” he said. “I still feel young. Age is just a number. I’m still fast; I’m still winning, so it’s difficult to walk away. But I will say that more of my career is in my rearview mirror now than out my windshield.”A version of this article appears in print on January 24, 2015, on Page D6 of the New York edition with the headline: Adaptability Aids in a Driver’s Evolution.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.