By PATRICK MAKSJAN. 23, 2015
COLUMBUS, Ohio —  Reporters and photographers at the N.H.L. All-Star Game media day thronged around Zemgus Girgensons, a modest second-year center for one of the league’s worst teams who obliterated a list of hockey superstars in fan voting dominated by his home country, Latvia, where he is a national hero.But the frenzy passed, and Girgensons was ushered away from the podium to make room for Marc-Andre Fleury, a Pittsburgh Penguins goalie and one of the sport’s top players. In a game of “which of these things is not like the others,” Girgensons, 21, stands out as an obvious answer. He does not rank among the top 100 scorers this season and is not even the points leader for his team, the Buffalo Sabres, who have lost 15 of their last 16 games, dating to last month. Because of that, Girgensons was convinced he would be picked last when the 40-player All-Star roster was divided into two teams in Friday night’s All-Star Game draft. He was not; Nick Foligno chose him fourth to last. Girgensons was playful on the topic, but it appeared to weigh on him. Advertisement“I’ve thought about it,” he said with a faint smile. “Plenty.”Girgensons joked that he wanted to participate in whichever challenge would be easiest at the skills competition on Saturday. “Definitely the one you can’t mess up,” he said.AdvertisementIn a spectacle where hockey’s biggest stars face one another for one weekend, Girgensons stands out as an enigma. Yet in the six weeks of fan voting for the All-Star Game, Girgensons amassed 1,574,896 votes — provided largely by Latvia, which has a population of about two million. That was at least 320,000 more votes than hockey fixtures like Patrick Kane, Sidney Crosby, Jonathan Toews and Alex Ovechkin received. Girgensons’s first All-Star Game is, for him, a bizarre undertaking approached with bashful smiles.“I had no plans to be here,” he said.But a lot of other people planned on his being here.“I saw it on TV pretty much every week — he was leading the votes by quite a big margin,” said Anze Kopitar, the Los Angeles Kings’ leading scorer and a Slovenian hockey hero.“But one thing I know: Latvian fans are very passionate about their hockey,” he added. “We’ve seen it at the world championships — they always have the big fan base where lots of fans come and cheer all the time. I’m not surprised that happened.”That is why, in Latvia, Girgensons has a cult following. When the Sabres selected him 14th over all in the 2012 N.H.L. draft, he became the highest-drafted Latvian in the league’s history. In 2013, Girgensons received the Rising Star Award in the Latvian Sports Personality of the Year honors. He is so beloved, in fact, that fans have written songs about him. Girgensons said of Latvian fans: “They’ve always been crazy. You can look up YouTube videos, like 10 years ago. They’ve been the same way the whole time.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.This month, Olas, a Latvian rap group, made a music video to honor Girgensons, who said, “It just shows how much people back home really care about stuff like this.”When Girgensons travels home, he is received as if he were the Beatles in 1965. Because of the potential response, visits must be covert.Advertisement“People there really know when I get there,” Girgensons said, “so I’m kind of undercover so I don’t get bothered too much.” He wears sunglasses and a hat to conceal himself from the masses, as if he were a movie star in Los Angeles trying to visit the supermarket.“You have to,” he said.On Thursday, in front of Nationwide Arena in Columbus, Girgensons filmed a video to thank his fans. The first take was in English, and the second was in Latvian.“I don’t think there’s too much pressure here at the All-Star Game,” he said. “It’s for them.”He smiled, raised his eyebrows and added, “They know how to party.”A version of this article appears in print on January 24, 2015, on Page D6 of the New York edition with the headline: In Spectacle of Biggest Stars, a Modest Center Stands Out.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.