AdvertisementSupported byBy Tim RohanOver the years, Derek Jeter developed a tic at the plate that gave him an advantage. Or was it a trick? Whenever a pitch darted inside, Jeter bent over, stuck out his backside, held back his bat, and watched as the ball went by. It was his way of signaling to the umpire that the pitch was a ball, and often he got the call.The move wasn’t illegal, but it also wasn’t always honest. By the time Jeter retired last year, the image of him staring down an inside pitch was part of his mystique.Other baseball players stole signs, scuffed baseballs, corked their bats and juiced their bodies. N.B.A. players flop to draw fouls, and tennis pros fake injuries.The line between cheating and gamesmanship is constantly blurred, and the New England Patriots, one of the N.F.L.’s premier franchises, seem to continually test it. Quarterback Tom Brady and Coach Bill Belichick have won three Super Bowls together and are about to appear in their sixth, but they have now been at the center of two high-profile rule controversies that have potentially tainted their legacies. Years after punishing the Patriots for stealing signs, the N.F.L. is investigating whether the team intentionally deflated balls it used on offense during last week’s A.F.C. championship game, in which the Patriots beat the Colts, 45-7, to advance to the Super Bowl. Deflated footballs are easier to handle, especially in wet conditions.“This kind of gamesmanship goes on all the time,” said Stephen Mosher, a professor at Ithaca College who studies sports ethics. “It’s certainly accepted as part of the culture that you game the system as much as you possibly can, and if you don’t get caught, it ain’t cheating.”Professional athletes constantly search for advantages, large and small. Some of this is considered cheating, despicable; some, harmless, acceptable.Major League Baseball, perhaps more than any other league, can commiserate with the N.F.L.’s current Patriots scandal. Baseball history includes a long list of players who were vilified for cheating or dishonoring the game. They steal signs and doctor baseballs, too. But in baseball, if it’s done a certain way, it seems to be generally accepted.If a base runner can see a catcher’s signal and figure out a sign, that’s fine. But if a team uses video equipment or some elaborate scheme, that’s not.When Michael Pineda, the Yankees pitcher, was found to have pine tar on his neck last season, he was ejected, and suspended for 10 games. Pine tar can give pitchers a better grip on the ball. Using it is against the rules. But the general reaction around baseball was: Don’t be so obvious next time.Then again, over the last decade or so, baseball has driven away its most egregious cheaters, the steroid users who once made the game so popular. It may seem hypocritical, but many of those players — Barry Bonds, Roger Clemens, Mark McGwire — may be kept out of the Hall of Fame for tainting the game’s integrity.“I played right in the middle of that era,” said C. J. Nitkowski, who pitched in the majors between 1995 and 2005. “It never bothered me at the time. I knew guys were using. I had to make a decision and I decided not to do it. Sometimes I wonder if I should have.”Nitkowski added: “You start to look back, and you realize the advantages guys had. Not even the physical advantages, but the mental advantage, the mental advantage of stepping in the box and knowing that you cheated to get there, the confidence that gives you. I mean, this game is so mental. The further I get away from my playing days, the more frustrated I get.”When performance-enhancing drugs aren’t involved, sport ethics tend to get fuzzier. Hockey goalies wear baggier jerseys and bigger pads in an attempt to cover more of the net. Basketball players flop to draw fouls, and soccer players are notorious for faking injuries and openly wasting time. With the exception of professional golfers, acting honorably often is the most remote option.Tennis players typically deploy a series of tactics whenever they need to collect themselves. They call injury timeouts when they aren’t obviously injured. They take their time between points. They challenge line calls just to have 20 seconds to breathe.They also manipulate the tennis ball. A used and worn tennis ball typically moves slower than a new ball that is fresh and has just been rotated into the match.“Some players, if they have to face Serena Williams, for instance, they will try to scuff the balls, rub the balls against their strings to make them bigger and fluffier,” said Mary Carillo, a former professional player who is now a broadcaster. “Take some of the weight off of Serena’s shot.”Carillo added, “It’s certainly not considered cheating.”Mosher, the professor, said that as athletes continue playing sports through the high school, collegiate and professional levels, they get better at skirting or bending the rules because their coaches teach them how. Catchers are taught how to frame pitches, for example. Then the behavior is reinforced because they are rewarded for it.That behavior is generally accepted, Mosher said, so long as both teams understand what’s going on. Earlier in the playoffs, the Patriots used a rare tactic in which they had only four offensive linemen on the line of scrimmage and used an extra receiver as a decoy. It was an effort to confuse the defense, and it worked.Baltimore Ravens Coach John Harbaugh ran onto the field, screaming at the officials.Golfers would probably have taken offense, too. More than any other sport, golfers are expected to live up to a high moral code on the course. There is no referee watching their every move to make sure that they don’t have extra clubs in their bag or that they drop their ball in the correct spot. Golfers are expected to police themselves. “It’s necessary for the integrity of the game, for the enjoyment of the game, that everybody understands that it’s up to the individual to call penalties on themselves, to be their own caretaker, and protect the field,” said Brandel Chamblee, a golf analyst. “Everybody in a golf tournament is watching over everyone else.”Even television viewers can call in rules violations. “If you get labeled a cheat in this game,” Chamblee added, “it’s the worst kind of admonishment that the game can dish out.” Indeed, Chamblee called for Tiger Woods to disqualify himself from the 2013 Masters because Woods took an improper drop on the 15th hole after his approach shot hit the flagstick and the ball caromed into a pond during the second round. Instead of a bogey 6, Woods was assessed a two-stroke penalty, for a triple-bogey 8, by the Masters committee the next day.“The integrity of this sport is bigger than the desire to see Tiger Woods play golf today,” Chamblee said at the time. “I want to see Tiger Woods play golf. I have never seen anybody play golf like him. I want to see him make a run at Jack Nicklaus’s majors record. I want to see that. But I don’t want to see it this week. I don’t want to see it under these circumstances. The right thing to do here, for Tiger and for the game, is for Tiger to disqualify himself.”The Patriots’ scandal has taken a similarly serious tone. On Thursday, Belichick and Brady held news conferences in which they denied having knowingly cheated. The sessions became must-watch events.Like most juicy scandals, the case even got its own name: Deflategate.“This whole thing seems so petty,” Mosher said.He guessed that the N.F.L. was thrilled that Deflategate was drawing attention from more serious league issues, like player concussions and domestic-violence cases, during what is usually a quiet week before the week of the Super Bowl.It has indeed caught the attention of fans who are debating the Patriots’ integrity at water coolers and through social media. To Mosher, this was just another episode in “the soap-opera melodrama that is professional sports.” “I’m sure the Patriots are not the first, nor are they the last, team to do this kind of thing,” Mosher said. “Unless, of course, the N.F.L. changes its rule.”Advertisement