AdvertisementSupported byBy Ben ShpigelTodd Bowles, the Jets’ new head coach, appointed two coordinators and seven assistants Friday as he continued to fill out his staff.Running the defense will be Kacy Rodgers, who spent the past seven seasons coaching the Miami Dolphins’ defensive linemen. Rodgers worked with Bowles in Dallas from 2005 to 2007, then in Miami from 2008 to 2011.Bobby April Jr., formerly the Raiders’ special teams coordinator, takes over that position with the Jets. April, entering his 24th season as a special teams coach, served on the Philadelphia Eagles’ staff with Bowles in 2012.Other additions include: Mike Caldwell as assistant head coach/inside linebackers; Mark Collins as the outside linebackers coach; Joe Danna as the defensive backs coach; the former U.C.L.A. head coach Karl Dorrell as receivers coach; Robby Brown as quality-control coach on offense; and Kavan Latham and Aaron McLaurin as assistant strength and conditioning coaches.Bowles retained Justus Galac as the team’s strength and conditioning coach.GRIEVANCE FILED The players union filed a grievance against the league over changes to its personal-conduct policy.League officials said they wanted players and others in the N.F.L. to be held to stricter standards. The league said in a statement, “Clearly, the union does not share that belief.”Officials for the N.F.L. Players Association did not immediately respond to requests for comment.The union and the league have been at odds over the personal-conduct policy since both groups began dealing with the Ray Rice domestic violence case.Union officials have said they wanted to open the personal-conduct policy to collective bargaining in order to negotiate changes, while N.F.L. executives have said the current contract gives them leeway to make necessary revisions.The N.F.L. said in its statement that it consulted with the union, as well as current and former players and other experts, before making changes. (AP)PACKERS BUYING LAND The Green Bay Packers’ latest purchase of property around Lambeau Field was a hotel.The hotel, the Road Star Inn, was among a growing number of properties in the team’s portfolio. The hotel’s general manager, Andrew Schroepfer, told WLUK-TV in Green Bay that it would close in about a month.The Packers have not commented on the team’s plans for the area.With the purchase, the Packers will own 24 properties west of Lambeau Field. The team has torn down several buildings in the area recently. (AP) EMBATTLED RAVENS PLAYER The Baltimore Ravens intend to cut ties with defensive tackle Terrence Cody, who is being investigated for animal cruelty involving his dog.The Ravens made no reference to the investigation when they issued a news release that said Cody’s contract will be terminated after the Super Bowl.Cody, 26, is the subject of an investigation launched by the Baltimore County State’s Attorney’s Office.A Baltimore County police official said no charges had been filed and that the investigation was ongoing.According to Cody’s agent, Peter Schaffer, Cody took his dog to a veterinarian for treatment and the pet subsequently died.Cody missed the first 12 games of the 2014 season after hip surgery. He was activated on Nov. 4 but played in only one game, seeing limited action in Miami on Dec. 7.His one-year, $730,000 contract was set to expire in March. Cody would then become an unrestricted free agent. (AP)AROUND THE LEAGUE The Pittsburgh Steelers signed punter Brad Wing to a one-year contract extension. ... Bill Kollar, who has 26 years of experience coaching defensive lines in the N.F.L., was named to fill that role with the Denver Broncos. (AP)Advertisement