AdvertisementSupported byBy Brendan PruntyPISCATAWAY, N.J. — The only place for John Beilein, the men’s basketball coach at Michigan, to sit in the hallway of the Rutgers athletic center on Tuesday night was on a medical table with a cushion held together with duct tape. He hoisted himself up, pored over the box score from his team’s victory over Rutgers and accepted pats on the back and congratulations from alumni.“Never an easy night,” Beilein said, exhaling.He knows this better than most these days.Twenty minutes earlier, Michigan had survived a 54-50 battle with Rutgers. It was the fourth time in seven games that the Wolverines had not scored 60 points. On Tuesday, two days after the team announced that its best player — the junior guard Caris LeVert — would miss the rest of the season with a left foot fracture, Beilein was forced to conjure up more magic.He cobbled together an 11-man rotation consisting of one senior, one junior, four sophomores, four true freshmen and a redshirt freshman. Two of those players, Sean Lonergan and Andrew Dakich, are walk-ons. And on this night in particular, Beilein was forced to burn the planned redshirt year of Dakich because of the shortage of healthy players.“We’re trying to get them to embrace the adversity,” Beilein said. “They all want to play right away, but we need to get them prepared. Make sure they’re ready to go against some of the smart, good players out there.”It was a challenge Michigan appeared unready to face only a month ago. On Dec. 6, Michigan was 6-1 and ranked No. 17 in the Associated Press Top 25 poll, but then was stunned at home by the nation’s lone Division I independent program, the New Jersey Institute of Technology. The loss appeared to be a one-day hiccup. It wasn’t.Three days later, there was another home loss, this time to Eastern Michigan, the first time Michigan lost to its in-state neighbor since 1997. That was followed by a loss to No. 3 Arizona. Then a third loss at the Crisler Center, this time to Southern Methodist. By the time Michigan began Big Ten play on Dec. 30, it had a 7-5 record.Then the health problems began.When the team arrived at Rutgers, Beilein’s roster read like a MASH unit’s. Forwards Kameron Chatman and D. J. Wilson had knee injuries. Guard Derrick Walton Jr. was battling turf toe. Forward Duncan Robinson had an ankle injury. This week, guard Spike Albrecht and forwards Ricky Doyle and Zak Irvin are battling illnesses.“We’re definitely not new to adversity,” the senior forward Max Bielfeldt said. “When you have guys go down, guys get sick, it’s next man up.”It is an approach that has worked for Michigan.Seven games into conference play, the Wolverines have begun the process of salvaging what appeared to be a lost season. With a 5-2 record in the Big Ten entering Saturday night’s game against the conference’s top team — No. 6 Wisconsin — Michigan is continuing to come up with solutions, even if problems seem to pop up by the day.“Every team in the country is going through something,” Walton said. “It just so happens that this is what we’re going through. We’re just taking it in stride. You learn from it, you stay positive.”LeVert’s injury was supposed to be a major problem for Michigan. He is viewed as a potential first-round N.B.A. draft choice and entering Tuesday’s game was the team’s leader in six statistical categories: points, rebounds, assists, steals, minutes per game and 3-point field goal percentage.In Michigan’s first game after losing the 6-foot-7 LeVert, oddsmakers had Rutgers — a team with a 10-9 record that was picked in the league’s preseason poll to finish last — as a 3-point favorite.“There was some doubt in that locker room,” Beilein said of his team’s mental state entering the game on Tuesday.Beilein’s approach, though, has been one of consistency. He has had depleted rosters and lineups stacked with young players before. Two years ago, he took a team with five freshmen and a sophomore as regular contributors to the national championship game. Last season Michigan, with a roster consisting mainly of freshmen and sophomores, won three games in the N.C.A.A. tournament before losing in a regional final.“What I’ve learned in all these 40 years is that you don’t know what to expect,” Beilein said. “Anything can happen. Just as crazy. You’ve just got to adjust.”Beilein believes that the turnaround his players have made from a month ago is due in large part to their owning what happened in December.After the losses to N.J.I.T. and Eastern Michigan, Michigan was the punch line to college basketball jokes. It would have been easy for a young team to let the rest of the season play out, especially after losing LeVert.Instead, the Wolverines found ways to win.After the victory at Rutgers, ugly as it was, Michigan huddled in the cramped visitors’ locker room and chanted the university’s fight song. When the last note was sung, Beilein shouted to his players: “Good night. Good fight.”“Things happen,” Walton said. “We had a little more bumps in the road than the average team, but we’re not harping on it at all. Things happen all throughout the year. This just happened to us. You can’t cry about it. You’ve just got to get through it.”Advertisement