By TYLER KEPNERJAN. 25, 2015
At the foot of the desk of the new baseball commissioner, in a frame waiting to be hung on his office wall, is an original roster from the Rome American Little League in upstate New York, dated April 27, 1969. In the No. 10 slot is a 10-year-old from Van Buren Avenue named Robert Manfred. He never played organized baseball past Little League, but on Sunday he will ascend to the top of the game.Manfred, known as Rob, is taking over for Bud Selig, who was in office for 22 years while maintaining his base in Milwaukee. Manfred, a labor lawyer, is at home on Park Avenue in Manhattan. Three of his four grown children live close by, and one attends Colgate. He saw his first game at Yankee Stadium, and Mickey Mantle hit two home runs.“And then I was a big Bobby Murcer fan during the down years,” Manfred said, smiling. “The Jerry Kenney, Horace Clarke years.”Manfred, 56, has worked for Major League Baseball since 1998, most recently as the chief operating officer who negotiated three collective bargaining agreements with the union. He led the Biogenesis investigation and was Selig’s top lieutenant on almost everything. A small replica of Dodger Stadium sits beside Manfred’s computer, a gift from the bankruptcy lawyers baseball used when the Dodgers’ owners were in peril.AdvertisementThe room holds other artifacts — family photos, framed degrees, a signed photo of Muhammad Ali glowering over Sonny Liston, an Eisenhower biography — but that Little League lineup card might mean the most. Unlike Selig, Manfred is taking over in peacetime. There has not been a work stoppage since the strike that canceled the 1994 World Series. He can afford to think long term when asked for his priorities.Advertisement“The one that I’m most excited about, and I think may be most important for the game over the long haul, is a focus on kids,” Manfred said. “We have to have more kids, period, playing the game. We have to have more of the best athletes playing the game in order to keep our product compelling on the field. Even putting the elite guys to one side, if you play, the chances you’re going to be a fan go up dramatically. All the research shows that.”Manfred said he wanted M.L.B. to be more of a presence in the amateur game, from Little League through the N.C.A.A., to encourage participation. He also hinted at programs that would draw younger fans to major league parks, before pivoting to another objective, symbolized right there on his windowsill: a personal charging station for two iPads and an iPhone.“I am the original plugged-in guy,” Manfred said. “I hate to admit it, but I am.”Selig was the right man to lead the owners out of the strike, unifying them in a way perhaps no one else could. His decades in baseball gave him historical perspective, and he advanced his initiatives by combining the homespun personal touch of a born salesman with the dogged persistence of a seasoned politician. Selig was willing to wait for most changes, and by the end, he had a long list of accomplishments. Manfred said he would lean on Selig, now the commissioner emeritus, for guidance.But Selig was also famous for not owning a desktop computer. He still presided over the development of baseball’s thriving advanced media company, but it is no secret that Manfred is better suited for an age that demands a more streamlined approach.“You hear a lot about our game, our society — how do the two fit together? — and is baseball and its pacing consonant with our society,” Manfred said. “I think it’s really important that we use technology to make the game as user-friendly in the ballpark and during broadcasts as we possibly can. You can enhance and provide real fans with information via technology that makes the game move faster and keeps people engaged during the game, without distracting from what’s the core, what’s out there on the field.”It is accepted wisdom, Manfred said, that baseball’s national television audience skews older, as reflected in the annually sluggish Nielsen ratings for the All-Star Game and the World Series. But, he said, 5.7 million people open the AtBat app every day, and the users’ average age is 30.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Manfred said he was convinced that young fans were hungry for baseball and the daily drama other sports could not offer. But those fans consume the game differently from the way older fans do, and in Manfred, the owners believe they have a leader to capitalize on that interest.“We’re in the middle of a technology age, a media age, that’s different than it used to be,” said Lew Wolff, the Oakland Athletics owner and longtime Selig ally. “I think there’s room for growth, and Rob is very sensitive to that. One of these days, maybe long after I’m out of it, people will say, ‘Look at what Rob added to baseball,’ just like they say about Bud.”AdvertisementAs that technological revolution unfolds, there are other issues, perhaps more tangible, that Manfred could address. The All-Star Game will be in Cincinnati in July, meaning that Pete Rose’s status will become a story. Manfred has not reviewed the case involving Rose, who was barred from baseball for life in 1989 for gambling on the Reds as their manager, but he offered opinions on other topics.THE DESIGNATED HITTER “I have never experienced one moment of mental dissonance over the fact that the American League has it and the National League doesn’t. I just never have. It’s interesting, right now, given where offense is in our game. I can’t see the American League clubs giving it up, and right now, given the composition of our National League owners, I don’t see them buying into it. So I think we’re staying where we are.”DAY GAMES IN THE WORLD SERIES “I don’t rule that out, and the reason is not that I really foresee it in our current situation, but the media landscape is changing so quickly that to say, ‘We’re never going to do that,’ I think, would be foolhardy. And I do see the appeal of that, particularly on the issue of youth.”ADVERTISEMENTS ON UNIFORMS “There was more chatter about that in the game 10 years ago than there is now. It’s just not a hot issue for us. I think people have great respect for the way our uniforms look. I don’t foresee that one; I really don’t.”EXPANSION “I don’t see it in the immediate future. At a minimum, it’s a ways down the road. I just don’t see any immediate push for it.”MONTREAL “Look, I think Montreal helped itself as a candidate for Major League Baseball with the Toronto games that they had up there last year. It’s hard to miss how many people showed up for those exhibition games. It was a strong showing. Montreal’s a great city. I think with the right set of circumstances and the right facility, it’s possible.”THE ALL-STAR GAME RESULT DETERMINING HOME-FIELD ADVANTAGE FOR THE WORLD SERIES “I’m in favor of it staying. I understand people have different theories about why it doesn’t make sense. I think the one thing that’s very, very difficult to argue with is when we went to the home-field advantage rule, the way the game was played by the players, how seriously they took it, changed and changed for the better. Why you’d want to go backwards on that issue is something that really escapes me.”INTERNATIONAL DRAFT “Inevitable. It’s going to come someday. When? It’s going to be a product of negotiation with the players. I think there is a natural appeal to a single vehicle for entry into the game, no matter where you hail from. It’s the most efficient way to promote competitive balance.”A version of this article appears in print on January 25, 2015, on Page SP9 of the New York edition with the headline: New Commissioner Is Determined to Steer Young People Toward Sport.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.