AdvertisementSupported byBy Ben RothenbergMELBOURNE, Australia — Apparently in cruise control, Eugenie Bouchard stalled out on the road to a routine victory.Bouchard, the No. 7 seed at the Australian Open, had won nine of 10 games on Sunday to take a 6-1, 3-0 lead over Irina-Camelia Begu in their fourth-round match at Rod Laver Arena. One bookmaker offering live betting on the match moved Begu’s odds of a victory to 101-1.But Begu won the next five games, and she ultimately took the second set, 7-5. Bouchard, a Canadian, regrouped in the third set for a 6-1, 5-7, 6-2 victory, but she brimmed with dissatisfaction after the win.“It’s disappointing for me because I want to play so well, and I want to be perfect,” she said. “That’s not possible; it happens. Yeah, I think I started being a bit less aggressive, a bit too passive, and that’s not my game at all. I don’t do well when that happens. She could string together a few good points here and there, hit some good shots and serves, and got some confidence in the second set. You know, that helped her.”Bouchard added, though, “I learned a lot from it, and I’ll try to make sure it doesn’t happen next time.”That next time will be in the quarterfinals against second-seeded Maria Sharapova, who dismissed Peng Shuai, 6-3, 6-0, in the match that followed Bouchard’s.Sharapova and Bouchard met most recently in the semifinals of the French Open, and Sharapova came back for a 4-6, 7-5, 6-2 victory before winning her second title there two days later.“I think I’ve progressed a lot since then,” Bouchard said. “I definitely want to keep playing my game no matter what, really kind of take it to her, go for my shots. That’s what I want to do on the court. And it’s more fun when I play that way, too. I had more fun in the third set today. So I want to try to do that.”Although the tournament is moving into its second week, Bouchard said she could still find time to improve her game before the next round.“I believe in cramming,” she said, smiling. “Tomorrow — it’s great with Slams that we have a day off, and it just gives you some more time if you want to work on a few things here and there.”After defeating Peng, Sharapova praised Bouchard, the only woman to reach three major semifinals last year.“Last year, I think she had the most consistency in all the Grand Slams,” Sharapova said. “She’s been playing incredibly well.”Another consistent performer at the major tournaments has been Simona Halep, the No. 3 seed, who still looms as a possible semifinal opponent for Bouchard or Sharapova. Halep reached the quarterfinals for a second consecutive year in Melbourne with her victory Sunday night, beating unseeded Yanina Wickmayer, 6-4, 6-2.In the quarterfinals, Halep will face Ekaterina Makarova, the No. 10 seed, who advanced Sunday afternoon with a 6-3, 6-2 dismissal of Julia Görges. This will be Makarova’s third quarterfinal appearance in Melbourne in the past four years, as well as her third consecutive Grand Slam quarterfinal. Last year, she reached the quarterfinals at Wimbledon, and she was a semifinalist at the United States Open.Advertisement