AdvertisementSupported byHornets 76, Knicks 71By Viv BernsteinCHARLOTTE, N.C. — Saturday night was the one-year anniversary of Carmelo Anthony’s 62-point performance, a Knicks record, against Charlotte. As coincidence would have it, the teams were playing each other again. Funny how much has changed in a year. The Charlotte Bobcats are now the Hornets. The Knicks do not look a whole lot like last year’s version, either, except for the uniforms. Their starting lineup on Saturday featured three players who were on 10-day contracts. And that lineup did not include Anthony, who sat out the game to rest his left knee, which had forced him out of the lineup for six games this month. Could a starting five that included Lance Thomas, Langston Galloway and Lou Amundson be enough for the Knicks to extend their season-best winning streak to four games? Not quite.Tim Hardaway Jr. scored a season-high 25 points to lead the Knicks, but Charlotte, playing without its star guard, Kemba Walker, pulled away in the final minutes for a 76-71 victory despite shooting just 32.9 percent from the field for the game. The Knicks were only marginally better, at 35.4 percent. Hardaway hit a 3-pointer to tie the score at 69-69 with 2 minutes 39 seconds to go, but a baseline jumper by Brian Roberts gave the Hornets a 71-69 lead with 2:14 left. Al Jefferson added a layup on Charlotte’s next possession, then made a free throw with 22 seconds left to put Charlotte ahead by 74-71. A Hardaway miss from 3-point range with 14.9 seconds to go and a turnover after an offensive rebound finished the Knicks. After the game, Anthony spoke with Hardaway, who could have waited for a final shot rather than rushing the 3-point attempt.“He said, ‘You need to know game-time situations,’ ” Hardaway said. “ ‘You need to know for future reference, because you’re going to be in this position again; you never know when.’ ”But Coach Derek Fisher did not pin the loss on Hardaway’s decision. The Knicks had bigger concerns.“I had a group of guys out there that have never been in that situation before — together, at least,” Fisher said. “It also impacts the way you finish games. There were five guys out there that need to have a feel for each other and what needs to happen. We couldn’t generate enough offense down the stretch.”One of the players Fisher did not have at the end was Amar’e Stoudemire, who sprained his left ankle and a wrist and was not able to play in the final several minutes.“At that point, I couldn’t do much,” Stoudemire said. “My ankle was just throbbing. I felt like it was getting tighter and stiffer. So it was tough. At that point, I knew I couldn’t be beneficial out there.”Stoudemire did not say whether he would be able to play on Monday against Sacramento at Madison Square Garden.Despite Anthony’s absence, it looked as if the Hornets were the overmatched team early on. Coming off a 129-90 shellacking at Cleveland on Friday night, the Hornets lacked the firepower to stay with the Knicks early in the game, particularly without Walker, who was resting a sore knee. The Knicks built a 9-0 lead as Charlotte missed or was blocked on its first nine shots. The lead was in double digits, at 29-18, midway through the second quarter, with the Hornets shooting 5 of 30 from the field. But Charlotte climbed back into the game, rallying to close the gap to 37-36 at halftime despite having shot just 25.6 percent. Thomas, one of the three Knicks on 10-day contracts, had 10 points at the half, as did Hardaway.Charlotte never let the Knicks pull away again, though. Even after losing the starting center Bismack Biyombo to a knee contusion in the first half, the Hornets tied the game for the first time, 47-47, on a layup by Al Jefferson with 6:35 remaining in the third quarter. Charlotte took its first lead, 55-54, on a Jason Maxiell jumper with 3:09 to go in the period. Lance Stephenson’s drive-and-scoop shot off the glass gave the Hornets a 57-54 lead going into the final quarter.Fisher said that resting Anthony had been a precaution; the Knicks were playing their third game in four nights. They have another stretch of three games in four nights beginning Monday.“I thought it was best for now,” Fisher said before the game. “But there’s no concrete plan to stay with it that way. I’m hopeful that as we get through this weekend and approach next week, that we have a back-to-back Wednesday-Thursday, he’ll be in there.”REBOUNDSJose Calderon, who hurt his left knee against Orlando on Friday, did not make the trip to Charlotte. Derek Fisher said he did not know whether Calderon would be available Monday. “Jose’s feeling much better this morning compared to last night,” he said. “We can’t predict where he’s going to be come Monday, but I think it was smart to have him stay back and kind of get the treatment around the clock, and we’ll see where he is tomorrow.”Advertisement