AdvertisementSupported byDodgers 5, Mets 2By Tim RohanLOS ANGELES — Mets shortstop Ruben Tejada lay facedown in the dirt near second base, motionless, as the Dodger Stadium crowd erupted. The Dodgers’ Chase Utley had just slid hard into him, breaking up what might have been a potential inning-ending double play by submarining Tejada and sending him flying into the air and to the ground hard on his back.As Tejada lay there, still motionless, the Mets surrounded him as the umpires reviewed the play. The slide had been violent, with the Dodgers trailing by a run in the seventh inning. As Tejada was carted off the field with a broken leg, the umpires determined he had not touched the base. Utley, who had initially been called out, was now safe. Instead of getting two outs, or even one, the Mets had recorded zero outs on the play. Manager Terry Collins quizzed the umpires, but the reversal stood.The Dodgers took advantage of the opportunity by scoring three more runs en route to a 5-2 victory, beating the Mets in demoralizing fashion and tying the National League division series at one game apiece as it heads back to New York for Game 3 on Monday. That slide cost the Mets not only their starting shortstop but valuable momentum in a best-of-five-game series.Afterward, both teams were left to debate what had happened and whether the slide had been a dirty play. Utley, a former Philadelphia Phillies standout and a longtime Mets nemesis, drew strong reactions from the Mets’ players, who clearly took issue with the way he had taken out Tejada while his back was turned.“Only Chase knows what the intent was,” David Wright said. “I have a problem with the play on a number of different levels — one being the slide itself. In my opinion, he wasn’t anywhere near the bag. With that being said, he didn’t even touch the bag.”Wilmer Flores, who replaced Tejada, said Tejada “wasn’t even on the base” when Utley barreled into him.The debate between the teams was heated because it was an awkward play to begin with. With two runners on base and one out, Howie Kendrick hit a ground ball up the middle. Second baseman Daniel Murphy ranged far to his right, fielded the ball and flipped it awkwardly to Tejada covering second. Tejada reached for the ball, turning his back to first. As he attempted to spin to his left to throw to first, Utley slid squarely into his legs.Replays showed that Utley was well to the right of the base and had made only a token attempt to reach out for it with his left hand. The umpires called Utley out, and he jogged off the field as Tejada lay on the ground. The umpires took the opportunity to review the play to see whether Tejada had touched the bag, unusual in itself because what was seemingly an example of the so-called neighborhood plays — when infielders receive the ball in proximity of the base — are rarely reviewed.But because Murphy’s throw had not been true and there did not appear to be a clear chance for a double play, the umpires ruled that the neighborhood rule did not apply. Their review determined that Tejada’s foot was off the bag by the tiniest of margins when he received the ball from Murphy.Joe Torre, the league’s chief baseball officer, said later that the second-base umpire, Chris Guccione, had made a “judgment call” and that he was still reviewing the play to determine whether the slide had been excessive and whether Utley deserved punishment.“I would hate to think that Utley tried to hurt somebody,” Torre said. “It certainly was late — that concerns me, the lateness of the slide. We’re still basically talking about it. But the umpire had one shot. I certainly can’t fault the umpire for everything he had to look at.”Utley took his time returning to the clubhouse after the game to speak with reporters, and when he finally arrived, he denied any wrongdoing.“I feel terrible he was injured,” he said of Tejada. “I did not intend to hurt him whatsoever. I was just trying to break up the double play.”Asked about Tejada’s having his back turned, Utley said: “I didn’t realize that his back was turned. Everything obviously happens fast. And I tried to break it up.”The inning had started well enough for the Mets. Noah Syndergaard, their young star pitcher, was throwing a gem against Zack Greinke, one of the game’s elite pitchers.Syndergaard set the tone early for the Mets early, pumping fastball after fastball. The crowd gasped and pointed to the scoreboard when he first hit 100 miles per hour. Syndergaard hit that mark 13 times over the first two innings.Once the Dodgers started sitting on Syndergaard’s fastball, he adjusted by using his off-speed pitches. He stranded two runners in the third inning, striking out Corey Seager, the Dodgers’ budding 21-year-old standout shortstop, on a changeup, then Adrian Gonzalez on a slider. After Andre Ethier doubled in the Dodgers’ first run, Syndergaard struck out Yasmani Grandal on a slider.Taking the mound for the seventh, Syndergaard had thrown a hefty 101 pitches, but Collins decided to stick with him. Syndergaard walked Grandal and allowed a single to Utley before Collins pulled him for the veteran journeyman Bartolo Colon, who has had little experience as a reliever.That was when Kendrick hit the ground ball that changed the game. After that, Collins summoned Addison Reed, who surrendered doubles to Adrian Gonzalez and Justin Turner and the lead to the Dodgers.After the game, Tejada left the clubhouse early, using a crutch and wearing a suit, with a supportive black boot to protect his injured right leg.“You can’t forget about it,” Wright said of the play. “One of your teammates has a broken leg. I think that you try to rally around that. You try to go out there and try to get a win or two for Ruben, a guy that sticks his neck out there trying to turn a big double play, knowing he’s going to get hit.”Advertisement