AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressIt was easy for Phil Mickelson to skip the Match Play Championship in Arizona when his children had spring break because he never cared for the golf courses at Dove Mountain or the tournament’s fickle one-and-done format.This year he is sacrificing two tournaments that he loves, and where he has won a combined six times.Mickelson, who made his 2015 debut in the Humana Challenge in La Quinta, Calif., said on his website that in February he will skip the Pebble Beach National Pro-Am in Pebble Beach, Calif., and the Northern Trust Open at the Riviera Country Club in Pacific Palisades, Calif., because of spring break.“Those are two of my favorite events, two of my favorite courses,” Mickelson said. “But with the kids in two schools with different spring breaks, I’ll take that time off. They’ve accommodated my schedule enough over the years. It’s time for me to accommodate theirs.”Mickelson is a four-time winner at Pebble Beach. He won at Riviera in 2008 and 2009, and lost in a playoff in 2007 and 2012. He has not missed Pebble Beach since 1997.After the Humana Challenge, where Mickelson was tied for 36th at seven under par entering the weekend, he will play the Phoenix Open at TPC Scottsdale in Arizona starting Jan. 26 and at the Farmers Insurance Open at Torrey Pines in San Diego starting Feb. 5. NEW GOLF CHANNEL HOST Golf Channel is adding a familiar face to golf worldwide, but new to America.Cara Robinson, an English sports television host, has been hired as a co-host for “Morning Drive” and is expected to start her new role in late February as the PGA Tour begins its Florida swing.Robinson was host of “Golfing World,” a weekly television program on Sky Sports that was available to 20 million viewers in Britain, Ireland, Italy, Germany and Austria. She traveled extensively to the biggest events for player profiles and features.She also played a lead role in “Open Live,” a digital telecast at the British Open. Robinson also hosted Sky Sports’ tennis coverage during the 2012 Olympics in London. A MODEL FOR HENLEY If imitation is the sincerest form of flattery, then Brandt Snedeker should take a bow.And it came from Russell Henley, already regarded as a good putter. He was told at Kapalua Resort in Hawaii, which hosted the Hyundai Tournament of Champions earlier this month where Henley tied for third, that the way he goes through his pre-shot routine on the green looked like Snedeker. Turns out looks were not deceiving.“I take it as a compliment,” Henley said. “I remember the week after Brandt won the Tour Championship, I was in Charlotte and I struggled. I missed the cut the week before in Midland on the Web.com Tour. I remember watching how he didn’t take a lot of time and he just kind of got over the putt and he reacted. That’s how I’ve always done everything.”Henley changed his routine. Instead of looking at the ball during his practice strokes, he looks at the hole before he gives it a rap. “I remember trying to emulate that just because I was searching for something because I needed to play well,” he said. It seems to have worked. Henley has won twice in his first two years on the PGA Tour.ADVISORY COUNCIL NAMED The PGA Tour has never had a foreign-born player on its policy board, a streak that will continue.The tour announced its 16-member Player Advisory Council, which advises and consults with the board on competition issues. Three of those players on the council were selected to run for chairman, and the winner will serve a three-year term on the board.The candidates are Davis Love III, Webb Simpson and Kevin Streelman. Voting ends Feb. 17.Of the top 125 on the PGA Tour money list last year, 38 percent of the players were born overseas. The council has only three foreign-born players (19 percent) this year: Freddie Jacobson of Sweden, Geoff Ogilvy of Australia and John Senden of Australia.OLD PUTTER FINDS NEW LIFE Jimmy Walker went back to his favorite putter for two weeks in Hawaii, and he could not miss on his way to winning the Sony Open last Sunday for the second time in a row. He one-putted 16 times on the back nine at Waialae in the third and fourth rounds.Walker won twice on the Nationwide Tour and captured the money title in 2004 using a Scotty Cameron model. He sent the 11-year-old putter to the studios last fall to add the weight he felt it needed. Tungsten was added to the sole, and Walker fell in love with it again.“I’ve always loved the look of it,” he said. “I got it back last month and put it back in the bag as soon as I saw it. I don’t foresee taking it out any time soon.”Advertisement