By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSJAN. 24, 2015
Ryan Johansen of the hometown Blue Jackets pulled a youngster out of the stands and guided him to a goal to win the breakaway challenge, and Nashville’s Shea Weber fired the hardest shot with a 108.5-mile-per-hour blast at the N.H.L. All-Star skills competition in Columbus, Ohio, on Saturday night.Weber missed the net on his first attempt but made up for that with a shot second only to the 108.8-m.p.h. drive in 2012 by the five-time winner Zdeno Chara.Patrick Kane of the Blackhawks had the fastest time (13.529 seconds) in the accuracy shooting, and Tampa Bay’s Jonathan Drouin was the fastest skater (13.103 seconds).The team led by Blue Jackets forward Nick Foligno earned a 25-19 skills competition victory over the squad led by the Chicago Blackhawks’ captain, Jonathan Toews. Team Foligno will meet Team Toews on Sunday in the All-Star Game.AdvertisementThe breakaway challenge proved the most innovative of any of the lighthearted, head-to-head competitions.AdvertisementJohansen pulled a 7-year-old boy — Cole, the son of the Blue Jackets trainer Mike Vogt — out of the stands to score a goal to the delight of the crowd. Johansen also employed a star-laden V-formation to the net on his third, and final, attempt.WORLD CUP IS BACK The World Cup of Hockey will be making a long-awaited return in 2016, with eight teams and games played in Toronto before N.H.L. training camps open in September.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Commissioner Gary Bettman and Donald Fehr, the executive director of the N.H.L. Players’ Association, announced the tournament’s return at a news conference Saturday, during the league’s All-Star weekend festivities. The league also announced that the Boston Bruins and the Montreal Canadiens would play in the Winter Classic on Jan. 1, 2016, at Gillette Stadium, the home of the New England Patriots of the N.F.L. It is one of several outdoor games planned for next year.A wrinkle will be added to the World Cup format, with two teams of multinational players. One team will consist of North American-born players age 23 and under. Another will include European-born players whose countries are not represented.The other six teams will be Canada, the United States, Russia, Sweden, the Czech Republic and Finland.The World Cup and its predecessor, the Canada Cup, were held seven times from 1976 through 2004. Canada won five of the seven tournaments; Russia won in 1981.The 2016 tournament will be held two years before the Winter Olympics in South Korea. The N.H.L. has not yet determined if it will allow its players to compete in the Pyeongchang Games.One caveat that players had is that they do not want the World Cup to be held at the expense of competing at the Olympics, which N.H.L. players have done since the Nagano Games in 1998.A version of this article appears in print on January 25, 2015, on Page SP10 of the New York edition with the headline: All-Stars, and One 7-Year-Old Fan, Show Off Their Skills on the Ice.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.