By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSJAN. 24, 2015
The F.A. Cup lived up to its giant-killing reputation on Saturday as Chelsea and Manchester City were eliminated at home by lower-league teams.Four of the top six teams in England’s Premier League were ousted on a day of fourth-round shocks, with the league leader, Chelsea, squandering a two-goal lead and losing by 4-2 to third-tier Bradford City in a match featuring teams separated by 49 places in the English league pyramid.“We must feel ashamed; me and the players must feel ashamed,” Chelsea Manager José Mourinho said. “ ‘Frustration’ is not the right word — ‘embarrassed’ would be more appropriate.”In his two spells as Chelsea’s manager, Mourinho had not lost against a lower-division team.“It is a disgrace we were knocked out,” he said.AdvertisementA virtually full-strength Manchester City lost, 2-0, to second-tier Middlesbrough at Etihad Stadium, raising questions about the wisdom of City’s decision to travel to Abu Dhabi for a five-day training camp before the game. City, in second in the Premier League, returned from the trip late on Friday, and the team faded in the second half against Middlesbrough.Advertisement“An unforgettable day for us,” said Patrick Bamford, who is on loan from Chelsea and scored Middlesbrough’s first goal.Southampton, in third in the Premier League, twice surrendered a lead to lose, 3-2, at home to Crystal Palace, and host Tottenham — sixth in the league — conceded an injury-time winner and lost, 2-1, to Leicester City.Swansea City lost, 3-1, at Blackburn, a second-tier club, in another fourth-round stunner. Swansea finished the match with nine men.The surprising results in the F.A. Cup began on Friday, when star-studded Manchester United was held to a 0-0 draw by fourth-tier Cambridge United at Old Trafford. Liverpool, in eighth in the Premier League, also drew, 0-0, when it hosted second-tier Bolton on Saturday.RONALDO SENT OFF IN WIN Cristiano Ronaldo earned a straight red card for kicking an opponent late in Real Madrid’s 2-1 win at Cordóba. Gareth Bale scored on an 89th-minute penalty kick for a victory that left Madrid, the Spanish league leader, a point ahead of Barcelona, which routed host Elche, 6-0.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Ronaldo had been held in check before the 82nd minute, when he lashed out at Cordóba’s Edimar.Bale helped Madrid rally when he earned a free kick and sent a shot into the defensive wall, where Federico Cartabia used his hand to block it. Bale then converted the resulting penalty kick.ARSENAL SET TO ADD DEFENDER The Spanish club Villarreal said it had reached the framework of a deal to send the Brazilian defender Gabriel Paulista to the Premier League club Arsenal. Villarreal also said it would receive Arsenal forward Joel Campbell on loan until the end of the season.IVORY COAST ESCAPES WITH DRAW Tactical changes again helped the Ivory Coast avoid defeat at the Africa Cup of Nations, this time in a 1-1 draw with Mali in Malabo, Equatorial Guinea. Max Gradel, a first-half substitute, scored in the 87th minute to rescue the Ivorians, the tournament favorites.In the day’s other game, also in Group D, Ibrahima Traoré scored late in the first half to give Guinea a 1-1 draw with Cameroon in Malabo. The two draws left all four teams in the group with 2 points after two matches.AdvertisementMONACO KEEPS STREAK ALIVE Dimitar Berbatov scored in a 1-0 win over Lille as Monaco, in fifth place in the French league, extended its unbeaten run to 12 games.A version of this article appears in print on January 25, 2015, on Page SP8 of the New York edition with the headline: Chelsea and Other Giants Ousted in F.A. Cup.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.