By PETER MAYJAN. 24, 2015
FOXBOROUGH, Mass. —  New England Coach Bill Belichick wasted no time owning up to altering footballs.Does he deflate them? No, he said. He added that he had no knowledge of who does.Does he deface them? Yes, he said. Every chance he gets.One of the revelations from Belichick’s news conference about the “football issue” on Thursday, when he said he had no knowledge that his Patriots might have used underinflated footballs against the Indianapolis Colts in the A.F.C. championship game, was a quick sidestep to his obvious pride in making practice footballs borderline unusable. He opened the second paragraph of his statement — just after he said he was shocked by the deflation accusations against his team — by reversing course. He went from the deflation topic, which had led him to the lectern in the first place, to the defacement matter.He was more than happy to offer minute details of what happens to footballs at Patriots practices as a way of reminding the uninitiated that his players will never use the conditions of a football as an excuse. That’s because they experience daily the absolute worst.Advertisement“Let me just say that my personal coaching philosophy and my mentality has always been to make things as difficult as possible for players in practice,” he said.AdvertisementHe added: “With footballs, I’m sure that any current or past player of mine would tell you that the balls we practice with are as bad as they can be — wet, sticky, cold, slippery. However bad we can make them, I make them.”That may have constituted news to the outside world, but inside the New England locker room, it was common knowledge.Who’s going to win? What color will Katy Perry’s hair be? What about the commercials? Make your Super Bowl picks and predictions and share your ballot with your friends.“I don’t know anything about what’s going on,” running back LeGarrette Blount said. “But we practice with terrible balls.”He continued, “Bill comes and pours water on the balls that we practice on.”Patriots quarterback Tom Brady, in his 30-minute session with the news media on Thursday, said the balls that Belichick waters at practice could be the same ones the team uses for games.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The veteran Patriots learned early on that it was useless to protest the conditions of the practice balls. Belichick has a stock response: He makes them worse and, as he said, “that stops the complaining.”He continued: “I want the players to deal with a harder situation in practice than they’ll ever have to deal with in the game. Maybe that’s part of our whole ball-security philosophy. I’m trying to coach the team, and that’s what I want to do.”His approach seems to be working. The Patriots lost only four fumbles this season, the second fewest in the N.F.L., and had the second-best turnover differential. That is one reason they are headed to Super Bowl XLIX next Sunday against the Seattle Seahawks in Glendale, Ariz.Brandon LaFell, in his first season with New England, made the mistake of asking Belichick if he could get new gloves during practice because of the slippery ball. Belichick simply walked over to the football and doused it with water.Advertisement“We practice with the worst balls ever made,” LaFell said.Belichick said he hears comments during practice “from time to time,” usually from the ballhandlers and kickers who do not like the balls’ condition.“They’re a lot more sensitive to it than I am,” he said. “But I can tell you, and they will tell you, that there is never any sympathy whatsoever from me on that subject. Zero.”He added: “That has never been a priority for me. We play with whatever, or kick with whatever we have to use. And that’s the way it is.”A version of this article appears in print on January 25, 2015, on Page SP4 of the New York edition with the headline: Footballs Fair Game At Belichick’s Practices.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.