JAN. 24, 2015
Diverging Opinions On Paterno’s RecordTo the Sports Editor:The N.C.A.A.’s decision to rescind the draconian sanctions levied against the Penn State football program is, in essence, an admission that its rush to judgment three years ago very likely wrongly tarnished the reputation of Joe Paterno and just about everyone affiliated with the university.Now the news media and, it is hoped, the courts, by way of the Paterno family’s lawsuit, must thoroughly examine the motives and actions of Mark Emmert, the N.C.A.A. president, and Louis Freeh, the former F.B.I. director whose one-sided and incomplete report served as the catalyst for the sanctions.In the end, we may find that these two men let their egos get in the way of truth and justice.VAUGHN GILBERT, McKeesport, Pa.To the Sports Editor:Re “The Rehabilitation of Joe Paterno, Back at No. 1,” Jan. 17: As a former college quarterback, I can understand the restoration of Joe Paterno’s victories; he was an outstanding coach. As a survivor of child sexual abuse, however, I cannot understand how Paterno’s elevation back to being the winningest coach in college football exonerates him. The shame occurred on his watch.AdvertisementThe one man who can tell us what Paterno knew or didn’t know is the predator, Jerry Sandusky. My hope is that true rehabilitation comes to Sandusky behind bars. We just might learn what his boss knew or didn’t know.AdvertisementMARK JOSEPH WILLIAMS, Far Hills, N.JA Lucky Toss and an Unfair RuleTo the Sports Editor:Re “A Recovery and a Romp,” Jan. 19: The overtime victory by the Seattle Seahawks in last Sunday’s N.F.C. title game was a remarkable achievement. But the most important play was the coin flip that gave the ball to the Seahawks at the start of overtime.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The rule that gave the victory to Seattle without giving the Green Bay Packers an opportunity to match the Seahawks’ touchdown is unfair. The rule should be changed.LARRY GERSTEIN, Santa Barbara, Calif.The Genius of Slow-Motion ReplayTo the Sports Editor:Re “Tony Verna, Who Started Instant Replay and Remade Sports Television, Dies at 81,” Jan. 22: Tony Verna is rightly receiving accolades for figuring out real-time instant replay for television sports. As brilliant as that concept was, the true genius was the next step: creating slow-motion video.Sports production myth has it that the sportscasting pioneer Roone Arledge was in a bar with the sports engineer Julius Barnathan after a boxing match, lamenting that videotape could not be slowed the way film could be in the printing process. Barnathan then worked with the electronics company Ampex to create the ability to slow videotape — as we see today on every sports production.DAVID B. HILL, Pacific Palisades, Calif.The writer is a former chief executive of Fox Sports Media Group.A version of this letter appears in print on January 25, 2015, on Page SP6 of the New York edition with the headline: Letters to the Editor.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.