AdvertisementSupported byBy Allan KredaThe Islanders have many reasons to be grateful as they look ahead to the second half of the season.With 31 victories in 46 games, they are in first place in the Metropolitan Division. They are getting steady production from four lines and top-notch goaltending from Jaroslav Halak, who will represent the team at Sunday’s N.H.L. All-Star Game, along with center John Tavares. With the playoffs looming and a move to Barclays Center in Brooklyn ahead, the Islanders also have reason to be excited about their future.Their team depth is best exemplified by the Bridgeport Sound Tigers, the Islanders’ American Hockey League affiliate.The Sound Tigers, based in Connecticut, are populated with players who have spent time with the Islanders. The younger brigade appears to be benefiting from the organization’s theme of structured play and relentless work ethic, which starts with Islanders Coach Jack Capuano and extends to his Bridgeport counterpart, Brent Thompson.With forward Colin McDonald, goaltender Kevin Poulin and defensemen Aaron Ness, Griffin Reinhart and Ryan Pulock, the Sound Tigers have a distinct talent base in case the Islanders need reinforcements down the stretch or in the postseason. “There are always stories of guys who get in the lineup late in a season and wind up playing throughout the playoffs,” said Thompson, an assistant on Capuano’s staff during the past two seasons and a former N.H.L. defenseman. “We want the transition to be seamless.”The Bridgeport roster features two of the Islanders’ recent first-round draft picks: Reinhart, the fourth overall pick in 2012, and Pulock, the 15th pick in 2013. Pulock, who is out with an upper-body injury, had 12 goals in his first 29 games. Thompson cites McDonald and Ness as particularly valuable assets for his squad. Ness, 24, the team’s captain, will replace Pulock at the A.H.L. All-Star Game on Monday in Utica, N.Y. McDonald, 30, who leads the team in goals (14) and is tied for the lead in points (34), has proved to be a positive veteran presence since he was sent down in October because the Islanders had a glut of forwards.“Having those guys here is a great benefit,” Thompson said. “A player like Colin McDonald — how he goes about his game, his day-to-day habits — that’s huge for our young guys because he has played for the Islanders and knows what it takes to be successful.”Ness has just 24 games of N.H.L. experience, while McDonald has 124, plus six playoff games, on his N.H.L. résumé. Poulin, 24, played 28 games for the Islanders last season. “The guys look up to me, and I take pride in that,” said McDonald, who was captain of the Sound Tigers during the 2012 lockout. “I play hard every game no matter where I am because that’s my job.” Capuano, who coached the Sound Tigers for three-plus seasons before ascending to the Islanders’ bench in November 2010, said synergy and the process were important.“We have a staff down there that understands our staff up here,” Capuano said. “When you look around the league, there are many guys who spent a lot of time in the American league. We all understand what it takes to get here.”Eleven players on the Islanders’ roster also skated with the Sound Tigers; Frans Nielsen, Kyle Okposo and Matt Martin played for Capuano in Bridgeport.For Casey Cizikas, who centers the effective fourth line between Martin on the left and Cal Clutterbuck on the right, his time at Bridgeport was crucial. “That experience taught me what kind of player I have to be to be successful here,” he said. “And so many of us had the same route.”He added, “It’s definitely nice that we’ve all been through it together.” While the Islanders will be preparing to face the Rangers, the Boston Bruins and the Detroit Red Wings this week after the All-Star break, Thompson’s squad will continue riding buses to arenas in Syracuse, Providence and Binghamton. The weekend-focused A.H.L. schedule often features three straight games without a day off. That demanding pace helped Brock Nelson — second on the Islanders behind Tavares with 15 goals — make the adjustment from college hockey to the bruising 82-game marathon of the N.H.L. season. Nelson led the Sound Tigers with 52 points in 2012-13, his only full season in Bridgeport.“All those bus rides and back-to-back games, I learned a lot,” said Nelson, a first-round pick by the Islanders in 2010. “It means even more because many of my teammates there are here now, and we played similar styles in both places. Mutual understanding goes a long way.”Capuano and Thompson take pride in their shared outlook, a bond forged in friendship and featuring open lines of communication between staffs.“The relationship we have built is strong, and we know what expectations are and how they should be relayed to our players,” Thompson said. “That message goes from our general manager, Garth Snow, to Jack and his assistants to me and my staff.”Patience also proves a valuable attribute when it comes to shepherding young talent.“It’s not a race, not a sprint to reach the N.H.L.,” Thompson said. “Once they get up there, we don’t want them to come back down here.”Advertisement