AdvertisementSupported byBy Ben RothenbergMELBOURNE, Australia — As they met at the net before their third-round match Saturday night at the Australian Open, CoCo Vandeweghe towered over Madison Brengle. Vandeweghe, the 6-foot-1 granddaughter and niece of former N.B.A. players, plays “above-the-rim” tennis built on a powerful serve and a smashing forehand. But once the match started, the 5-foot-4 Brengle consistently undercut Vandeweghe’s lashing power, the variety and placement of Brengle’s shots tangling Vandeweghe into 41 unforced errors and allowing Brengle to cruise to a 6-3, 6-2 victory. With little warning, Brengle, 24, a former junior standout, is winning as she never has before — she improved her backhand and also shored up the weaknesses in her serve and forehand. “My game had to develop, and everybody goes at their own pace,” Brengle said. “It took me just a little bit longer, which I think wasn’t a bad thing for me, to mature and develop a little out of the spotlight.”Including her first appearance in a WTA Tour final last week in Tasmania, she has won eight tour-level main-draw matches in January. That exceeds her total of seven such wins in the previous eight years since her tour debut. After years of failing to even approach the top 100, Brengle will enter the top 50. The effect on Brengle’s bank account is even more stark. For reaching the fourth round, Brengle has earned $175,000, more than the $151,370 she made all last year. She has earned $208,274 this month compared with her combined winnings from 2010 through 2013, $196,364. Before she was given a wild-card entry to last year’s United States Open, Brengle had lost in the qualifying rounds of 24 consecutive Grand Slam events. Her failed attempt to qualify for Wimbledon last June changed the trajectory of her career.“I was so negative,” she said, “and before I even played my first-round qualifying round match there, I packed my bags and was looking at the flights, like, ‘O.K., I’m going home.’ ” During the match, though, she wearied of the gloominess, and her results have since soared. In the fourth round of the Australian Open, Brengle plays another American who shares her given name and has also never performed this well at a Grand Slam tournament, the 19-year-old Madison Keys.“Whenever I see her, ‘Hi, Maddie,’ ‘Hi, Maddie,’ ” Brengle said. “Good name.”Although Keys has received help from the United States Tennis Association for much of her professional career, Brengle has not. Frustrated with her off-court behavior and conditioning shortcomings, the U.S.T.A. cut its support for Brengle as her rise from the junior ranks stagnated in 2007. After severing ties with the U.S.T.A., Brengle has since moved to training at IMG Academy in Bradenton, Fla., and praised the spirit of her coaches there, who include Jose Lambert, Pat Harrison and Nick Bollettieri. “They get me,” Brengle said. “I love working with them on little things in my game and having a constant positive attitude coming from the people I work with. They very much understand that tennis is an up-and-down sport. It’s not all up.”Though her fitness and results have improved, Brengle still professes a deep love for cheese and red wine. She said she had enjoyed several bottles of malbec here. “I’m very much a 24-year-old girl who likes watching ‘Scandal’ and drinking red wine,” she said. At home, Brengle drinks out of the large wine glasses she saw on “Scandal,” which can hold nearly a full bottle. Though she generally shies away from media attention and has no visible presence on the social media channels used by most players for branding and fan outreach, Brengle has a distinctive, confident way of walking. She likens her gait to that of Christina Hendricks, her favorite actress on “Mad Men.” “A lot of tennis players, there’s a different way they carry their shoulders,” Brengle said. “I think good posture looks a little different. I don’t strut, I keep my spine upright. My parents didn’t like it when we slouched. So be up straight — I think it looks better.”Brengle’s mother, Gaby, a tennis coach in her hometown, Dover, Del., made her daughter play against adult men from the time she was 7. “They did not have to do that,” Brengle said of her childhood sparring partners, “but they went out after they got off work to go play with me. That was a huge help to me. I couldn’t have gotten to the point I did, living in Delaware, if they hadn’t done that. Normal club members, and they went out of their way to help me. The whole community got behind me.” From the early days, Brengle said, her simple enjoyment of playing the game has kept her attached to tennis through the highs and lows.“I enjoy learning from it, adapting my game, seeing what my opponent doesn’t like,” she said. “Winning isn’t too shabby, either.”Advertisement