
On College Basketball By                     
 HARVEY ARATON
 
JAN. 24, 2015
The games blur, with the seasons, successes and failures positioned across time like the capricious swings of a stock market graph. The personal memories are what vividly remain as the connective tissue of a rich career.So it was with Harry Statham, the career leader in coaching victories for a four-year men’s college basketball program as he awaited the arrival into Club 1,000 of Mike Krzyzewski, who could become the first male coach from Division I to reach that milestone when Duke plays St. John’s on Sunday at Madison Square Garden.Ask Statham, 77 and a 49-year veteran at McKendree University, what has most impressed him about Krzyzewski, and he unfolds a story about the time Coach K visited his campus in Lebanon, Ill.“He remembered my wife’s name,” Statham said. “Her name is Rose.”It was in April 1993 when Krzyzewski accepted an invitation to participate in a Founders Day program, and the Stathams, among the morning greeters, introduced themselves.Advertisement“There was a midmorning assembly,” Statham said, “and then an evening event, a dinner. It was a long day of speaking, of meeting people, signing autographs. And after all that, when he was about to leave, Coach K came over, thanked us for having him and said, ‘It was a pleasure to meet you, Rose.’Advertisement“When he left, I remember she said: ‘Wow, that’s impressive. He remembered my name.’ ”Krzyzewski made a fan for life, and that is what the Coach K loyalists have been talking about.“It’s his attention to detail,” said Tommy Amaker, the former Duke point guard who started his coaching career as a Krzyzewski assistant and is now the head coach at Harvard. “There are people who do things for the sake of doing, and they come across as salesmen. With Coach K, there is always substantive sincerity.”No coaches in sports are held up as great humanitarians the way college basketball and football coaches are. It’s all a bit overdone, and sometimes a great lie. It is always important to recognize that Krzyzewski has been in the business of winning, of promoting his program and becoming fabulously wealthy in the process.He has had his share of adversarial relations, from the likes of Dean Smith at North Carolina to the occasionally pushy reporter at Duke’s student newspaper.But nobody lasts as long as Krzyzewski has at Duke, since 1980, without ultimately being a man who — more than remembering names — gets along. Bob Knight, his coach and mentor at Army, proved at Indiana that even what seems like absolute power has its limits. And nobody stays three-plus decades at one institution without placing a premium value on roots, along the way realizing that money — or, in this case, more money — isn’t necessarily better.Krzyzewski’s salary is reportedly about $10 million a year, which by some estimates is more than that of even the most credentialed coaches in professional sports. But about a decade ago, the Los Angeles Lakers offered much more than he was making at Duke, with Kobe Bryant as lead recruiter. Krzyzewski said no.If he needs an N.B.A. fix, he has treated it as coach of the national team, now into a third Olympic cycle after restoring, with Jerry Colangelo, the United States as the premier world power.AdvertisementEarly on, Krzyzewski heard criticism that perhaps his volunteer duties were interfering with Duke recruiting. Most people eventually figured out that it can’t be bad for the Duke coach to be at the head of an Olympic development system that trains the best American high school players, not to mention having LeBron James and Kevin Durant on his speed dial.Krzyzewski has cashed in, but he’s done it his way, on commitment.“I see him now, the same passion, the same drive as when I was playing,” said Billy King, the Nets’ general manager and Dukie, class of ’88, “and, I think, he’s not shortchanging anybody.”The rewards at Krzyzewski’s level are otherworldly compared with what Statham has reaped at McKendree, a longtime National Association of Intercollegiate Athletics power that in recent years has moved to the N.C.A.A.’s Division II. A true lifer, Statham played basketball at McKendree, about 20 miles east of St. Louis.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I originally aspired to be a Division I coach,” he said. “The options to get there were to go to a D-II school, have major success and wait for a shot. Or sit on a D-I bench for four or five years and hope to get a chance. At some point, I decided I was fine where I was. I was getting great kids. I was happy.”He and Rose settled in, and the university ultimately named the gymnasium for him. His players — three of whom were drafted by N.B.A. teams, none ever making a roster — often return to say hello. Ask him to name the best, and he can’t, or won’t.It’s a team thing, and Statham would say everyone shared in the accumulation of his 1,085 victories heading into Saturday’s game at St. Joseph’s of Indiana. Danny Miles of the Oregon Institute of Technology won his 1,000th game last season. Herb Magee of Philadelphia University will arrive there shortly. (Tennessee’s Pat Summitt, retired with 1,098, is the only women’s coach with four-digit wins.)The numbers are impressive, but a more probing question is how many players — even those in the one-and-done world that Krzyzewski has been forced to operate in — does a coach send off into the world with something beyond the knowledge of cracking a zone?Amaker’s example is how he can summon, on demand, in Krzyzewski’s voice, an urgent “Next play, next play.” Which Amaker now considers a mantra for dealing with life’s challenges: failure, heartbreak and even, or especially, triumph. Because victories are nice, but they are not, in the end, the most impressive aspect of recalling a name.The On College Basketball column last Sunday, about coaches who have won 1,000 games, misstated the given name of the coach at Philadelphia University who is nearing his 1,000th victory. He is Herb Magee, not Dave.A version of this article appears in print on January 25, 2015, on Page SP2 of the New York edition with the headline: As a Measure of Coaching Success, 1,000 Is Just One Number.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »