

 Benjamin Hoffman
 

KEEPING SCORE
JAN. 24, 2015
The Knicks have won each of the three games the well-traveled Lou Amundson has started, but not because of anything he is doing on offense. In Friday night’s win over the Orlando Magic, Amundson took a pass from Tim Hardaway Jr. and dunked it for his only 2 points of the game.Amundson, who started for the Knicks and played 19 minutes, had missed a tip-in, a layup, a 14-foot jumper and two 4-footers, but he got himself on the board with 8 minutes 18 seconds left in the fourth quarter and exited shortly after. He contributed six rebounds and two blocks, but he failed to reach double digits in points for the 100th consecutive game.Although 10 points is a paltry total for many players — Kevin Durant and LeBron James both entered the weekend with active streaks of more than 400 games with 10 points or more — there have been some notable exceptions.Jason Kidd scored 9 points or fewer in 504 of his 1,391 career games. A master of the triple-double, he did not hesitate when asked which category was the hardest for him: “Points!”AdvertisementDennis Rodman scored 9 points or fewer 634 times in 911 career games, including one in which he played all 48 minutes and attempted just one shot, which he missed. (He did grab 25 rebounds.)But Amundson, Kidd and Rodman are offensive powerhouses compared with Charles Jones, a backup center and forward who spent most of his career with the Washington Bullets and the Houston Rockets. There may not be enough evidence to call Jones the worst offensive player in N.B.A. history, but there is no question that he was the player given the least to do on that end of the court.From a basketball family that remarkably sent four brothers — Wil, Caldwell, Major and Charles — to the N.B.A., Jones could block shots, rebound and, most important, get in the way of the opposing team’s stars.But when it came to offense, Jones’s teams were playing four-on-five. The advanced statistic usage percentage is an estimate of how often a player is involved in offensive plays. The Basketball Reference website includes the statistic starting with the 1977-78 season, and in that time, no player other than Jones has managed a career of more than 10 games while being involved in less than 7 percent of his team’s plays. Jones was involved in 6.7 percent of his team’s plays in 726 career games. Amundson’s usage percentage is a comparatively robust 15.1 percent.The dearth of plays by Jones hindered his ability to score, and he once went 321 consecutive games without cracking 10 points, which according to the Elias Sports Bureau is not only an N.B.A. record but higher than the previous mark, set by Manute Bol, by 101 games. For his career, Jones failed to reach double digits in scoring in all but 20 games, and his 1,826 career points were trumped by his 2,079 personal fouls.AdvertisementBut in the middle of his epic single-digit scoring streak, Jones found a niche for himself that Amundson currently can only dream of on the lottery-bound Knicks.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In 1995, the 38-year-old Jones signed a 10-day contract with the Houston Rockets and unexpectedly played a key role in the team’s championship run. He helped contain David Robinson in Game 1 of the Western Conference finals, harassing him into an awful shooting performance and boxing him out at the buzzer, preserving Houston’s win. Then in the N.B.A. finals, he was back to his bread and butter, serving as a one-man Shaquille O’Neal fouling machine.“The one thing I can do is try to hold him, stay in his way and make it tough,” Jones told The Baltimore Sun before the series. “At least in order for him to get to the basket, he’d have to run over me. Hopefully, he won’t break anything.”In four games, Jones piled up 15 fouls and just 4 points, earning a championship ring for his effort.As Amundson tries to find his place in the N.B.A., a journey that has taken him to 10 teams, he can take inspiration from something Jones’s former coach Wes Unseld said.“If you judge a person’s contribution and ability just by looking at a stat sheet, then you would never have a person like C. J. on a team,” Unseld told The Sun, referring to Charles Jones. “But if you judge it on how many games you win, you better have at least one or two.”Amundson should note, however, that even helping a team win it all will not necessarily make him a household name. In a stark example of how easily defensive players can be forgotten, a picture taken during the 1995 N.B.A. finals perfectly captures Jones’s importance to the Rockets. He is chest to chest with the 300-pound O’Neal, fighting to keep him from the basket while protecting Hakeem Olajuwon, Houston’s most important player, from a potential charge by O’Neal.The caption provided by Getty Images said, “Shaquille O’Neal #32 of the Orlando Magic attempts a shot against Hakeem Olajuwon.” It failed to mention Jones.Working through his second 10-day contract with the Knicks, Amundson will soon be at a crossroad, and the team will have to decide to sign him for the rest of the season or release him. If the Knicks keep winning, he may force their hand just like Jones did with the Rockets, no matter how little their efforts show up in a box score.A version of this article appears in print on January 25, 2015, on Page SP3 of the New York edition with the headline: Nonentities on Offense Can Fill Important Roles .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »