By KEN BELSONJAN. 24, 2015
Given the N.F.L.’s obsession with rules, protocols and procedures, the Pro Bowl is the equivalent of the league letting its hair down. Players chuckle with one another on the field, wear wacky uniforms and talk openly about how the game, which is often played in Hawaii, is a vacation.But in recent years, the level of play fell so much — even by the low standards of professional all-star games — that the Pro Bowl was mocked and the N.F.L. considered shutting it down. It did not help that despite years of tinkering, including moving the game to one week before the Super Bowl instead of one week after it, the event lost nearly $4 million annually during recent games held in Hawaii. Television ratings were sometimes dismal as well.In 2012, Commissioner Roger Goodell called the Pro Bowl embarrassing and said that if it could not be more competitive, he was “inclined not to play it.”This alarmed the players, who have long seen the game as a perk as well as an honor. So Domonique Foxworth, then the president of the N.F.L. Players Association, promised that the players would take the game more seriously and came up with ways to make it more compelling.AdvertisementAlumni captains were chosen to pick teams that were no longer divided by conference, rules were changed to speed up the game and minimize injuries, and the game became a showcase for experiments. The novelties have continued. This year, for instance, the uprights will be 14 feet apart, about four and a half feet narrower than usual. The tablets that were used on the sidelines for the first time this season will also display video, not just photographs.Advertisement“There were a couple of years it was horrible, when it seemed like tag football,” Foxworth said. “But the players told me they enjoyed playing together, so I came up with some ideas to keep the game.”The game has changed location, too. For only the third time in the Super Bowl era, the Pro Bowl on Sunday will be played in the same stadium as the Super Bowl. The first two times that happened were 1967, in Los Angeles, and 2010, in Miami Gardens, Fla.This time around, Michael Bidwill, one of the owners of the Arizona Cardinals, recognized that the league had not yet made final its agreement to play in Hawaii in 2015, so he asked the league to take the game to his state to lift the local economy.“The state has already invested in the Super Bowl, so the fact they get a second event is a bonus,” Bidwill said. “We hope this turns into a soft infomercial for Arizona.”The N.F.L. is committed to returning to Hawaii in 2016. But holding the event in Glendale, Ariz., has advantages for the league. The N.F.L.’s operations staff does not need to be split between two states, and it can use the game as a dry run for the Super Bowl. The league can spend less to host the players in Arizona than in Hawaii and can generate more revenue because about 15,000 more tickets will be sold for the game in University of Phoenix Stadium than for a typical game in Honolulu.As the host team, the Cardinals helped sell tickets to the game by offering them to their fans, many of whom could not afford tickets to the Super Bowl but were willing to pay about as much as they would for a Cardinals home game to see some of the league’s best players.“We jumped on the opportunity because it’s not something we can go to every year,” said Juan Garza, a longtime Cardinals season-ticket holder.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Garza said he happily paid $120 for two tickets to the Pro Bowl. “I’m just going to go to see some players we don’t see on a regular basis,” he said.AdvertisementEven though all 63,000 tickets, from $25 to $200, have been sold, the game is likely to lose money. That is because the N.F.L. will not receive a $4 million subsidy from the Hawaii Tourism Authority for holding the event in that state. The players on the winning Pro Bowl team will also still receive $55,000 each, while players on the losing team will earn $28,000.Foxworth and Jim Steeg, who ran the Pro Bowl for the N.F.L. between 2000 and 2005, said the financial losses often did not include the value of having the game on television, which provides a harder-to-quantify benefit to sponsors and the league.“When you don’t allocate any television money to the game, it’s hard to make money,” Steeg said. “It was barely making or losing money when I was doing it.”Ratings stagnated during the past decade, but they improved when the Pro Bowl was moved to the weekend before the Super Bowl in 2010, even though that meant that players on each Super Bowl team would not be able to take part. While the Pro Bowl still has weaker ratings than nationally televised regular-season games, it attracts more viewers than the Major League Baseball and N.B.A. All-Star Games.As with those All-Star Games, the N.F.L. has come up with gimmicks to keep fans interested in a game that has been akin to a pickup game. A two-minute warning is added to the first and third quarters to simulate two-minute drills. There are no kickoffs — the ball is placed at the 25-yard line at the beginning of each quarter and after scoring plays — and sacks do not stop the game clock.For now, these changes have breathed some life into the game. But it is unclear whether they will secure the game in the long term.“Last year, it was great,” Foxworth said. But he added, “One year is not enough to say it’s safe.”A version of this article appears in print on January 25, 2015, on Page SP1 of the New York edition with the headline: A Mocked Game Seeks Relevance. Stop Laughing.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.