AdvertisementSupported byRoundupBy The Associated PressAshley Wagner won her third national figure skating title, rebounding from last year’s disappointing performance to set United States championships records with her free skate (148.98 points) and overall (221.02) scores in Greensboro, N.C.Knowing she needed to raise the difficulty of her jumps, Wagner, 23, added two new combinations to her long program, and she landed both of them Saturday for a total of seven triples. She beat Gracie Gold, the defending champion, by a whopping 15.48 points.Wagner entered last year’s nationals as the two-time defending champion, but she fell twice in her free skate to finish a distant fourth, making the Olympic team only because of her past success.Karen Chen, 15, competing at her first senior United States championships, finished in third on Saturday but is too young for the senior world championships. With skaters now allowed to perform to music with lyrics, Wagner skated to the “Moulin Rouge” soundtrack. She added triple-Lutz-triple-toe and triple-loop-half-loop-triple-Salchow combinations after finishing third at the Grand Prix Final.“Today was an incredible step up from my performance at the Grand Prix Final,” she said. “I almost have a maxed-out program.”Earlier, Alexa Scimeca and Christopher Knierim won their first title at nationals, becoming the first American pairs team to complete a quad twist in competition.The two led by 5.63 points after the short program but went through with the new element, and Scimeca successfully rotated four times in the air before Knierim caught her. That helped them set two records for the United States championships: 136.48 points for the free skate and 210.49 total.Madison Chock and Evan Bates won the ice dance title, their first at nationals, with the six-time champions Meryl Davis and Charlie White taking a break. Chock and Bates were the runners-up the past two years.VONN FALTERS Lara Gut of Switzerland profited from Lindsey Vonn’s bad luck and won a World Cup downhill in St. Moritz, Switzerland.Vonn, making her first start since setting the career World Cup wins record last week, hit a rut halfway down the course while trailing Gut’s time split by 0.05 of a second. Vonn was pushed wide into soft snow and lost speed. She finished in 23rd, over two seconds behind Gut.Anna Fenninger of Austria, who was second, now has six runner-up finishes but no victories in her defense of her overall World Cup title.By placing third, the Romania-born Edit Miklos earned the first podium finish for her adopted country, Hungary, in 48 years of World Cup racing. Vonn still leads the downhill standings, although Fenninger closed the gap to 79 points. Two races remain.NORWEGIAN CLAIMS DOWNHILL The Norwegian skier Kjetil Jansrud won a shortened version of the classic men’s World Cup downhill on the Streif course in Kitzbühel, Austria.Fog on the upper part of the course forced organizers to delay the race by two hours and then lower the starting gate as conditions failed to improve.In the shortest downhill in World Cup history, Jansrud clocked 58.16 seconds — half the time usually needed on the 3.3-kilometer course — to edge Dominik Paris by 0.02 of a second.LATVIANS FIRST IN BOBSLED Oskars Melbardis and Daumants Dreiskens of Latvia climbed atop the overall standings in the two-man bobsled World Cup by winning in St. Moritz.REPEAT FOR A FINN The Finnish snowboarder Roope Tonteri successfully defended his big air world title in Kreischberg, Austria, and Elena Könz of Switzerland won the inaugural women’s big air competition. GERMANS EXTEND LUGE LEAD Toni Eggert and Sascha Benecken of Germany won a doubles race in Winterberg, Germany — their fifth victory of the season — to extend their lead in the luge World Cup standings.ITALIAN AND SWEDE TOP SPRINTS Federico Pellegrino of Italy and Jennie Oeberg of Sweden took advantage of a weakened field to win freestyle sprint races at a cross-country skiing World Cup meet in Rybinsk, Russia. Oeberg became the first non-Norwegian woman to win an individual World Cup race this season.SLOVENE TAKES SKI JUMP Peter Prevc of Slovenia earned his first ski jump World Cup win of the season. Also in Sapporo, Japan, Eric Frenzel of Germany won a Nordic combined World Cup event, his fifth straight victory.AUSTRIAN WINS WOMEN’S JUMP Daniela Iraschko-Stolz of Austria won a women’s World Cup ski jump event in Oberstdorf, Germany, her first victory of the season.Advertisement