AdvertisementSupported byBy Christopher ClareyMELBOURNE, Australia — It was well past midnight on Sunday at the Australian Open.Madison Keys, a young, unseeded American, had just upset Petra Kvitova, a two-time Wimbledon champion, in straight sets in the third round on the biggest court this Grand Slam tournament has to offer. As Keys walked into the cool of the early morning, she talked about the burden of being told you are going to be a great player long before you are able to beat a great player.“It’s tough sometimes in those moments where everyone is kind of telling you it will work out and things like that,” Keys said. “You don’t always believe them, and it’s one of those things where you’re like, ‘Maybe it won’t happen.’ But finally having that happen, it feels great, and it makes you really, really realize that people are telling you the truth, and it makes your confidence and your belief in yourself just skyrocket.”The prospect of Keys’s brimming with self-belief should be intimidating to the rest of the field. Though she is still just 19 and ranked 35th, her potential has long been evident. She has the fluid service action and easy power to be a major force, but the timeline for tennis prodigies becoming worldbeaters is more extended now than in earlier eras.There has been no shortage of tears and doubts after losses in the last two seasons for Keys, and there were plenty more after a second-round loss to Aleksandra Krunic, a qualifier, in blustery Armstrong Stadium at last year’s United States Open.But such experiences and the decision to work with a new coach, Lindsay Davenport, in the off-season have helped Keys mature more quickly, and the result was there for everyone to see on Saturday night in Rod Laver Arena, including the fourth-seeded Kvitova. Keys played a poised, controlled and forceful match to win, 6-4, 7-5. She served out the first set with an ace and served out the match at love.“Very, very impressed how she closed it out tonight,” said Thomas Johansson, a former Australian Open men’s singles champion who has coached Caroline Wozniacki. “She has great power from both sides and a very good serve. If she can work on her movement and her variation, she will win a Slam.”Beating Kvitova once is no guarantee of greatness, but it was certainly encouraging, and it put Keys into the fourth round and the second week of a Grand Slam tournament for the first time. The victory was also her first over a top-four player — not counting her abbreviated 5-1 victory over Serena Williams in a team tennis match when Keys was 14.“Twenty years ago, everyone was a lot younger who was breaking through,” Keys said. “Now champions are getting older, and you know some people are peaking when they are 24 or 26. So I think that’s been a little bit of an aspect of it for me, getting older and maturing a little bit. But on top of that, having Lindsay, who’s gone through it, who knows how to deal with it, having that in my corner has really helped.”Davenport won three Grand Slam singles titles and finished a season at No. 1 four times. Like Keys, she had easy power, a versatile serve and a taste for baseline risk. She, too, needed time to grow into a champion’s mind-set.Keys spent much of the last two seasons working with coaches from the United States Tennis Association, but last fall in Beijing, she met with her agent, Max Eisenbud, who has also managed the careers of Maria Sharapova and Li Na, and told him she wanted to create her own team.Eisenbud had not expected the request so soon and quickly reached out to Davenport, whom he saw as an ideal fit in terms of game and temperament, to help Keys in the off-season while he looked for a full-time coach.“It was about their games, but also Madison doesn’t do well with yellers,” Eisenbud said. “She shuts down, so I thought Lindsay would be soft-spoken and everything.”Davenport and her husband, Jon Leach, have four young children, which meant, in Eisenbud’s mind, that she could not take on a role beyond the off-season. But Eisenbud, who was then busy reaching an agreement with the veteran coach Wim Fissette, said Davenport called him after working with Keys for two weeks.“She says, ‘You are going to kill me, but I’m enjoying this, and I want to do more,’ ” Eisenbud said. “I said: ‘What do you mean you want to do more? You have four kids under the age of 8.’ And she’s like: ‘I’m really enjoying this. She’s better than I thought. She’s coachable. My kids like her. I want to do more.’ ”It remains unclear just how much more she will be able to do. Leach, a former junior and collegiate standout, is also part of the coaching team. For now, they are both in Melbourne with plans to continue in their posts, and as Keys closed out the biggest victory of her career on Saturday, Davenport was growing emotional in the stands.“She got teary,” said Pam Shriver, a former U.S. Open finalist who is an ESPN analyst. “It looked like an expression of pride and happiness, and you know what it is when you’ve played that kind of match so many times yourself on a big court. You know it’s not that easy, but somehow Madison made it look easy because of her power, because of the game plan that was pretty clear.”Keys set the attacking tone from the opening point with a backhand winner down the line with Kvitova serving. Keys broke Kvitova five times in the match, which turned into a duel between tall players who could generate tremendous pace. Yet it was Kvitova, the reigning Wimbledon champion, who more often looked late to the ball or out of position.“She can be top 10 for sure,” Kvitova said of Keys, whom she had beaten, 6-2, 6-2, in Tokyo in 2013.Even when Kvitova broke Keys back twice in the second set, Keys did not become flustered. She took her time between points, put Kvitova on the defensive and mixed her deliveries. Keys won 58 percent of the points on her second serve against a player who routinely pounces on second serves.In the end, Keys did not rush or crack, breaking Kvitova to go ahead, 6-5, in the second set, then serving out the victory with aplomb.“I was pretty nervous,” Keys said of the match. “But I was also weirdly calm right before I served. So that last game, I just stayed in the moment and kept playing the next point and didn’t let myself think about it.”The next challenge not to think about is a fourth-round match against another unseeded American, Madison Brengle.“I think it’s great,” Keys said. “We’re obviously representing our name pretty well.”Advertisement