By BEN ROTHENBERGJAN. 25, 2015
MELBOURNE, Australia —  Lisa Raymond won her first-round mixed-doubles match at the Australian Open on Sunday evening. Still, ask her how she is doing, and you will get a blunt reply: “Not great.”Raymond, an 11-time Grand Slam champion, a bronze medalist at the 2012 London Olympics and a former No. 1 player in doubles, competed in her first Australian Open in 1994. At 41, she is at least a decade older than most professional players. But over the past few years, injuries to her younger doubles partners have derailed her tournaments. The latest was a calf injury here to her women’s doubles partner, Mirjana Lucic-Baroni.“The irony is I’m 41 and they’ve all been a lot younger, and I’m the one who is usually not the injured one who has to pull out,” Raymond said. “Either I did something very bad in a previous life, or I don’t know.”She added: “Hopefully there will be some good sign coming soon. Because I don’t know how much longer I can take this; I’ll be honest.”AdvertisementHaving spent 137 weeks at No. 1, most recently in September 2012, Raymond has slipped to 46th in the doubles rankings, and she has not reached the final of a tournament in over a year. With poor results and a string of bad luck, Raymond has asked herself tough questions about her future.AdvertisementAlthough she is still earning a living, Raymond finds it impossible to be satisfied with her underwhelming results, given all she has accomplished in her career.“I don’t like doing anything average and being mediocre at anything,” she said. “With my friends and family, I won’t go out and hit golf balls with people because I haven’t taken enough lessons, because I know I’m not going to be very good.”Raymond’s sentiment was echoed by Venus Williams, a seven-time Grand Slam singles champion who said she was not satisfied by reaching the fourth round of the Australian Open, even though it ended a four-year stretch of failing to reach the second week at major events.“It’s great to be in the second week,” Williams said. “But is fourth round my goal when I come to these tournaments? No.”Raymond, though less in the spotlight than singles champions, shares the feeling.“You take a Roger, you take a Serena, and you say to them, ‘Wow, you got to the semifinals and quarterfinals of a Slam,’ and they’ll say that’s not good enough,” Raymond said, referring to Roger Federer and Serena Williams. “And that’s how I feel. I’m not happy just being average.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Raymond, who was set to play her second-round mixed-doubles match with Robert Lindstedt against the team of Cara Black and Juan Sebastián Cabal late Monday, said she had not yet decided on her future after the Australian Open.“It’s not fun,” she said. “After here I’m going to go home and do some tough thinking and hard thinking, and if things can’t pan out, as far as finding the right person, I’m not going to do it.”Raymond said she would like to stay working in the sport, possibly as the director of tennis for a club in the Philadelphia or New York area. She said she would consider coaching on the professional tour, but only if the perfect match presented itself.AdvertisementThe current coach-player team she is most impressed with is her former doubles partner Lindsay Davenport and 19-year-old Madison Keys.“I think it’s a great partnership; I really do,” Raymond said. “Of all the new coaching hires, I thought that was hands-down the best match. Somebody asked me two years ago who I thought was going to be the best American out of this group, and without even flinching, I said Madison Keys. I still think that. She’s the real deal.”Before Raymond starts thinking too much about who the perfect match for her might be, she wants to win one more big tournament and go out on top, the way Pete Sampras did by winning the 2002 United States Open.“It’s a cliché, but everybody wants to walk away on their own terms, and they want to walk away like Pete did, winning the U.S. Open,” she said. “That was a dream. Everybody thinks, ‘Oh, if I could just get that one more win, I could stop.’ ”But she conceded that if she started winning again, it would be hard to put the racket down.“I know — and then you’re a hypocrite,” she said, smiling. “If I do that, then come find me.”A version of this article appears in print on January 26, 2015, on Page D5 of the New York edition with the headline: Veteran Doubles Champion, 41, Pursuing a Last Big Title to Exit On.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.