AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressMELBOURNE, Australia — Dominika Cibulkova reproduced the kind of tennis that helped her reach the final last year as she beat the two-time champion Victoria Azarenka, 6-2, 3-6, 6-3, on Monday in the fourth round of the Australian Open.Under the closed roof at Rod Laver Arena, Cibulkova pounded 44 winners, including a dozen on her backhand side, and broke the former No. 1-ranked Azarenka’s serve seven times to reach a Grand Slam quarterfinal for the sixth time.The 10th-ranked Cibulkova, who lost the final here last year to the now-retired Li Na, next faces top-ranked Serena Williams.Azarenka, unseeded this year after her ranking slipped into the 40s because of an injury-interrupted 2014 season, won the Australian title in 2012 and 2013 and reached the quarterfinals last year. She opened the tournament with a win over the 2013 semifinalist Sloane Stephens, then defeated the No. 8 seed, Caroline Wozniacki — a United States Open finalist last year and a former No. 1 — and the No. 25 seed, Barbora Zahlavov Stryova.Azarenka won the first two games of her fourth-round match, too, before Cibulkova broke back and went on a six-game roll. Azarenka controlled the second set, despite slipping twice, and was on level terms in the third until Cibulkova got the decisive break in the seventh game.Cibulkova held to take a 5-3 lead, chasing a slice backhand into the corner and whipping a forehand crosscourt on game point, then broke Azarenka’s serve again.“I just walked onto the court, and all great memories came to my mind,” Cibulkova said, reflecting on how her run last year was inspiring her at the Australian Open, “I thought, ‘I’m a great player, and I can do it.’ ”The 5-foot-3 Cibulkova used a powerful backhand to win important points in the first set, then relied on her backhand to maximum effect.“As you can see, I’m not the tallest player on tour,” she said. “I need to have something extra if I want to beat these top players. This is my energy on the court; this is how I play.”Rain forced roofs on all three stadium courts to be closed early, but they opened for later matches when the weather cleared. Play was stopped briefly when part of the new retractable roof on Margaret Court Arena leaked.Advertisement