AdvertisementSupported byAn AppraisalBy Barry BearakWe called him Mr. Cub, and to be honest, Ernie Banks did not have much competition for the title. The Cubs of the late 1950s and early ’60s aspired to nothing more than mediocrity. This was a modest enough goal. And yet the team always fell short. Mediocrity hovered maddeningly above its grasp.It was the crosstown White Sox who went to the World Series in 1959. This was tough on a 10-year-old Cubs fan like me. As a counterweight, what did I have to boast about? Well, the Cubs had Ernie Banks, that’s what. And he was the best ballplayer in all of Chicago. Maybe the best in all of baseball. Back then, to be a young Cubs fan was to adore this wonderful man. To pretend to be him. To pull out a blue crayon and write 14, his uniform number, on the back of a white T-shirt. To wiggle your fingers around the handle of the bat just as he did, like a virtuoso fingering the keys of a saxophone.Banks, a power-hitting shortstop, was the National League’s most valuable player in 1958 and 1959. But he was more than a superstar. He was a walking billboard for baseball — or rather baseball as a homespun ideal. Think of every ode to the glory of the game, the dust on the basepaths, the smell of freshly cut grass in the outfield, the slugger promising a home run to the hospitalized child.Banks, who died Friday at 83, played baseball — and lived life — with infectious enthusiasm. His face seemed incapable of anything but a smile. His temperament included only two outlooks: sunny and sunnier. It delighted him to be at the ballpark. He liked to say, “It’s a beautiful day; let’s play two.” He said this even though the Cubs finished below .500 during 13 of his first 14 seasons. Playing two was likely to mean losing two.His career spanned 19 years, 1953 to 1971, all with the lowly Cubs, who haven’t won the pennant since 1945. P. K. Wrigley, the chewing gum mogul and back then the team’s owner, assessed this long run of woe in 1960 and declared: “I am thoroughly disgusted. I can’t take it anymore.”Banks was not susceptible to such gloom. To him, being in baseball’s desert only meant an oasis was just beyond the next dune. Each year, he arrived at spring training with a different optimistic slogan: The Cubs are due in ’62 ... will come alive in ’65 ... will be heavenly in ’67-ly ... will shine in ’69 ... will glow in ’7-0.He hit 512 home runs. Rather than towering blasts, they were usually line drives that left the ballpark lickety-split over the left-field wall. Banks was not a well-chiseled muscleman. He was built narrow at the top and wide at the bottom, something like a pear. His strength was in his wrists.The soundtrack to each of these home runs was provided by the announcer Jack Brickhouse. “That’s hit, that’s pretty well hit,” he would begin, building to a gleeful crescendo, “Hey, hey!” As Banks loped around the bases, the announcer added a grateful “Attaboy, Ernie.”Banks was the first black player on the Cubs, arriving a full six years after Jackie Robinson broke Major League Baseball’s color barrier. The Cubs, slow on the basepaths, had been equally slow to integrate. I knew the outline of Ernie’s story. He grew up poor in Dallas, one of 12 children. His father picked cotton for a while. Ernie’s love for baseball began in high school. Before playing for the Cubs, he was with the Kansas City Monarchs of the Negro leagues. Back then, I had little notion of the world’s complexity. Why had black ballplayers been kept out of the major leagues? I hadn’t really thought about the answer. But I knew black players were terrific: Banks, Hank Aaron, Willie Mays, all the rest. I wondered how the Cubs could sign up some more.My beloved team eventually became a winner, in the late ’60s. But the Amazin’ Mets kept the Cubs from the pennant in 1969. Chicago was nine games out front in mid-August. Then the team imploded. Cubs fans of a certain age have not had a good night’s sleep ever since.The crusty, contentious Leo Durocher was the Cubs’ manager, and his hallmark sentiment was “Nice guys finish last.” He and Banks had human DNA in common but not much more. Mr. Cub was a sore-kneed first baseman by then, and the manager bad-mouthed him behind his back. Banks knew of the slights. With typical graciousness, he responded by calling Durocher the greatest manager of all time.During those years, my own affection for Banks wavered. The Cubs were blessed with three other future Hall of Famers: Billy Williams, Ron Santo and Fergie Jenkins. Each was in his prime. The aging Banks, on the other hand, seemed to move around the bases as if the infield dirt were flooded with molasses.And there was more to my misgivings. The 10-year-old boy from 1959 was a 20-year-old man in 1969, a year when the entire world seemed askew. The Vietnam War had torn America apart. The Chicago Eight went on trial. The civil rights movement had boiled over into street violence. My friends and I were passing around a copy of “Soul on Ice” by the Black Panther Eldridge Cleaver. The sunny disposition of Mr. Cub seemed out of kilter with such unsettling times.In 1969, Mark Kram, an outstanding writer for Sports Illustrated, wrote: “Banks does not appear to have much clout among the blacks. His lack of militancy bugs them, but, more important, they feel he is not part of The Cause.” Banks, Kram wrote, was perhaps “too saccharine amid the maelstrom of social calamities.”Mr. Cub understood these reservations about his character, and he was unapologetic. He told Kram: “I care deeply about my people, but I’m not one to go about screaming over what I contribute. I’m not black or white. I’m just a human being trying to survive the only way I know how. I don’t make enemies. If I’m not crazy about somebody, he’ll never know it. I kill him with kindness.”And that’s how he lived his life, a genuinely humane man who thought every day was beautiful. He tried to make people happy and wore his kindness like an amulet. Cubs fans will miss him terribly.If there’s a heaven, he is up there playing two.slide showAdvertisement