AdvertisementSupported byBy Patrick MaksCOLUMBUS, Ohio — Before his first challenge at the N.H.L. All-Star skills competition Saturday night, Ryan Johansen skated toward center ice, bearing a mischievous smile. Johansen, an up-and-coming star for the Blue Jackets, tossed his gloves and his stick to his feet and stripped off his blue sweater. Underneath was an Ohio State jersey with the No. 5 of quarterback Braxton Miller, who has been the face of the Buckeyes and of this city for the last four years. The moment was met with deafening applause throughout Nationwide Arena, and it proved symbolic of the weekend, for which the hockey world descended upon football-obsessed Columbus. “He gets it,” Tom Gavin, the president of the Columbus Chill Youth Hockey Association, said of Johansen, who had two goals and two assists in the All-Star Game on Sunday night. “It is a football town.” Others entrenched in hockey here say the region can be more than that, though.“They’re just begging for a winner,” said Bill Davidge, an announcer who has been around the middling Blue Jackets since their embryonic stages. Some local hockey supporters had hoped the All-Star Game — which had been scheduled to be held in Columbus in 2013, an event canceled by the league’s lockout — would help promote the sport. “It’s going to be great for us to showcase our city and show them what Columbus is all about,” Blue Jackets forward Nick Foligno said of this year’s All-Star Game, in which a team he captained fell to a team led by the Chicago Blackhawks’ Jonathan Toews, 17-12. But the weekend was co-opted by Ohio State’s football team, which drew 45,000 fans to Ohio Stadium on a blustery Saturday afternoon to celebrate its title game win this month over Oregon.“You have the National Hockey League’s center of attention for three days here,” Gavin, the youth association president, said, “and your lead story is about something that happened three weeks ago.”Johansen’s nod to the Buckeyes on Saturday night was no accident, with the area’s spotlight fixated on football through all seasons. “I think that is a huge obstacle,” John Haferman, the director of the Columbus Ice Hockey Club, said. “You come into a community that supports Ohio State in general.” The university is sewn into the region’s genetic makeup. Hockey has been spliced in. Even so, the streets downtown near Nationwide Arena crawled with hockey fans in a spectrum of jersey colors. For the skills competition, a series of trivial challenges ultimately won by Team Foligno, the lines of people waiting to enter the arena stretched to the next street. If hockey is indeed played in the shadow of college football here, it was not obvious at the bars, restaurants and boutiques nearby. Nationwide Boulevard, a main drag, was turned into a massive snow slide, and McFerson Commons Park became a sheet of ice for families to skate on. “They’re attracting great crowds,” Gavin said, adding: “It would’ve been nice if Ohio State could’ve waited a weekend — just give us our due. But it is what it is. It’s kind of like that with hockey just in general.”Still, the marriage between Columbus and football has been cemented by more than a century of the best and worst times. Hockey is a new flame.And its impassioned following in the region suggests there is ample space for hockey to coexist with football, as well as room for the Blue Jackets, an organization that has made two playoff appearances since its first season, 2000-1, to mature into an N.H.L. power. “It’s a big enough city,” Haferman said.Davidge, the Blue Jackets announcer, said: “I think it’s a separate entity. I think sport fans, they go hand in hand. I think the key is right now, you have Ohio State winning; it helps Columbus be identified as a major sports city. And likewise, when we start winning Stanley Cups, it’s going to help the entire area in every sport to say, Hey, that’s a city of winners.” So far, hockey has captured a sliver of the masses. But “if these guys ever get a few good winning seasons together or really make a serious run at the Cup, I think you’ll see this sport grow even more,” Gavin said of the Blue Jackets. “I think fans get a little disappointed,” he continued, “because every year toward the end of the year, the Blue Jackets tend to do really well, and they’re like: ‘Next year’s our year! Next year’s our year.’ And you kind of get into it. “And then it isn’t. It gets hard.”The All-Star Game, which featured a record 29 goals, offered some excitement. And Johansen, who ensured the most valuable player award went to a Blue Jacket, offered some hope.Advertisement