AdvertisementSupported byN.F.L. RoundupBy Benjamin HoffmanPHOENIX — Shortly after arriving here Sunday, the Seattle Seahawks were thrust into the circus of media sessions of the type they had become familiar with on their way to a Super Bowl win last year. But Coach Pete Carroll and a group of players made it clear that they did not intend to add to the league’s various distractions as they prepared to face the New England Patriots in Super Bowl XLIX.Russell Wilson, the Seahawks’ quarterback, was all smiles while answering questions about deflated footballs. No longer the scrappy underdog of a year ago, he seemed comfortable in his pursuit of joining Bart Starr, Bob Griese, Terry Bradshaw, Joe Montana, Troy Aikman, John Elway and Tom Brady in the small club of quarterbacks to win consecutive Super Bowls.“The experience of last year, I think, helps us, because we know what the format is going to be like,” Wilson said.Wilson brushed aside the notion that the scandal surrounding the status of the footballs during New England’s A.F.C. championship game win would affect the Super Bowl.“It has nothing to do with anything,” he said.The topic has been so popular all week that “Saturday Night Live” dedicated the show’s opening sketch to the Patriots’ news conferences, and Bill Nye, “The Science Guy,” appeared on “Good Morning America” to critique Coach Bill Belichick’s scientific theories on how the balls could have lost pressure.But Wilson was not biting. Asked if he had preferences for the condition of the ball, he said: “All I care about is, ‘Does it have laces?’ If it has laces, I’m good to go.”Carroll was similarly dismissive of the furor, saying that he had never looked into the process of how balls were prepared for the game but that the events of the week, including Belichick’s unusual news conference on Saturday, had him researching the process. “I’m much better versed in it today than I was a week or so ago,” Carroll said.The exception to the tranquillity was the volatile Richard Sherman, who, asked whether he considered himself the league’s best cornerback, told reporters he did not like “preschool questions.” He also did not hold back when asked whether he thought the Patriots would be punished for football tampering. “Probably not,” said Sherman, who criticized the appearance together of N.F.L. Commissioner Roger Goodell and the Patriots’ owner, Robert K. Kraft, at a private gathering before the A.F.C. championship game.“Talk about a conflict of interest,” Sherman said.The Seahawks had a distraction of their own to worry about, with ESPN reporting that the N.F.L.’s head of officials, Dean Blandino, had warned that if running back Marshawn Lynch celebrated touchdowns by grabbing his groin, as he has done previously, the team would face 15-yard penalties for unsportsmanlike conduct. Seattle would then kick off from the 20-yard line rather than the 35. While the gesture did not result in a penalty in the N.F.C. championship game, the N.F.L. did fine Lynch $20,000 after having fined him $11,050 for a similar celebration against Arizona in December. Lynch’s teammate Chris Matthews was also reportedly fined for joining Lynch in the celebration, which prompted the normally tight-lipped Lynch to take to Twitter to complain.“I feel embarrassed to work for a particular organization that fined a teammate of mine for shaking my hand after a touchdown,” his post said.Wilson said the team had not paid much attention to the reports of potential consequences because efforts to control Lynch, who has been nicknamed Beast Mode, would not work once he was in the end zone.“It’s just the excitement of the game,” Wilson said, offering as an aside, “I think sometimes they pick on Marshawn a bit, to be honest with you.”In last year’s title quest, Wilson’s mantra was, “Why not us?” This year, he updated it to acknowledge that his team was no longer going to surprise anyone. “One mission,” Wilson said was Seattle’s theme. “We’ve got one mission week to week: to go 1-0.”FOCUS ON BROWNS’ GORDON The Browns said they were disappointed about a report that the troubled wide receiver Josh Gordon had failed another drug test and could be facing a one-year N.F.L. ban.ESPN, citing anonymous sources, first reported Gordon’s failed test. Pro Football Talk said he had tested positive for alcohol.In a statement, the Browns declined to comment further, citing “the confidential nature of the N.F.L.’s substance abuse policy.” The Browns said they had not been notified by the league of a failed test. (AP)Advertisement