By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSOCT. 10, 2015
Alex Ovechkin scored a stunning go-ahead goal early in the third period, and the Washington Capitals opened their season with a 5-2 victory over the visiting Devils on Saturday night.With the score tied at 2-2, Ovechkin gathered the puck in his own zone, streaked down the ice and eluded defenseman John Moore by pulling the puck behind his right leg to his backhand side. Then he dragged it back across his body in time to fire a wrist shot above goaltender Keith Kinkaid’s left shoulder.Ovechkin later assisted on Marcus Johansson’s power-play goal to make the score 4-2.Adam Henrique scored twice for the Devils, who lost for the second time in two nights.BLACKHAWKS 4, ISLANDERS 1 Patrick Kane and the rookie Artemi Panarin each had a goal and two assists, and Chicago beat the Islanders for the second straight night, this time at home.AdvertisementScott Darling made 28 saves for the Blackhawks in his first start of the season. He lost his bid for a shutout when Cal Clutterbuck scored a short-handed goal with 1 minute 5 seconds left.AdvertisementCANADIENS 4, BRUINS 2 Lars Eller scored two goals, leading Montreal to a victory at Boston. Alex Galchenyuk had three assists for the Canadiens, who have won their last six games against the Bruins.PANTHERS 7, FLYERS 1 Jaromir Jagr and Reilly Smith each scored twice, and Vincent Trocheck had a goal and three assists as host Florida opened its season by routing Philadelphia.The Panthers scored four times against Steve Mason in the first 6:46, a modern N.H.L. record for the fastest four goals to start a season, according to the Elias Sports Bureau.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.SENATORS 5, MAPLE LEAFS 4 Mike Hoffman had the decisive goal in the first shootout of the N.H.L. season, sending Ottawa to a road win over Toronto.Kyle Turris, Alex Chiasson, Milan Michalek and Mark Stone scored in regulation for the Senators, and Craig Anderson finished with 37 saves.RED WINGS 4, HURRICANES 3 Teemu Pulkkinen scored two goals in the third period, lifting Detroit past host Carolina.LIGHTNING 4, SABRES 1 Steven Stamkos scored his first goal of the season, capitalizing on a nifty pass from Ryan Callahan, and Tampa Bay won at Buffalo.WILD 3, BLUES 2 Charlie Coyle scored two goals as host Minnesota edged St. Louis, the team the Wild eliminated in the first round of last season’s playoffs.PREDATORS 2, OILERS 0 Pekka Rinne made 31 saves for his 37th career shutout as Nashville beat visiting Edmonton. Craig Smith and Filip Forsberg scored for the Predators.A version of this article appears in print on October 11, 2015, on Page SP9 of the New York edition with the headline: Artful Effort by Ovechkin Foils Devils; Isles Also Fall.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.