AdvertisementSupported byWinter Sports RoundupBy The Associated PressJason Brown won his first United States figure skating title Sunday, holding off Adam Rippon thanks to his big lead after the short program.Joshua Farris, skating last, had a chance to overtake Brown in Greensboro, N.C., but one of his triple-jump combinations did not count because he did a double toe loop three times. It was still a successful event for Farris, who finished third to earn a chance to go to the world championships.Rippon became the first man to win back-to-back world junior titles in 2009, but he had struggled to live up to that promise in the senior ranks. He had just one medal at the United States Championships before Sunday, a silver in 2012, and was eighth last year.Brown finished with 274.98 points to beat Rippon by 2.5. Rippon won the free skate with 187.77.Brown, the runner-up last year to earn an Olympic berth, skated well enough Sunday to clinch victory. He landed with two feet on his second triple axel but had eight triples over all, proving he could win a national title without a quad.Brown said he had trained quite hard and consistently. “So I went out there like it’s another day in the office,” he said.VONN EXTENDS RECORD Lindsey Vonn mastered a tricky super-G race in St. Moritz, Switzerland, extending her record for World Cup victories with her 64th.Vonn of the United States raced down the Engiadina course in 1 minute 23.55 seconds with only one rival able to finish within a second of her.Anna Fenninger of Austria was runner-up for a seventh time this season, 0.24 of a second back. Nicole Hosp of Austria was 1.10 behind Vonn in third.On crossing the finish line, Vonn raised both arms in the air and bowed to the cheering Swiss crowd, which appreciated her impressive run.“I tried to really push the limits and be smart in places where I knew there would be trouble,” Vonn said. “Now I have a lot of confidence going into the world championships.”Vonn’s pursuit of Olympic and world titles has often been hampered by injury and crashes in the days before racing. She twice blew out her right knee in 2013.“It’s nice to finally feel healthy again,” Vonn said. She now heads for the worlds — which open Feb. 2 at Vail and Beaver Creek, Colo., with Vonn a hometown favorite — having won three of her past four races in an eight-day span.SWEDE WINS FIRST SLALOM Mattias Hargin of Sweden won a men’s World Cup slalom in Kitzbühel, Austria, for his first career victory.“Normally, I am very calm, but this is incredible,” Hargin said. “Finally I’ve made it. It feels great the win has come here in Kitz.”Third after the opening leg, Hargin ran a flawless second run to finish in 1:43.10. Marcel Hirscher of Austria, the first-run leader, overcame a mistake halfway down his final run to finish 0.49 behind in second.Felix Neureuther of Germany, who won the race a year ago and also triumphed in Wengen, Switzerland, last week, finished third and remained in the lead of the discipline standings.NEW SKI JUMP LEADER Daniela Iraschko-Stolz of Austria defeated the Olympic champion Carina Vogt of Germany in a World Cup ski jump in Oberstdorf, Germany, for the second straight day to take the standings’ lead from Sara Takanashi of Japan, who finished fifth.Iraschko-Stolz’s total of 234.3 points edged Vogt by 0.6 of a point. Taylor Henrich of Canada was third with 228.6 points.In addition, Roman Koudelka of the Czech Republic won a World Cup ski jump in Sapporo, Japan, his fourth victory this season.GERMANY SWEEPS LUGE AGAIN Natalie Geisenberger claimed her seventh luge World Cup victory in eight races in Winterberg, Germany, and helped Germany to a clean sweep in the team relay for the third weekend in a row. Geisenberger, the Olympic and World Cup champion, was fastest in both runs of the women’s race for a combined time of 1:53.829, beating her compatriots Dajana Eltberger by 0.195 of a second and Anke Wischnewski by 0.342.LATVIA TAKES 4-MAN BOBSLED Oskars Melbardis piloted Latvia to a victory in the four-man bobsled World Cup in St. Moritz, Switzerland, to extend his lead in the standings.Melbardis, who won the two-man event Saturday, drove his crew of Daumants Dreiskens, Arvis Vilkaste and Janis Strenga to the two fastest runs for a combined time of 2:09.73.Germany filled the podium places, with the pilot Francesco Friedrich’s crew trailing Melbardis by 0.18 of a second. The four-time world champion Maximilian Arndt, who won last week at home in Koenigssee, was 0.38 back in third.FIRSTS FOR THE RUSSIANS The Russians Maxim Vylegzhanin and Yulia Tchekaleva won men’s and women’s skiathlon races in the cross-country skiing World Cup in Rybinsk, Russia.The three-time Olympic silver medalist Vylegzhanin won the 30-kilometer men’s race in 1 hour 21 minutes 54.8 seconds in front of his home crowd, becoming the first Russian to win an individual World Cup race this season.Switzerland’s Dario Cologna was 2.7 seconds behind Vylegzhanin in second. Cologna moved to second in the men’s overall standings behind Martin Johnsrud Sundby of Norway, who missed the meet. Matti Heikkinen of Finland finished third.In the women’s 15-kilometer skiathlon, the double Olympic bronze medalist Tchekaleva made an early breakaway and held the lead for her first career World Cup victory in 44:16.SLOVENE WINS SKI CROSS The freestyler Filip Flisar of Slovenia won the world ski cross title while Andrea Limbacher of Austria won the women’s gold medal on the final day of the worlds in Kreischberg, Austria.Advertisement