By DAVE CALDWELLOCT. 10, 2015
Not a single $190 replica Rangers sweater with a No. 24 and Oscar Lindberg’s name stitched on the back could be found on the racks at the souvenir stands Saturday at Madison Square Garden. The jerseys are said to be on order. The Rangers could probably sell boxes now.After scoring a goal in each of the Rangers’ first two games, Lindberg, a rookie center, needed only 5 minutes 12 seconds in the home opener, a 5-2 victory over the Columbus Blue Jackets, to double his season total.When asked if the puck seemed to be finding its way into the net for him, Lindberg smiled and said: “Right now it is. I’m trying not to overthink it.”Rangers goaltender Henrik Lundqvist, benched in last season’s home opener after allowing six goals in the first 35 minutes of a grim loss to Toronto, sparkled Saturday, stopping 37 of 39 shots in his third game — and third victory — in four nights.AdvertisementLundqvist seems to have benefited from an off-season plan by the goaltending coach Benoit Allaire to get him off to a faster start. The Rangers have won their first three regular-season games for the first time since 2008.Lundqvist’s best save came late in the second period, when he scrambled to knock aside a shot by forward Ryan Johansen that appeared to be headed into an open net. The capacity crowd jubilantly chanted, “Henrik!”AdvertisementLundqvist said, “At that moment, you try not to panic — just try to stay cool and time it.”But Lundqvist is 33 and a commodity. Lindberg, a 23-year-old fellow Swede who had played in only one N.H.L. game before this season, was again a pleasant surprise, tapping in a rebound of a shot by Kevin Hayes 80 seconds into the game and then pounding in a crisp pass from J. T. Miller less than four minutes later.Lindberg became the first Ranger to score in each of the first three games of his rookie season since Steven King did so in 1992, according to the Elias Sports Bureau. The Rangers’ other three centers — Dominic Moore, Derick Brassard and Derek Stepan — also scored.“I think the majority of us would say we got better in all three games, in each period,” said defenseman Ryan McDonagh, the Rangers’ captain. “That’s a good sign. Obviously, we know we can improve, too.”Lindberg already has. The Rangers obtained him from Arizona in an all-but-overlooked May 2011 trade for center Ethan Werek, their second-round draft choice two years earlier. Werek played three seasons in the American Hockey League and is now under contract to play for the Florida Everblades of the ECHL.Lindberg played two more seasons for Skelleftea AIK in the Swedish Hockey League and then joined the Rangers’ Hartford farm club in 2013, scoring 46 goals in 150 regular-season games but never quite reaching his potential. Wearing No. 48, he played one regular-season game for the Rangers last season, when Rick Nash sat out because of back spasms.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But the Rangers knew what they had. Their decision to trade the speedy Carl Hagelin, who could kill penalties and score big goals, was due mostly to the fact that Hagelin was a restricted free agent who had earned a big raise. But the Rangers were close to the salary cap, and they also had Lindberg, who can play center and wing, in reserve. He is making $600,000.AdvertisementAfter scoring two goals in four preseason games, he won the Lars-Erik Sjoberg Award as the best rookie in training camp. Then he scored on his first shot of the season in a 3-2 victory Wednesday against Chicago, earning the Broadway Hat, a postgame locker-room honor, from his teammates.Barely a minute and a half into Saturday’s game, Hayes set up Lindberg’s first goal by picking off a pass by Fedor Tyutin deep in the Blue Jackets’ zone. Columbus goaltender Sergei Bobrovsky stopped Hayes’s shot, but Lindberg scored on the rebound.Miller later set up Lindberg by firing the puck around the stumbling Columbus defenseman Kevin Connauton into the crease. Lindberg beat defenseman Dalton Prout to the puck, and it went in off his skate.“It was a good job of him just directing it,” Miller said of Lindberg.That seems to be the way it is going for Lindberg. The No. 24 sweaters bearing the name of the former captain Ryan Callahan are slowly disappearing from the Garden. A sensation has taken over, replica jerseys soon to be for sale.“I don’t think he’s going to continue on an 80-something-goal pace,” Rangers Coach Alain Vigneault said of Lindberg. “Players go through these stretches. I need him to be effective at both ends. But he’s gotten us some really timely, important goals.”A version of this article appears in print on October 11, 2015, on Page SP9 of the New York edition with the headline: A Swede Is the Star of the Rangers’ Home Opener. Lundqvist Is Good, Too.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.