AdvertisementSupported byDuke 77, St. John's 68By Zach SchonbrunNo record was at stake Sunday afternoon. Duke Coach Mike Krzyzewski had already taken care of that, eclipsing Bob Knight’s mark for wins by an N.C.A.A. Division I men’s basketball coach, 902, in 2011 and chugging steadily onward. Still, an announced crowd of 19,812 at Madison Square Garden on Sunday had the chance to see four little digits align to represent one big, round number — and with it, a breakthrough into another echelon of the sport. Krzyzewski vaulted across the threshold of 1,000 wins — a faraway figure to all but a few coaches at any level of men’s or women’s college basketball — although it required some struggle by No. 5 Duke against a St. John’s team feeling somewhat slighted to be the afterthought in a nonconference game on its home court.A 15-1 run by the Blue Devils late in the second half sealed a 77-68 victory, and for the 1,000th time in his career, Krzyzewski shook hands with, and offered consolation to, a losing opponent at midcourt.A swarming contingent of cameras shadowed him as he went from one on-court interview to the next. The Duke players slipped on white T-shirts with “Coach K” on the front and “1,000 Wins and Kounting” on the back. They danced and huddled, then chanted, “Family!”“I’m honored,” Krzyzewski, 67, said. “I’m a lucky guy who has been at two great institutions, West Point and Duke. I’ve had unbelievable support. I’ve never had a day in 40 years where I’ve worried about my back. Not many people can say that.”Only two other men’s basketball coaches (Harry Statham of McKendree University, an N.C.A.A. Division II program, and Danny Miles of Oregon Tech, in the National Association of Intercollegiate Athletics) and one women’s coach (Pat Summitt, the former coach at Tennessee) have reached 1,000 wins. Herb Magee of Division II Philadelphia University, with 997 victories, will almost certainly be the next.But Krzyzewski, with a career winning percentage above .760 and four N.C.A.A. tournament titles, has come to redefine excellence and longevity in the modern era, even as the recruiting process has changed drastically and star prospects have begun to dash off campuses in a matter of months.One year with Krzyzewski, it is Kyrie Irving; another year, Jabari Parker; another year, Jahlil Okafor, a freshman who commanded the attention of more than a few of the 209 news media members to receive credentials for Sunday’s game. The 6-foot-10-inch Okafor, halfway through his first collegiate season, is already drawing comparisons to Tim Duncan and Hakeem Olajuwon. He is a tantalizing prospect for Knicks fans, which was most likely why the Knicks’ president, Phil Jackson, and forward Carmelo Anthony were on hand to watch him play.Okafor, 19, seemed to sense his opportunity to audition. He soared into the air for an offensive rebound, spun and softly deposited the ball through the rim for the game’s first basket. With Okafor scoring 8 points in the first eight minutes, the Blue Devils (17-2) built an 11-point lead.St. John’s (13-6) charged back. The Red Storm have beatific memories of playing Duke at the Garden; the last time the team faced the Blue Devils there, in January 2011, St. John’s won, 93-78.That has stood as perhaps the biggest win of Coach Steve Lavin’s tenure. On Friday, St. John’s guard D’Angelo Harrison explained that the motivation to win this game was greater than usual. “We just don’t want them to celebrate on our court,” Harrison said.A layup and free throw by Rysheed Jordan with 3 minutes 40 seconds left in the first half gave St. John’s a lead, and after a Harrison 3-pointer with two seconds remaining, the Red Storm bounded into the locker room at halftime ahead, 43-39.The lead swelled to 10 early in the second half, with the team propelled by Sir’Dominic Pointer, who finished with 21 points, and Jordan (18). But Duke rallied. Krzyzewski inserted the bruising forward Marshall Plumlee alongside Okafor, a rotation he said had not been used all season. “I thought we made a mistake right away and we were going to lose by 30,” Krzyzewski said. “And then, boom. It just, boom. It was great.”A 3-point play by Okafor capped a 9-0 Blue Devils run that cut the Red Storm’s lead to 1. A 3-pointer by Quinn Cook gave Duke a lead. And a 3-pointer by Tyus Jones with 1:15 left made it a 7-point game, one that the Blue Devils could salt away. Okafor had 17 points and 10 rebounds, while Jones scored 22 points.“Duke made the decisive final run or final blow,” Lavin said. “We were not able to answer.”On Friday, Lavin looked to pop culture to summarize Krzyzewski’s achievement in coaching. Lavin mentioned the singer Tony Bennett and the television host Johnny Carson as comparable models of routine excellence — men at the pinnacles of their professions who kept performing, night after night, for decades. “That’s what puts him at the top,” Lavin said of Krzyzewski.Krzyzewski was asked how his energy remained, unwavering, after so many years.“Energy is not a matter of age,” Krzyzewski said. “It’s a matter of commitment to your position, to what you do.”Sunday’s game, he said, was a perfect example. He called the Garden’s atmosphere “magical.” And the game took on the likeness of a three-act play. “I’m not sure I’ve ever been a part of a game like that,” Krzyzewski said. “It’s kind of nuts, huh? You’re involved with 1,400 games or whatever I’ve been involved in, and to have one that’s different, that’s what makes the game so good.”Among the few people granted access to visit with Krzyzewski in the locker room before the game was Lou Carnesecca, the coach with the most wins in St. John’s history, the eponym of the Red Storm’s on-campus arena, and a cherished figure in New York college sports.Carnesecca, 90, brushed his hand against Krzyzewski’s cheek. He joked, “Just don’t take the chandeliers.” Advertisement