AdvertisementSupported byBy Jonah Engel BromwichEvery week, The New York Times will choose one essential game to watch, highlighting hot teams, winning and losing streaks and statistical intrigue in the N.B.A. Los Angeles Clippers at San Antonio, Saturday, 9 p.m. Eastern, ESPNAt this point last year, the San Antonio Spurs were in first in the Southwest Division and in second in the Western Conference, at 33-10. That represented something of a worst-case scenario: In the past four seasons, the team has not finished worse than second in the West. (And by the end of last season, the Spurs were back in first.)Through Saturday’s games, San Antonio was sitting in seventh, at 28-17. But the Spurs often start at a jog before sprinting into the postseason, and they had won eight of their 11 games this month entering Sunday’s matchup with Milwaukee. Much more interesting to Spurs fans than the team’s mildly worrisome (and rapidly improving) record should be the way that the squad is evolving. The most notable development is the growing importance of forward Kawhi Leonard. Without Leonard, who has missed 18 games this season, the Spurs have gone 9-9. They are better in virtually every important statistical category when Leonard plays, most tellingly defensive efficiency: Entering Sunday, the team had allowed 95 points per 100 possessions with him and 103 without him. The first mark would make the Spurs the best defensive team in the N.B.A.; the second would leave them outside the top 12.Leonard’s usage rate — a statistic that uses shots, free throws and turnovers to estimate what percentage of a team’s possessions a player used while he was on the floor — is also rising. As a result, this season, his fourth in the league, he is on pace to lead the Spurs in scoring average for the first time, at 15.4 points per game entering Sunday. Leonard, 23, the most valuable player of last year’s N.B.A. finals, is no longer in a clean-up role on offense; he has become one of the Spurs’ first options. The rest of the Spurs have begun to accommodate that change. As the team goes inside to Leonard, shooters like Danny Green are finding more opportunities on the perimeter; Green is averaging almost seven more minutes a game than he did last season and is shooting and scoring more frequently. And with Leonard back from a hand injury and shouldering more of the scoring load, Tony Parker has been under less pressure to risk aggravating a hamstring injury. The Spurs’ Big 3 still matter, but Leonard has taken a lot of the weight off them. Tim Duncan and Manu Ginobili, who have stayed relatively healthy, have benefited from that freedom, and Coach Gregg Popovich remains as committed as ever to ensuring that his players are well rested going into the postseason. Leonard’s absence gives the Spurs reason to shrug off their relatively bumpy start to the season. The Los Angeles Clippers, set to play at San Antonio on Saturday night, have no such excuse.The Clippers still have one of the league’s elite offensive units. Unlike other teams with comparable results, though, the Clippers have had a lot of trouble replicating their success when their starters come off the floor. Then there is the Clippers’ defense, which remains full of holes even with the considerable talent of Chris Paul on the perimeter and DeAndre Jordan inside. Even small flaws like those are enough for a team to lose ground in this season’s tough Western Conference. A squad can improve its defense through hard work and good coaching — and Clippers Coach Doc Rivers was once thought to be a defensive specialist — but as of now, it seems unlikely that the Clippers, in sixth place at 29-14 through Saturday, will rise to the level it takes to compete with the conference’s more complete teams. The Clippers still lack a useful contributor at the wing, and the recently acquired Austin Rivers (Doc Rivers’s son) and Dahntay Jones do not seem capable of doing much to move the needle. An ESPN article called those moves a chemistry experiment. But the Clippers do not have an obvious lack of chemistry; what they lack is a couple of solid second-string scorers, and with the trade deadline less than a month away, time is running out to add those pieces. That closing window is especially a problem for the Clippers, with three stars in their prime. One of the Spurs’ secret weapons has been longevity: Their Big 3 have been able to maintain a consistent level of play while staying in San Antonio long enough for the team to develop the next generation of talent. That kind of culture is rare in the N.B.A. If the Clippers cannot get it together on defense and acquire some extra help, they may not be able to compete with teams like San Antonio when it counts, both this season and beyond.Advertisement