AdvertisementSupported byBy Huw RichardsFrench clubs will have every reason for optimism when Rugby Union’s European Champions Cup returns in April for its playoff stage.While they will be outnumbered four to three by English clubs in the quarter-final draw, which was finalized by the last round of pool stage matches this weekend, the French have the prime spots. Racing Metro, Toulon and Clermont Auvergne are all at home while the English quartet of Bath, Northampton, Wasps and Saracens must travel. Ireland’s Leinster, a three-time winner, claimed the eighth spot and a home draw.Home advantage is huge in this competition, which was renamed and restructured at the start of this season after 19 years as the Heineken European Cup. In 18 years of quarterfinals, home teams have a 75 percent winning record. Only two teams, Leinster in 2009 and its compatriot Munster a year earlier, have won the trophy after an away quarterfinal.The big winner among the French was Racing, a club which is saturated in history, not much of it recent. It is a five-time French champion, but only twice in the last 100 years.It still plays at the Stade Colombes, the venerable stadium in the Paris suburbs which was France’s home ground from 1920 until 1972 and a venue for the 1924 Olympics.It is only six years since Racing reclaimed a place in France’s elite TOP 14 competition and it had failed to progress in four previous Heineken ventures. This time it not only made the playoffs, but claimed No. 1 seeding with a spectacular 32-8 victory away to Northampton, reigning champion and current leader of England’s Premiership.Racing dominated completely at Franklin’s Garden and sealed victory with tries from Juan Imhoff, Benjamin Lapeyre and Jamie Roberts in 20 minutes either side of halftime.“We spoke at the start of our season about our goals, and they were to qualify in the TOP 14 (playoffs) and Europe. We have ticked one of those boxes today, and to be the only unbeaten team in the pool stages is pretty special,” Roberts, who was voted Man of the Match, said afterward. “We have got a glorious opportunity now, with a home quarterfinal.”Racing will host Saracens, while Toulon, which is aiming for an unprecedented third consecutive title, plays Wasps at home. Toulon, the one team sure of its playoff place before the final weekend, won its last pool match, 26-3, away to Llanelli Scarlets.Clermont, the team Toulon beat in the final two years ago, sealed its place and home draw by defeating Saracens — last year’s beaten finalist — 18-6. It claimed the opening try through English fullback Nick Abendanon, withstood a 10-minute period shorthanded when its lock forward Sebastien Vahahmahina was sin-binned, then took advantage itself with a try by prop Vincent Debaty when Saracens was a man short. Clermont will host Northampton.Leinster claimed its pool and a home draw by drawing 20-20 away to Wasps in Coventry. It led 20-6 at halftime, but had to hold on at the end when Wasps outside-half Andy Goode was wide with a potentially match and pool-winning drop-goal attempt. Leinster will play Bath in Dublin.Bath was the only English winner from its seven competitors this weekend, leapfrogging previous leader Toulouse — which lost, 27-26, at Montpellier — to become the first team ever to win a pool after losing its first two matches.It fell behind to visitor Glasgow, which would itself have qualified with a win, but used the power of its scrummage to force two penalty tries and a 20-15 victory which was in doubt until the last second.Northampton’s director of rugby Jim Mallinder spoke for all three English second-place qualifiers, each of which went into the weekend hoping to secure top place in its pool and a home draw, when he told BBC Radio Northampton “The positives are that we have still qualified, but it is a disappointment today. It was a massive game for the club and we came second best.”But Glasgow’s loss means Scotland will be unrepresented, as will Wales and Italy. So too will the tournament’s holy trinity of Toulouse, Munster and Leinster, who between them have won the tournament eight times, reached the final 15 times and the playoffs 41 times. At least one of them was in every final from 2000 and 2010 and at least two had made the playoffs every year apart from the inaugural tournament in 1995-6.Munster was eliminated last week, while Leicester had to win at Ulster, possibly its least favorite away trip, but went down, 26-7, with Ulster wing Darren Cave scoring three tries.Toulouse looked on course for a victory that would also have meant all four quarter-finals being played in France when it led 20-9 after halftime at Montpellier, but succumbed to a spectacular late rally.Advertisement