By ROB HUGHESJAN. 25, 2015
LONDON — In his many victories coaching teams in four countries, we have too often seen the arrogant side of José Mourinho. A bigger, more humble Mourinho emerged Saturday after the most shocking defeat of his coaching career.The moment that Chelsea lost, 4-2, in its own stadium to third-tier Bradford City, Mourinho impulsively raised his hands to applaud the victors. Then, once the cameras were off him, he slipped down the corridor, entered the Bradford dressing room and shook the hands of each player and staff member.A calculated gesture of a man who lives his life in the glare of publicity? A ruse to deflect the embarrassment of his team, which cost $300 million to assemble and lost to an opponent that cost just a little over $11,000 to put together?I think not. I believe this to be the inner Mourinho, the man who started out in Portugal a decade and a half ago to inspire players to pull off this kind of upset. He recognized, even then, that anything can happen if a group is sufficiently motivated to defy the odds.Advertisement“I congratulated the Bradford people for their belief and their attitude to come here and enjoy their game,” he later said on television. “They were fantastic. What they achieved was the beauty of football, and the beauty of the F.A. Cup more than any other competition. I didn’t want to be a part of that beauty.Advertisement“We deserve criticism. It is a disgrace — a sporting disgrace for Chelsea — but please, don’t just be critical. You have to praise the opponent because they deserve that praise.”They do. The Bantams, as Bradford is known, grew up mightily as they overcame Chelsea, which leads the Premier League and led Saturday’s game by two goals after 30 minutes. But then back came Bradford. Jon Stead, a journeyman player who has been around the lower echelons of professional soccer for more than a decade, was pivotal to the comeback.The way he got between the Chelsea defenders and the way he held up the ball — turning to strike one goal, then turning away to set up two others — was a lesson in center-forward play. He had accomplices, two of them former players at Chelsea: Filipe Morais, who had been discarded from Chelsea’s academy as a teenager, and Billy Knott, who has admitted that he ruined a golden opportunity at the London club because of a lack of discipline.But Phil Parkinson, the coach who has put this Bradford team together on a shoestring, was right to quietly say on Saturday night that discipline and honesty were the tenets his side displayed after starting their comeback just before halftime.They were facing a drubbing, but refused to lie down and take it.Mourinho is right to recognize that as the spirit of the underdog when it comes to the F.A. Cup. He correctly stated that there was not one player in Bradford’s amber and black shirts who would qualify for his Chelsea blues. But by the time Mourinho sent in Cesc Fàbregas, Eden Hazard and Willian — all world-class players — as substitutes, the momentum had been lost to the fiery Bantams.This was the first time Chelsea has lost at Stamford Bridge this season, and the first time since 1958 that Chelsea has conceded four goals to a club from the third league.But it was by no means the only huge surprise in the F.A. Cup this weekend. On Friday, Manchester United, fielding its own collection of costly stars, huffed and puffed and ended up without a goal in a scoreless tie at Cambridge, whose roster was put together without a penny spent in transfer fees.AdvertisementAt least United lives to fight another day after the 0-0 result at a stadium whose standing capacity totals 8,000 — and there will be a replay at Manchester’s 75,000-seat Old Trafford stadium.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Our players had never lined up in the tunnel alongside Radamel Falcao and Ángel Di María before,” said Cambridge Coach Richard Money. “Now that they’ve done that, whatever happens in the replay happens.”Regardless of the result of the return match, the millions generated from this Cup run will help a club that stared down the barrel of bankruptcy a few seasons back.There was nothing as dramatic as that, but it still was shocking when the top three clubs in the Premier League were eliminated from the F.A. Cup, living up to the tradition of the oldest knockout tournament on the planet.Manchester City, second in the Premier League, took a risk by flying home late Friday afternoon after a break in Abu Dhabi, the home of City’s owners. The flight took seven hours, but Coach Manuel Pellegrini insisted that had nothing to do with Saturday’s loss at home to second-tier Middlesbrough.Even there, a Chelsea connection played a part. The first goal in Middlesbrough’s 2-0 win was scored by Patrick Bamford, who is on loan from Chelsea. The second came from a Spaniard, Kike, who was brought to Middlesbrough by the team’s Spanish coach, Aitor Karanka.Karanka, wouldn’t you know it, was an assistant to Mourinho while the two were together at Real Madrid from 2010 to 2013. Arguably an even bigger factor in City’s loss was yet another Spaniard, Tomás Mejías, the tall, elastic goalkeeper who learned his trade as a Real Madrid junior player. He stopped four potential scores before City capitulated to Middlesbrough’s late goals — and possibly to travel fatigue.Southampton, third in the league standings, suffered a 3-2 home defeat to Crystal Palace, while Tottenham Hotspur, the sixth-place team, was beaten, 2-1, on its home turf by Leicester City.There are different theories on what is taking place. One is that the top teams, chasing the big money of Champions League qualification, give a low priority to the Cup. The other view, Mourinho’s view, is that every dog has its day, and we should congratulate the small guys when they do.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.