By CARL NELSONJAN. 26, 2015
CHANDLER, Ariz. — A visibly angry Robert K. Kraft made a surprise appearance Monday night during the New England Patriots’ news media availability, reading a statement defending Coach Bill Belichick, quarterback Tom Brady and the organization.Kraft, the Patriots’ owner, was addressing the controversy surrounding the footballs New England used in its victory over the Indianapolis Colts in the A.F.C. championship game. The N.F.L. said Friday that at least some of the balls were underinflated and that it was investigating how and why.The Patriots are set to play the Seattle Seahawks in the Super Bowl on Sunday.“I believe unconditionally,” Kraft said, “that the New England Patriots did nothing wrong in the process that was in violation of N.F.L. rules.”He added that he “would expect and hope” that the N.F.L. would issue an apology, “in particular to Coach Belichick and Tom Brady for what they have had to endure this week.”AdvertisementKraft said: “Tom, Bill and I have been together for 15 years. They are my guys. They are part of my family. Bill, Tom and I have had many difficult discussions over the years. I’ve never known them to lie to me.”Who’s going to win? What color will Katy Perry’s hair be? What about the commercials? Make your Super Bowl picks and predictions and share your ballot with your friends.After Kraft left the podium, Belichick spoke, but he did not answer questions about a Fox Sports report on Monday that, citing unnamed sources, said the N.F.L.’s investigation was focusing on a Patriots locker-room attendant.AdvertisementThe attendant was captured on video taking footballs from an officials’ room to another room on the way to the field, according to the report.“My attention now is on the Seattle Seahawks and our game,” Belichick said, a point he reiterated.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Ted Wells, who is leading the league’s inquiry with the N.F.L. executive vice president Jeff Pash, said in a statement Monday that he expected the investigation to last at least several more weeks.“We are following customary investigative procedure, and no one should draw any conclusions about the sequence of interviews or any other steps, all of which are part of the process of doing a thorough and fair investigation,” Wells said.Brady said earlier Monday that it was tough not to take the accusations personally.“I’ve moved past those initial feelings, and I want to move forward,” he said.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.