AdvertisementSupported byCubs 6, Cardinals 3By Tyler KepnerST. LOUIS — The Chicago Cubs turned this National League division series on Saturday with two bunts. They got help, too, from physical and mental errors by the St. Louis Cardinals. But the bunts sent the mayhem in motion, and for that, Cubs Manager Joe Maddon said, they could thank Don Zimmer.Zimmer, a former Cubs manager who died in June 2014, was a confidant and part-time coach when Maddon managed the Tampa Bay Rays. He cornered Maddon early in his tenure and lectured him on small ball.“This is all Don Zimmer stuff out here,” Maddon said after the strategy helped produce a 6-3 victory in Game 2 at Busch Stadium. “So whenever it works properly, he’s the first guy I think about.”The Cubs evened the best-of-five series and will turn to Jake Arrieta for Game 3 on Monday at Wrigley Field. Arrieta, who will face Michael Wacha, is 14-1 with a 0.72 E.R.A. since the All-Star break, a run for the ages that could take the Cubs to the verge of the N.L. Championship Series. The teams will play Game 4 on Tuesday before a possible finale here on Thursday.“We don’t plan on coming back here,” first baseman Anthony Rizzo said. “We plan on playing a good game Monday. Obviously we’re very confident. We want to do this now.”The Cardinals, who have reached the N.L.C.S. nine times since 2000, had leaned on John Lackey in Game 1 and turned to the left-hander Jaime Garcia on Saturday. Maddon sat his left-handed-hitting outfielders, Chris Coghlan and Kyle Schwarber, and started two who hit right-handed, Austin Jackson and Jorge Soler.Both made an impact against Garcia, who was fighting a stomach virus but looked sharp enough in the first inning, with two strikeouts. Matt Carpenter led off the bottom of the first with a home run, but Garcia soon threw away the lead.He served up five runs in the second inning, and while all were unearned, that was a quirk of the stat sheet; the pitcher and his defense came unglued.“To me, they’re all earned,” Garcia said. “That should never happen. It started with that bunt.”Garcia was being kind. Actually, the rally started with an error by second baseman Kolten Wong, who lost his grip on the ball while trying to turn a double play. His wild throw brought the hitter, Jackson, to second base, and from there Jackson stole third easily. Garcia blamed himself for failing to hold Jackson close.A walk to Miguel Montero brought up pitcher Kyle Hendricks — batting eighth, a Maddon specialty — with one out.Hendricks bunted. Garcia scrambled for the ball. Catcher Yadier Molina said he yelled: “Four! Four!” — indicating home plate — but Garcia had a different plan.“It was a mental mistake on my side,” he said. “I tried to go to second for a double play. My first reaction, because it was a hard bunt, was to go for a double play. But that should never happen. That situation right there, you’ve got to go home and try to get that out.”Garcia glanced homeward, futilely, and then whipped an off-balance, flat-footed throw that skipped on the dirt and into right field. Now it was 1-1, with runners on second and third, and the Cubs channeled Zimmer. They squeezed again, with Addison Russell, and Montero scampered home. Molina said he could not remember a team squeezing twice in a row.“Everything has to be set up properly for that,” Maddon said. “It just was. That happens every so often, I guess. A harvest moon, possibly.”An infield single scored another run, and Soler slammed a hanging slider over the center-field wall for a two-run homer. The Cubs had a 5-1 lead, and after one more out, Garcia’s day was done. The Cardinals announced the stomach virus, but Manager Mike Matheny said Garcia was coming out, anyway.The Cardinals did get two midgame homers, and Adam Wainwright, their ace of postseasons past, returning from a torn Achilles’ tendon, spun vintage curveballs in a five-out relief appearance.Wainwright started the first game of the season, in April, against the Cubs at Wrigley. Now the teams head there again, for the first time as playoff foes, with a dominant pitcher on the mound and the edge in the series at stake.“I can’t wait to see what Wrigley’s like,” Rizzo said. “It’s always crazy when Jake pitches; I can’t imagine. With the rivalry and all the Cardinal fans there, it’s going to be a great time.”Advertisement