AdvertisementSupported byBy Karen CrouseSCOTTSDALE, Ariz. — One of the New England Patriots’ most ardent fans is in town this week. The twist is that it is a business trip for him.The golfer Keegan Bradley cannot decide if the twinning of the Phoenix Open and Super Bowl XLIX is the best or the worst possible circumstance.The final round of the tournament is scheduled to end about 30 minutes before the kickoff of the game between Bradley’s beloved Patriots and the Seattle Seahawks. It is 31 miles from the tournament site, TPC Scottsdale, to University of Phoenix Stadium, a commute that takes about a half-hour when traffic is flowing.“I’ve watched every minute of every one of their games this year,” Bradley said Monday of the Patriots. “I don’t want to miss the start of the Super Bowl.”While Bradley has Patriots quarterback Tom Brady among his phone contacts, he had assumed he would be one of the billion people watching the telecast. In his fervent search for tickets, he was not about to reach out to Brady, whom he has known since the quarterback texted him out of the blue with a congratulatory message after Bradley’s victory in the 2011 P.G.A. Championship.“I know how I am trying to prepare for a major,” Bradley said, “so I would never ask anyone for tickets.”In the days after the Patriots secured a Super Bowl berth, Brady’s record-setting sixth, Bradley scrambled for seats. He came up empty. Then, by chance, Bradley was paired in a pro-am last week with a man with a connection to the Patriots’ owner, Robert K. Kraft. Through his amateur partner, Bradley said, he was able to purchase four tickets at face value. Bradley and his girlfriend will attend the game with the golfer Brendan Steele and his wife.Bradley, who has two top-25 finishes in three appearances in Phoenix, said he and Steele had discussed strategies for getting to the game if one or both were in contention for the title. With the 14-time major champion Tiger Woods making his first appearance at the tournament since 2001, traffic in the area is expected to be as congested as the tee box on a drivable par 4. “We decided we’ll cross that bridge when we come to it,” Bradley said.He added, none too convincingly, “If I ever was going to miss the start of the Super Bowl, I guess being in one of the final groups, with a chance to win a PGA Tour event, would be the best-case scenario.”The last time the Super Bowl was held in Arizona, in 2008, Brandt Snedeker played in one of the final groups on the Sunday of the PGA Tour event. After finishing in a tie for ninth, Snedeker made it to the stadium with a few minutes to spare. “There was no traffic, because by that time everybody was already there,” said Snedeker, who had obtained the tickets through one of his corporate sponsors.The winner in 2008 was J. B. Holmes, who defeated Phil Mickelson in a playoff. Mickelson had acquired two tickets to the Super Bowl game between the Patriots and the Giants. But even before having to go overtime, Mickelson had decided the double was not doable. At the start of the day, he handed the tickets to his caddie, Jim Mackay, and told him, “It’s your job to give these tickets away.”Mackay, whose second-favorite N.F.L. team after his hometown Arizona Cardinals is the Giants, looked for a youngster wearing a cap with the logo of Callaway, one of Mickelson’s sponsors. On the third tee, he found one: He approached Drew Fockler, who was standing next to his father, John, and asked them if they liked football. When they replied enthusiastically, he reached into Mickelson’s bag, pulled out the tickets and asked them if they would like to attend the Super Bowl. The Focklers happily accepted the tickets. They later sent Mickelson a thank-you note.Mickelson has no plans to attend Sunday’s game. Describing the Super Bowl as “a life experience,” he said: “It was something I’ve enjoyed doing a few times, probably three or four. But it is a lot of effort to go there, and I don’t have that strong desire now that I’ve done it a number of times. I will later with my kids.”Or sooner, if his hometown team, the San Diego Chargers, returns to the big game for the first time since losing to the San Francisco 49ers in 1995.“Or that,” Mickelson said with a laugh.Advertisement