AdvertisementSupported byN.F.L. RoundupBy Benjamin HoffmanPHOENIX — Asked to face the news media for a second time before the New England Patriots even landed here, the Seattle Seahawks found themselves discussing the possibility of becoming a dynasty on Sunday by winning Super Bowl XLIX and becoming the ninth team to repeat as champions. The players were careful to point out that they were not a dynasty yet.“This is something that you look back and see after the fact,” Coach Pete Carroll said Monday. “It’s fun to project what’s happening, but a dynasty is what New England has now.” Kam Chancellor, the team’s hard-hitting strong safety, spoke more boldly about his team’s chances in the game and said the Seahawks were no longer a surprise success.“This team will weather the storm,” Chancellor said. “I would say it’s definitely harder the second time. Just to get to this spot, you’re going to get teams’ best every single time because they study film all off-season to study your weaknesses.”Cliff Avril, a defensive end, was bullish on his team’s ability to keep this run going, given Seattle’s young core of stars.“I think the sky’s the limit, honestly, with this team as long as we continue to want to keep getting better as a team,” Avril said.The Patriots under Coach Bill Belichick and quarterback Tom Brady are appearing in their sixth Super Bowl, having won three, and Las Vegas has made them a 1-point favorite despite the distractions of the ball-deflation scandal after the A.F.C. championship game. The run of success by the Patriots is something Carroll seemed interested in emulating, while acknowledging the inherent difficulties of doing so. “Every year you’re faced with difficult decisions, because it’s constantly in motion to manage the cap,” Carroll said. “It calls for us to make very difficult decisions.”The team chose not to re-sign Brandon Browner, a star cornerback who missed last season because of a suspension and is now on the Patriots. It also gave up Golden Tate, one of the team’s more consistent wide receivers.“We lost some really good players from last year’s team, and we knew that we were losing some heart-and-soul guys,” Carroll said. “They were decisions we had to make.”One of those decisions came during the season, when the team traded Percy Harvin, the talented but enigmatic wide receiver, to the Jets in October. Having given up three draft picks to acquire Harvin, the team got just 23 regular-season receptions from him because of various injuries. He did, however, have one of the most memorable plays of last year’s Super Bowl when he returned a kick 87 yards for a touchdown to start the second half. Carroll felt that despite Harvin’s talent, the move to send him to the Jets was addition by subtraction.“We made a big statement going after Percy,” Carroll said. “He was an incredible football player. As it turned out, we just felt it was better for our team to move on where we had come from, in a sense. We went back to more of the format that got us here.”Carroll emphasized the importance of continuity, not just with his roster, but with the team’s routines.“We have our way of doing things, and for us it’s the disciple of staying the same is what the challenge is,” Carroll said of how he was handling this week. “What we’ve done in the past leading up to the game is what got us here, so we’re not going to adjust now.”MADDEN VIDEO PREDICTION In its annual simulation of the Super Bowl using the Madden video game, EA Sports predicted a 28-24 victory for the Patriots. The simulation predicted an M.V.P. performance by Tom Brady, passing for 335 yards and four touchdowns. The whimsical take on an actual prediction has had a decent run of success since its inception, with the simulation predicting the correct winner eight times in 11 tries.Advertisement