By ALLAN KREDAJAN. 26, 2015
Kyle Okposo, the Islanders’ top-line right wing, will be sidelined for six to eight weeks with an upper-body injury. The team announced no further details on the injury.The Islanders (31-14-1) lead the Metropolitan Division with 63 points, 3 points ahead of the second-place Pittsburgh Penguins. The Islanders are scheduled to play the Rangers on Tuesday night at Nassau Coliseum as the N.H.L. season resumes after the All-Star break. The game could be postponed because of blizzard conditions affecting the Northeast.Okposo, 26, has 14 goals and 30 assists for 44 points, 1 point behind his center John Tavares for the team lead. Okposo led the Islanders last season with 69 points in 71 games, stepping in when Tavares went down for the season with a knee injury at the Olympics in Sochi, Russia.“It’s a huge loss; he’s one of our leaders,” Tavares said, adding, “He works hard on his game and sets an example that way.”Led by Tavares and Okposo, the Islanders are second in the N.H.L. in scoring, averaging 3.15 goals per game. Okposo scored a career-high four goals in a 6-3 home victory over Pittsburgh on Jan. 16. Okposo had seven goals and 10 assists in his last 14 games before the All-Star break.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Forward Mikhail Grabovski, who has six goals and eight assists in 38 games, may return from a lower-body injury to take Okposo’s spot. Grabovski skated on the top line with Tavares and Josh Bailey at Monday’s practice.The Islanders face a difficult schedule this week. After the Rangers, the Islanders have games against two other Eastern Conference teams in playoff position: the Boston Bruins on Thursday and the Detroit Red Wings on Saturday.Okposo, the seventh overall pick in the 2006 draft, has not missed a game this season. If he is out for eight weeks, he will not return until late March. The regular season ends April 11.Okposo joined the Islanders during the 2007-8 season and was one of their most effective players during his only postseason experience, scoring three goals in an opening-round six-game loss to Pittsburgh in 2013.A version of this article appears in print on January 27, 2015, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Key Player for Islanders Is Sidelined.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.