AdvertisementSupported byBy Allan KredaThe Rangers’ oft-derided power play — a source of frustration through the regime of their former coach John Tortorella and during Alain Vigneault’s first season behind the bench — is now a source of confidence as the team heads into the second half of the season.Buoyed by the addition of the veteran defenseman and power-play specialist Dan Boyle and growing chemistry among forwards Rick Nash, Derek Stepan, Derick Brassard and Martin St. Louis, the Rangers (27-13-4) are 12th in the N.H.L. in power-play efficiency, converting 19.3 percent of the time. They return from the All-Star break Tuesday night against the Islanders at Nassau Coliseum, a game threatened by a snowstorm.The Rangers had an efficiency rate of 18.2 percent last season after two years with an identical 15.7 percent (23rd in the league). The last time the Rangers registered a man-advantage success rate among the league’s top third was 2006-7.“We have a lot of guys going great at the right time, and we’re all more and more comfortable,” said center Stepan, who leads the Rangers with 24 assists, including 7 on the power play. “We’re keeping it simple and getting results.”His fellow center Brassard leads the Rangers with 14 power-play points, and St. Louis has 13. Nash, who is tied for the N.H.L. lead with 28 goals, rounds out the top power-play unit, with 8 points with a man-advantage.During a recent 11-game stretch, the Rangers scored 10 times in 31 power-play chances, including goals by Brassard, Chris Kreider and Nash in the first period of a 6-1 victory over Buffalo on Jan. 3.Brassard said that cohesion and confidence as a group were main factors in the Rangers’ 16-3 record since Dec. 8.“We’re well-prepared because we want to use the power play as a weapon and we have a plan for every game,” Brassard said. “We know special teams are key every game, and we all know our roles. We just need to keep going.”The assistant Scott Arniel, who joined the organization with Vigneault before last season, works with the team’s forwards and pays close attention to man-advantage strategy.St. Louis, 39 and a veteran of more than 1,100 games, credited Arniel, the former head coach of the Columbus Blue Jackets, with instilling additional mindfulness to the team before each game.“He helps us a lot because he pre-scouts opponents and gives us direction,” St. Louis said. “But at the end of the day, we’re the ones out there. You take what they give you.”Vigneault, who guided the Rangers to the Stanley Cup finals last spring, said having an extra voice like Arniel’s provided bonus assurance.“Arnie does a really good job,” Vigneault said. “He makes sure the guys are aware of the other team’s tendencies. He makes me look good.”Vigneault also praised Boyle and his strong shot from the point. In his first year with the Rangers, Boyle, 38, had to contend with a broken hand sustained on opening night and the flu, missing 17 games over all.Boyle appeared to be reaching his stride in recent weeks with three goals and four assists on the power play.This pleased Vigneault.“A big part of our game is defense to offense and being able to move the puck,” Vigneault said. “That starts with our defense. Our guys have a ‘shoot-more’ mentality, and it’s paying off. The power play is all about puck movement, traffic and puck recovery. We are executing that well.”Advertisement