By SAM BORDENJAN. 26, 2015
LONDON —  DeAndre Yedlin had modest plans for New Year’s Eve 2013. He went to his mother’s house in Seattle. He watched some fireworks on television. He went to sleep.One year later, his experience was slightly different. Yes, he went to someone else’s house again, but this time Yedlin was invited to Harry Kane’s home here, settling in for a comfortable New Year’s dinner with Kane, a young English striker and Yedlin’s new teammate at Tottenham Hotspur.“We had pasta and a roast chicken that his missus made,” Yedlin said recently. “It was fantastic.”That meal was the nominal kickoff to a year that Yedlin, the young defender who was a breakout star of the World Cup for the United States, is hoping will be transformative. While the recent transfers of Jozy Altidore and Mix Diskerud added two more names to the list of high-profile Americans who have left Europe to return to Major League Soccer, Yedlin, 21, who played for the Seattle Sounders for two seasons, has gone the other way. In fact, he said, he never seriously considered staying put.AdvertisementMuch of that was because of his personal ambitions, a desire, he said, “to get out of my bubble” in Seattle, the city where he grew up. But also important was his dialogue with Jurgen Klinsmann, Yedlin’s coach with the national team and a former German striker who played all over Europe, including two spells with Tottenham.AdvertisementAs Yedlin was weighing his options after the World Cup — Roma, from the Italian league, was also interested in signing him — Klinsmann told Yedlin not to make any decisions without calling him, according to Yedlin. And while Klinsmann and representatives of U.S. Soccer have gone to great lengths recently to highlight Klinsmann’s support for M.L.S. — a dynamic that has been mixed, at best, in the past — Yedlin said Klinsmann left no doubt with him regarding the coach’s preference.“It’s no secret he’d prefer his players to play in Europe,” Yedlin said.Klinsmann clearly values Yedlin as a prospect. He called him in to national team camp this week for Wednesday’s friendly at Chile even though Yedlin has not played a first-team match since mid-November. That is a reflection of the value Klinsmann places even on weekly training at a top European club, a step up that even Yedlin described as “a different level.” That distinction became clear to Yedlin in his first workout.“Everything is just faster, just so much faster,” he said, acknowledging that that was no small statement from a player whose greatest attribute might be his speed. “Trainings here are short, sharp, intense. In America, it’s slower, more relaxed. Here, everything is high-paced.”Yedlin had an idea what to expect, having consulted with older players such as Obafemi Martins, who played in Europe for 13 years before joining Seattle, as well as Clint Dempsey, the American captain who returned to M.L.S. in 2013 after successful stints playing for Fulham and Tottenham.Dempsey, in particular, was a valuable resource as Yedlin braced himself for the various shocks — professional, cultural, vehicular — of moving abroad. Yedlin said Dempsey told him to savor all the details about playing professional soccer in England, even the ones that might seem like challenges.“He said that in the M.L.S., the fans who get it, get it — but not all the fans really understand the tactics behind the game,” Yedlin said. “Here, it’s more cutthroat: They know everything, and you hear it all the time. It’s more of a job.”Brad Friedel, the American goalkeeper who has played in England since 1997 and is in his fourth season with Spurs, echoed that sentiment to Yedlin. The scrutiny for soccer players, particularly in London, Friedel said, is like no other microscope in sports.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“When you play great, they talk about it,” Friedel said. “When you play bad, they talk about it louder.”AdvertisementIt is unclear how Yedlin will fit into Spurs’ plans. While he has primarily played right back, Klinsmann used Yedlin as a wing at times during the World Cup, and Spurs Coach Mauricio Pochettino has shown a similar inclination to move players around on the field.Yedlin said he had not had any direct guidance from Pochettino — his immediate focus has been getting himself back to match fitness after a layoff that followed Seattle’s playoff elimination — but said he would be comfortable playing on the back line or elsewhere.Spurs sold one of its right backs, Kyle Naughton, to Swansea last week, a move that could make it slightly easier for Yedlin to find playing time. Kyle Walker seems entrenched as the starter at the position in the Premier League, but Tottenham is still alive in the League Cup and the Europa League, so a crowded calendar of games could produce some openings for Yedlin to break in to the team.If Yedlin is able to return to match fitness quickly, he may have opportunities to play. There is also the chance that Tottenham may decide to send him out on loan to another club, a move that would offer the chance to play regularly and ease him into the English professional game. Yedlin said he had not been given any guarantees about playing time, either at Spurs or elsewhere, and was choosing instead to just settle in as best he can.The past few months have been a barrage of change. After the World Cup, where he played significant parts in three of the United States games, he heard from his agent while on a media tour in New York that Roma had expressed interest in signing him. Not long after, Spurs came calling.Italy was tempting, Yedlin said, but while he was looking for a change, he also wanted to be realistic. A language gap and a greater cultural shift from the United States made Italy seem a bit too daunting; add in that he had always dreamed of playing in the Premier League, and signing with Tottenham was the obvious choice.By the time he sat back for the long airplane ride from Seattle to Europe, it seemed impossible to think that everything had begun in Brazil just six months earlier.He is still finding his way. He found a place to live in central London and is driving, with varying degrees of success, his own car. Exiting the highway from the left remains bizarre to him. Roundabouts are still potential hazards (“I almost crashed the first day and had to ask, ‘Are there rules about these things?’ “ he said). At times, he still mistakenly refers to the distinctive London High Street as “High Road.”The greater priority is proving he belongs at this level. While other Americans may be heading back to the United States, Yedlin is determined to stay in Europe for the long term.Advertisement“My goal is play here forever,” he said, before offering a slight amendment. “O.K., maybe going back to play in Seattle to finish my career would be cool. But I don’t want that to happen for a long, long time.”A version of this article appears in print on January 27, 2015, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: His Heart and Coach’s Advice Take World Cup Star Abroad.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.