By ANDREW KEHJAN. 26, 2015
With a powerful snowstorm heading toward the Northeast, the N.B.A. postponed two games scheduled for Monday night in New York.The Knicks’ game against the Sacramento Kings at Madison Square Garden was rescheduled for March 3 at 7 p.m. The Nets’ contest against the Portland Trail Blazers at Barclays Center was postponed until April 6 at 7 p.m.The league did not have any other games scheduled Monday in the path of the storm.The last time that either the Knicks or the Nets had a game postponed was Nov. 1, 2012, because of Hurricane Sandy. That day, the two teams were scheduled to play each other at Barclays Center.The storm could create further problems for the teams traveling into and out of New York this week, as Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo declared a state of emergency Monday. During the course of the day, public transportation service around the city was being reduced or suspended, flights in the region were grounded, and officials were encouraging people to avoid roads and stay indoors.AdvertisementThe Knicks are scheduled to play the Oklahoma City Thunder on Wednesday at Madison Square Garden. The Nets are scheduled to play the Hawks that night in Atlanta.AdvertisementAfter their game was postponed, the Nets were planning to take a bus to Philadelphia on Monday afternoon and to fly to Atlanta on Tuesday morning, a team spokesman said.CELTICS 99, JAZZ 90 Tayshaun Prince scored 19 points, and visiting Boston held off Utah.Tyler Zeller had 14 points and 7 rebounds for the Celtics, who grabbed control of the game with a big second quarter. Jared Sullinger had 12 points and 9 rebounds, and Avery Bradley also scored 12.Prince, who was acquired from Memphis in a three-team trade on Jan. 12, was 7 for 10 from the field and 3 for 4 from the free-throw line.Gordon Hayward had 26 points for the Jazz, and Enes Kanter finished with 20.Boston outscored Utah, 38-14, in the second quarter, shooting 60 percent from the field during the period.THUNDER 92, TIMBERWOLVES 84 Russell Westbrook scored 18 points, Serge Ibaka added 13 points and a season-high 19 rebounds, and host Oklahoma City knocked off Minnesota without the injured Kevin Durant.Durant sat out after spraining the big toe on his left foot Sunday against the Cleveland Cavaliers. Westbrook shot just 7 for 22 from the field but was 4 for 6 and scored 11 points in the fourth quarter to help the Thunder remain in control. The reserves Anthony Morrow and Reggie Jackson each added 14 points to help Oklahoma City’s bench outscore Minnesota’s, 45-21.Andrew Wiggins scored 23 points, Thaddeus Young had 22 and Gorgui Dieng had a season-high 18 rebounds for the league-worst Timberwolves, who shot a season-low 34.1 percent from the field. (AP)AdvertisementGRIZZLIES 103, MAGIC 94 Zach Randolph had 24 points and 10 rebounds, Marc Gasol added 16 points and 10 boards, and host Memphis topped Orlando.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Beno Udrih added 15 points, and Jeff Green finished with 12. Randolph also had six assists for the Grizzlies, who won their third straight.The Magic, who dropped their sixth in a row, got 18 points and 12 rebounds from Nikola Vucevic. Victor Oladipo also had 18 points, and Elfrid Payton had 12 points and 6 assists but shot 5 of 14 from the field. Dewayne Dedmon had 10 points and 10 rebounds.Memphis led by as many as 20 points and held a double-digit advantage through much of the contest. Both teams shot 47 percent for the game. (AP)PELICANS 99, 76ERS 74 Anthony Davis had 32 points, 10 rebounds and 4 blocked shots, and host New Orleans stretched its season-best winning streak to four games by defeating Philadelphia.Ryan Anderson scored 19 points and Eric Gordon added 13 for the Pelicans, while Tyreke Evans tied a season high — set one night earlier — with 12 assists.K. J. McDaniels scored 16 points for the 76ers, who lost their sixth straight. Henry Sims and Luc Mbah a Moute scored 14 points each.Philadelphia played without Michael Carter-Williams, who was sidelined by an upper respiratory infection.Davis shot 12 of 19 from the field, including five layups and five dunks, and made all eight of his free throws. (AP)AdvertisementSURGERY FOR BRYANT Kobe Bryant is to have surgery Wednesday on his torn right rotator cuff, most likely ending his 19th season with the Los Angeles Lakers.The team announced Bryant’s surgery Monday. He injured his shoulder last week in New Orleans.The Lakers planned to announce a timetable for Bryant’s recovery after surgery, but Coach Byron Scott anticipated losing the third-leading scorer in N.B.A. history for the rest of the year.“Kobe is probably not going to play” again this season, Scott said.A version of this article appears in print on January 27, 2015, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: Storm Shelves Home Games for the Knicks and the Nets.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.