
On Tennis By                     
 CHRISTOPHER CLAREY
 
JAN. 26, 2015
MELBOURNE, Australia — Whatever the outcome, it will be a full-circle moment Wednesday when Venus Williams and Madison Keys meet in the quarterfinals of the Australian Open.The particulars have fluctuated through the years, but what is clear is that Keys was 4 years old when she spotted Williams on television at Wimbledon wearing — what else? — a white dress.She wanted one of her own, and she wanted to swing like Williams, too, and so she was soon taking cuts with a racquetball racket at her family’s home in Illinois.Fifteen years and plenty of sweat and family sacrifice later, Williams, 34, and Keys, 19, are about to meet for the first time in a Grand Slam tournament.Advertisement“I think all of us touch lives in ways that we never dreamed of growing up as kids,” Williams, the No. 18 seed, said Monday night after beating sixth-seeded Agnieszka Radwanska, 6-3, 2-6, 6-1, in the fourth round. “You just want to be No. 1 in the world. You want to win a major. You never think about the people you inspire from your efforts and your attitude.”AdvertisementOther athletes might have thought about it sooner, but Williams and her younger sister Serena were raised to be champions outside the existing system, raised to believe that their story, gifts and burdens were very much their own.But after a halting start, they have ultimately been a bridge to the next generation of American players, including several African-American ones. There were African-American women succeeding as pros directly before the Williamses, including Chanda Rubin, the Wimbledon finalist Zina Garrison, Lori McNeil and Katrina Adams, the new president of the United States Tennis Association, who was sitting in the front row of the president’s box in Rod Laver Arena on Monday night.But there are plenty more coming, including Sloane Stephens, Taylor Townsend and Keys, the biracial daughter of lawyers, who moved early to Florida to hone her game.Keys, who beat the unseeded American Madison Brengle, 6-2, 6-4, on Monday in the fourth round, had early exposure to greatness, getting advice and support from Chris Evert at Evert’s academy in Boca Raton, Fla. She now has Lindsay Davenport, a former No. 1 and once one of the Williamses’ great rivals, as her coach.But Venus has been an inspiration, too, and not just to the 4-year-old Keys.“I think Venus has helped the sport, especially the women’s side, with equal prize money,” said Keys, referring to the fight for equal pay at Wimbledon. “She was a huge part of that. Just watching her is inspirational. She’s had her health battles. She loves tennis. She’s still out here, and she’s doing it remarkably well. I think that’s inspirational. However long I play, I hope I can be someone similar to that.”What Keys did not say Monday is that her big game, like most big games in women’s tennis, also owes a major debt to Venus and Serena, who took the power and aggression to a new level, amplifying the attack-on-any-stroke approach adopted by Monica Seles before them.“The revolution was when the Williamses started to play,” said Sam Sumyk, Victoria Azarenka’s coach. “And since then — for 13 or 14 years — we’ve all been playing catch-up, simple as that.”AdvertisementThe youngsters do appear to be gaining: See Serena’s intense three-set tussle on Monday with Garbiñe Muguruza, 21, of Spain, who beat her at the French Open last year and hit winners Monday off serves and shots that Serena used to believe were safe.See Keys, as well.“Madison’s taking those big cuts consistently, and now it’s just a matter of not taking them so often and finding the right time to go for the big one,” said Mary Joe Fernandez, the United States Fed Cup captain. “She’s such a great server, and her second serve might be her better serve. It kicks up high. I’ll be curious to see mentally how she and Venus approach this match and who will execute with their big weapons first.”It will be the inspiration against the inspired: the 34-year-old representing the past and present of American women’s tennis against the 19-year-old who represents the future and quite possibly the present, too.Keys, who lost their only previous meeting in straight sets on the Charleston, S.C., clay in 2013, did not sound as ready as others to buy into the back story.“It really just matters to you guys,” she said to reporters of the symbolism Monday.But it is clearly in the air. “You really feel like it’s the changing of the guard,” Fernandez said. “Is Madison ready for that? Is she ready to take that mantle and take her idol’s spot? It’s a very fitting matchup.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.This will be Williams’s 34th Grand Slam singles quarterfinal, and Keys’s first. But circumstances will make it seem fresh for both of them. While Serena has racked up big titles and become a fixture at No. 1, Venus Williams has not reached this stage of a major tournament in singles since she made it to the semifinals of Wimbledon in 2010.She was found to have Sjogren’s syndrome, an autoimmune disorder, in 2011 and has spent much of the last four years trying to come to grips with how to manage the disease as an elite athlete. She has played matches she certainly should not have played, looking gaunt, weak and overmatched at times and taking beatings from players who were not in her class.A champion of lesser character might have quietly said farewell and focused all of her limited energy on her design company or other fields where the deck was not stacked in her disfavor.But Williams, who long ago developed an ability to work her way pleasantly through news conferences without leaving much of a trace, usually has been easy to read when retirement has been broached.AdvertisementShe is not ready, thank you very much. Not ready to be pushed on the topic either. And in typical Williams fashion, following the beat of her own drum is looking like the right approach.After nearly a year of solid tennis achievement, she has rebuilt a sturdier platform for her attack-minded game. She is hitting her forehand more squarely, even running around her two-handed backhand again. She looks fitter, more muscular and healthier and has come up with dietary approaches and cross-training methods — including dance — that work best.“It’s clear she’s much more in shape than she was a year or two ago,” said Patrick Mouratoglou, Serena Williams’s coach. “I can see in her training that she has a lot more energy. In the past, there were many matches she was not in a condition to play because she was too tired. I don’t see that anymore, so she’s getting back progressively to her former level.”Having Serena as a benchmark is also helpful, although to Venus’s considerable credit, she has never shown resentment, at least not publicly, as her sister passed her on the Grand Slam singles honor roll and then accelerated.Asked Monday to explain her inspiration, Venus did not hesitate. “Definitely my sister Serena,” she said. “She’s just the ultimate champion.”Venus, with seven Grand Slam singles titles, will not be catching Serena, who has 18. Although it might seem overambitious, Venus still has every intent of adding to her total, which helps explain why her reaction to what was technically an upset victory Monday was not exactly the equal of Nick Kyrgios’s falling on his back with relief and disbelief when he beat Andreas Seppi in the fourth round Sunday night.“I feel like I’ve been here before, so it’s not like I’m jumping up and down for joy,” Williams said. She added: “Yes. I’ve done this. This is what I’m always going into each tournament thinking I want to do, even when I fall short.”Intriguingly, Keys, the one who truly never has done this before, is also projecting a certain cool and has repeatedly mentioned that this is her “last tournament as a teenager” as if to emphasize that she wants to bid that phase goodbye with something big.“I think it’s a huge opportunity for me,” Keys said. “I haven’t been in this situation before. I’m going to make the most of it, but at the same time, no matter what, I’m not really going to be satisfied with any win. I want to be at the end of the tournament holding the trophy up. That’s my goal in the long run.”AdvertisementIt is a reasonable goal in light of her gifts and the work she has put into developing them. And it certainly does seem symbolic and a little bittersweet that the woman blocking her path in Melbourne is the same woman who opened her eyes to the sport.A version of this article appears in print on January 27, 2015, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: On a Big Stage, Hoping to Beat Her Inspiration.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »