AdvertisementSupported byBy Benjamin HoffmanPHOENIX — One chooses not to speak with the news media, while the other was often accused of talking too much. But Marshawn Lynch, the embattled Seattle Seahawks running back, and Jim McMahon, the quarterback of the 1985 Chicago Bears, have a lot in common in terms of drawing the N.F.L.’s ire in the time leading up to a Super Bowl.Lynch, like McMahon, also enjoys the strong support of his coaches and teammates despite the fire each of them drew from the N.F.L. Lynch’s latest act of revolt and headline making has been to celebrate touchdowns by grabbing his groin.The N.F.L. fined Lynch $20,000 and told the Seahawks that if he grabbed his groin during the Super Bowl, they would be penalized 15 yards.Coach Pete Carroll, while acknowledging that the team would discuss the potential on-field consequences with Lynch, showed complete support for his star running back.“We love him,” Carroll said. “We always celebrate the uniqueness of our players in a way that allows them to play at their best.”Lynch’s silent ways have also run afoul of the N.F.L.’s image makers. He does not relish talking to the news media and has incurred $100,000 in fines this season for not complying with the league’s media policy.Last year, Lynch avoided his mandated media availability before the Super Bowl. On media day, rather than taking his place with the team’s other stars, he was in one of the small pens for lesser players and spent most of the time standing behind a teammate. The next day he had his teammate Michael Robinson field questions for him while doing his best impersonation of Lynch.Lynch was not one of the players chosen for his team’s media sessions Sunday or Monday, so no one knows what to expect from him this week.Lynch’s teammates said the star’s silence was the news media’s loss.“You are all missing out on a great guy,” Kam Chancellor, the team’s strong safety said. “A great personality, a great football player.”Bobby Wagner, a linebacker, agreed.“He’s a great guy,” Wagner said of Lynch. “All the time.”McMahon provided similar fodder for discussion in the weeks before the Bears’ 46-10 Super Bowl rout of the New England Patriots in January 1986.He drew a fine from Pete Rozelle, the N.F.L.’s commissioner at the time, for wearing an Adidas headband in a game. McMahon retaliated by playing the N.F.C. championship game with a white headband that had “Rozelle” scrawled across it.“Why do they worry about this chicken stuff?” McMahon said after the game. “They’re trying to take all the fun out of the game.”Afterward, McMahon got a show of support from his coach.“He’s amazing,” Bears Coach Mike Ditka said. “I didn’t know what it said, and then I read it.”Rozelle took the slight well, joking that he should have had a shoe line to promote with the unexpected publicity, but he also cautioned against going too far with jokes.“Jim has turned into a fascinating folk hero,” Rozelle said. “He’s an individualist who has captured the imagination of the country. But I do feel that he can cross that line.”McMahon crossed the line the next week after an acupuncturist treated his injured buttocks. At the Wednesday practice before the Super Bowl, he wore a headband that said “Acupuncture,” and when a news helicopter circled overhead, he pulled down his shorts, mooning the cameras.“I just wanted to show them where it hurt,” McMahon said.It is unlikely Lynch will put on a similar show. He has accepted fines in the past rather than fulfilling his media obligations, but the fact that on-field penalties are being discussed could alter the dynamic. Lynch has been fined at least $130,000 this season for his inappropriate gestures and his lack of willingness to work with the news media, a small percentage of his $6 million salary. But he was notably upset when one of his teammates was fined for joining him in a celebration.Randy Moss, the retired wide receiver, made a case for fines not being an effective punishment after pretending to moon the crowd at Green Bay’s Lambeau Field after a touchdown in a 2005 playoff win. The N.F.L. fined Moss $10,000.“Ain’t nothing but 10 grand,” Moss said of the fine. “What’s 10 grand, to me?”He claimed a rich person like him did not write checks and, when asked how he would pay the N.F.L., he uttered the catchphrase now associated with him: “Straight cash, homey.”Lynch is likely to draw fines this week if he avoids the news media. But if he gets into the end zone Sunday, the league will find out if a threat of consequences that affect his teammates is enough to tone down his act. Or, like McMahon, he could simply choose to step things up.Advertisement