By JAMES GLANZJAN. 27, 2015
A law firm hired by the N.F.L. to investigate footballs used by the New England Patriots has formally asked the Columbia University physics department for help in understanding how weather and temperature could affect the pressure in footballs, according to a summary of the communication obtained by The New York Times.Lorin L. Reisner, a partner in the litigation department of the law firm Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton and Garrison, called the physics department on Monday, according to notes taken by an administrative manager.“He would like to consult with a physicist on matters relating to gas physics,” the notes said.Some of the footballs used by the Patriots in the A.F.C. championship game against the Indianapolis Colts were discovered to be inflated well below league specifications. Since then, debate has raged among physicists and scientific laypeople about whether the footballs were tampered with, or whether there could be a more benign explanation, perhaps based on how the balls were handled or the chance that they were moved from warm to cooler areas before the game.In a vague and scientifically confounding news conference on Saturday, Bill Belichick, the Patriots’ coach, appeared to suggest that some mysterious element of preparing the balls for use in the game could provide an innocent explanation for the deflation based on simple physics. Both Belichick and Tom Brady, the team’s quarterback, have strongly denied any involvement in tampering with the footballs.AdvertisementJeff Pash, the league’s top lawyer, and Ted Wells, co-chairman of the litigation department at Paul, Weiss, are leading the investigation.AdvertisementThe league has hired Renaissance Associates, an investigative firm that the N.F.L. said had “sophisticated forensic expertise,” to help review electronic and video information.The communication by Reisner appears to show that the N.F.L. is taking seriously the question of whether physics could explain the deflation. Reisner’s call to the Columbia physics department first became known when Brian Metzger, a physicist at Columbia, mentioned it in a Facebook post.Who’s going to win? What color will Katy Perry’s hair be? What about the commercials? Make your Super Bowl picks and predictions and share your ballot with your friends.In a bit of physics humor, Metzger then asked in the post whether Brian Greene of Columbia — one of the world’s best-known cosmologists — would “step up to the task.”Reisner did not immediately respond late Tuesday night to email and voice mail messages requesting comment on his query to the physics department.William Zajc, another Columbia physicist who was aware of the request by Reisner, said that he was tempted to field the questions because of all the flawed physics discussions he had seen in news media reports.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I’m amused,” Zajc said of the query. But in the end, he said, “I didn’t do it.”Zajc said he believed there was little chance that atmospheric effects alone could account for the discrepancies in the football pressure.“I think it’s more likely than not that they were manipulated,” Zajc said.The records obtained by The Times show that Reisner followed his phone call with an email to the physics department.“Just to confirm our call, we represent the N.F.L. in connection with the investigation into the footballs used during the A.F.C. championship game and would like to discuss engaging a professor of physics to consult on matters relating to gas physics and environmental impacts on inflated footballs,” Reisner said. “Please let me know whether there is a Columbia professor who may be interested in and appropriate for this assignment.”Robert Kirshner, a cosmologist at the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics in Cambridge, Mass., said that after the news conference on Saturday, Belichick would not receive invitations to give physics seminars anytime soon.Advertisement“I think Belichick is better at keeping pressure on the passer than passing a physics test,” Kirshner said.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.