By CHRISTOPHER CLAREYJAN. 27, 2015
MELBOURNE, Australia — In a match that felt like a changing of the guard, Madison Keys, an unseeded teenager from the United States, defeated 34-year-old Venus Williams on Wednesday to reach the semifinals of the Australian Open.Keys, playing in her first Grand Slam quarterfinal, had to fight against her nerves and a left leg injury that surfaced in the second set. But she found the strength and the big shots she required to finish off her 6-3, 4-6, 6-4 victory.“I’m very happy I’m into the semifinals, but the moment is definitely sweeter being able to play Venus,” Keys said. “You just have to enjoy the moment, and I did enjoy it, and I get to enjoy another moment next round.”Williams said: “I definitely didn’t serve as consistently as I wanted to, and I felt just not as aggressive off the ground as I would have liked. I think in this kind of match you have to be aggressive but I give a lot of credit to her. She was swinging freely and most of them went in for her so it’s great for her.”AdvertisementKeys, 19, will face another Williams sister, top-seeded Serena, in the semifinals. Serena Williams, a five-time Australian Open champion, advanced impressively, winning Wednesday’s second quarterfinal, 6-2, 6-2, over Dominika Cibulkova.AdvertisementCibulkova, a surprise finalist last year who was seeded 11th this year, has lost all five of her matches against Williams and was unable to hold serve consistently. Williams, meanwhile, finished with 15 aces and saved the only two break points she faced on her own serve.Keys was drawn to tennis at age 4 when she watched Venus Williams playing at Wimbledon, and like all players of her generation, she has grown up watching the Williamses win major titles and change the women’s game.Keys’s big-serving, first-strike style is certainly in the same mold. She has what tennis aficionados like to call easy power, and though at 5 feet 10 she is not particularly tall in this era (and three inches shorter than Venus Williams), she can produce winners from just about anywhere on the court.“She’s not the tallest, but she is so strong,” said Mary Joe Fernandez, the former French Open finalist who is now the United States Fed Cup captain. “She has strong legs and a strong core and also has great timing.”Keys and Williams had played once before, with Williams winning, 6-4, 6-4, in 2013 on clay in the quarterfinals in Charleston. but this was a very different surface and setting.This was the first Grand Slam quarterfinal for Keys and the first for Williams since Wimbledon in 2010, and despite moments of excellence, the quality of the exchanges was generally low.Williams struggled for much of the match to control her forehand. Keys made errors in bunches, too, and was affected by the injury, which clearly began to bother her midway through the second set.AdvertisementShe had looked strong for much of the first: dictating play and fighting off trouble with her big serve and capitalizing on openings. But when serving at 1-1 in the second set, she started and ended the game with double faults to give Williams her first break of the match.Serving at 1-3, Keys made a backhand error on the fourth point of the game and winced, squatted and reached for the inside of her upper left leg. She then missed two more backhands to lose her serve again.She called for the trainer on the changeover and was examined while sitting, standing and lying on the court before leaving the court for further treatment. When she returned five minutes later, she had her left thigh tightly wrapped and proceeded to reel off three straight games, looking much less hindered in her movement.But serving at 4-4, with the momentum swinging her way, Keys faltered again on the backhand wing, making two more errors off that side from deuce to give the edge back to Williams, who then served out the set with an ace.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.At Wimbledon last year, Keys was riding a seven-match winning streak but had to retire from her third-round match against Yaroslava Shvedova with a left adductor injury. That match had been halted because of darkness, and Keys warmed up the next day before deciding to withdraw.But she was able to push on in the sunshine in this Grand Slam tournament on Wednesday even if not at full power, receiving two more visits from the trainer on changeovers in the second set.Keys confirmed after the match that the leg injury was in the same area as the one from Wimbledon.“It was definitely one of those thing where it wasn’t nearly as bad as Wimbledon, but it was the nightmare of ‘I don’t want this to happen again,'” she said. “So it was a little overwhelming, but luckily the pain meds kicked in a little bit, and the tape helped.”Still, Keys knows she will need to be near her best in order to have any reasonable chance of beating the other Williams sister, the one with 18 Grand Slam singles titles and an enduring grip on the No. 1 ranking. Beating Serena Williams is a daunting enough prospect without a leg injury. Good treatment is essential.“I know; that’s where I’m heading next,” Keys said Wednesday.A version of this article appears in print on January 28, 2015, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: A Resilient Keys Ousts Williams.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.