AdvertisementSupported byBy Viv BernsteinCHARLOTTE, N.C. — Kurt Busch tried to be the picture of corporate correctness on Tuesday in his black button-down shirt with company logos prominently displayed.As of now, Busch, the 2004 Nascar Cup champion, still drives the No. 41 Chevrolet for Stewart-Haas Racing. He is still a member in good standing in Nascar.But Busch, sponsors, team and Nascar officials and fans are all awaiting word from the Delaware district attorney’s office regarding whether he will be charged with domestic assault after an investigation into a confrontation with his former girlfriend Patricia Driscoll at Dover International Speedway last September.They are also awaiting a ruling from Family Court in Kent County, Del., on whether a protection order will be issued requiring Busch to stay away from Driscoll. Both of those decisions could come any day.How much is that weighing on Busch and Stewart-Haas as they prepare for the Daytona 500 on Feb. 22? Team officials insist they are not making any contingency plans to find a replacement driver if Busch is charged and faces potential discipline by Nascar. As for Busch, he will not say. Peppered with questions on Tuesday about how he feels and what might happen, he tried to make it business as usual.“We’re all waiting on the investigation to find a conclusion,” Busch repeated in some form almost every time he was asked, always leading the conversation back to racing.Nascar is waiting, too. Despite a call in November from United States Representative Jackie Speier of California to suspend Busch pending results of the investigation, Nascar has chosen to allow him to continue racing without penalty.“The only thing we want to do is, and this is important, we’ve got to let the facts come in,” Nascar’s chairman, Brian France, said Monday. “There would be no reason for me or Nascar or anybody else to get ahead of those facts given that they may change. Let’s let the facts come in, and if there’s something for us to react to, you can appreciate that we will be very careful and very aware of what the circumstances are.”Nascar’s approach contradicts the advice that Robert S. Mueller III’s investigatory report offered to the N.F.L. after the Ray Rice domestic violence case. Mueller, who investigated the N.F.L.’s handling of the case, wrote that the league should have been better prepared to undertake its own investigation.Nascar instead has monitored the hearings and will make a decision on Busch after “a final determination by the court system,” said Steve O’Donnell, an executive vice president of Nascar.But no matter what Nascar does, it will not be able to distance itself completely from the headlines that were generated at the Family Court protection order hearing two weeks ago when Busch testified that he believed Driscoll, president of the Armed Forces Foundation in Washington, was a trained assassin.“Mr. Busch’s statements in court serve to confirm my belief that he needs professional counseling to deal with his alcoholism and issues of depression,” Driscoll responded.That was one of the few issues Busch addressed on Tuesday.“Obviously, it would be difficult to have all those symptoms and also race at the top levels and finish sixth at the Indy 500 and things like that,” Busch said.He was backed by his team owner, Gene Haas.“Every time I’ve been with Kurt Busch at dinner I’ve never seen him drink,” said Haas, who has chosen not to take any action against Busch. “On race weekends, when I’m having a beer, he’s having water. I never saw that personally so. I think he’s a stable person and he’s a fun person to be around. Those characterizations I don’t believe are true.”Busch has been among the top competitors in the sport for more than a decade. Last May, he generated publicity by racing both the Indianapolis 500 and the Coca-Cola 600 Nascar race on the same day. But he has also made a career of generating negative headlines, including an arrest outside Phoenix International Raceway for reckless driving in 2005 and a confrontation with a broadcaster that led to the end of his association with Penske Racing in 2011. He also threatened a reporter in 2012 and was suspended by Nascar.“I’m not a believer in any headline is a good headline,” the three-time champion Darrell Waltrip said of the latest Busch saga. “I think if it’s negative, it’s negative. I think if it’s negative it pulls the sport down and it gives it a bad rap, it gives it a bad image. “I don’t see where it helps us any to be talking about something negative.”Advertisement