
Sports of The Times By                     
 JULIET MACUR
 
JAN. 27, 2015
PHOENIX — Marshawn Lynch is so polite that he told the dozens of reporters waiting for him on Tuesday at the Super Bowl’s media day that he was going to snub them before he actually went ahead and did it.“I’m just here so I don’t get fined,” he said from behind a pair of dark sunglasses. “So y’all can sit here and ask me all the questions y’all want to, I’m going to answer with the same answer. So y’all can shoot, if y’all please.”See how nice? The man said, “Please.”Then Lynch, the Seattle Seahawks’ star running back who has already been fined $100,000 this season for refusing to speak to reporters, responded to question after question by saying, “I’m here so I won’t get fined.” Throwing the reporters a morsel, he changed it up by saying, “I’m just here so I won’t get fined.”He said the same thing after every question, even to queries posed to him by Deion Sanders, even after a question that came from a young kid.AdvertisementLynch did salute a couple of times. And he did smile, letting his golden grill gleam in the harsh lights of the television cameras. He flashed that grin when the gymnast Shawn Johnson — the tiny and eternally adorable gold medalist from the 2008 Olympics — threw him a bag of Skittles as part of her gig with “Inside Edition.” Lynch blew her a kiss and told her, “You’re sexy, too.” She ran off, blushing.Seahawks quarterback Russell Wilson said that running back Marshawn Lynch should not be fined for refusing to answer questions at Super Bowl media day on Tuesday.(I cringed, only because I first wrote about Johnson when she was 15 — and she is 23 now, but still looks 15.)AdvertisementAfter less than five minutes of an hourlong media session, Lynch looked at his smartphone and said, “Time!” and walked off. He has said he doesn’t like to talk to reporters because it’s mandatory, and he doesn’t want to be forced into anything, and that’s completely sensible. My 3-year-old has been known to avoid things my husband and I make her do, too.But how about this for “Time!” Isn’t it time that we give Marshawn Lynch (and anyone else) a pass and do away with the rule that says N.F.L. players must make themselves available to reporters at the Super Bowl? Five minutes of his shtick this week was enough, thanks.How about for the rest of the week, the league gives Lynch’s mandatory media time to players who actually say something? To people who actually want to say something?Give Lynch’s time to Seahawks linebacker Bobby Wagner, who admitted on Tuesday that, yes, he does love puppies. (He has one named Roxy.) Or to Seahawks quarterback Russell Wilson, who said he sings gospel music to himself during games.Who’s going to win? What color will Katy Perry’s hair be? What about the commercials? Make your Super Bowl picks and predictions and share your ballot with your friends.Or hand the time to the Patriots tight end Rob Gronkowski, who isn’t known for providing anything insightful but was willing to go along with the fun, laughing and grinning for the whole time he had to talk. “From zero to 100, what’s your favorite number?” (Eighty-seven, his jersey number.) “It’s the year of the booty. Who has your favorite one?” (J.Lo.)He answered everything, yet still gave nothing away. When someone asked him about the Patriots’ use of underinflated footballs in the A.F.C. championship game, Gronkowski said: “I don’t have to answer your question. I can always deflect it. That’s how we’re trained.”AdvertisementAnother big smile.Frankly, if all Lynch’s media time was gifted to Seahawks defensive end Michael Bennett, we’d all be better off.Bennett said he didn’t think it was “constitutional” to force players to speak to reporters, but that he does it anyway because he is a “businessman” and talking to reporters is part of the job. Besides, he said, why not?Wearing a straw cowboy hat — which cost $800, Bennett proudly pointed out, he was asked what motivates him to play hard.
CreditDoug Mills/The New York Times        “I have three daughters,” he said matter-of-factly. “That’s three weddings!”Asked about his beard, he said he loves it: “Moses had one. Genghis Khan had one. Just good guys, man. Jesus had one, too.” (It was perhaps the first time Genghis Khan was matched with the other two.)He answered another question by saying, “Behind Denzel Washington, I think I’m the second-best looking” and also had some pretty funny Deflategate jokes that cannot be repeated here.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Bill Belichick has to talk to reporters because he is the voice of his team, but instead of dragging Lynch to the lectern every year, how about fining Belichick for every 15 minutes he answers questions in a monotone? Or offering him a bonus when he smiles, as he did Tuesday when he was asked what he would say to the “people of China.”“Go Patriots,” he responded. Then he cracked a smile, which was nearly as awkward as Lynch calling Shawn Johnson sexy.But whatever players said on Tuesday, it was clear that Marshawn Lynch did not want to join the fun. It’s too bad. He has a good story to tell, and he could have shared it with reporters from all over the world, some of whom might not have heard it. How he was raised by a single mom and how they sometimes wondered what they would eat that night, or how Lynch had only one pair of jeans that he’d sometimes iron the morning before school because they were still wet from being laundered the night before.Instead, reporters heard, “I’m just here so I don’t get fined.”Nearing the end of his five minutes, a microphone atop the table in front of him fell to the ground, and he rose from his chair to retrieve it. Or maybe he was just running out the clock.He doesn’t want to talk. He just wants to run. So why does the N.F.L. insist on this charade?Lynch is, by most accounts, a nice guy — all his teammates say he’s great — but in a perfect world, we’d never have to hear a peep from him again.Email: juliet@nytimes.com A version of this article appears in print on January 28, 2015, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: One Question for the N.F.L.: Why Insist on a Media Day Charade?.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »