

 Karen Crouse
 

ON GOLF
JAN. 27, 2015
SCOTTSDALE, Ariz. — Toward the end of the state-of-his-game address, Tiger Woods delivered a line that should be appropriated posthaste by the PGA Tour as its catchphrase. Forget “These Guys Are Good.” Given the headlines illuminating the sport this month, the better slogan would be “It Is What It Is.”Woods uttered those words on Tuesday at the Phoenix Open in response to questioning about a tooth he said he lost eight days earlier after watching his girlfriend, Lindsey Vonn, win a World Cup event in Italy.The gap in Woods’s mouth drew more coverage than any gap wedge he has hit. Photos of his jack-o-lantern mouth made the rounds online, and conspiracy theorists materialized out of the thin mountain air to question his explanation that he had lost it in a collision with a journalist’s video camera.Two days before Woods, a 14-time winner of major championships, makes his first official PGA Tour start since last August, the quality of his smile attracted more scrutiny than the state of his game. Woods smiled to reveal a full set of teeth.AdvertisementHe stood by his story and even found a way to spin it for a few laughs. He described trying to blend in at the awards staging area by wearing dark sunglasses and a black-and-white skull bandana over his mouth. “I had my mask on, so no one knew who I was,” Woods said, adding mirthfully, “because there is not a lot of brown dudes at ski races, O.K.?”AdvertisementHe also told the assembled media contingent, “Every sport you get teeth knocked out, and unfortunately I wasn’t actually competing.”Asked what he made of the attention paid to his broken smile, Woods said: “It’s a new world. We need to talk about something. Have to fill up space.”Nongolfing news has rushed in to fill the vacuum created by PGA Tour fields missing most of the world’s top players, who are on hiatus or participating in events abroad. There is the curious case of Dustin Johnson, who decided to leave the tour with his game in full bloom and the calendar at high noon. He missed the last major tournament of the year, the lucrative FedEx Cup playoffs and the Ryder Cup for a leave that the tour has described as voluntary. Johnson’s return to competition is set for next week, after six months away, which happens to be the exact period covering a drug-related suspension.The abrupt disappearing act of Johnson has never been adequately explained, and the absence of transparency gave the tour a black eye. One of its members, Robert Allenby, ended up with worse than that after he missed the cut at the Sony Open in Hawaii, the first full-field event of 2015.He stopped at a wine bar for dinner. What happened next is up to Honolulu detectives to piece together. Allenby has maintained that he was kidnapped, robbed, beaten and dumped from the trunk of a car, causing severe facial swelling and a laceration that required stitches. In recent days an alternative story has emerged that places him at a strip club that night and alleges that he fell and hit his head on a rock, and was not shoved out of a car.A little over an hour after Woods finished his news conference, Allenby stepped to the same microphone, appearing the picture of health save for a bloody scab on the bridge of his nose. With nine television cameras rolling, he gave a measured opening statement.“There has definitely been a lot of confusion,” Allenby said, “but I think the No. 1 thing that you should all remember is that my story stays exactly the same as the way I told it.” He added, “I was a victim, and all of a sudden you’re putting all the blame on me.”AdvertisementAllenby, an Australian with four PGA Tour victories and 18 wins worldwide, said he sustained a concussion, endured debilitating headaches until two days ago and has “no memory in my brain” of a period that covers roughly two hours, the time during which his alleged kidnapping and assault took place.“I have been going backwards and forwards, and there is just nothing,” Allenby said. “I can’t tell you how frustrating that is, because we all want to know the truth. We all want to get to the bottom of it.”There was one lighthearted moment in Allenby’s 15-question news conference, the first he has held since that night in Hawaii. It occurred when he fielded the first of two golf-related inquiries. How did he feel going into his first start since the alleged assault?“I’m hitting the ball well,” Allenby said. He laughed, as if relieved that the out-of-bounds conversation had somehow found its way back inside the ropes.Tom Weiskopf, a 16-time tour champion who won the 1973 British Open, also spoke Tuesday. He was one of the original architects of the tournament course, TPC Scottsdale, and was involved in a recent redesign to make its layout a sterner test for the world’s best golfers. In 2001, the last year Woods played in the event, the winner, Mark Calcavecchia, finished at 28 under par.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In the 1970s, Weiskopf was better known for roasting golf courses than restoring them. His bad behavior during competitive rounds, which included walking off the course midround on occasion, earned him the nickname Terrible Tom.How does the golfer once lambasted for sullying the tour’s image feel about the headline-grabbing actions of today’s stars?“I was no saint,” Weiskopf said with a laugh. “You deserve what you deserve, O.K.? We’re in a sensational world today where information is passed so quickly, and it’s unfortunate that you have controversy.”Weiskopf chose to look at the bright side of the spotlight. Since Woods joined the tour in 1996, golf’s purses have been on a rocketlike trajectory, carrying the game’s popularity to another stratosphere.“That’s great, that that’s where this game has finally gotten to,” Weiskopf said.And if the cameras sometimes cast an unforgiving light on the tour and its members, well, Weiskopf has a simple response to all those who find themselves in the public’s cross hairs. “Deal with it,” he said.A version of this article appears in print on January 28, 2015, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: On Tour, the Stories Keep Getting Weirder.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »