AdvertisementSupported byBy Pat PickensLast April, goalie Martin Brodeur won his final game in a Devils jersey, and he saluted the Prudential Center crowd after it serenaded him with a “Mar-ty!” chant.But he was not ready then to say goodbye to hockey. “In the back of my head,” he said recently, he knew “this is not the last time I was going to be on the ice.” The last time has now come and gone. Brodeur, who holds the N.H.L. record for career victories by a goalie and won three Stanley Cups with the Devils, will announce his retirement at a news conference Thursday in St. Louis.Brodeur, 42, spent his first 20 full seasons in the N.H.L. with the Devils, compiling 688 victories. A free agent since the end of last season, he signed with the St. Louis Blues in December after their starting goalie Brian Elliott was injured.The Blues said in a news release Tuesday that Brodeur would stay with the organization in a management role.Brodeur went 3-3, including his record 125th shutout on Dec. 29, with a 2.87 goals-against average and .899 save percentage in seven appearances with St. Louis, and has been on a leave of absence since Jan. 15. In addition to wins and shutouts, Brodeur has also played the most games and minutes of any goaltender in N.H.L. history.“What more can you say about Marty than what his statistics say and the success he’s had?” asked Lou Lamoriello, the Devils’ president, general manager and interim coach. “Not only the wins, but winning championships and conferences. He’s been a pillar of excellence and will go out as one of the best to ever play the game.”Lamoriello said he had “been in contact throughout the year” with Brodeur, and he intended to have Brodeur back in New Jersey next season in a key administrative role.“He’s going to stay in St. Louis with the team the rest of the year, they’re going to announce,” Lamoriello said. “It’s our intention to have him back next year. They gave him an opportunity to play, and he got emotionally involved. They’ve asked him to stay, travel with the team and interact with the players, and I respect that.”The Devils selected Brodeur, a Montreal native, in the first round of the 1990 draft. He became their starting goalie in 1993 and was soon the face of the franchise. In 1995, he helped led the Devils to the first of five Stanley Cup finals appearances during his tenure, which included championships that year and in 2000 and 2003. Brodeur, whose son Anthony is a goalie prospect in the Devils’ organization, won the Vezina Trophy as the league’s top goaltender four times.Lamoriello found it difficult to put into words how valuable Brodeur was to the Devils’ growth.“First of all, he’s a tremendous ambassador of the game,” Lamoriello said. “Not only are the statistics there, but the team sport that he’s in and the awards he has won, you have to look at how significant he was. Not to look at how significant he was would be underestimating and underappreciating what he’s done. I really can’t explain. He’s had such a high value for us.”Brodeur’s recent seasons with the team were less decorated, despite a surprising berth in the finals in 2012. His retirement announcement will come about a year after he was pulled during a nationally televised game against the Rangers at Yankee Stadium. Brodeur appeared in only 11 games after that, as the Devils turned to Cory Schneider, whom they acquired in 2013 to be his successor.The Devils parted ways with Brodeur after last season, but Lamoriello said he wished Brodeur’s career with the team had ended differently.“I don’t want to use the word disappointing,” Lamoriello said. “There was time for a change to be made. We had made a significant trade and investment, and no one understands that better than Marty Brodeur. I certainly would’ve liked to see him play his last game as a Devil, but these days, that’s the exception, not the norm.”Advertisement