By BILL PENNINGTONOCT. 10, 2015
EAST RUTHERFORD, N.J. —  Steve Spagnuolo, the Giants’ defensive coordinator, greeted reporters Thursday with a wide smile.Spagnuolo ought to be happy. His defense, which was expected to be a liability, is the top-ranked unit against the run in the N.F.L., yielding 69.8 yards per game.Then again, his squad is last in the league in pass defense, giving up 316.2 yards per game.“I didn’t know that,” a still smiling Spagnuolo said when told about his team’s first-place/32nd-place dichotomy. “I didn’t know it was that extreme. I had no idea.”All around the Giants’ locker room, as players prepared to host the San Francisco 49ers on Sunday night, there was some measure of head-scratching going on. How could the Giants’ defense statistically be both so good and so bad? Especially since the Giants defense, over all, has been mostly proficient. The team is 11th in the league in points yielded per game. (The run and pass defense rankings are based on yards given up.)AdvertisementAccording to the Elias Sports Bureau, since 2002, when the N.F.L. expanded to 32 teams, only three teams have finished first in run defense and last in pass defense in the same season: the 2006 and 2007 Minnesota Vikings and the 2012 Tampa Bay Buccaneers. None of those teams had a winning record.AdvertisementGiants cornerback Prince Amukamara was particularly puzzled by the poor pass defense numbers and had discussed them with the other starting cornerback, Dominique Rodgers-Cromartie.“We were thinking, like, there’s no receiver that gave us trouble other than Julio,” Amukamara said, referring to Atlanta’s Julio Jones, who caught 13 passes against the Giants last month.Middle linebacker Jon Beason, the veteran, spiritual leader of the defense, had a theory. The Giants are a classic “bend but don’t break” defense so far.“We’ve faced a couple of teams that had really good running attacks, and we focused on taking that away from them,” Beason said. “You do that and then you make them one-dimensional. And that’s a goal of any good defense. It’s kind of the plan — give up yards, not points.”Giants Coach Tom Coughlin agreed.“If we can stop the run against these really good run teams, you force them to do things that they don’t normally rely on, and that can be an advantage,” Coughlin said.Other Giants were looking at the situation philosophically.“Not having a single defensive identity is kind of our identity,” defensive tackle Cullen Jenkins said. “We don’t have big-name guys on defense. We don’t have big-contract guys. We’re under the radar. What we have is 11 guys who get it done when we really have to get it done.”Jenkins mentioned the Giants’ fourth-quarter goal-line stand in the victory over the Buffalo Bills on Oct. 4.Advertisement“That doesn’t show up statistically, but it was six different guys making tackles on four different plays during that stand,” Jenkins said. “We don’t have a star.”Indeed, expectations were never high for the Giants’ defense this season. The prospects were even gloomier after the team’s best defender, Jason Pierre-Paul, was sidelined in a Fourth of July fireworks accident.Then four safeties were lost for the season because of preseason injuries. The team’s front office did not add a big-name defensive free agent in the off-season. Beason missed the first two games with a knee injury.But a play-calling gaffe, not the defense, cost the Giants a season-opening victory in Dallas. A fourth-quarter Eli Manning fumble near the Falcons’ goal line opened the door for another defeat in the team’s second game, although the Giants defense did give up two late touchdown drives.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Since then, in successive victories, the Giants have given up 21 points and 10 points. For the season, they have yielded 20.5 points per game, almost a top-10 ranking.Still, can the 2-2 Giants build a winning season — they are in a three-way tie atop the N.F.C. East — with a formula that leads to a first-place ranking against the run but a last-place finish against the pass?“Look, nobody wants to be 32nd in anything,” Spagnuolo said. “But we play the game to win it, not to improve our stats. There were defensive calls made late in some games where all we’re trying to do is protect the goal line because we had a lead. So the other teams’ stats pile up.“We have to get better in pass defense, and if we keep stopping the run and improving our pass rush, we should. But if the result on the scoreboard stays where it’s been the last couple of weeks, I’m O.K. with that.”AdvertisementThe rookie safety Landon Collins was convinced that the disparity in the defensive numbers was entirely related to how the Giants played in the fourth quarter. The Giants have led every game entering the fourth quarter.“We’ve held teams down pretty well in the first half and even most of the second half,” Collins said. “We haven’t finished off games as well. That’s where we’re letting ourselves down.”As it happens, there may be some precedent for this season’s team. It could even be something to rally around.The 2015 Giants are on pace to break a four-year-old team record for passing yards allowed per game. In 2011, the Giants’ pass defense ranked 29th, with opponents averaging 255.1 yards per game.The Giants also won the Super Bowl that season.A version of this article appears in print on October 11, 2015, on Page SP11 of the New York edition with the headline: One Defense Leads the League. The Other Trails It. Both Are the Giants’. .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.