By BEN ROTHENBERGJAN. 27, 2015
MELBOURNE, Australia — After some unflinching words from her family, Maria Sharapova has been relentless on her opponents.Sharapova, seeded second at the Australian Open, advanced to the semifinals here for the seventh time when she routed seventh-seeded Eugenie Bouchard, 6-3, 6-2 in their quarterfinal match Tuesday afternoon.Sharapova has been dominant in her last three matches after needing to save two match points against 150th-ranked qualifier Alexandra Panova in the second round. Sharapova said she had been motivated in part by a critical phone call from her father and former coach Yuri Sharapov, who offered harsh critiques after the second-round scare.“I don’t want to face that phone call with my father too many times during a tournament,” Sharapova said Tuesday, laughing. “I better get my stuff together. So, yeah, it was important to change some things around and just to come out with a little bit of a different perspective and, yeah, play a bit better. I’m happy I was able to do that.”AdvertisementSharapova, always blunt herself, said she appreciated the tough love.“He’s absolutely right,” she said of her father. “Deep down inside, you know, sometimes it’s encouraging to hear that, because no one will tell you that. I like to hear that. I like coming off the court and hearing how it is.”AdvertisementBouchard, who played a tough three-set match against Sharapova at the French Open semifinals last spring, was unable to muster much fight this time, relying on her ultra-aggressive tactics to prevail instead of adapting to Sharapova’s power.“If I don’t have enough time, I probably go for riskier shots, and that’s why I would miss a few more,” said Bouchard, who hit 30 unforced errors. “That’s why I think I made a few too many unforced errors today. Just feeling under pressure, feeling I had to go for something. That’s what she does well: She puts pressure on her opponents.”Sharapova wrote “Fly high and sing your own song” on a camera lens before she left the court, a possible reference to her silencing of the Genie Army, the boisterous fan club that followed Bouchard throughout the tournament and chanted constantly during stoppages in play.“I actually prefer writing my own songs and singing them,” Sharapova said when asked about the message. “I think I did a pretty good job of that today.”In the other women’s quarterfinal earlier Tuesday, third-seeded Simona Halep also had trouble adapting to her opponent’s play and sprayed an uncharacteristic 31 unforced errors in a 6-4, 6-0 loss to 10th-seeded Ekaterina Makarova.Analyzing the match highlights afterward on ESPN, the 18-time major champion Chris Evert was critical of Halep’s effort.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Simona Halep was very disappointing, I just didn’t see the fight in her at all,” Evert said. “She just played sort of like she knew she was going to lose, and she sort of wanted to get off the court. I’m very disappointed in her, but I think she’s going to go back and rethink her game.”Halep, whose appearance in the quarterfinals here last year put her into the top 10 for the first time, said she felt used to the occasion but still not at ease.Advertisement“Not really pressure — I was a little bit stressed; I don’t know why,” she said. “I had experience from last year to play quarterfinals, so it doesn’t mean that I felt pressure. Just, I didn’t feel the game, the ball. Was a very bad day for me.”Makarova, who reached her first major semifinal at the United States Open last September, will play Sharapova on Thursday afternoon. Makarova has lost all five of her matches against Sharapova, including previous meetings in Melbourne in 2012 and 2013. It will be the first all-Russian semifinal at a Grand Slam event since Dinara Safina beat Vera Zvonareva here in 2009.Russian tennis cannot be considered at its peak, not when compared with stellar results in the past, as when Russian women won three Grand Slam singles titles in 2004 or swept the medals at the 2008 Beijing Olympics. Makarova, who grew up watching her favorite players at the Kremlin Cup in Moscow, said she still drew inspiration from that golden generation, including her favorite, Anastasia Myskina.“Now it’s a little bit less of us,” she said. “I don’t know. I really wanted to be one of them when I was watching them and learning some things from them. I’m so happy that at these tournaments, I’m quite like they are.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.