OCT. 10, 2015
What A.L.S. Sufferers Really Need: Financing for ResearchTo the Sports Editor:Re “A Trip to Fenway as Summer Wanes,” Oct. 4: Dan Barry’s article about his friend Bill Malinowski revealed the insidious nature of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, the way in which it saps the life of those it strikes, one day at a time, until the patient becomes a protoplasmic mass with a mind that may still function, but a body that can’t move, a throat that won’t swallow and lungs that will not breathe. What those of us who suffer with A.L.S. need is the power of a Viagra/Cialis-type drug that will give us back our lives. Not to resurrect our sexual appetites, but to resurrect our humanity.As Gretchen Reynolds noted in September 2014, the greatest obstacle to advancing A.L.S. research for that power pill is the absence of financing. The 2014 Ice Bucket Challenge raised $115 million that contributed significantly in less than a year to the discovery that a protein, TDP-43, when functioning properly, may provide the key to reversing the destructive path of A.L.S.PHIL AVILLO, York, Pa.Risks Are No FantasyTo the Sports Editor:Re “Scandal Erupts in Unregulated World of Fantasy Sports,” Oct. 6: Betting on unregulated gambling with those not subject to strict public scrutiny and regulation is always a mistake and a greater risk than gambling itself. That something like fantasy sports wagering is not unlawful does not make it the equivalent of something legal and closely regulated, such as casinos in the United States.Americans lose $70 billion a year in legal commercial and Indian casinos in 44 states. They wager at least $75 billion on state lotteries and billions more on horse racing, pull tabs and the like.AdvertisementThe major sports leagues, especially the N.F.L., are outright hypocrites — fiercely opposing legalization of betting on their actual games while working hand in hand with unregulated businesses to enable so-called fantasy betting on them. It is no fantasy, it is sports betting — and it is meant to be illegal.AdvertisementAll of it should be shut down by federal law until Congress decides how to sort it out.CARL ZEITZ, Union City, N.J.The writer was a member of the New Jersey Casino Control Commission from 1980 to 1988.Lessons From SabathiaTo the Sports Editor:Re “Leader’s Abrupt Departure Brings Only Respect from Yankees,” Oct. 6: C. C. Sabathia and the Yankees deserve respect and support for Sabathia’s decision to miss the playoffs and seek immediate treatment for alcohol addiction.The American Medical Association declared more than 50 years ago that addiction is a disease, as Sabathia said, yet many do not know it. That’s part of the reason only 10 percent of the 23 million Americans with alcohol and drug problems receive treatment.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Sabathia is right to treat his addiction to alcohol as a serious health issue requiring immediate care. Addiction is as at least as serious as the elbow, knee and back injuries that Tyler Kepner lists as the typical causes of player absences.The Yankees should be applauded for placing the health of Sabathia above any other consideration, including playoff prospects. The example should serve as a model for other people grappling with this disease and other businesses with employees who seek help.ROBERT B. LEVY, New YorkRight Man for the JobTo the Sports Editor:Re “Always Pushing for an Edge, at Times Perhaps Too Hard,” Oct. 7: To blame Joe Girardi for the Yankees’ flaws because he is too prepared and too highly focused is ludicrous. Was his approach blameworthy when the team roared out to a much better than expected start? Would anyone want his manager not to fight for every advantage? Or to speak outside the family about the well-liked and respected C. C. Sabathia’s personal issues? And to say he overworked his position players like Brett Gardner is to say a major league player in his prime is incapable of playing almost every day.The true issue with the Yankees is a roster in transition — a transition, it is hoped, from bad contracts to a healthy mix of not outrageously priced veterans and younger stars like Didi Gregorius and Greg Bird.AdvertisementThis is a team being reshaped, and I can’t think of a better, more committed and passionate manager — and a more decent man — to help oversee that process in a tough town like New York.RANDY WHITESTONE, Scarsdale, N.Y.Academy’s Silent PartnerTo the Sports Editor:Re “Washington Nationals Use Baseball as a Beacon of Hope at Youth Academy,” Sept. 27: An important element was left out of this article. The land was donated by the United States Park Service. It was part of Fort Dupont National Park. In fact, the horse stables in the background of one of the photos are for the Washington, D.C., park police. None of this happens without participation of the National Park Service.ED SAFRANEK, Marshfield, OhioA version of this letter appears in print on October 11, 2015, on Page SP8 of the New York edition.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.