By PAT BORZIOCT. 10, 2015
KANSAS CITY, Mo. —  This one, Manager Ned Yost cannot explain. Neither can the people in the Kansas City Royals’ baseball operations who handle analytics.By even the most rudimentary statistics, shortstop Alcides Escobar has no business leading off for the Royals. His .293 on-base percentage in the regular season was one of the worst on the team. He drew 26 walks in 148 games.Yet when Escobar leads off, the Royals win. A lot.This season the Royals were 82-49 with Escobar at the top of the lineup, and 13-18 with others there. When Yost moved Alex Gordon into the leadoff spot early September, the Royals went 7-9. Yost restored Escobar to the top of the lineup on Sept. 30, and the Royals finished the season on a five-game winning streak that clinched home-field advantage in the playoffs.“Alcides? He’s pretty good,” Royals catcher Salvador Perez said.Equally unexplainable is the belief among Yost and his players that the Royals win whenever Escobar swings at the first pitch of the game, whether he puts it in play or not.AdvertisementA Royals spokesman said the club lacks statistical evidence to support their view. But that hasn’t stopped various Royals from stating it as a fact. All they do is point to the first two games of their American League division series against Houston.AdvertisementGame 1: Escobar took the first pitch. The Royals lost, 5-2.Game 2: Escobar fouled the first pitch into his own dugout, sending teammates scrambling for cover. The Royals won, 5-4.“Dale Sveum said, no matter what, swing at the first pitch,” said Escobar, referring to the Royals’ hitting coach. “I say O.K.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Going back to last year, and including playoffs, the Royals are 104-60 with Escobar leading off. In their unexpected wild-card run to Game 7 of the World Series last year, the Royals won 20 of their final 30 games with a leadoff hitter who averaged about one walk a week. Yost can’t quantify that and doesn’t care to.“We’re 44 games over .500 with Eskie in the leadoff spot,” Yost said. “Doesn’t matter if he’s struggling or not. It works.“And, I mean, there are times where he will get up there and swing at the first pitch of the game. Our guys go crazy when he does that, because our percentage in winning ball games when Eskie swings at the first pitch is huge. As soon as Eskie swings at the first pitch, you hear everybody in the dugout go: ‘We’re winning today. We’re winning today.’ ”Statistics do show that Escobar, a first-time All-Star this season, is an excellent first-ball hitter. This season he batted .364 with a .367 on-base percentage when he swung at the first pitch. The first-pitch-hitting numbers for his career are significantly higher (.327, .335) than his overall career figures (.262, .298).So when Escobar leads off for the Royals on Sunday in Game 3 at Minute Maid Park in Houston, don’t be surprised to see him swing if the Astros ace Dallas Keuchel throws his first pitch anywhere near the strike zone.Advertisement“Most of the time he does it, it ends up in a positive for us,” Royals first baseman Eric Hosmer said. “I don’t know if that’s coincidence. I don’t know what that is. But when it works out for us and he gets a hit on the first pitch of the game, it kind of sets the tone for us offensively. At the same time, for the opposing pitcher, it kind of puts him in a little bit of a hole.”As the first batter of a game this season, Escobar posted a .336 on-base percentage while hitting .281 with two homers. Not fabulous, but certainly respectable. The Hall of Famer Rickey Henderson, widely considered the greatest leadoff hitter who ever played, batted .276 leading off games, with a .380 on-base percentage, according to baseballreference.com — much better figures than Escobar’s.As for the first-pitch-swinging talisman, consider this: The last five days of the season, with Toronto challenging the Royals for home-field advantage, Escobar swung at the first pitch in every game. The first four times, in Chicago and Minnesota, he fouled it off. On the last, he swung and missed. Escobar reached base only once, on a bunt single Oct. 1 against the White Sox. Yet the Royals won every game and scored 25 runs.“That’s crazy,” Escobar said. “But that’s good for us. When I swing at the first pitch, we win a lot of games. My hitting coach tells me: Continue to swing the bat. If they throw a strike, swing.”A version of this article appears in print on October 11, 2015, on Page SP6 of the New York edition with the headline: For Royals, Even a Swing and a Miss Is a Good Way to Start if Escobar Leads Off.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.