By RAY GLIERJAN. 29, 2015
ATLANTA —  The Atlanta Hawks have roared past being a curiosity and are in full bloom as a phenomenon. Their last loss was on Dec. 26, and they look indestructible, with balance and chemistry on offense and defense.They brushed off the Nets, 113-102, here on Wednesday for their 17th straight victory and continue to represent the N.B.A.’s most remarkable story this season.Their fans are so enamored with the club that a game set for Saturday night against the Philadelphia 76ers, who are tied for the worst record in the Eastern Conference, is a sellout, Steve Koonin, the Hawks’ chief executive, said.Last year, the Hawks drew negative attention because of racial controversy involving an owner and their general manager. But this week, business executives were calling Koonin, he said, to try to get tickets to the N.B.A.’s hottest game, a Feb. 6 showdown with Golden State, which leads the Western Conference.AdvertisementThe Hawks had six players in double figures Wednesday, led by forward Paul Millsap, who scored 28 points and went 15 of 16 from the free-throw line. Atlanta (38-8) had 29 assists on 38 baskets, and these were skilled assists: bounce passes through traffic and dishes to the wings for 3-point shots.Advertisement“You just can’t do it by yourself anymore; it’s just too difficult,” guard Kyle Korver said. “The way we play is fun. Everyone debates it, whether ‘they’ can win in the playoffs, but we really don’t care much about that. It’s fun for us, and it’s working.”The Nets (18-27) were competitive because of a former Hawk, Joe Johnson, who scored 26 points, and the superb floor game of point guard Jarrett Jack, who had 13 assists and just one turnover in 38 minutes.The Hawks are 17-0 since Dec. 26, and their crowds are starting to swell to capacity routinely: This was their eighth sellout in the last 10 games.Atlanta’s style of play has mesmerized fans here who for years watched the Hall of Famer Dominique Wilkins try to carry the club against the best in the N.B.A. The first pass is never the last pass with these Hawks: The ball goes into the paint and then kicks out to the wings with dizzying pace. The Hawks do not roar in much for dunks, but the crowd still roars for terrific passes.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“They have guys with high basketball I.Q.,” Jack said. “And they have guys who are versatile and do so many things. That’s what makes them such a tough cover.“They are a good team, and the fans appreciate it. I don’t know when I have ever seen fans fill the upper level of this place like they did tonight.”The Hawks’ style could earn three of their players — Millsap, center Al Horford and point guard Jeff Teague — invitations Thursday night to the All-Star Game as reserves. Korver just shrugged when asked about the possibility and said he did not even know when the reserves would be named.The Hawks have become an instinctive team when they have the ball, which makes them tough to scout. The players just seem to know where one another are and expect the pass.Advertisement“Every time down the court everyone feels like they matter,” Korver said. “No one is out there just spaced out, watching someone else go to work. You feel like you matter every single time — your cut or your pass, your screen or your shot, you affect if we score. When you feel like you matter, do it a little harder, and do it with pace.”What they do on offense, they also accomplish on defense.“I don’t think anyone in here has made the all-defensive team,” Korver said. “We got guys who are good defenders; we have to play together.”One threat to the Hawks may be overconfidence, but the players do not look capable of complacency. They sprinted up the floor on Wednesday and rallied back on defense, especially in the fourth quarter, when they held the Nets to 21 points and took control of the game.“There can’t be any complacency,” Horford said, “because we haven’t really done anything yet.”A version of this article appears in print on January 29, 2015, on Page B15 of the New York edition with the headline: Hawks Merrily Roll Past Nets to Their 17th Straight Win.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.