By CHRISTOPHER CLAREYJAN. 29, 2015
MELBOURNE, Australia — As it turned out, an Australian Open semifinal was not Maria Sharapova’s toughest all-Russian match in Melbourne this year.That came in the second round, when she had to summon all her tennis survival instincts to save two match points before holding off a little-known compatriot, Alexandra Panova.“This is unacceptable,” Sharapova’s father, Yuri, told her in a telephone call, according to Sharapova.Her subsequent performances have been much more acceptable to father and daughter, as she has rumbled through the next four rounds without dropping a set or, for that matter, more than three games in a set.AdvertisementOn Thursday, in an all-Russian semifinal, she made impressively brisk work of Ekaterina Makarova, the No. 10 seed, to win, 6-3, 6-2.Advertisement“I felt like I was given a second chance,” the second-seeded Sharapova said, referring to the Panova match, in an interview with ESPN.She will now get another chance at winning the Australian Open after her title here in 2008 and yet another chance at beating Serena Williams, who has defeated her 15 straight times dating to 2005.Williams won the more competitive of Thursday’s semifinals by defeating Madison Keys, an unseeded 19-year-old American, 7-6 (7-5), 6-2.Williams lost her serve in the opening game of the match, and Keys, who had never been past the third round in a Grand Slam tournament until this event, was able to apply consistent pressure with her powerful first serve and groundstrokes.But Williams’s trademark ability to attack the second serve was one of the qualities that ultimately made the difference. After winning the tiebreaker and the first set, she took command in the second, although Keys did manage to save seven match points when serving at 1-5 in a marathon game and forced Williams to serve again.Williams, the greatest player of this era, did not look relaxed about the prospect, screaming “Come on” repeatedly as if she were serving to stay in the match, instead of serving for it.But she was able to close the deal on her ninth match point and then shouted, clenched her fists and hunched forward. At the net, Keys extended her hand for a shake, but Williams ignored it and gave her a hug instead and then some words of encouragement.Advertisement“I think she’s going to be winning this tournament very soon and lots of other Grand Slams,” said Williams.That is quite a prediction at a stage in women’s tennis when other young contenders have emerged, above all Eugenie Bouchard of Canada, but Keys does have remarkably easy power from all sectors of the court and a solid team behind her now in the former No. 1 Lindsay Davenport and her husband Jon Leach.“She pushed me really hard in that first set,” Williams said of Keys.The question now is whether Sharapova can push Williams, who has won all but one set in their last 11 matches. It will be No. 1 versus No. 2, but this is not yet a rivalry: a fact that has hurt women’s tennis in the past decade.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But despite such disappointments, Sharapova has kept working doggedly and competing ferociously, trying to make improvements in her attack-minded game with the help of her multinational team, headed by the veteran Dutch coach Sven Groeneveld.Williams may have been Sharapova’s major career stumbling block, but she has also provided her with great motivation to add levels to her game and find an extra half step along the baseline.After winning a tuneup tournament in Brisbane, Sharapova is moving well and has shown her usual taste for risk under great pressure. She saved the two match points against Panova by swinging for the lines and hitting them. And though Makarova was unable to pose that sort of threat, Sharapova stayed true to that style.The prime example came in the eighth game of the match. Makarova, after a shaky and edgy start, had just broken Sharapova’s serve to get back to 3-4 and was now serving into the wind.Makarova won the first point of the game, but the next four points ended with the following shots from Sharapova: backhand winner down the line, forehand winner down the line, forehand winner inside-out, backhand winner crosscourt.Three of those were winners were struck off balls that were relatively deep. “I just stood my ground and competed well,” Sharapova said.AdvertisementIt was the second consecutive Grand Slam semifinal for Makarova, a 26-year-old left-hander from Moscow. She was beaten soundly by Williams at the United States Open and now beaten soundly here by Sharapova. Both Williams and Sharapova attacked Makarova’s second serve successfully, but Makarova’s bigger disappointment was her inability to control her forehand in extended rallies.The handshake, when it came, was quick and formal. Sharapova competes for Russia, the country of her birth, but she has long kept a professional distance between herself and the opposition.Her move to Florida to train in her childhood also has created geographical distance between herself and her compatriots.After important points she shouts, “Come on,” not the Russian equivalent, and she divides most of her time off tour between homes in Longboat Key, Fla., and Manhattan Beach, Calif.“Obviously, they’re both big parts of my life,” Sharapova said of Russia and the United States before the semifinal. “I spent my childhood in Russia. I live in the United States, where I am very comfortable and very happy. I know both cultures extremely well. At the end of the day, I’m very happy to be representing Russia.“It’s more of a feeling than anything else. I have a lot of family back home, you know, that I see and speak to quite often during the year. Despite not living there, I have a very strong connection to the country. But yet I’m very happy when I’m able to go to the United States.”A picture caption in some editions on Thursday with an article about Maria Sharapova’s victory in the semifinals of the Australian Open misspelled the given name of her opponent. As the article correctly noted, she is Ekaterina Makarova, not Ekatarina.A version of this article appears in print on January 29, 2015, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Sharapova Breezes Past Compatriot to Advance to Final.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.