AdvertisementSupported byN.H.L. RoundupBy The Associated PressJacob Josefson and Patrik Elias scored in a shootout, and the Devils rallied late to beat visiting Toronto, 2-1, on Wednesday night, extending the Maple Leafs’ losing streak to a season-high seven games.Cory Schneider made 29 saves through overtime and handled both Toronto shootout attempts as the Devils won for the fifth time in eight games (5-2-1). Defenseman Adam Larsson scored the tying goal with 2 minutes 50 seconds left in regulation.James van Riemsdyk scored on a breakaway in the third period, and Jonathan Bernier made 22 saves in Toronto’s loss.Bernier made a pad save on Scott Gomez on the Devils’ first shootout attempt, but Josefson and Elias beat him with backhanders on the next two tries.Mike Santorelli missed the net on Toronto’s first attempt, and Schneider stopped Tyler Bozak on the second.Larsson’s goal was his second of the season. Martin Havlat sent the puck to the right point, and Larsson, a 22-year-old defenseman, wristed a shot through traffic that beat Bernier for his fifth goal in 158 career games.Until the unlikely goal, it appeared that van Riemsdyk’s score with 8:11 left in regulation would be the winner. It capped a breakout play on which the former Devils forward David Clarkson sent a pass between his legs to Bozak, who made a nifty pass to send van Riemsdyk in alone on Schneider.Bernier had kept Toronto ahead with a glove stop on a breakaway by Mike Cammalleri with roughly five minutes to play.CAPITALS 4, PENGUINS 0 Alex Ovechkin scored twice to take the N.H.L. lead in goals, Braden Holtby recovered from a short slump to get his fifth shutout of the season, and Sidney Crosby had one of his worst face-off nights as host Washington broke a four-game losing streak.Ovechkin had a tip-in goal in the first period and then scored from his customary spot in the left circle with a one-timer on a power play in the second. His 29 goals are one more than Rick Nash and Tyler Seguin have. Eric Fehr and Mike Green scored in the third period.Holtby, the stabilizing force that helped the Capitals recover from a slow start to the season, had allowed four goals in each of his last three starts. But he was back to his reliable self, stopping 27 shots to blank Pittsburgh for the second time in a little over a month. Pittsburgh has not scored against Washington in 120 minutes this season.Crosby received an injection last week to treat a lower-body injury that caused him to miss one game as well as the All-Star Game, and he was not his usual self.He lost 15 of his first 18 face-offs and lost 17 of 24 for the game, a 29 percent success rate that is among the worst in his 594 N.H.L. games.The Penguins also played their third straight game without the franchise stalwart Evgeni Malkin, who also has a lower-body injury. Pittsburgh has lost five of six.ISLANDER IS FINED Islanders forward Cal Clutterbuck was fined $2,000 by the N.H.L. for violating the league’s rule against diving and embellishment.Clutterbuck was cited by the league’s hockey operations department for a play in the Islanders’ game against Philadelphia on Jan. 19. It was determined that he embellished to draw a hooking penalty on Flyers forward Jakub Voracek. The Islanders scored on the ensuing power play.The N.H.L. also said Clutterbuck was issued a warning after a game against St. Louis on Dec. 6. The second infraction triggered the fine.Advertisement