By BRIAN SCIARETTAJAN. 28, 2015
The beginning of 2015 is looking a lot like the end of the 2014 for the United States national team, which endured another collapse in the second half and lost to Chile, 3-2, in Rancagua on Wednesday.Since the World Cup, the United States has won just one of six games. Coach Jurgen Klinsmann’s American squad has been outscored, 9-0, in the second half of those games. On Wednesday, the United States gave up two goals to surrender a 2-1 halftime lead.The Americans opened the game in an unusual 3-5-2 formation, with three defenders and two wing midfielders providing cover on the outside, but defensively there were holes that Chile was able to exploit. Midfielders Brek Shea, who scored the Americans’ opening goal, and DeAndre Yedlin were caught upfield too many times, putting stress on the back line, and Jermaine Jones’s conversion to a central role took a step back.After halftime, the United States shifted into a more familiar 4-4-2 formation, but the players’ fatigue was apparent and Chile dominated the second half. Mark González, in particular, shined for Chile with two goals and a dominant performance.AdvertisementKlinsmann had wanted to use his team’s recent friendlies to experiment, but a series of poor performances since the World Cup have put him into a position where he is going to have to find a winning solution fast if the Americans are going to contend at this summer’s Concacaf Gold Cup. A victory there would give his team a spot at the 2017 Confederations Cup in Russia, an important World Cup warmup for regional champions.AdvertisementThe ratings, from 0 (diabolical) to 10 (world class):STARTING LINEUPNick Rimando: The Real Salt Lake keeper was hung out to dry by his defense on Chile’s first goal, but he was caught leaning on the second. On the third goal he made a terrific save, only to have González pounce on the rebound. Aside from the goals, Rimando wasn’t asked to make many difficult saves. Rating: 5.0Steve Birnbaum: It was a learning experience for Birnbaum, who was making his international debut after a solid rookie season with D.C. United. Over all, it was an appearance that he should be proud of, as he did not make many mistakes. His job was not easy with Yedlin being caught upfield far too often. Rating: 5.5Jermaine Jones: As one of the top American performers at the World Cup, Jones is undergoing a positional change at the national team level to central defense. Wednesday’s game was his worst outing since the switch. His giveaway in the 34th minute showed that he takes too many risks, and he shared the blame with Matt Besler on Chile’s first goal when the two failed to communicate on a cross. Jones pressed forward too much and looked lost defending set pieces and crosses. Rating: 4.0Matt Besler: It was an up and down game for Besler, who hit a beautiful pass out of the back line for the assist on Shea’s early goal. But minutes later he was part of a breakdown with Jones that resulted in Chile’s first goal. After that mistake, Besler was the best American defender in the game, despite having a difficult assignment covering for Jones in the middle and Shea in front of him. Rating: 5.5Michael Bradley: Bradley had to cover for others while still aiding the attack, and in the second half he was the lone bright spot for the United States. He nearly scored in the 61st minute when his shot rocketed off the crossbar. In the 77th minute he set up Lee Nguyen for a good chance inside the box. Rating: 6.5Mix Diskerud: Fresh off a move to New York City F.C., the Norwegian-born Diskerud was strong in the first half and made a great play to cut the ball back on Altidore’s first-half goal. Defensively, he also broke up several of Chile’s attacks in the middle of the field. Another solid and complete performance. Most important, when he left, the Americans were in front, 2-1. Rating: 6.5Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.DeAndre Yedlin: Offensively, Yedlin was a nightmare for Chile as he used his speed to get behind the defense multiple times. Defensively, however, he got caught up the field too many times, including in the 67th minute when González slipped past him to tie the score at 2-2. He showed his talent against Chile, but also his weaknesses. Rating: 5.0Clint Dempsey: The captain was strong in the first half, when he was asked to run the offense. His pass to set up Altidore in the 44th minute gave the Americans a dangerous free kick, but he tired in the second half before coming out in the 69th minute. Rating: 6.0AdvertisementBrek Shea: Much has been made of Shea’s struggles at the club level and his return to Major League Soccer, but the Texan got off to a dream start by scoring the opening goal: Taking a beautiful pass from Besler behind the defense, he made a nice move to beat the goalkeeper with a powerful shot low to the far post. Shea struggled defensively, however, and Chile was able to press down his side of the field effectively. In the second half, Shea showed an obvious lack of match fitness. Rating: 5.0Jozy Altidore: The new Toronto F.C. striker played with confidence that has been missing since his Eredivisie days with AZ Alkmaar. In addition to scoring a nice goal off Diskerud’s setup, Altidore was effective passing and making smart runs. Rating: 6.0Bobby Wood: The 1860 Munich forward was a surprise starter given his terrible club situation; he hasn’t even made the bench in Germany since October, and hasn’t scored since May 19, 2013. The rust was expected, and Wood was more or less invisible. He looked hesitant to take on defenders and rarely looked dangerous before he was pulled at halftime. Rating: 4.0SUBSTITUTESLee Nguyen: After coming on to start the second half, Nguyen initially looked rusty with his passing in the attacking third of the field, and it took him too long to get involved. He had a great opportunity in the 77th minute when he took a pass from Bradley but his shot missed just wide. In stoppage time he set up a late chance for the Americans to steal a tie. Rating: 5.0Wil Trapp: Widely expected to be a key component in this year’s Olympic qualifying campaign, Trapp replaced Diskerud in the 59th minute. He was put in a difficult situation with the team around him fading, but his contribution was a noticeable dropoff from what Diskerud had given the team. Trapp will get better, but the game was moving fast for him. Rating: 4.5Gyasi Zardes: In his first appearance for the national team, Zardes, a Los Angeles Galaxy forward, was one of the few bright spots offensively in the second half. His hold-up play was effective, and he showed ambition moving forward. Rating: 6.0Chris Wondolowski: The San Jose forward replaced Altidore in the 75th minute and had little impact other than a nice header late that forced Chile’s goalkeeper to make a quality save. Rating: 5.0We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.