By LEANDER SCHAERLAECKENSJAN. 28, 2015
A billboard will go up sometime before the Red Bulls’ home opener on March 22, right by Exit 16 on I-280, the main access road to Red Bull Arena in Harrison, N.J. It will denounce the club’s new management team and its Austrian energy-drink-selling ownership. Most notably, it will profess support not for the team’s new coach, Jesse Marsch, but for his ousted predecessor.The billboard is part of an unusual fan revolt. Long one of M.L.S.’s biggest spenders even as their trophy case remained frustratingly empty, the Red Bulls have seen their relationship with their fans tumble in recent weeks. The cause of the furor was the unexpected firing of Mike Petke as coach on Jan. 7, but the grievances are old and varied: a revolving door of 14 coaches in 19 seasons, a history of signing marquee players who did not perform or did not seem to want to, and a persistent lack of playoff success.Explanations from team officials have done little to calm fans. Surprised by the reaction to the coaching change, the Red Bulls organized a town-hall meeting with 300 season-ticket holders — and many vented their anger at the team. Answering criticism that management had done little to improve the roster in the off-season, the Red Bulls announced several acquisitions this week, including the signing Wednesday of the United States national team midfielder Sacha Kljestan.It remains to be seen if any of the recent decisions will quiet those fans agitating for an even bigger change: an end to Red Bull’s ownership of the team. Red Bull bought the MetroStars, as they were then called, in 2006 and rebranded them. While Red Bull has invested significantly in a stadium and players, some fans say they are fed up with the team’s failure to develop into a consistent title contender.AdvertisementThe sudden departure of Petke, who was fired only weeks before preseason training, by the Red Bulls’ new sporting director, Ali Curtis, may have been intended to signal a new direction for the team. Instead, it blindsided not only the popular Petke but also his players.AdvertisementScores of fans asked for refunds for their season tickets, though none were given, a common policy in sports. Others began an online fund-raising campaign for the billboard. It took seven hours to reach the $3,200 target; ultimately, $5,500 was raised.“A lot of the fan base has had to compromise in supporting this team because of the odious situation of being owned by a company whose main goal is selling energy drinks,” said Mike Vallo, 26, a writer who helped organize the billboard campaign. “They’ve just made mistake after mistake. The Petke firing was the last straw for a lot of people.”Marsch this week began the difficult job of replacing Petke by gathering his still-forming team in Orlando, Fla. Several key players, including Kljestan and midfielder Tim Cahill, remain absent.“I knew that Mike was a fan favorite, and for all the right reasons,” Marsch said of Petke this week. “The level at which a lot of the emotion was exemplified was probably higher than I expected. But no problem, and I respected people for saying what they thought.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Not only was Marsch’s appointment unpopular, but the Red Bulls will most likely open the season without a marquee player. The star striker Thierry Henry retired after the team was eliminated from the playoffs last season, and Cahill, who is playing for Australia at the Asian Cup this month, may not return to the club for the final year of his contract. Combined, they earned about $8 million annually, meaning the team’s payroll, among the highest in M.L.S. for years, is expected to be significantly smaller than last year’s total of about $11.3 million.Whereas the Red Bulls were once in the conversation for every major star making noises about coming to M.L.S., this month they had to admit that the United States national team striker Jozy Altidore was out of their price range. (Altidore joined Toronto F.C.) Instead the Red Bulls will add Kljestan, a veteran of the Champions League with the Belgian club Anderlecht and a former teammate of Marsch’s at the now defunct Chivas USA.Marsch, 41, is well regarded as a soccer mind after a 14-year M.L.S. playing career, a stint as a national team assistant coach and a commendable season in charge of the expansion Montreal Impact in 2012. He preaches the sort of fluid and zippy soccer that the Red Bulls have regularly aspired to but rarely delivered.His philosophy and willingness to innovate were ultimately why Marsch was preferred to Petke, whose teams often played a more labored style. So, too, was his eagerness to embrace the commitment to analytics favored by Curtis as he remakes the team.Advertisement“The traditional role of a head coach has changed,” Curtis said. “And if you don’t evolve and have a coach that can embrace different ways of thinking and ways of improving your club, we’d be left behind in the next three to four years.”That is particularly important this year because the most recent rebooting of the Red Bulls will take place amid competition in the marketplace: An M.L.S. expansion team, New York City F.C., will offer fans a natural rival, and an alternative.“This is a big club and a wonderful opportunity for me,” Marsch said. “As much as you could talk about the reduction of payroll and superstars and everything else, this is still a club that should be successful, can be successful, and when we get it right, I think the rewards will be massive.”A version of this article appears in print on January 29, 2015, on Page B18 of the New York edition with the headline: Fans Rebelling Against the Red Bulls.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.