By ANDREW KEHJAN. 28, 2015
Some coaches and players would be perfectly happy if the grueling N.B.A. regular season were shorter. The Knicks, who have firmly acknowledged that this is not their year, might not protest much about ending the whole thing tomorrow.But the Oklahoma City Thunder would probably not mind having a few extra weeks tacked onto the end. That would give them more time to mend the damage incurred to their record early this season, more games to assume their rightful place in the league’s pecking order.Instead, while trying to bounce back from their injury-plagued start and into a playoff spot, they have had to treat every game as a must-win situation. So their task was complicated by their 100-92 loss to the lowly Knicks on Wednesday.“We have to do a better job,” Thunder Coach Scott Brooks said after the game at Madison Square Garden, “and we have to do it soon.”AdvertisementThe defeat dropped the Thunder’s record to 23-23. At the start of the day, Oklahoma City was in 10th place in the Western Conference, two spots from a postseason berth, behind the Phoenix Suns (26-20) and the New Orleans Pelicans (24-21).AdvertisementIt has been a strange and frustrating season for the Thunder, who were supposed to be title contenders.Before the game against the Knicks, ESPN’s Hollinger NBA Playoff Odds tool listed the Thunder as having a 41 percent chance of making the postseason. Basketball Reference’s Playoff Probabilities Report had the team at 28.9 percent. More optimistic were FiveThirtyEight’s N.B.A. Power Ratings, which claim to better account for real-time changes in team personnel; the Thunder were listed as having a 72.6 percent chance to make the playoffs.“We’re not where we want to be,” Brooks said before the game, “but we still have 37 games to go.”The Thunder’s struggles have largely stemmed from injuries. Kevin Durant and Russell Westbrook were sidelined early this season, depriving the team of two of the league’s best players. Westbrook, who fractured his hand in the second game of the season, did not play again until Nov. 28. Durant, who missed the first 17 games of the season with a broken foot, did not return until Dec. 2. The Thunder went 5-12 in October and November.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The slow start has left them with no margin of error. It was worrisome, then, that Durant, who also missed six games this season with a sprained right ankle, was sidelined for a second consecutive game on Wednesday with a sprained toe on his left foot. It was the 25th game he has missed this season. In his first seven seasons combined, he missed 16 games.Against the Knicks, the Thunder clearly missed Durant, who is averaging 25.6 points per game this season.Midway through the fourth quarter, Tim Hardaway Jr. sank two straight 3-pointers, giving the Knicks an unlikely 9-point lead with six minutes to play. Westbrook responded with 7 straight points for the Thunder, but the comeback fell short.“They’re an N.B.A. team,” Westbrook said when asked if he was surprised by the Knicks’ performance. “Regardless of what their record is, they’re an N.B.A. team. They come out every night, and they play basketball, just like we do.”AdvertisementCarmelo Anthony scored 31 points, and four other Knicks scored in double figures as the team earned its fourth win in five games.Through Westbrook’s first 31 games this season, he averaged 24.7 points, 7.6 assists, 6.0 rebounds and 2.3 steals. He was superb again on Wednesday, scoring 40 points, but he could not carry his team by himself.Brooks acknowledged that the constant revolving door of players had taken its toll.“It’s been a season of adjusting with players out and adjusting with players back in and adjusting with players who are not playing the same role when the players were out, so you’re always in constant adjustment,” he said. “It’s part of it. You have to deal with it and continue to put yourself in a position to win, and we still have a good enough group to win, even when we have guys out.”But that was not the case Wednesday, when they lost precious ground in a race against time.REBOUNDSA long list of aching body parts forced AMAR’E STOUDEMIRE to miss his 14th game of the season. Stoudemire, who has been battling a sore right knee, sprained his left ankle and his left wrist in the Knicks’ game Saturday against Charlotte. Coach DEREK FISHER said he hoped Stoudemire could be available to play this weekend or early next week. ... SCOTT BROOKS spoke fondly of coaching Fisher, who played for the Thunder from 2012 to 2014. “He’s as consistent a worker as I’ve ever been around as a player, and I’m sure he has the same type of work ethic as a coach,” Brooks said. “He’s steady. He understands that every season it’s about the process of getting better. I know this is not the season he would have liked, but he’s not changing his attitude toward the game he loves.”A version of this article appears in print on January 29, 2015, on Page B15 of the New York edition with the headline: Loss to Knicks Leaves Thunder Less Room to Err.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.