AdvertisementSupported byBy John BranchPHOENIX — Not far from where the Super Bowl will be played Sunday, at a party store called Dulceria La Nueva Pico Rico, Norma Rios, an employee, stood next to a tank of helium. The store sells hundreds of balloons each week, and underinflation can ruin a child’s day. Rios pointed to the ceiling.“They start to fall,” she said.Over at Arizona State, Gustavo Ventura, a professor of economics, was discussing various principles of inflation and deflation, too. Slight inflation seems to be the economic target of countries around the world, he said, but moderate deflation can be helpful, too.“A negative inflation rate of, say, minus 1 percent shouldn’t scare anybody,” Ventura said. “People sometimes talk about it like it’s really bad. If you have a fixed income, deflation is not such a bad idea.”Rios and Ventura are among those with extensive knowledge of inflation and deflation, a topic that has swirled through the N.F.L. for nearly two weeks and shows little sign of blowing over before the Super Bowl. Unlike most of the New England Patriots, Ventura and many others were happy to talk about what they knew.Footballs that the Patriots used in their 45-7 victory over the Indianapolis Colts in the A.F.C. championship game had too little air, which violated N.F.L. rules and made them easier to throw, catch and carry.Coach Bill Belichick and quarterback Tom Brady said they knew nothing about why the balls were underinflated. The Patriots have stopped talking about it, and the N.F.L. said it was investigating the matter. The inquiry could take weeks.In the meantime, at bounce houses, bike shops, tire stores and ivory towers, there are plenty of experts to explain the advantages and disadvantages of deflation.“You’re going to feel like it’s hard to pedal,” Ruben Flores, owner of the Bike Zone, said of underinflated tires. “The bike’s going to make you tired. And you could ruin the tire.”Mario Aguilar, manager of Secrets for Adults, stood near a display of life-size blowup dolls. One was named Sultry Nurse, and another was called Mr. Stud. For best results, Aguilar explained, they should be fully inflated. There is little advantage in letting some air out.“They won’t feel right,” Aguilar said. “You do need to have a good, full balloon.”In the N.F.L., secretly squishy footballs have become a serious issue. Fans now know what most did not before: Each team has its own set of footballs to use on offense, and they are required to have between 12.5 and 13.5 pounds per square inch of air pressure. Officials reportedly discovered that 11 of New England’s 12 balls were deflated during the game against Indianapolis.For critics of football in general, or the Patriots specifically, the scandal serves as a cultural proxy for people’s appetite to cheat or excuse those who do. The story has led the network nightly news programs and been daily fodder for tabloid newspapers. Some suggested last week that the Patriots forfeit the Super Bowl or that Belichick and Brady be suspended.Others find it all a bit, ahem, overblown. “Saturday Night Live” turned the matter into farce. (“Honestly, I wasn’t even aware that footballs could be inflated or deflated,” the show’s faux Brady said.) Debates flared over whether the controversy, nicknamed Deflategate, deserved the attention it received, given the N.F.L.’s other issues, including concussions and domestic violence.Among those who found the whole thing a bit funny were people who spent their working lives filling things with air.“You’re talking about a couple of pounds less of air pressure,” said Hector Reyes, a service manager at a Firestone Complete Auto Care. “You’re not playing with a pancake. They’re making a big deal about it. I think it’s ridiculous.”What is not a joke is driving on underinflated tires. At Val’s Tires, the owner, Valery Yusupov, knew nothing of Deflategate. But he knows the importance of keeping tires filled to recommended standards, which is often around 40 pounds per square inch for passenger cars.“No. 1, it’s going to cost you gas mileage,” he said. “No. 2, you can ruin your sidewall if it’s too low, and the whole pressure goes on your sidewall and not the tread. The tire’s going to wear out a lot faster.”Told that the Patriots had argued that the footballs in question might have deflated naturally, losing two pounds of pressure in the cold weather, Yusupov nodded.“When the weather cools off here, lots of people come in and say, ‘Looks like my tire is too low,’ ” Yusupov said.At Secrets for Adults, Aguilar said the store sold a few blowup dolls a week, with a high ratio going to truckers and hosts of bachelor parties. And while underinflation is not recommended, the alternative might be worse.“We’ve had people try to return them when they’ve popped,” he said.At tire stores and bike shops, workers use gauges to check inflation. At the party balloon store, Rios uses her finger. She puts it on the stem of the balloon, and when she feels it start to bubble under her finger, she stops.To Ventura, chairman of the economics department at Arizona State’s W. P. Carey School of Business, the effects of inflation and deflation are something you feel, but not with your hands. Inflation is, essentially, the sustained increase in prices, and most countries and central banks develop policies aimed at low, steady rates of inflation as a measure of economic growth.Deflation is the opposite — the falling of prices. But as prices fall, profits often do, too, and economies have been known to spiral downward.“An advantage of deflation, and I hope people don’t take this too seriously, is that money can be viewed as an asset,” Ventura said. “It has a positive rate of return because if you hold money from today to tomorrow, and there is deflation, it’s like the money is gaining interest. If there is inflation, holding money is essentially a tax.”Ventura was less certain what any of this had to do with the Super Bowl. Ventura, who is from Argentina, did not understand why opposing N.F.L. teams got to use their own footballs.“In regular football, everybody plays with the same ball,” Ventura said, referring to soccer. “The ball is the official ball. It should be the same with the N.F.L. Then there is nothing to talk about.”Super Bowl XLIX: SEATTLE vs. NEW ENGLAND 6:30 p.m. Sunday TV: NBCAdvertisement