By BEN ROTHENBERGJAN. 28, 2015
MELBOURNE, Australia —  Xu Shilin might become the next great Chinese tennis player, but her path to success has only recently led her back to China.Xu, 17, learned the game at an eight-court tennis complex that was owned by her father, Yang, in Zhongshan, a city in Guangdong Province. He gave her her first too-heavy racket and trained her intensively from an early age.“I basically grew up on a tennis court,” Xu said.But after Yang read about the success of training academies in Florida, he made the decision to move there with his wife, Lu Mei, and Xu, then 8. That journey has been common among European players like Monica Seles and Maria Sharapova, but at the time it was rare for a player to depart the Chinese system at such a young age.“My parents just wanted something good for me — to go down a different road than the other Chinese players,” Xu said.AdvertisementXu was rapidly Americanized during her six years in Florida as she learned to speak English, developed a love for the movie “Mean Girls” and adopted the nickname Coco. The family eventually settled at the Club Med Academies in Port St. Lucie, where Yang found work as a coach and Xu rose to second in her age-group rankings. It was only then, as she became one of the world’s best junior players, that she and her family were persuaded to return to China.AdvertisementThe coaxing, oddly, came from an American, Terry Rhoads, a former Nike executive who has lived in China for 20 years and is the managing director of the Chinese sports branding agency Zou Marketing. Rhoads, who had worked with the tennis player Li Na and the basketball star Yao Ming, convinced Xu and her family that China would offer the best financial opportunities as she embarked on a professional career.“I convinced her parents that, really, China was the future,” Rhoads said. “My message to the family was that this girl belongs to China and Chinese tennis is going to go to the moon and Coco is going to play a big part.”Xu initially returned to China at 14, with Rhoads but without her parents. She trained in Beijing at Potter’s Wheel, a tennis academy managed by the Argentine coach Carlos Rodríguez, who previously guided Li and Justine Henin to Grand Slam singles titles. Xu’s parents, who had remained in Florida in hopes of gaining American green cards, returned to China to join their daughter months later.“It was a really refreshing experience,” Xu said of the period she spent apart from her family, “because I had to do everything by myself and I clearly wasn’t used to it. It helped me to grow up a lot.”Xu has continued to develop into an elite player, with her best results coming last fall. She won three consecutive singles titles, including a gold medal at the Youth Olympic Games in Nanjing, and finished the year just short of the No. 1 ranking among juniors, which was claimed by the American Catherine Bellis.At the Australian Open this week, Xu became the first Chinese player to be seeded No. 1 in a Grand Slam singles event when she received the top spot in the junior girls’ draw.“I’m very happy with what I’ve done already,” she said. “But it doesn’t stop here, obviously. I have to keep going.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Xu’s evolution has extended to her team; she went through four coaches just last year. The latest is a Belgian, Olivier Grignard, who used to work with Rodríguez in Beijing but now runs his own training center in Foshan.AdvertisementWhile Xu has powerful groundstrokes and moves toward the net well, Grignard does not hesitate to cite aspects of her game and her personality that he says still need improvement, including her intensity, her professionalism and the consistency of her effort.“She can do whatever she wants, but she needs to learn how to suffer,” he said. “She needs to improve physically because physically she is not so strong.”Some of those deficiencies were on display in Xu’s third-round loss Wednesday, when she was soundly beaten, 6-2, 6-2, by 15-year-old Katie Swan of Britain. Swan’s powerful serve proved too much for Xu.Although Xu has had little success at the professional level and is only 570th in the WTA rankings, she has already cashed in on the hunger for the next Chinese star. Including endorsement fees from racket, apparel and smartphone companies, Xu’s 2014 earnings are in the “high six figures,” Rhoads said.Li retired last year, having earned two career Grand Slam singles titles, and no clear front-runner has emerged to succeed her, from the junior ranks or among the 11 Chinese women currently in the top 200. But finding one is a priority for companies and the WTA Tour, which will hold seven tournaments in China this season.“Of course, media and fans, we are looking for the second Li Na,” said Zhang Bendou, a tennis reporter for the Chinese website Titan Sports. “But more and more people realize that what Li Na did is uncopyable. Not only because of what she did on court but also because of her personality, the special timing she had, the transition from system to the professional tour.”Xu understands that, and she said becoming “the next Li Na” was not her approach.“I don’t think about it like that,” she said. “I’m just trying to be myself.”A version of this article appears in print on January 29, 2015, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: 17-Year-Old Tries to Step Into a Void.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.