AdvertisementSupported byBy Benjamin HoffmanPHOENIX — There are patterns to be found in chaos, but anyone who claims to know how effectively the New England Patriots will run the ball in Super Bowl XLIX on Sunday has not been paying attention to the team this season.From week to week, the Patriots were all over the place, rushing for as many as 246 yards, against the Indianapolis Colts in Week 11, and as few as 50, against the Buffalo Bills in Week 6. Part of that came from continually shifting personnel. Shane Vereen led the team in carries. Jonas Gray led the team in rushing yards. LeGarrette Blount led the team in yards per carry.New England was the only team in the N.F.L. that did not have a running back carry the ball at least 130 times — Vereen topped out at 96 — yet the Patriots managed to finish in the middle of the pack with 1,727 rushing yards and 13 touchdowns. It was a game of musical chairs managed deftly by New England to find balance for the offense each week while showing allegiance to no one.But some stability came to New England in November. Blount, then with the Pittsburgh Steelers, walked off the field during a game with the Tennessee Titans, reportedly upset that he had not had a single carry. His subsequent release by Pittsburgh opened the door for a return to New England, where he had success last season.The unusual circumstance led to praise and scorn for the Patriots. Some said that Blount had forced his release to orchestrate his return to the Patriots. Others cited it as another example of Coach Bill Belichick’s providing sanctuary to troubled players.This week Blount dismissed such talk and also chose not to speak ill of his former team, saying he had made a lot of friends while with the Steelers. As for why the Patriots had been willing to take a chance on him, Blount said it was fairly simple.“They knew that I could run the football,” he said. “They know that I can be effective with it. They know that I have big-play potential.”Blount also fits in with the team’s emphasis on ball security. He carried the ball 60 times for the Patriots and never fumbled. He was not alone; the team’s running backs combined for one fumble this season, and that came from fullback James Develin, who carried the ball just three times.“I’ve always been told that you can’t win the game without the football,” Blount said. “If you give the football away, you have no control of the game.”A theory in the wake of the deflated-ball scandal of the A.F.C. championship game was that the reduced air pressure could be a reason for New England’s unusually low rate of fumbles. But with no evidence that the team used underinflated balls in other games, it is impossible to know if the theory has any merit.Regardless, the Patriots’ running backs have quite a challenge as they prepare to face one of the league’s top run defenses.Judging by New England’s two playoff wins this season, it is equally possible that Blount and Vereen could be the stars of the show or relegated to spectator status.Super Bowl XLIXAdvertisement