By KEN BELSONJAN. 28, 2015
KISSIMMEE, Fla. — Rebecca Morgan squared her feet, bent her knees, raised her hands and tried to connect with her inner linebacker. Beside her, two dozen other mothers did the same as they listened to Mike Haynes, a former N.F.L. defensive lineman, teach them how to tackle safely.The women were taking part in a Moms Clinic, one of hundreds conducted nationwide by USA Football, a nonprofit group that was started by the N.F.L. 12 years ago and is at the forefront of efforts to combat the toll that concussions have taken on the sport.Through USA Football, the N.F.L. has targeted mothers, many of whom decide which sports their children play but have not competed in football themselves, to reassure them that the game can be safe.While youth football still flourishes in many communities, the campaign comes as several surveys show that participation in tackle football has declined in recent years. Perhaps of more concern to the N.F.L. are the results of a recent Bloomberg Politics poll that found that half of Americans did not want their sons playing football. A separate survey by Robert Morris University showed that nearly half of those polled said that boys should not be allowed to play tackle football until they reached high school.The latest, most jarring revelation came Wednesday, when the journal Neurology released a study that showed that N.F.L. retirees who began playing tackle football before they turned 12 were at increased risk of developing memory and thinking problems compared with players who began when they were 12 or older. Both groups scored below average on many memory and cognitive tests, but there was a roughly 20 percent difference between the two groups on several measures.Advertisement“You’ve got to look that parent in the eye and demonstrate through actions, not words, that you are doing things to create a better, safer environment for their child,” said Scott Hallenbeck, the executive director of USA Football, which is based in Indianapolis. “Otherwise, guys, we’re in trouble.”AdvertisementThe league has aggressively promoted USA Football and Heads Up Football on television and in stadiums. Roger Goodell, the commissioner of the N.F.L., has even participated in several Moms Clinics.The N.F.L. needs vibrant youth leagues to ensure that it can continue to have a stream of talented players and grow the devoted fan base that has helped turn the league into a $10-billion-a-year business.“You are always interested in what the future of your game looks like and being able to communicate a message to maybe dissuade fears that are put in an inappropriate setting,” said Charlotte Jones Anderson, executive vice president of the Dallas Cowboys and a member of the NFL Foundation, which last year gave USA Football a $45 million grant.When the league formed USA Football in a partnership with the N.F.L. Players Association, the group’s mission was to develop coaching manuals and practice schedules for coaches in the thousands of youth football leagues across the country.But as concerns about concussions have grown, USA Football has focused more energy on the Heads Up Football program, which includes courses for coaches and face-to-face workshops with trainers like Mr. Haynes. And while USA Football does not take a stance on what age youngsters should start playing tackle football, they leave that up to the individual leagues.In the past two years, coaches from 5,500 of the roughly 9,500 youth football leagues and organizations nationwide have registered for the Heads Up Football program, which includes a 90-minute online certification course. USA Football has also hosted more than 200 clinics for coaches and mothers, who are taught about good diets, proper hydration, how to wear helmets and how to avoid concussions and other injuries by tackling correctly.“For moms, it’s less X’s and O’s and more safety and directions,” Mr. Haynes said.Mr. Hallenbeck is convinced that USA Football is making a difference. He pointed to a two-year study commissioned by USA Football of more than 4,000 youth football players that found that almost 90 percent of players did not miss a game or a practice because of injury and none suffered a catastrophic head, neck or heat-related injury. The Datalys Center for Sports Injury Research and Prevention, which did the study, posited that “coach education could address changeable behaviors within teams and positively influence player safety.”AdvertisementMr. Hallenbeck acknowledged that fewer boys were playing tackle football, but he noted that participation in other sports had declined even faster, an even larger public health concern.Yet given how long it took the N.F.L. to acknowledge the long-term risks associated with concussions, some critics question whether USA Football’s real aim is to soften the sport’s image in the face of growing skepticism about its safety.Either way, the N.F.L. is clearly fortifying USA Football as a bulwark. Almost three dozen Moms Clinics have been held at N.F.L. facilities, and current and retired players and coaches serve as trainers and spokesmen. USA Football has reduced its reliance on funding from the N.F.L., but it has received more support from N.F.L. partners like Marriott, Riddell and ESPN, which recently donated $175,000. This month, the N.F.L. named Roman Oben, a former offensive tackle, the director of youth and high school football.“We have to appreciate that USA Football is not an independent body, it’s the N.F.L. advising us what to do with our children in a dangerous sport,” said Chris Nowinski, the executive director of the Sports Legacy Institute. “The N.F.L. needs a pipeline for talent, but also fans.”Whatever its motives, as USA Football promotes safety, it has been swept into a wider debate over when young players should start tackling. While many youth leagues admit boys as young as 5, doctors and coaches say that flag football is a better option. Some of the sharpest disapproval has come from one of the N.F.L.’s most celebrated members: John Madden, the broadcaster and Super Bowl-winning coach.“Why we have to start with a 6-year-old who was just potty-trained a year ago and put a helmet on them to tackle, I have no idea why we have to start,” said Mr. Madden, one of the chairmen of the league’s player safety advisory panel. “We will eventually get to tackling, but let us go through some techniques without the helmets and then we’ll go through a transition with the pads so we learn all that stuff and how to wear it and then we’ll tackle.”Some detractors raise more fundamental questions about whether safe tackling is in fact an oxymoron.“The N.F.L.’s marketing department continues to devise new ways to deflect attention from its past misdeeds and continues to devise schemes in an attempt to convince their national audience and parents that football can be made safe,” said Michael Kaplen, a lawyer who represents brain trauma victims. “Simply put, it cannot be made safe. Football is a concussion delivery system.”Some youth football organizations argue that USA Football is trying to temper the sport’s image and coddle children instead of being more honest about its risks. They are also angered that USA Football claims to speak on behalf of millions of parents and coaches.AdvertisementBrian Morgan, the president of the Texas Youth Football Association, got into a public spat with USA Football last year after several teams in his association were shown on the show “Friday Night Tykes.” Football, Mr. Morgan said, can be dangerous, but parents understand it also teaches children about hard work and teamwork.Mr. Morgan said that his coaches were teaching many of the techniques that USA Football preaches and that the programs they charge for are readily available free from other sources.“The self-proclaimed governing body of youth football wants to tell us how to teach, but they don’t teach the way we do,” Mr. Morgan said. “They didn’t invent this. They didn’t revolutionize it. It’s very hard to legislate the head out of football.”Here on the practice field among concerned mothers, though, Rebecca Morgan (no relation to Brian Morgan), whose 15-year-old son plays high school football in Spring Hill, Fla., said the program was useful.“I learned a lot and I can take that information back to him,” she said. “As a nurse, it gets me scared, not just the concussions but an injury that may make him do something else.”A version of this article appears in print on January 29, 2015, on Page A1 of the New York edition with the headline: To Allay Fears, N.F.L. Huddles With Mothers.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.