AdvertisementSupported byOn TennisBy Christopher ClareyMELBOURNE, Australia — Before leaving the United States for Australia, Madison Keys and her new coach, Lindsay Davenport, had lunch, just the two of them.“I told her, ‘You know, you are way better than 30,'” Davenport said Wednesday. “'And I don’t know exactly what the reason is you are only ranked there, but you play much better and you have to start to believe that and you have to start to act like it. You’ve got to play the role here.’“And I said: ‘Big things are around the corner. I don’t know if it’s next month or in six months, but things are going to happen. But you have to let them happen for you.'”As it turned out, the big things were just around the corner: in Melbourne, at the Australian Open, where Keys, an unseeded 19-year-old, has not only reached the fourth round for the first time at a Grand Slam tournament but made it all the way to the semifinals, too.Logic says that her inspired run, which has included victories over the two-time Wimbledon champion Petra Kvitova and the seven-time Grand Slam singles champion Venus Williams, will end Thursday when Keys faces the leading woman of this era: Serena Williams, an 18-time Grand Slam singles champion who is still No. 1 at age 33.The two have spoken but have never played. Serena Williams was in rare form in her 6-2, 6-2 quarterfinal rout of Dominika Cibulkova, and Keys has aggravated a left thigh injury, which required treatment during and after her 6-3, 4-6, 6-4 victory over Serena’s older sister Venus on Wednesday.“Serena’s always been one of the best, and she will forever be one of the best tennis players in women’s tennis,” Keys said in an interview Wednesday. “So much respect for that and so much respect towards her and her game, but I think it’s more I just have to go out and have to be excited about it, and I have to just really embrace the moment, and it’ll be fun. She’s obviously an amazing player. She’s been in this position before. It’s really just more that I kind of have to not focus so much on her and really just stay focused on myself.”Keys said that as a youngster she was loyal to the Williams sisters, Davenport and the genial Belgian star Kim Clijsters.“Those were my four people, yeah,” she said. “If they were playing each other, I was glued to my couch watching that match. I loved watching all of them. I didn’t really have a favorite. I couldn’t really pick one out, but it always broke my heart when one of them had to lose.”Venus and Serena Williams have been complimentary of Keys, and Wednesday was no exception.“It’s good to see another American, another African-American, in the semifinals playing so well,” Serena said. “Regardless, there’s going to be an American in the finals, so that is great. It’s also great for me and Venus because we know that finally there’s other Americans that are constantly playing well and playing better, showing that they want to be the world’s greatest.”Keys said she deeply appreciated the sisters’ support. Asked whether she saw the symbolism in a young African-American player facing the Williams sisters in consecutive Australian Open matches, Keys, whose mother, Christine, is white and whose father, Rick, is black, said that she did. But she added that she preferred not to identify herself with a specific race.“It’s something that’s always there obviously, but I’m very much right in the middle,” she said. “I don’t really think of it. I don’t really identify myself as white or African-American. I’m just me. I’m Madison.”Keys said she has gotten over the nervousness associated with being around players she grew up watching on television with one exception.“The one person who kind of still gets me is Roger Federer,” she said.But facing Serena across the net with a major trophy in range clearly can be intimidating. Davenport, a former No. 1 player who faced the Williams sisters frequently during her career, knows that full well.“Jeez, the way Serena played today, I’m not sure many people can challenge her if she serves like that and is that focused,” Davenport said. “Not having a day off is going to hurt. I’m not going to lie about that: physically and mentally. I think it helped a ton, even after beating Kvitova, that we all had the day, that next day, to enjoy it and then, O.K., 3 or 4 p.m., back to business now. There’s no chance to do that this time, and I think even more pressure is magnified when you are not 100 percent, though I’m not sure what percentage she is yet.”Williams, who has a cold, is not feeling 100 percent, either, and spoke in a congested voice Wednesday. But if Keys can get her leg into condition to play without restriction, she does have the baseline punch to stay with Williams. Keys also has a powerful first serve and a world-class second serve, which could keep Williams from ripping returns with her customary late-round abandon.Williams has faced a younger rising American late in the Australian Open before, losing in the quarterfinals to Sloane Stephens in 2013. But Patrick Mouratoglou, Williams’s coach, said that she played that match with a sprained ankle, which will not be the case Thursday.“Potentially Madison has the game to trouble Serena, but I don’t think anyone can stop Serena when she is launched,” said Mouratoglou, who is nonetheless a believer in Keys’s talent.“We didn’t know if it was going to happen this year or next year,” he said. “But that she is in the semifinal of a Grand Slam is not a surprise.”Being unseeded and a teenager (her birthday is Feb. 17) guarantee that Keys’s achievement receives extra attention in a sport in which prodigies have long played an important role.But she is no bolt from the deep blue. She has been considered a potential champion for years, identified long ago by the United States Tennis Association as well as the veteran agent Max Eisenbud, who represents Maria Sharapova and Li Na, as a talent worthy of considerable investment. Sharapova, the No. 2 seed, will face her fellow Russian Ekaterina Makarova in the first semifinal Thursday.Keys won her first main draw WTA singles match at age 14, which made her the youngest to do so since Martina Hingis. She won a round at the United States Open at 16 and won two rounds here at the Australian Open at 17.That was the same 2013 season in which she lost in the second round of the French Open on a cold, drizzly afternoon and broke down in tears.“It must be hard to be patient when you know you have it in you, isn’t it?” a reporter said to her.“Yeah,” she said, fighting to keep her composure.Keys may not have paid the dues of a 28-year-old who finally breaks through, but she has certainly paid a few. That endearing grin Wednesday as she celebrated beating one of her idols was hard-earned.Her wait for big success also has allowed her time to observe the tour and settle into her career without constant scrutiny; to watch other members of her generation, like Stephens and Eugenie Bouchard, make their big move first.“I think it’s definitely hard for the people who just out of nowhere come in and they do really well and all of the sudden the spotlight is on them,” Keys said. “I was very fortunate to have some of the spotlight taken away because Sloane has been doing so well, and we have both Williams sisters. So I kind of had my ups and downs not so much in the spotlight, which I think was really good for me.”But the spotlight is now unmistakably pointed in her direction, and not long after that lunch with Davenport she is projected to enter the top 20 next week no matter what happens Thursday.Advertisement