By BEN ROTHENBERGJAN. 28, 2015
MELBOURNE, Australia —  Against one of the best servers in the game, top-seeded Novak Djokovic turned in an untouchable performance.Djokovic beat eighth-seeded Milos Raonic, 7-6 (5), 6-4, 6-2, on Wednesday night in the Australian Open quarterfinals, and he did not face a single break point on his serve in the match.In his semifinal, set for Friday night, Djokovic will face fourth-seeded Stan Wawrinka, who beat Kei Nishikori, 6-3, 6-4, 7-6 (6), on Wednesday afternoon. Sixth-seeded Andy Murray and seventh-seeded Tomas Berdych were to meet in the other semifinal Thursday night.Djokovic has served dominantly throughout his first five matches in Melbourne, and he has been broken only once in 73 service games (on a double fault in his second-round rout of Andrey Kuznetsov). More known for his returning and rallying skills than for his serving prowess, Djokovic said his coach, Boris Becker, could be credited with some of the improvement on that shot, which was Becker’s forte.Advertisement“Serve was one of the tasks, one of the things that we wanted to improve,” Djokovic said of his work with Becker. “I know I can’t serve as fast as Milos, but I’m trying to use the angles, the accuracy, align myself to have some free points with that serve. That’s what I used well during this 10 days now so far.”AdvertisementWawrinka also consistently overpowered Nishikori with his serve, winning 86 percent of points on his first serve and striking 20 aces.Fans from Nishikori’s native Japan, many in face paint and kimonos, flocked to Rod Laver Arena to watch him at a tournament that has called itself the Grand Slam of Asia-Pacific.But it was Wawrinka who looked at home from the start, taking early break leads in the second and third sets. Over all, he hit twice as many winners as the fifth-seeded Nishikori, 46 to 23.Nishikori trailed by 6-1 in the third-set tiebreaker before he saved five consecutive match points to level the score at 6-6, sending the resigned crowd into unlikely excitement.But with Wawrinka pinned behind the baseline on the next point, an attempted drop shot by Nishikori hit the bottom of the net tape and slid down onto his side of the court, sending his coach, Michael Chang, similarly slumping into his seat.The error gave Wawrinka a sixth match point, which he converted with an ace for a spot in the semifinals.“I’m still nervous,” Wawrinka, the defending champion in Melbourne, said in his on-court interview after his narrow escape against Nishikori, the first man from Asia to break into the top five of the ATP rankings in singles.AdvertisementWawrinka said of the failed drop shot in his news conference, “I was really happy because I was not going to get to that ball.”He added: “I had the wind with me, so it was not easy to make a drop shot, especially at that moment. No, it was a crazy tiebreak, but good tiebreak. Good to finish in three sets.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.After his run to the final of the United States Open last year, which included a five-set win over Wawrinka in the quarterfinals, Nishikori was expected by many to move one step further at this tournament. Still, he said, reaching the last eight of this tournament was a strong result.“It’s not easy,” he said of making a Grand Slam quarterfinal, adding: “I have to keep doing this. I mean, I could be better. But you know, I think I need, kind of, this experience, playing tough all the time, playing a lot of matches.”Wawrinka said he believed his play was even better than it was here last year, when he beat Djokovic and Rafael Nadal en route to his first major title.“But I think we all improve every year,” Wawrinka said. “I’m more aggressive. I’m more confident with my game when I come to the net.“Again, it’s a Grand Slam. You play every two days. Today was a great level, was a great match. Now I’m going to enjoy a little bit, watch who’s going to win tonight and get ready for the semifinal.”Wawrinka and Djokovic played grueling five-setters in each of the previous two years in Melbourne, with Djokovic prevailing, 12-10, in the fifth set in the fourth round in 2013 and Wawrinka avenging that loss in the quarterfinals last year.“You know when you play Novak, especially in a semifinal in a Grand Slam, you have to play your best game,” Wawrinka said. “You have to play your best tennis if you want to push him. So far, I’m playing great. I’m confident with my game. I’m happy I won in three sets today. Let’s see.”AdvertisementDjokovic, who beat Wawrinka in five sets in the semifinals of the 2013 United States Open, said he was prepared for another hard-fought match.“I’m ready for the battle,” he said, adding that their last three Grand Slam matches “were the finals stages of a Grand Slam, semifinals, quarterfinals.”“Grand Slams are the tournaments where you want to perform your best,” Djokovic continued. “I’m sure we both are very much aware of that fact, and it’s why we get to play on a high level against each other and we push each other to the limit, in a way.”Djokovic said he would watch footage of his loss to Wawrinka here last year, which he had not yet brought himself to revisit.“Probably now is the time,” he said playfully. “I will not watch the last point of that match. Everything else is fine.”A version of this article appears in print on January 29, 2015, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Facing Player With a Top Serve, Djokovic Does Him One Better.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.