AdvertisementSupported byBy Karen CrouseLOS ANGELES — Pitcher Brett Anderson describes himself “as pretty boring, for the most part.” Of course he does. He specializes in misdirection.In a crowded bar, Anderson would be the one seated in a corner booth, drawing scant notice while scoping out the action, speaking only to make a wry remark that would slay his tablemates.When it was suggested to Clayton Kershaw that Anderson was quiet, he smiled and said, “To you guys.” Kershaw has known Anderson, who is scheduled to start against the Mets on Monday when the teams’ National League division series moves to Citi Field, longer than any Dodger. He was in South Bend, Ind., on the frigid April night in 2007 when Anderson made his professional debut for the Silver Hawks.“I remember I couldn’t feel my hands,” said Kershaw, who started for the Silver Hawks’ opponent, the Great Lakes Loons.Anderson put up better numbers, but Kershaw’s team won. Born 47 days apart in 1988, Anderson and Kershaw were 19 then. They’re so much more comfortable now.“It was so cold that night, I’m sure both of us were thinking, ‘What are we doing here?’ ” Anderson said Thursday, on the eve of Kershaw’s start in their postseason opener.He added, “It’s fun now to see how far we’ve come, obviously playing on the same team, getting ready to pitch in postseason games.”The left-handed Anderson, 27, has a wicked sinker and a stealth slider. Since joining the Dodgers this season, he has added to his repertory the superpower of invisibility, a function of pitching behind two Cy Young Award winners, Kershaw and Zack Greinke.“I like it because I can sit back and watch and judge and send my sarcastic tweets out and not have to deal with all of the hoopla that comes with being one of the best pitchers in the game,” Anderson said. “I can slide in behind them and hopefully give us a chance to win like I’ve done for the most part this year.”In a career-high 31 starts, Anderson was 10-9 with a 3.69 E.R.A. He has pitched 1801/3 innings, more than in the three previous seasons combined, when he was slowed by elbow ligament surgery, a herniated disk in his back, a broken bone in his pitching hand and a right-foot stress fracture.“He should be proud of his year,” Dodgers Manager Don Mattingly said. “He’s been really good, I mean, really good for us all year long.”Mattingly added: “I think he answered a lot of questions for himself in terms of what he’s capable of. I think he’s answered questions around baseball that this guy can pitch.”Anderson is used to being eclipsed by Kershaw and Greinke, whose success, he said, “motivates me to do what I can to get on that level.” But on Monday he figures to be overshadowed by the Mets’ Matt Harvey, who guaranteed extra scrutiny for his playoff debut by showing up late last week for a pre-series practice. Having made playoff appearances for the Oakland Athletics in 2012 and 2013, Anderson may be the starting pitcher who feels more at home at Citi Field.“I’m excited,” Anderson said. “It’s going to be a little cooler in New York, and I sweat a lot, so I like that aspect.”Anderson was speaking in the climate-controlled Dodgers clubhouse while the temperature outside climbed toward 90 degrees. At one point, he reached into his windbreaker pocket, retrieved a stick of balm and absent-mindedly coated his lips while listening to a question. He capped the stick and casually dropped it into his toiletries bag, a jaw-dropping gesture to those who knew Anderson earlier in his career.Beginning in high school and continuing through his first few years in the big leagues, Anderson stood his lip balms in his locker like soldiers in formation, with the labels facing out, before leaving the clubhouse. It was one of the myriad rituals that Anderson has shed like old skin. Speaking of skin, he won’t wear a jersey if the sleeve touches his elbow. It is one of the few superstitions he has been unable to break.“Before, I had tics and all kinds of stuff,” Anderson said. “Now, you play enough games, you get hurt enough, all the O.C.D. kind of stuff goes out the window because you think, you do this, you’re going to stay healthy, but then you don’t. So now I just go out and work hard. The hard work has paid off more than the O.C.D. kind of stuff.”Before baseball became his business, it was his babysitter. His father, Frank, a baseball coach, was climbing the college ranks during his son’s childhood.“They had a college student pick me up from elementary school, they would drop me off at the baseball field and lock the gate behind me, and then they would find me after practice,” Anderson said, adding: “I was a baseball rat. I don’t ever remember a time where I wasn’t going to the field or around baseball or playing or watching my dad’s games.”Anderson’s father was the pitching coach at Texas in 2002 when the Longhorns won the College World Series. No one knew that one of the future major leaguers in the victorious team photograph was its 14-year-old bat boy, Anderson.After the 2003 college season, Anderson’s father accepted the head coaching job at Oklahoma State.“When I was younger, my dad was recruiting a lot; he was gone because he was trying to build his career and stuff,” Anderson said. “That’s one of the reasons he took the job at Oklahoma State, to be able to watch me pitch, because he had seen me pitch maybe once my freshman year.”Coming out of high school, Anderson was selected by the Arizona Diamondbacks in the second round of the 2006 amateur draft. If he had not turned pro, he said, he would have played either at Texas or in Stillwater for his father, who became an assistant coach at Houston shortly after being fired by Oklahoma State in 2012.He wondered if he had made the right decision that first month in the Midwest League when he took the mound for the Silver Hawks with fingers that were numb from the cold.“There were a couple of times where I was like, Oh, I could be in college at Oklahoma State or Texas, where it’s warm,” Anderson said.Looking at the arc of his career, which has had more bends than his breaking ball, Anderson said: “I was lucky. I ended up being fairly talented, I worked hard and it worked out.”Advertisement