

 Michael Powell
 

SPORTS OF THE TIMES
JAN. 27, 2015
PHOENIX —  The charm of the N.F.L. is that every once in a while, in its utterly controlled and contrived fashion, it goes so wonderfully meta that it folds in on itself.So we have the Super Bowl media day, which marries the American love of carnivals with its adoration of marketing. Everyone is a prop, as players and coaches sit, swami style, in separate purple booths as the hoi polloi gather round. Everyone chats simultaneously and says little.“I don’t have to answer your question,” Patriots tight end Rob Gronkowski explained, amiably. “I can deflect it. That’s how we’re trained.”Or so it usually goes. Except the Seattle Seahawks, a looser agglomeration of public personalities than the New England Patriots, jumped the tracks. (“I embrace media day because I don’t care what you think, honestly,” Seahawks defensive lineman Michael Bennett told reporters. On the possibility of beating Peyton Manning and Tom Brady in consecutive Super Bowls, “It’s like Madonna and Marilyn Monroe.”)AdvertisementThe Seahawks’ most glorious smack talk came on the subject of footballs deflated below the league standard. The Patriots were found to possess 11 such footballs in their A.F.C. championship game against the Indianapolis Colts. Quarterback Tom Brady has a stated preference for softer footballs.AdvertisementThe N.F.L. has investigated this allegation, after its desultory fashion. Its lead investigator says it could be weeks before the investigation concludes. Or peters out, as the case may be.Seahawks cornerback Richard Sherman gained a national reputation after he issued a chest-thumping diatribe following a big victory a year ago. He is in fact a thoughtful man, and he pieced two and two together this past Sunday. He noted that Robert K. Kraft, the wealthy owner of the Patriots, is a close and reliable ally of Roger Goodell, the wealthy commissioner of the N.F.L.Who’s going to win? What color will Katy Perry’s hair be? What about the commercials? Make your Super Bowl picks and predictions and share your ballot with your friends.“Will they be punished?” Sherman asked of the Patriots. “Probably not. Not as long as Robert Kraft and Goodell are still taking pictures at their respective homes. I think he was just at Kraft’s house last week for the A.F.C. championship. Talk about conflict of interest.”Sherman’s desire to connect the dots of wealth and influence did not please Kraft. He deplaned in Phoenix on Monday and unburdened himself.Like his coach, Bill Belichick — who showed up for media day in rime-of-the-ancient-beachcomber wear, with old jeans, an old sweatshirt, and old flip-flops — Kraft portrayed himself as a man of science, talking of his careful study of the physics of ball inflation.Then the owner tossed down. Many, he said, have made “scarring accusations against our coach, quarterback and staff.”If the league is “not able to definitively determine that our organization tampered with the air pressure in the footballs,” Kraft said, “I would expect and hope that the league would apologize to our entire team and in particular, Coach Belichick and Tom Brady.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Kraft’s statement rewarded the inner deconstructionist, not the least his use of “definitively.” That sets a high adjectival bar. It is possible that league investigators, an indefatigable lot, will locate a video of Belichick and Brady chuckling and holding footballs up to the light as they insert pins and deflate each one. Anything short of that standard, however, and Kraft wants that league apology gift-wrapped.AdvertisementFox Sports reported recently that league investigators had focused on a “person of interest” — a lone ball boy in the Patriots’ employ. He was seen, we’re told by sources unknown, taking the footballs into the men’s room.Perhaps the league has unearthed the most assertive ball boy in history. But it sounds akin to federal prosecutors focusing intently on the Gambino crime family before targeting the kid who delivers pizza pies to the crime headquarters.
CreditDoug Mills/The New York Times        Fortunately, we can turn again to Richard Sherman. He sat in his purple booth on media day and returned to the question of those buddies Kraft and Goodell.“Did all these people come out and support him after the Ray Rice thing? Or was it Robert Kraft?” Sherman asked. “Who was the first person to call him and support him? Give it to me.”Kraft, in fact, was one of the very first owners to offer comfort to Goodell through his many dark nights last year. In the autumn, Kraft sat for an interview with the CBS anchor Charlie Rose. Rose, who is a painfully accommodating fellow, lauded Kraft — who was identified as the Master Kraftsman — for having a team valued at $2.6 billion.Their chitchat then detoured to that video of Baltimore Ravens running back Ray Rice delivering his left hook to the head of his fiancée in an elevator. Don’t blame Goodell, Kraft told Rose. “He had no knowledge of this video.”A subsequent and no doubt definitive — because the league says so — N.F.L. investigation determined that Goodell had not seen the video.Kraft showed up at media day and poked at Sherman, accusing him — the nerve! — of engaging in personal marketing. It’s important to realize that as the N.F.L. brands itself across the collective forehead of America, it is intent on stamping out the personality of individual players, from banning end zone dances to post-quarterback sack boogaloos to stomping on the power of the players union.Sherman didn’t much seem to care Tuesday. “I kind of go to the beat of my own drum,” he noted.That day ended on a curious note. The N.F.L. quickly transcribes and disseminates highlights from all of the various players in their various booths. So with expectation I turned to the Sherman transcript. It included his quote about the beat of his own drum.AdvertisementI did not find his comments on Kraft and Goodell. Maybe the N.F.L. wasn’t so meta after all.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »