AdvertisementSupported byCanadiens 1, Rangers 0By Pat PickensFor much of Thursday night’s Rangers-Canadiens game, two of the N.H.L.’s best goaltenders showed just how good they are.Carey Price and Henrik Lundqvist matched each other save for save as the teams traded chances like prizefighters dealing punches. But late in regulation, Lundqvist blinked.Max Pacioretty scored the game’s only goal, and the Canadiens dealt the Rangers a 1-0 loss at Madison Square Garden.Lundqvist stopped 25 shots, taking a tough-luck loss. The Rangers failed to score more than one goal for the second consecutive game since the All-Star break, falling for the fourth time in seven games. The Rangers have been shut out three times in that stretch, and only Carl Hagelin’s goal late in a loss to the Islanders on Tuesday kept them from four scoreless efforts.“We are doing a lot of good things, but we can try to get more traffic in front of the goalies and make it a little tougher for them,” Lundqvist said. “But we are working really hard, and we are not far off. We need a couple of bounces here or there, and it will be a different story.” Pacioretty picked up his 22nd goal of the season on a seemingly innocuous shot from the half boards that eluded Lundqvist’s glove with 4 minutes 17 seconds left in regulation. He nearly added an empty-net goal, but the puck hit the post.“I don’t expect him to shoot,” Lundqvist said. “I get caught too deep, and when I’m about to push to my left, I get stuck in the post. There’s no excuse. I have to expect him to shoot even though it’s a weird angle or whatever. I have to stop it. This is on me, and it’s a tough feeling.”Defenseman Ryan McDonagh said he might have screened Lundqvist on Pacioretty’s goal.“He made a smart play and shot it right through my legs,” McDonagh said. “It’s tough for any goalie to pick up a shot like that with a quick release and a little bit of a screen by myself.”Price made the goal stand up, stopping all 24 Rangers shots for his third shutout of the season. Two of Price’s best saves came in the third period. Less than a minute into it, he shut down Rick Nash’s short-handed breakaway with a poke check.Later in the period, Price acrobatically kept the game scoreless with a shoulder save on Martin St. Louis. After Price stopped Derek Stepan’s initial shot, St. Louis batted the puck off Price’s shoulder, and Price covered the puck before another Ranger could put it in.“We got some real good looks,” Rangers Coach Alain Vigneault said, “but we obviously met a goaltender who was on top of his game tonight.”Advertisement