
TV Sports By                     
 RICHARD SANDOMIR
 
JAN. 29, 2015
Bill Belichick’s funereal demeanor is so rooted in the public imagination that any smile or moment of loquaciousness is like finding a great prize in a Cracker Jack box. You cherish little diversions like the one at Super Bowl media day on Tuesday when he talked about a hand-held monkey puppet.For most of us, it was more fun than watching him dolefully deny the involvement of his New England Patriots in the deflation of 11 footballs used in the A.F.C. championship game. But the scandal did allow him to play Mr. Wizard by giving his summary of the effects of climate change on football air pressure.Melancholy Bill isn’t always present, or so network production crews have found when they meet with him a day or so before each game. At times he can be downright friendly.“Most people would assume that Belichick would be the worst,” said NBC’s Cris Collinsworth, who will call Sunday’s Super Bowl with Al Michaels. “But in many ways he’s the best.”AdvertisementThe privileged access to Belichick, as well as other coaches and players, derives from the billions that the networks pay to carry N.F.L. games. In these private gatherings, announcers, producers and directors ask coaches about the directions their teams may take and what story lines could be emphasized.AdvertisementIn exchange, they implicitly guarantee that they will not use their knowledge before a play or formation is deployed.“We saw that pass that Julian Edelman threw in practice,” Collinsworth said, referring to the surprise touchdown pass that Edelman, a receiver, tossed in the Patriots’ divisional playoff game against Baltimore. “But the last thing I’m going to say is, ‘Oh, boy, they like to do this with their receivers.’ So you can’t tip your hand. You only get one chance if you bury these guys.The coach of the New England Patriots does not smile often at news conferences, but he managed a couple when he was asked an “oddball question” on Wednesday.“What probably helped me most was going to law school,” Collinsworth said, “knowing the obligation of what you can and can’t say, the attorney-client privilege. That’s probably nothing that we take more seriously than that.”How much the networks learn about strategy or game calling depends on the cooperation of the coaches. Belichick would seem to be a reluctant, difficult, willful subject, Dick Cheney in a hoodie.“On a scale of 1 to 10, Bill is a 1 sometimes, and a 10 some others,” said Phil Simms, CBS’s lead N.F.L. analyst. “The bigger the game, the better his spirits, friendlier he is and the more he tells you.”As long as you understand Belichick’s ground rules, he said, the meetings can be illuminating, even fun.“He won’t tell you his game plan or his injury situation,” Collinsworth said. “But if you want to want to talk about football, he’ll talk to you in a wide-eyed, energetic, enthusiastic way.”AdvertisementWhen Belichick met with NBC before the New England-Baltimore game, Belichick gave Collinsworth a mini-tutorial on blocking that was “15 minutes of the most brilliant football stuff you ever want to hear.”But Belichick is also likely to tease network personnel or vent about a remark made by an announcer during a game.Who’s going to win? What color will Katy Perry’s hair be? What about the commercials? Make your Super Bowl picks and predictions and share your ballot with your friends.“You go into these meetings, you put your reputation on the line,” said Collinsworth, who recalled Belichick castigating him for comments he made about Spygate — when New England clandestinely videotaped the Jets.Simms has known Belichick since 1979 and has called, with his partner, Jim Nantz, about as many Patriots games as anyone.“I do find him forthcoming about game plans — not often, but when the situation is right,” he said. “I’ll move around in practice, he’ll walk by and we’ll talk about what will happen in the game and he’s honest in his assessment of the other team. He’ll give credit to them or he’ll say, ‘Come on, Simms, they’re not really good.’ ”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Simms said that one of his strategies — given his film study and knowledge of teams’ offenses and defenses — is to avoid asking Belichick anything about a coming game.“I’ll ask him about football history,” he said. “I’ll say, ‘Bill, I saw a game on TV and they were playing the single-wing formation and he’ll say, ‘Oh, the single wing was created in 1942,’ and we’ll get into these unbelievable discussions.”He added: “With all coaches, I don’t ask pertinent questions too often. I’ve gone years without asking Bill a serious football question. I don’t need to.”Jay Rothman, the producer of ESPN’s “Monday Night Football,” said that Belichick had a comfort level with the network’s analyst, Jon Gruden, a former coach. “He knows he’s talking to one of his own,” Rothman said.But respect for a fellow coach can advance the relationship between Belichick and ESPN only so far.“Bill will never give it all up,” he added. “He is very guarded. Some meetings are better than others. He’s cordial. He’s not a monster. He’s got a huge passion for the history of the game. One time, we gave him a ‘Monday Night Football’ game ball that we had for the 40th season. He loved it. It was like I’d given him the Lombardi Trophy.”Email: sandor@nytimes.com A version of this article appears in print on January 30, 2015, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Behind the Scenes, Network Production Crews Find a Friendlier Belichick.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »