AdvertisementSupported byBy Karen CrouseSCOTTSDALE, Ariz. — Tiger Woods took a lemon and squeezed a two-over-par 73 out of it Thursday, proving there is nothing wrong with his mental game. After nearly six months away from full-field competition, Woods’s golf remains a little green. If it were a piece of fruit, he would let it ripen a few months before picking it.Woods stood at five over par after his first 11 holes at the Phoenix Open, at which point the gap separating him and the early leader, Keegan Bradley, who posted a six-under 65, was a gulf. Down the stretch, Woods picked up ground despite using his 4-iron or putter on chips because he did not trust his wedge. By the day’s end, Bradley had been overtaken by Ryan Palmer, who carded a 64 before play was suspended because of darkness with nine players on the course. “I fought back to give myself a decent look going into the weekend,” Woods said. “I’m proud of that, because that takes a lot of mental energy to be able to fight back like that.”Woods, a 14-time champion in major tournaments, is trying to find his game on the fly. While on the mend last year after back surgery, he revamped his swing to make it more like the one he had as an amateur. The thoughts involved in that process became distracting chatter in Woods’s head as he tried to keep pace with his 20-something playing competitors, Jordan Spieth (70) and Patrick Reed (71).“It was just about trying to be so committed to the swing change and do it,” Woods said. “I’m so much more shallow now than I used to be, and it’s hard sometimes.”Woods’s round got off to an inauspicious start when his drive at No. 1 nearly went out of bounds on the right, leading to a bogey 5. It was a harbinger of his day. He started with four 5s on his scorecard. “I started to fix it on the back nine,” Woods said. “This is my second tournament in six months, so I just need tournament rounds like this where I can fight, fight through it, turn it around, grind to through it and make adjustments on the fly.”It was a long and frustrating afternoon, but on the ninth hole, a fan coaxed a smile out of Woods. After another errant drive, Woods was walking toward his ball, which was nestled in thick grass near the lip of a fairway bunker. Outside the ropes, a man dressed in a Richard Sherman Seahawks replica jersey and a blue fedora with the Seahawks logo followed him down the fairway, shouting encouragement with such pitch and passion that Woods glanced in the man’s direction and grinned.Woods found two fairways and three greens on the front side and three fairways on the back. About the only comfort he could take from his wildness off the tee was that all his forays into the crowd produced no security breaches. After being heckled here one year by a fan who turned out to have a handgun in his fanny pack, and another year dodging an orange hurled in his direction as he lined up a putt, Woods crossed this tournament off his list.Security concerns, he said, were a factor in his 14-year gap between starts here. But on Thursday the fans, listed at a tournament-record 118,461, were respectful, if rowdy. The security headaches never reached the migraine stage, but there were a few moments of exasperation, including when a man in a Seahawks polo shirt protested as a police officer held him while Woods stood over his second shot.And on the par-5 15th, a man reached over a baby on his lap to pick up Woods’s ball when it came to a rest. When told to drop the ball, he sheepishly complied. The 156-yard 16th, which puts the par in party, has added thousands more seats since Woods aced it in 1997. A supersize crowd greeted Woods on Thursday, and it got so loud that he twice backed off his tee shot. He made a par, then exited with a wry smile and a tip of his cap.The party atmosphere extended to the skies. Two small planes buzzed around the course trailing banners, including one advertising a marijuana dispensary.Woods drove the 341-yard 17th hole, but missed his 20-foot eagle attempt and settled for a birdie. He eagled the par-5 13th. Those were the highlights. His play around the greens was ragged. If he wants to perform better, he will have to make up with his wedge.“I have a new grind on my wedge and sometimes it’s hard to trust,” Woods said, adding, “Some of my shots were into the green with tight pins, and either I’ll flop it or bump it, and I chose to bump it.”While Woods tries to groove his game on the go, Bradley’s game is exactly where he wants it. Asked on the eve of the tournament if he was working on anything in particular, Bradley said: “I’m past working on stuff. I’m more on a maintenance level right now.”Woods will get to that level. But, as he cautioned Thursday, it is not going to happen overnight. “That just takes time,” he said.Advertisement