AdvertisementSupported byOn BaseballBy Tyler KepnerST. LOUIS — Bob Gibson is almost 80 years old, a Hall of Famer and a titan of October, never shy with an opinion or insight. His spiritual equivalent on his old team, the St. Louis Cardinals, is Trevor Rosenthal, a 25-year-old reliever who had barely pitched at all before turning professional.“I’ll tell you right now: There’s one player in the major leagues that asks me more about my pitching than anybody, in all of the times I ever pitched or coached, and that’s the closer for the Cardinals,” Gibson said. “Every time he sees me. I make four or five trips throughout the year down there, and he seeks me out and sits down next to me, and we talk.”Gibson has written a new book, “Pitch by Pitch,” chronicling his record 17-strikeout performance in Game 1 of the 1968 World Series against the Detroit Tigers. It was the best of nine World Series starts for Gibson, who was 7-2 with a 1.89 E.R.A. and was twice named most valuable player.Gibson was often his own closer, completing eight of his nine World Series starts. The 2015 Cardinals had one complete game all season, and Rosenthal is their ninth-inning specialist. The game has changed, but the pressure of securing the final outs has not.“You definitely get the feeling that he gave it everything he had, every pitch,” Rosenthal said recently. “That’s always really evident when I’m talking to him: the effort that he gave. He didn’t even have to tell me that.”Rosenthal, who played shortstop for most of his time at Cowley County Community College in Kansas, made his first All-Star team this season. He had a 2.10 E.R.A. with 48 saves, and only three relievers threw more pitches in the National League.He was groomed as a starter in the minors, with a mix of pitches — changeup, breaking ball and a fastball that now averages 97.6 miles per hour — that seemed suitable for that role. But Rosenthal has pitched exclusively in the bullpen for St. Louis, and Gibson could sense his frustration in one of their conversations.“It was just the two of us sitting there, and he was lamenting the fact that he didn’t get to start,” Gibson said. “And I said to him: ‘That’s good, but do you really realize how important you are to this ball club, being the closer? Do you realize that?’ He just kind of blinked because his mind was set on being a starter, for whatever reason.“But he’s actually more important to the team than he would be as a starter because he’d pitch once a week, once every four or five days. He’s got a chance to go out every day or every other day and be meaningful to the team. I just explained that to him, and he nodded. He didn’t say anything; he just nodded. But I think he started to understand how important his job is to the ball club.”Rosenthal mostly listens, Gibson said, trying to absorb whatever he can. Rosenthal said he particularly enjoyed learning why Gibson stood where he did on the rubber — on the far right side against right-handed hitters, to add deception and make the ball look as if it was coming from behind their front shoulder.Rosenthal, who also cited the Hall of Famer Red Schoendienst, said that as long as some of the Cardinals’ greats were willing to offer their time, he should listen.“Bob is a guy I didn’t necessarily know a lot about until I was here and got to hear stuff about him and see his stats and the things that he did,” Rosenthal, who did not pitch in the Cardinals’ 6-3 loss to the Chicago Cubs on Saturday, said. “I don’t know if I was really looking for anything; I just tried to open the door for conversations. “It’s pretty amazing when you start talking to those guys, how much they pay attention to every game that we play. Even Red — they know how I pitch, they pay attention and they really care.”Gibson said he would be in St. Louis if the Cardinals beat the Cubs and advanced to the N.L. Championship Series. Gibson was often at his best against the Cubs; he shut them out 11 times, his most against any team.“Until you just told me, I wasn’t aware of that, that I had 11 shutouts against the Cubs,” Gibson said. “If I had to guess, I would have thought that I probably shut the Mets out more than anybody else. But I never thought about things like that.”Gibson (who shut out the Mets just four times, actually) did not think much about his World Series strikeout record while humbling the Tigers in the game he recounts in his book, which was written with Lonnie Wheeler. He took a moment to lift his cap to the crowd after breaking the record — but disguised it, he writes, as wiping sweat from his brow.Gibson beat Detroit again in Game 4 before falling to Mickey Lolich in Game 7. Still, his 1968 season stands as a benchmark in major league history, often cited when a pitcher like the Cubs’ Jake Arrieta gets especially hot.Arrieta had a 1.77 E.R.A. this season, then shut out Pittsburgh in the wild-card game. Impressive, for sure — but Gibson, in 1968, had a record 1.12 E.R.A. before his standout World Series.“You never know that that’s going to last,” Gibson said. “Somebody’s going to come along better and break it, eventually. That’s the last thing on your mind: ‘This is just great, nobody will ever touch this.’ No, you don’t think that way.“But it’s really nice to hear people compliment you when somebody else has done something good. Then you know that, Hmm, what I did was pretty good.”Advertisement