By KEN BELSONJAN. 29, 2015
PHOENIX — The N.F.L. said that the number of concussions fell 11.8 percent this season compared to 2013 as players adjust to new, stricter rules on helmet-to-helmet tackles.The league said that 202 concussions were diagnosed in the preseason and regular season in practices as well as games, down from 229 last season. The number of concussions has fallen 19.8 percent since 2011.The league said that concussions had declined even as it has introduced cameras on the sidelines, spotters in the press box and improved diagnostic techniques, all of which could have led to an increase in the number of reported concussions.“When we look back when we first started more precise data, they actually did go up,” said John York, the chairman of the San Francisco 49ers and the chair of the Owners Health and Safety Advisory Committee. “But since we implemented these rule changes, as well as talking to the coaches, talking to the players, referees, finding new ways to identify concussions, you’ve seen over the last three years, they’ve gone down.”AdvertisementThe league said that the number of concussions caused by helmet to helmet hits has fallen most dramatically. At the same time, the number of knee injuries has stayed roughly the same even though players are tackling opposing players by their legs more frequently.AdvertisementThe number of injuries in Thursday night games has continued to lag behind injuries suffered on Sundays and Mondays. Players have complained that they are more vulnerable to injury on Thursdays because they have less rest from the previous week’s game.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.OPTIONS FOR BALL INSPECTIONS The league’s competition committee will review procedures for handling game balls in the off-season, said Dean Blandino, the vice president for officiating of the N.F.L.In the future, game balls could be tested randomly to ensure they are properly inflated or tested during half time of each game, he said.Blandino’s comments come in the wake of the league’s investigation into why 11 of the 12 game balls used by the Patriots during the A.F.C. Championship game had less than the legal amount of air pressure.Blandino said that the Patriots’ game balls were properly inspected by Walt Anderson, the referee that day, before the game. During the first half of the game, the Colts advised the N.F.L. that at least one ball seemed to be underinflated. The balls were all then rechecked at halftime and reinflated.Blandino said it is not unusual for a ball to be taken out of a game, though it is typically because it is scuffed in some way.A version of this article appears in print on January 30, 2015, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: Fewer Reported Concussions.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.