AdvertisementSupported byBy Jeré LongmanFALL RIVER, Mass. — Aaron Hernandez wore a dark suit on Thursday, just as his former teammates with the New England Patriots had worn coats and ties earlier in the week. The difference was that they were flying to the Super Bowl and he was walking into his trial on a charge of first-degree murder.Mr. Hernandez, 25, is charged with orchestrating the killing of a friend, Odin Lloyd, a 27-year-old semiprofessional football player who was found in a pit, shot six times, at an industrial park near Mr. Hernandez’s home in North Attleboro, Mass., on June 17, 2013.If convicted of first-degree murder, Mr. Hernandez would face life in prison without parole. He has pleaded not guilty.Prosecutors have said that Mr. Hernandez participated in the murder several days after Mr. Lloyd spoke at a Boston bar with individuals whom Mr. Hernandez did not like.During opening statements to the 12-woman, six-man jury on Thursday, the prosecutor Patrick Bomberg tried to place Mr. Hernandez and Mr. Lloyd together at the time of the killing. He said that DNA matching the two men was found on a marijuana cigarette at the industrial park.DNA evidence “consistent” with Mr. Hernandez’s was also found on a shell casing inside a Nissan Altima rented to the former Patriots tight end and driven by him the night of the shooting, Mr. Bomberg said.That casing matched other casings found at the industrial park that were shot from a .45-caliber Glock handgun, the prosecutor said. The gun itself has not been located.A footprint matching the retro Air Jordan sneakers that Mr. Hernandez wore that day was found at the industrial park, as well as a rear tire impression matching that of a Nissan Altima, Mr. Bomberg said.Cellphone activity and footage from surveillance cameras placed Mr. Hernandez and Mr. Lloyd together just before the killing and depicted Mr. Hernandez returning home without Mr. Lloyd in the rented Nissan, Mr. Bomberg said.The prosecutor showed jurors home surveillance video and said that it depicted Mr. Hernandez standing outside his basement and holding a gun after arriving home early on the morning of June 17, 2013.Prosecutors are not required to prove that Mr. Hernandez pulled the trigger to obtain a conviction, but have to show beyond a reasonable doubt that he knowingly participated in the commission of a crime and did so with criminal intent, Judge E. Susan Garsh told jurors.The trial is taking place in Bristol County Superior Court, about an hour south of Boston and across the street from the home of another famous defendant — Lizzie Borden, who in 1893 was acquitted here of the ax murders of her father and stepmother.Michael Fee, one of Mr. Hernandez’s lawyers, gave an impassioned defense of his client in his opening statement, saying, “Aaron Hernandez is an innocent man.”The police and prosecutors conducted a “sloppy and unprofessional” investigation and ignored or twisted evidence, Mr. Fee said. As soon as it was determined that Mr. Hernandez, a celebrated N.F.L. player, was a friend of Mr. Lloyd’s, Mr. Fee said, “Aaron never had a chance; it was over.”Both sides acknowledged that Mr. Lloyd supplied Mr. Hernandez with marijuana and that they often partied together. Evidence that the two men were together shortly before the killing was not proof that Mr. Hernandez committed a crime, Mr. Fee said.Mr. Hernandez had no motive to kill Mr. Lloyd, Mr. Fee said. Mr. Lloyd had been dating the sister of Mr. Hernandez’s fiancée and the two men might have become brothers-in-law, Mr. Fee said.Mr. Hernandez had recently played in the Super Bowl with New England against the Giants, had signed a $40 million contract extension, had a young daughter and had considered marriage, Mr. Fee said.“Aaron Hernandez was planning a future, not a murder,” Mr. Fee said.Shayanna Jenkins, Mr. Hernandez’s fiancée, with whom he has a 2-year-old daughter, attended court for Thursday’s opening statements. She and Mr. Hernandez gave each other brief, unsmiling glances as he entered the courtroom. Some observers have wondered whether Ms. Jenkins, who faces a charge of perjury relating to her appearance before a grand jury in the case, will testify against Mr. Hernandez.The chances of that seemed to recede somewhat as Ms. Jenkins spoke congenially with Mr. Hernandez’s brother, D. J., an assistant football coach at the University of Iowa and a former quarterback at Connecticut.Legal experts have said the largely circumstantial case does not appear to be as open-and-shut as many once believed. No murder weapon has been located. No independent witness to the shooting has come forward publicly. Two associates of Mr. Hernandez’s who are also charged with murder and will be tried separately — Carlos Ortiz and Ernest Wallace — are not on the state’s witness list.Judge Garsh has also disallowed text messages sent by Mr. Lloyd to his sister minutes before he was killed, saying that he was with “Nfl” and “just so you know.”Nor will prosecutors be allowed to mention additional murder charges that Mr. Hernandez faces in the 2012 shooting deaths of two men after they left a nightclub. Prosecutors have said there was tension among the men over a spilled drink. Mr. Hernandez has pleaded not guilty in that case.Robert K. Kraft, owner of the Patriots, and Bill Belichick, the head coach, could be called as witnesses in the current trial, which could last six to 10 weeks. Unlike at earlier hearings, though, the police said there were no fans wearing Patriots gear outside the courthouse on Thursday. Judge Garsh has forbidden the wearing of any sports-related gear inside the tiny courtroom.Across from the courthouse, a parking garage attendant named Shawn Randall, 47, wore a Patriots cap and tattoo. He said he had little sympathy for Mr. Hernandez.“He had his whole life ahead of him and he blew it,” Mr. Randall said. “For what? Stupidity.”Across the street, at the Lizzie Borden house that is now a museum and bed-and-breakfast, Tim Reyes, 23, a cook, said he considered Borden the “original O. J. Simpson.”“Everything pointed to her” before she was acquitted, Mr. Reyes said, adding that he considered Mr. Hernandez “the O. J. of the new age.” “He probably thinks he’s going to get off because of his stature,” Mr. Reyes said.Meanwhile, Thomas Quinn III, the district attorney of Bristol County, told The Herald News of Fall River that he planned to wear the jersey of a Patriots tight end while he watched Sunday’s Super Bowl. Not Mr. Hernandez’s jersey, of course, but Rob Gronkowski’s.Advertisement