AdvertisementSupported byOn TennisBy Christopher ClareyMELBOURNE, Australia — The un-rivalry is back with Maria Sharapova facing Serena Williams in the Australian Open final.It will be their 19th meeting, and Williams has won the last 15. Yet somehow there remains a dim light of hope that, at some point, Sharapova will rise up and turn their matches into something more compelling than a vehicle for Williams’s greatness.“Of course she has a chance,” Chris Evert said.It has been more than 10 years since Sharapova beat Williams, which is rather difficult to fathom in light of Sharapova’s extreme competitive streak, excellent power baseline game and Williams’s tendency to lose the plot and her self-control every once in a great while.Instead Sharapova has remained the opponent who sharpens Williams’s strokes and concentration like no other.When I asked Williams on Thursday how much pride she took in her record against Sharapova, she spoke frankly.“I take a lot of pride in it," she said. “I think my game matches up well against her. I love playing her. I think it’s fun. I love her intensity. For whatever reason, I love playing, I just have the time of my life.”To make matters even more enjoyable, Sharapova has won only one set in their last 11 matches. That was in the Miami final in 2013 when Sharapova won the first set, 6-4, and was still ahead and on serve in the second set at 3-2. Williams swept the next 10 games to close out another victory, one in which she converted all seven of her break-point opportunities.The scores in their four subsequent matches have been 6-1, 6-4; 6-4, 6-4; 6-2, 7-6 (7); and most recently, 6-4, 6-3, in the semifinals in Miami last year.“Serena always gets psyched up for Maria, whether it’s a pride thing or whatever it is,” Evert said in an interview Thursday night. “I mean, let’s face it. She plays her best tennis against Maria, and the thing is they are both matched pretty evenly in power but when it comes to the first serve and when it comes to the moving, in terms of defense, Serena is better. And so Maria’s game fits well with Serena’s because Serena can outmove her and outserve her, and that’s what she’s done in the past.”There is every reason to believe she can do it again Saturday night in the final. Williams has had her struggles this year against the younger generation, losing the opening set to Elina Svitolina of Ukraine and Garbiñe Muguruza of Spain before finding a deeper groove. She also was pushed hard by Madison Keys, the unseeded 19-year-old American, in the first set of her 7-6 (5), 6-2 semifinal victory Thursday.But Williams has served and competed well down the stretch in all of those matches. Evert, working here as an ESPN analyst, was particularly impressed by her performance against Keys, a great talent who began training at Evert’s academy in Boca Raton, Fla., at age 10 and was coached by Evert’s brother John and counseled by Evert herself.“I admire that first set Serena played today,” Evert said. “Because I’ve been there, playing Tracy Austin, when you play somebody that young who almost does everything as well, if not a little better than you. Serena had to have a lot of composure out there in that first set because the crowd was starting to get into it, and Madison was just slapping winners right and left and acing her. Serena had never been up against that type of power. This is a new look for her to see that, so I really have to admire the way she kept her cool.”Williams did not look terribly cool in the latter stages, shrieking “Come on” as if she were on the verge of an upset defeat instead of victory (Keys saving eight match points before succumbing certainly added to the anxiety). Though Williams has looked tense at times, she insisted that she had changed her outlook after losing early in the first three Grand Slam tournaments of 2014. She felt she was focused too hard then on winning her 18th major singles title.“After Wimbledon, I decided to just not necessarily not care but just relax,” she said. “It all kind of came back for me after that. And I think it’s been working.”Williams did win her 18th, at the United States Open, tying Evert and Martina Navratilova, for fourth on the career list. She is now in position to win a 19th and move into a tie for third with Helen Wills Moody, behind Margaret Court with 24 and Steffi Graf with 22.Evert and Navratilova presented Williams with an 18-carat gold bracelet on court in New York to commemorate the moment, but Evert said the plans if the tie is broken here are less ceremonious.“I’ll take her to dinner,” Evert said with a laugh. “You know, everybody thinks I’m hypocritical. They think I’m not sincere when I say I want her to win 19, but I do. I really do. I’m a big fan of her tennis. She deserves it.”Williams is 18-4 in Grand Slam singles finals, with one of those losses coming to Sharapova at Wimbledon in 2004, when Sharapova was just 17 and about to become a global brand. Sharapova is 5-4 in Grand Slam finals, with two of those losses coming to Williams, at the 2007 Australian Open and the 2013 French Open.But they both have won all four of the major singles titles, which makes them unique among active players. And they have experienced more frustration than satisfaction in Australia in recent years. Sharapova’s title came in 2008; Williams has not won here since 2010.Their best match in Melbourne — widely considered the best of all of their matches — came in the semifinals in 2005 when Williams saved three match points before closing out a 2-6, 7-5, 8-6 victory on her way to the trophy.Sharapova served for the match at 5-4 in the second set, only to lose her serve on a double fault. She served for it again at 5-4 in the third set. Williams saved the first match point when Sharapova smacked a big forehand long; the second with a clean forehand return winner off a second serve and the third with another forehand winner.“I don’t actually remember too much of it,” said Sharapova, who saved two match points of her own here in the second round against Alexandra Panova. “It was a very physical battle. It was tough to lose that one, definitely had a lot of chances.”That defeat, coming after two straight victories over Williams, was also the start of her losing streak. To end it, the consensus is that Sharapova must serve extremely well and that Serena must not.“If that happens, it’s a 50-50 shot once they get in the rallies,” said Evert, who also thought Sharapova needed to take big chances on second-serve returns, too.But Sharapova sounded prepared to be more patient than usual.“Her power and aggressiveness, I think that’s always made me a little bit too aggressive, maybe going for a little bit more than I had to,” said Sharapova, sounding subdued but not dejected. “You know, she’s great at making players hit that shot that you don’t necessarily have to go for.”Evert said if she were giving the pep talk, she would tell Sharapova to keep the score close “because everybody’s human.”“Serena’s going for her 19th,” Evert said. “I would say to Maria, ‘The pressure is all on Serena.'”Sharapova has spent a fair portion of her career talking about Williams and presumably thinking about Williams. They have had their share of off-court tension, and Sharapova made it clear in an interview with The New York Times before the 2014 season that she respected Williams more on the court than off.But she also acknowledged that the challenge posed by Williams was a source of great motivation.“Of course,” she said, before adding a caveat. “I’ve never been one to compare myself to others: from the beginning of my career, when it started with Anna Kournikova, and I’m certainly never going to finish my career comparing myself to anyone. Everyone will always have their paths and their ways and every individual is different.”That may be true, but for now one individual reigns over this women’s tennis era from a great height, partly at the expense of Sharapova. No matter what happens Saturday, Williams is guaranteed to remain No. 1 next week and Sharapova No. 2.But the rankings surely won’t matter if the Russian can finally find a way – any way – to get past her un-rival and hoist the trophy.Advertisement