By BENJAMIN HOFFMANJAN. 29, 2015
PHOENIX — The smiling Marshawn Lynch from media day was officially gone Thursday when the Seattle Seahawks running back faced the news media for the final time before the Super Bowl. No longer content to answer every question with a stock answer like “I’m just here so I don’t get fined,” Lynch briefly addressed the large crowd and tried to explain his point of view.“I don’t know what story you’re all trying to get out of me,” Lynch said. “I don’t know what image you’re trying to portray of me. It don’t matter what you all say about me.”He talked about being more comfortable in his own environment, and he said he felt all of the attention was based on people not liking him.“You’re all mad at me,” he said. “And if you’re not mad at me, then what are you all here for?”The Seattle Seahawks running back replied to every question at a Super Bowl news conference with a variation of “you know why I’m here.”Done with his introduction, Lynch glanced at his phone and said, “For this next three minutes I’ll just be looking at you all the way you’re looking at me.”AdvertisementOver the course of his remaining time he proceeded to deflect all questions, rarely giving a straight answer. He occasionally would interject the questioning reporters with statements like, “Shout out, Oakland, California,” and “Shout out to my teammates.” When asked if he could say anything in Spanish he replied, “Hola.” When asked about the availability of his Beast Mode hat, which reportedly could lead to his being fined by the N.F.L. as it is not officially licensed merchandise, he directed people to Beastmodeonline.com.AdvertisementThings got chilly, however, as time was running out. He declared he had 20 seconds left and was asked to give a prediction for the game.Lynch looked directly at the reporter who was at the end of his table and said calmly, “I’m going to sit here with my mouth closed and look at you.”He then delivered on his promise, intently staring at the reporter before an alarm on his phone went off and he walked away from the podium, finally free of his media obligations for the week.A version of this article appears in print on January 30, 2015, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: Statement and Stares From Lynch.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.