By BENJAMIN HOFFMANJAN. 29, 2015
PHOENIX —  In professional sports, being listed as 6 feet tall often means you are somewhere between 5-8 and 5-11. The rounding up is considered a courtesy, since being undersize carries something of a stigma. Julian Edelman, New England’s jack-of-all-trades wide receiver, freely admits that he is 5 feet 10 even if the Patriots’ website used to give him a couple of extra inches.It makes sense for Edelman to be honest, since nothing about him fits the mold of a wide receiver in the N.F.L. To go along with being short, he also has a lumberjack beard. He is fairly soft-spoken, and while his nickname, Minitron, is an allusion to Calvin Johnson’s nickname, Megatron, little about Edelman, other than his production, would remind anyone of Johnson, the Detroit Lions’ star receiver. For reasons known mostly to him, Edelman would rather be known as Squirrel.Two hundred thirty-one players were selected ahead of Edelman in the 2009 draft; scouts could not decide what position he should play. A supremely athletic quarterback in his time at Kent State, Edelman was considered a student of the game but not a legitimate prospect to remain behind center. The Patriots, as they often have with other players, saw an opportunity to take advantage of Edelman’s athleticism and reshape him for a position at which they believed he would be a better fit.For Edelman, that meant serving as a kick and punt returner, occasionally filling in as a defensive back, and carrying out a long apprenticeship at receiver. Going into 2013, it was unclear if he would ever fully make the transition, with many still considering him a quarterback trying to play wide receiver. His stock was low enough that the Patriots let him become a free agent after that season before bringing him back at a minimum salary.The Patriots wide receiver and punt returner talked about his role on the team.In the past two seasons, all the questions about his ability to adapt have fallen away. Edelman has made 197 receptions — a total surpassed in the N.F.L. in that period only by Antonio Brown and Demaryius Thomas.AdvertisementCoach Bill Belichick and Josh McDaniels, the Patriots’ offensive coordinator, like to zig when you expect them to zag, so in the divisional round against Baltimore they took Edelman, now their star receiver, back to his quarterback roots with a play that is sure to be in the heads of Seattle’s defense anytime Edelman is on the field in Super Bowl XLIX Sunday night.AdvertisementIn the third quarter, with the Patriots trailing the Ravens by a touchdown, Tom Brady took the snap and threw across the field to his left to Edelman. Quickly, Edelman lofted the ball more than 30 yards into the waiting arms of Danny Amendola, who caught it for a game-tying 51-yard touchdown. The play fooled Baltimore so badly that no one was anywhere near Amendola when he caught the pass.Brady praised the play’s execution, and he said he was impressed that Edelman could still look the part of a quarterback when the team called his number.“He threw it better than me,” Brady said. “That was probably the best pass all season, unfortunately.”Who’s going to win? What color will Katy Perry’s hair be? What about the commercials? Make your Super Bowl picks and predictions and share your ballot with your friends.Amendola did not seem ready to turn the offense over to Edelman permanently — the pass was Edelman’s first in the league — but he said it was a lot of fun to finally try the play in a game after working on it in practice.“It was a great pass,” Amendola said. “It was a little wobbly, but he put it where it needed to be.”Edelman is most likely done throwing for some time — the element of surprise is the key to such a play — and this week he dismissed the idea that his experience as a quarterback has much to do with his success as a wide receiver.“Mentally it helps me here and there,” Edelman said of his years spent at quarterback. “But the game is so much more complex at this level. Everything you learned in college is like a rough draft for the league.”AdvertisementEdelman said the real key for his ascension was a nearly endless amount of film study that was focused on wide receivers who have had success specifically with Brady.“I’ve watched a lot of film on Wes,” Edelman said of Wes Welker, who was the team’s primary slot receiver until 2012. “I was fortunate to get to play behind him and learn how he played the position.”He also watched film on past Patriots receivers like Troy Brown, Deion Branch and Jabar Gaffney. He even took a close look at Randy Moss’s time with New England, even though physically he and Moss could not be more different.“I’m not the same style as him, or body type,” Edelman said. “But if you take a little bit of everything from all of those guys, they’re such smart football players. They were hardworking. They had little niches that they could do.”To call Edelman hardworking would be an understatement. And despite his run of success as a receiver, he did not rule out taking on other roles at the team’s request.“Anytime the coach asks you to do anything around here, you’re going to jump on it,” he said. “That’s ultimately how I made this team, and I take pride in going out there and trying to contribute in any kind of way I can.”A version of this article appears in print on January 30, 2015, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: By Breaking Mold of Receiver, Edelman Fits In With Patriots.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.