
Sports of The Times By                     
 GEORGE VECSEY
 
JAN. 29, 2015

CreditBruce Bennett/Getty Images        Martin Brodeur is a New York icon who belongs in the same company as Jeter and Seaver, Clyde and Broadway Joe, L. T. and Jackie Robinson and the Babe.It doesn’t matter that he played the fourth team sport of the region, and it doesn’t matter that he played across the Hudson River for the New Jersey Devils, his team for 21 seasons. He is a New York star, although he is retiring as a member of the St. Louis Blues, giving hints that he just might stay on in the front office past this season. That would be a gaffe the Devils would have to answer for over the years.Brodeur won three Stanley Cups, glittering in the mental New York landscape, like the Statue of Liberty, raising her torch in her right hand the way Brodeur raised his left glove while catching a screamer in front of the net. Records turn athletes into icons: Brodeur won 691 games, more than any other N.H.L. goalie.Now he is emphatically part of the Blues. In his bilingual retirement news conference in St. Louis on Thursday, he raved about his experience in his new town without mentioning Lou Lamoriello, who runs every aspect of the Devils, until he was asked about his future.Advertisement“For anybody that thinks me and Lou are not on the same page, everybody is wrong,” Brodeur said.But the best goalie in the history of the New York region is working in the front office in another city, at least through this season. Icons do sometimes move away. A son of Montreal, speaking articulate English with a charming Québécois accent, Mahr-TAN Broh-DYOOR played outside the city limits and finished up in Missouri, but somewhere along the way, New York adopted him the way we even take in sons of Boston as mayors. If they can make it here. ...AdvertisementBrodeur made it in New York, playing for a franchise once labeled “Mickey Mouse” by none other than Wayne Gretzky in 1984.Gretzky was making an uncharacteristic slight of a relocated franchise, but that was before Brodeur won three Cups (and reached two other finals). Twelve years later, Gretzky opted for a hitch in Madison Square Garden as part of his dossier as world superstar.According to the New York scale of values, one Stanley Cup in the World’s Most Expensive Arena is worth 10 or 12 Cups off the island of Manhattan. Mark Messier made himself into a New York legend by willing the Rangers to one — count it, one — Stanley Cup, in 1994.Brodeur was a rookie that season, losing to the Rangers in the Eastern Conference finals. He would eventually play 1,259 games for the Devils (before his seven-game coda with St. Louis), 21 seasons, putting him in the same amorphous, arbitrary category of New York icons along with the likes of Derek Jeter and Mariano Rivera; Walt Frazier and his mates when the Knicks were delightful, not execrable; Lawrence Taylor, whose aggressive linebacking helped win two Super Bowls for the Giants; and Joe Namath, who won the only Super Bowl the Jets have ever won.Then there are the Islanders, who play on the flatlands of Nassau County, farther from Midtown than Brodeur did. The Islanders became one of the great North American teams, winning four Stanley Cups from 1980 through 1983. Stars like Mike Bossy and Denis Potvin and Coach Al Arbour celebrated the Cups on Hempstead Turnpike, not along the Canyon of Heroes, and their lasting impression in the Garden may be the vulgar Potvin chant. Next season the Islanders will shuffle into Brooklyn, but for the moment they are raising echoes of an ancient civilization.The meandering Nets, now in Brooklyn, managed to lose Julius Erving from Long Island and got lost in the swamplands of New Jersey in an arena now being shut down. Brodeur played most of his career there, and lit up the dump.Brodeur’s long run puts him in the pantheon of New York sports icons that is littered with Yankees.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Some stars played their whole careers in New York, but the rules were different back in the day, because players were bound by contract until their teams had no use for them. The Boys of Summer were heroes in Brooklyn for a full postwar decade partly because the players could not entertain higher offers. The most historic figure was Robinson, but Dodgers management had no conscience about trying to trade him to the hated Giants after the 1956 season.AdvertisementTo be fair, one final fling elsewhere cannot be held against superstars of any time or place. If it’s not the money, it’s the love of the game, or both. Christy Mathewson departed the Giants after 635 games to manage the Reds in 1916 and let himself pitch one complete game (nine innings, eight runs, one victory). Ruth, who invented himself with the Red Sox, became redundant with the Yankees and immigrated to the Boston Braves. The Babe hit three homers in one game and soon retired — to return to New York, his adopted home, living on the Upper West Side, a familiar sight around Riverside Drive and Broadway. Tom Seaver was let loose twice by the Mets and pitched a no-hitter for the Reds and won his 300th game for the White Sox, but he wears a Mets cap in the Hall of Fame as homage to the 1969 championship.Willie Mays came back from San Francisco in 1972, to the city where he had begun in 1951. He returned as a beloved relative, not only of the city but also of Joan Whitney Payson, the owner of the Mets, whose family had once owned a small piece of the Giants. In her jolly, entitled way, she meant no harm, even if her nostalgia led to the unfortunate game in the 1973 World Series when Mays stumbled in the outfield and on the basepaths, his great reflexes clearly shot. He retired after that Series, but everybody understood the sentimentality behind his homecoming.The elegant Frazier even played three seasons in Cleveland, for goodness’ sakes, after the Knicks had no use for him. In 2013, Frazier told Brooke Gladstone of the radio station WNYC about his time in Cleveland: “I used to get dressed up and go out and wear my mink. Guys’d go, ‘Clyde, where are you going?’ ” So he stayed in and read self-help books, and later books to improve his vocabulary, before going home to New York to display his polysyllabic splendor.Then there was the strange sight of Namath, who also wore furs in New York, out of his element with the Los Angeles Rams in 1977. His knees were shot, and he lasted four games. He lives in Florida now, but he will always be Broadway Joe. It doesn’t get more New York than that.Martin Brodeur, not quite ready to retire, played seven games with St. Louis this winter but realized he was getting in the way as the third goalie. However, he made himself so popular that the Blues asked him to stay around for the rest of this season.Lamoriello, who fortified the Devils’ dynasty with tight control, has talked about bringing Brodeur home, but after his ceremony in St. Louis on Thursday, it did not sound at all certain that Brodeur would be back anytime soon.Email: geovec@nytimes.com A version of this article appears in print on January 30, 2015, on Page B15 of the New York edition with the headline: A New York Icon Who Shone Just Outside the Bright Lights.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »