By BEN ROTHENBERGJAN. 29, 2015
MELBOURNE, Australia —  What began as a battle against a former coach turned into a tribute to a new one as Andy Murray reached a Grand Slam final for the first time since 2013.After an ace sealed a 6-7 (6), 6-0, 6-3, 7-5 semifinal victory over Tomas Berdych, who scooped up Murray’s former hitting partner and coach Dani Vallverdu last fall, Murray turned and pointed toward his current coach, Amélie Mauresmo, as he walked backward toward the net, clenching his fist and jaw defiantly.“A lot of people criticized me working with her,” Murray said of the response after he hired Mauresmo last summer. “I think so far this week we’ve shown that women can be very good coaches as well.”For his fourth Australian Open final, the sixth-seeded Murray awaits the winner of Friday’s semifinal between top-seeded Novak Djokovic and Stan Wawrinka, the defending champion. Murray, who defeated Djokovic to win the United States Open in 2012 and Wimbledon in 2013, has won only one set in his previous three appearances in the Australian Open final.A more contentious meeting between Murray and Berdych had been anticipated. Berdych hired Vallverdu last fall after Vallverdu and Murray ended a long relationship, which had soured after the addition of Mauresmo to Murray’s team. Murray was frustrated at the number of questions about Vallverdu during the news conferences after his quarterfinal and semifinal victories.Advertisement“Me and Dani have been friends since we were 15 years old, and I felt like that was a little bit unfair and unnecessary,” Murray said. “This is sport; there is more to life than just sport. I thought it was a little bit of unfair and created, maybe, a little bit of extra tension.”AdvertisementMurray then conceded that the suggestion was not baseless.“But still, it was there, definitely, at the beginning,” he said. “But I think everyone calmed down after the start of the match.”The semifinal reached its boiling point in a tense first set, with Murray mocking Berdych’s complaints about the balls and celebrating more vocally than he normally does in the opening stages of a match. After winning a lengthy first set in a tiebreaker, the seventh-seeded Berdych, on the way to his chair, made a remark that incensed Murray, though he admitted after the match that he had not heard it clearly.As Berdych walked to his seat after winning the first set, which lasted 1 hour 16 minutes, he muttered “Good play, Tomas” to himself as he crossed paths with Murray at the net. The small brag irritated Murray, who then complained to the chair umpire, Pascal Maria. After the brief exchange, it was Berdych who seemed uneasy, quickly losing the second set and struggling to rediscover the form he had started the match with.“What, I have to be worried about every word that I’m going to say?” said Berdych, whose record in Grand Slam semifinals dropped to 1-4. “I mean, I just pumped myself up for winning a first set and that’s it, then sit on the chair. I’m not really looking left or right, what’s going on. I just keep focusing myself and that’s it. Maybe next time I should stay even more calm.”Berdych regained his footing in the third set, but Murray maintained his edge and closed out the victory in the fourth set, saving two of the three break points he faced during the match. Murray has lost only two sets in the tournament, both in tiebreakers.Since winning Wimbledon in 2013, Murray has had back surgery and watched his ranking drop to 12th. He split with his previous coach, Ivan Lendl, last March and hired Mauresmo before Wimbledon in June, putting her in the highest-profile coaching job ever held by a woman in men’s tennis.Murray said the victory should be seen as validation of his decision to work with Mauresmo, who won the Australian Open in 2006.Advertisement“I’m happy for him, but I’m not yet satisfied,” Mauresmo said. “I hope he can go one more — that’s the goal, and that was the goal from the first moment when we talked. But definitely, he’s showing now that his level is back now to be a contender for those big titles, and it is definitely very satisfying for me, because we’ve worked quite a lot in the off-season, and he’s been committed 100 percent, even more than that.”His results with Mauresmo have not been dissimilar so far to those he achieved with Lendl. Mauresmo said she was touched by Murray’s acknowledgment of her after his victory.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I really appreciated that,” she said. “I think he did it a little bit for me, which I appreciate, but also for him. He has been asked, probably, the same question over and over for the past six, seven months. So I think he probably meant it as, O.K., guys, this is it, let’s talk about tennis, let’s talk about the game, let’s talk about the other things I’m doing well, or not. Let’s focus on something else.”After Thursday’s match, Murray also mentioned the success of the 19-year-old American Madison Keys, who reached the women’s semifinals. She achieved a career-best result under another female champion-turned-coach, Lindsay Davenport.“I see no reason why that can’t keep moving forward like that in the future,” Murray said. “So I’m very thankful for Amélie for doing it. It was, I would say, a brave choice from her to do it, and hopefully I can repay her in a few days.”A version of this article appears in print on January 30, 2015, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: After Semifinal Win, Murray Puts Focus on New Coach, Not His Old One.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.