
On Soccer By                     
 ANDREW KEH
 
OCT. 10, 2015
PASADENA, Calif. — After years of living in Southern California, Jurgen Klinsmann seems to insert regional jargon naturally into his vocabulary. “Bummer” is a notable favorite.It seemed appropriate, then, how Klinsmann responded to a reporter’s question Friday about recent comments from a former player, Landon Donovan, who had suggested that Klinsmann’s job as coach and technical director of the United States soccer team should be in peril after a string of mediocre results.“It’s totally cool,” said Klinsmann, who is originally from Germany.Yet Klinsmann, always tanned and smiling when facing members of the news media, also offered what seemed like a tacit acknowledgment of the notion that he may have certain shortcomings. He noted that he had played for dozens of coaches of all statures and from all parts of the globe. And, he said, “There’s no perfect coach.”This has been an interesting time for Klinsmann, who has held his job since 2011. He is a year removed from leading the United States to what was generally regarded as a positive World Cup performance in Brazil, almost a full three years before the next one in 2018.AdvertisementBut for the first time, he is facing an extended period in which fans and pundits have openly doubted his performance and aptitude, and a 3-2 loss to Mexico outside Los Angeles on Saturday, which allowed Mexico to advance to the Confederations Cup in 2017, will not help matters.AdvertisementIt was bad enough that the team had staggered to a fourth-place finish this summer at the Gold Cup, the regional championship. A 4-1 loss in a September exhibition against Brazil seemed to lay bare the various ways Klinsmann and his players were falling short of expectations.Upon joining the program Klinsmann declared that he would create a proactive, attacking team, yet his players lately have looked mostly ponderous. He said the team would have a strong identity, but instead he has tinkered endlessly, without much to show for it. Sunil Gulati, the president of U.S. Soccer, has said Klinsmann’s job is not in jeopardy. But the chorus of unrest has been unmistakable.Taylor Twellman, who played 30 games for the national team and now works as an analyst for ESPN, said he thought coaches faced a different set of challenges after their first four-year World Cup cycle, with familiarity a primary obstacle to getting the best out of players. Noting that the team had also secured big wins overseas on Klinsmann’s watch, he said a lull could be natural.“A common denominator among players, you hate your coaches,” Twellman said. “It’s the connecting bond between all the players to complain about your coach. And being a coach for a second cycle, players know all your little intricacies, all your motivational tricks.”The same seems to have occurred on some level for fans and members of the news media. Klinsmann himself has always called for more pressure on the team from outsiders — in line with the soccer fervor in other countries — believing his players would emerge as stronger professionals from such a crucible.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Klinsmann has always tried to get players out of their comfort zones, but lately the public has seemed to try to nudge him away from this.Donovan’s comments — he implied that Klinsmann had it easy compared with coaches abroad — percolated through social media. Inside the team’s camp, some were quietly bemused by Donovan’s timing. But in public comments, they dismissed the small hubbub as background noise.Advertisement“I think media is media,” Brad Evans, a veteran defender, said when asked if the criticism carried extra weight coming from a former star. “Now we’re entering a phase where players — good players, ones that played a long time — are becoming pundits, and that’s just the nature of it, the culture shift.”Outside of the camp, though, people in the game generally agreed that punditry and fan frustration could prod officials into action. Mexico, for instance, has cycled through coaches at a comparatively absurd rate. Later this year, Juan Carlos Osorio will become Mexico’s 17th national team coach since 2000.“I think the media can always create stuff and drive firings and people getting hired,” said Carlos Bocanegra, a former national team captain who was hired this year as technical director of the M.L.S. franchise that will begin play in Atlanta in 2017. “Clubs and federations start taking that into account, of course. That’s a given.”But Bocanegra said the first year after a World Cup should allow for some experimentation, allowing young players to compete for time against veterans who might not be around in another three years. He said teams, in this early period, should always strive for wins, but that success was not the only priority.In a recent interview with ESPN, Klinsmann suggested as much, using the example of Ventura Alvarado, a young central defender, as a player he was calling upon, even if the immediate results would probably not be perfect.“So even in a Gold Cup or a World Cup qualifier, I’ll take that risk to give minutes to someone who maybe is not there yet, but I know it’s going to pay off two years from now,” Klinsmann said.Bruce Arena, the national team coach from 1998 to 2006, said fans and the news media focused on results and not always on an understanding of which ones mattered. He said he thought the Confederations Cup, from a competitive standpoint, was “really insignificant” and dismissed friendlies as “a complete waste of time.”“I didn’t worry about it,” Arena said of game-to-game results. Referring to Gulati, he added with a smile: “But the current president is the one who didn’t offer me a new contract after eight years and a lot of success. So I think somebody thinks it means something.”The long-term, hopeful outlook, for Klinsmann and the program, would be that all the doubt and discomfort manifest as a successful 2018 World Cup.Advertisement“You’re only judged as a national team coach on World Cup qualifying and playing in the World Cup — nothing else,” Arena said. “All the other stuff is meaningless, to be honest with you.”A version of this article appears in print on October 11, 2015, on Page SP12 of the New York edition with the headline: Klinsmann Stays the Course Despite a Chorus of Doubters .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »