By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSOCT. 10, 2015
Suzanne Smith likes to assign a camera operator to shoot the teams running onto the field when she directs N.F.L. games for CBS.Those images are often used as a backdrop when the commentators welcome viewers or when the broadcast comes back from commercials. But during last month’s matchup between the Steelers and the Rams in St. Louis, they proved particularly illuminating.As Greg Gumbel, the play-by-play announcer who works with Smith, puts it, “Who expects the field to get set on fire?”Sparks from the pyrotechnics that accompany player introductions started a small blaze, which wound up delaying the beginning of the game by nearly 30 minutes. Smith realized that one of CBS’s cameras had probably caught the moment, and sure enough, they found it and were able to show it to viewers at home.AdvertisementDirecting sports telecasts is largely about preparation, for both the predictable and the unpredictable. Smith is the only woman currently directing broadcasts of N.F.L. games, and a lifetime of experiences helped prepare her for this role.Advertisement“Coming up through the ranks, yes, don’t be naïve about it: There has been a tremendous amount of obstacles,” Smith said. “But I like to say that the passion outweighed the struggles.”When she was breaking into the business in the early 1980s, she did not really think of herself as a trailblazer, though there were plenty of reminders it was a field dominated by men.“When I started, I could not even comprehend the amount of people who said to me: ‘Who’s your father? How did you get his job?’ ” Smith said.“My father watches television,” she remembers thinking.He did, however, help instill in her a belief that she belonged. When Smith was 11, her father and her uncle insisted that she enter a soap-box derby that was supposedly for boys only.“My parents treated me like I could do anything,” she said.Smith was also growing up at the right time, when more opportunities to compete on an equal playing field were opening to girls because of Title IX, the educational gender-equity law. She earned an athletic scholarship to Temple, where she studied broadcasting.She then found herself in the right place in Philadelphia. While still in college, Smith interned at a station that televised Phillies games.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.After graduating, she was directing a morning news show and realized that she enjoyed working on college basketball games at night much better.Advertisement“I loved doing live television,” she said.Smith joined CBS in 1983. She said she felt her bosses had fairly judged her by her work. But there were many people to prove herself to week after week, and the crews she works with on N.F.L. games tend to be almost entirely male.“Over time, you get the respect of these guys, but you have to earn it,” Smith said. “Then, when you get it from one guy, he passed it on to the other guy. Now all of a sudden, people are like, ‘Oh, great, you’re doing our game.’ Whereas I don’t know what they were saying before, but they were probably saying, ‘Who’s this woman doing our game?’ ”She has heard from a colleague who books the crews that people want to work for her now.“A couple of years ago, I felt like that turned,” she said. “In fairness, also, I got better at my job.”The transition from associate director to director is like that of a football player going from college to the pros: The game seems so fast at first.“All of a sudden one day,” she said, “time slowed down.”Smith teams with the producer Bob Mansbach, who guides the course of the telecast. The director puts that plan into action.Smith sits in on the announcers’ meetings with players and coaches on the Friday and Saturday before a game, and then they all discuss how they will handle certain situations.In that Steelers-Rams matchup, St. Louis linebacker James Laurinaitis was about to pass Merlin Olsen as the franchise’s career tackles leader. Smith had a shot of Olsen’s name on the stadium’s Ring of Fame ready to go for when Laurinaitis set the record.Of working with Smith, Gumbel said, “It’s a very secure feeling when you’re talking about something and that pops up on screen.”AdvertisementSmith was less concerned by the fact she is the only female director of N.F.L. broadcasts than by the dearth of women working as directors, producers and executives across sports television.“Am I surprised there aren’t more women doing it?” she said. “I’m not surprised, but I’m perhaps disappointed.”In recent years, she has taken a more active role in changing that. She now has a platform to hire staff and to mold conversations as a coordinating producer for “We Need to Talk,” the all-female sports show on the cable channel CBS Sports Network.Of preparing more women for leadership roles, Smith said, “I am taking responsibility for it.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.