AdvertisementSupported byN.H.L. RoundupBy The Associated PressDefenseman Simon Despres scored 2 minutes 21 seconds into overtime, and the visiting Pittsburgh Penguins rallied to defeat the Devils, 2-1, on Friday night.Chris Kunitz tied the game with a power-play goal with 3:11 left in regulation, spoiling a magnificent game by the Devils’ Cory Schneider, who made 41 saves.The winning goal came after Schneider made a close-in stop on Brandon Sutton. The Penguins kept the puck in the zone, and Despres’s shot from inside the blue line beat Schneider, who was screened.“I didn’t get a great look at it,” Schneider said. “I think he came one way and shot it back the other through a screen. It just got a piece of the post and went in. It was a nice shot.”Marc-Andre Fleury made 13 saves for Pittsburgh, which fell behind, 1-0, when Devils forward Steve Bernier scored on a wraparound 6:08 into the third period.The Devils failed to match their season-best, three-game winning streak. The Penguins won for the second time in seven games (2-3-2).Schneider stopped the first 37 Pittsburgh shots and seemed to be on the verge of his third shutout of the season when Peter Harrold took a high-sticking penalty with 3:29 left in regulation.The Penguins needed only 18 seconds to tie it, 1-1. Sidney Crosby, who had been stopped point-blank earlier in the period by Schneider on a setup by David Perron, took a shot from the right circle that hit Schneider in the chest. Defenseman Adam Larsson could not clear the puck, and Kunitz fired the rebound into the net for his 15th goal.AVALANCHE 3, PREDATORS 0 Semyon Varlamov made 23 saves for his fourth shutout of the season, and host Colorado blanked Nashville.Jarome Iginla, Maxime Talbot and Gabriel Landeskog had goals for the Avalanche, who earned an important win in their pursuit of a playoff berth. BLUES 3, HURRICANES 2 Kevin Shattenkirk scored in the shootout, and visiting St. Louis edged Carolina.Ryan Reaves and David Backes scored in regulation for the Blues, and Jake Allen made 26 saves before stopping all three shots in the tiebreaker.Defensemen Justin Faulk and Ryan Murphy scored for Carolina, which had its three-game winning streak ended.HALL OF FAMER AILING The family of Stan Mikita said the Blackhawks Hall of Famer was found to have a possible brain disorder.His family issued a statement saying Mikita, 74, is “facing some serious health issues” and may be suffering from Lewy body dementia, a progressive disease that causes problems with thinking, movement and behavior. Mikita played his entire 22-year career with the Blackhawks, from 1958 to 1980. He was on the team that won the Stanley Cup in 1961, and he totaled 541 goals and 926 assists in 1,394 games.Advertisement