
TV Sports By                     
 RICHARD SANDOMIR
 
JAN. 30, 2015
The Super Bowl may sometimes disappoint as a competitive game, but never as an audience grabber. Witness Seattle’s 43-8 drubbing of Denver last year. Despite being a blowout, it was the fourth straight Super Bowl to draw 100 million viewers, generating a record 112.8 million.We know the reasons for the game’s appeal: The Super Bowl is a de facto national holiday celebrating the nation’s most popular sport. Many viewers focus on the commercials. The halftime musical guests — Katy Perry will headline on Sunday — engage still others. As a one-day event, it is unmatched in American sports; only the Olympics can accumulate such huge audiences, but it takes the Games more than two weeks.The N.F.L. so dominated the list of the most seen programs in the 2013-14 season that only three were not pigskin-related: the Academy Awards (45.3 million viewers), the 2014 Winter Olympics opening ceremony (33.5 million) and the Grammy Awards (30.5 million).The league and the broadcasters who carry the Super Bowl believe there are more viewers out there, not only because of population growth, but also because some people who watch the game are not counted by Nielsen: people in bars, restaurants and offices; those at parties and clubs; and, to an increasingly important degree, fans watching on mobile devices.AdvertisementWhat if all those viewers were included in Nielsen’s calculations? Mark Lazarus, chairman of the NBC Sports Group, said the other day that he thought the number of viewers would be closer to 115 million or 120 million.Advertisement“I really believe that the number is underreported substantially,” Lazarus said during a news media conference call to promote NBC’s broadcast of the Seattle-New England matchup.“If you take 120 million or so and add the parties, there’s no doubt in my mind that one in every two Americans is watching the game,” he said. That would be about 160 million viewers.Not that the N.F.L. or the networks need more Super Bowl viewers. The promise of enormous viewership every year has pushed the cost of a 30-second commercial to $4.4 million.Whether that viewership or windfall will be tempered in the future by people turning from football because of concerns over concussions or domestic violence cases cannot yet be judged.Finding a way to measure out-of-home viewing has vexed the networks and Nielsen for more than 25 years. No perfect technology has been developed to determine how many people who are watching are not counted. Bring them in from the cold, networks have implored Nielsen.In 1988, an ABC survey focusing on a San Francisco 49ers-Chicago Bears “Monday Night Football” game in 418 bars showed that 2.8 million viewers had gone uncounted by Nielsen. During the last two Olympics, NBC found that out-of-home viewing gave an 11 percent lift to its ratings for the 2012 Summer Games in London and a 9 percent ratings uptick for the 2014 Winter Games in Sochi, Russia.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.More recently, a three-month test last year by Nielsen in Chicago of people ages 25 to 54 showed that out-of-home viewing of general programming lifted ratings 7 percent to 9 percent; sports ratings got a 14 percent jump in April.“We’ve been doing this for a zillion years,” said Alan Wurtzel, president of research and media development for NBC Universal, who was at ABC when it measured the out-of-home “Monday Night Football” viewing.Advertisement“Nielsen has said that their methodology was designed to deal with in-home viewing, not out-of-home. The issue now is that as the medium has become more portable and the technology more personal, it isn’t about people watching at the health club or bar, but on a smartphone or tablet. And we know this behavior is only increasing. It will be the new normal, and we have to account for it.”Those who are watching a game on a phone or tablet, Wurtzel said, are likely to be paying closer attention to what they’re seeing than those in a crowded bar or at a party.And everyone at every network wants that mobile consumer, and many more, to count in Nielsen’s numbers.In a statement, a Nielsen spokesman described the company’s “significant and steady progress” in measuring out-of-home viewers with current technologies — like the portable people meter (a pager-like device that picks up audio signals from the television) — and in measuring viewers “wherever they may be, regardless of device and location.”If out-of-home measurement can elevate Super Bowl viewership to 120 million and beyond, it might also push the game’s rating to a 50.0. The previous high of 49.1 was reached in 1982, when the 49ers beat the Cincinnati Bengals, 26-21, in Super Bowl XVI. The next highest, 48.6, came a year later, as Washington beat Miami, 27-17. The rating has stayed in the 40s ever since, except for a dip to 39.0 in 1990, when the 49ers crushed the Denver Broncos, 55-10.Yet the growing population has pushed the Super Bowl audience from 85.2 million in 1982 to 106.5 million for the New Orleans Saints’ 31-17 victory over the Indianapolis Colts in 2010. That audience broke the United States viewership record of 105.9 million, set by the final episode of “M*A*S*H” in 1983.If a ceiling for Super Bowl viewership exists, we don’t know where it is. A game like Sunday’s, prefaced by the saga of deflated footballs and Marshawn Lynch’s bons mots, may set another record.Email: sandor@nytimes.com A version of this article appears in print on January 31, 2015, on Page D2 of the New York edition with the headline: A Mere 112 Million? The Super Bowl’s Audience Is Tough to Gauge.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »