By PATRICK McGEEHANJAN. 30, 2015
Charlie Williams, a pitcher best known as the trade bait the Mets used to land Willie Mays in the twilight of his career, died on Tuesday in Daytona Beach, Fla. He was 67.The cause was complications following surgery in late December to clear blocked coronary arteries, his brother-in-law, Paul Eggermann, said.Even as he lay in the hospital in the last few weeks, Williams continued to receive copies of his baseball cards from fans seeking autographs, Eggermann said. “It was a regular thing for a long time,” he said. “People would want to complete their collections.”Williams’s cards were keepers not because of what he accomplished in his eight years in the major leagues, but for how he wound up as a San Francisco Giant. The Mets drafted him in 1968 and put him on their roster in 1971, at a salary of $12,000. He earned his first major league win by pitching the last five innings of a 5-2 victory over Mays and the Giants at Candlestick Park in San Francisco and went on to win four more games that year.Still, he was expendable when the Giants offered to send Mays, who was by then 41, back to New York, where he had broken into the majors with the Giants before their move to San Francisco.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mays, who had hit 646 home runs at that point, hit just 14 more in his two seasons with the Mets before retiring. Williams had a career record of 23-22 in 268 games, 31 with the Mets.Charles Prosek Williams was born in Flushing, Queens, on Oct. 11, 1947, 16 years before the fledgling Mets took up residence there. He grew up nearby in Great Neck, on Long Island.After retiring from baseball in 1978, Williams briefly drove a taxi in New York City before settling in Florida. His immediate survivors include a daughter, Sharon Williams; a son, Ryan; and a sister, Barbara Eggermann.“He always kidded around that they traded Willie Mays for him, instead of vice versa,” Paul Eggermann said.A version of this article appears in print on January 31, 2015, on Page D8 of the New York edition with the headline: Charlie Williams, 67, a Met Traded for Mays.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.