AdvertisementSupported byBy Tim CaseyOn a family trip to Boston two years ago, the former Jets linebacker Mo Lewis and his son Chris toured the Massachusetts Institute of Technology’s campus. Chris Lewis, a ninth-grader at the time, had already received basketball scholarship offers from Memphis and New Mexico. Still, he had always dreamed of becoming an engineer, and few colleges had a better engineering program than M.I.T.Lewis, a 6-foot-9-inch power forward and one of the top juniors in the United States, said he seriously considered playing for M.I.T., even though it was an N.C.A.A. Division III program. But on Jan. 18, in an unusual move for such a highly regarded prospect, he instead committed to play at Harvard, starting in the fall of 2016. If he is admitted, Lewis will become one of the few players who rejected offers from more prominent Division I colleges to compete in the Ivy League.“I want to be able to keep my options open,” he said. “I do think about going to the N.B.A. a lot and to be able to be a successful engineer as well. I want to be able to do both, get as far as I can in both areas.”During his recruitment process, Lewis relied on the advice of his mother and father, both of whom told him to value education and think about life after basketball.His father, Mo Lewis, is perhaps best known for helping launch the career of Patriots quarterback Tom Brady, who will try to win his fourth Super Bowl on Sunday. With the Jets ahead in the fourth quarter of the second game of the 2001 season, Lewis tackled Patriots quarterback Drew Bledsoe as he tried to run for a first down. The hit knocked Bledsoe unconscious and caused internal bleeding. Brady, his backup, took over and remained the starter even when Bledsoe was healthy enough to return. The Patriots won their first Super Bowl that season.Lewis, 45, has moved on to a life that does not include much football. After 13 seasons with the Jets, the last in 2003, he thought about coaching, but changed his mind. Instead, he decided to work out young athletes near Atlanta, his hometown, and raise his two sons. Neither boy showed interest in playing football, and Lewis said he did not pressure them into following his career path.These days, Lewis is much more involved in basketball, the sport his boys gravitated toward when they were young. His oldest son, Mo IV, is enrolled at the Naval Academy Preparatory School in Newport, R.I., and plans to play basketball for Navy next season. A 6-foot-6 forward, he turned down scholarships from several other Division I programs.Mo Lewis did not play basketball growing up, but his wife, Christalyn, started on three state championship high school teams in Milledgeville, Ga. He goes to all of his sons’ games and works with Chris and his Milton High teammates on strength and conditioning.“Sometimes there’s kind of an overblown notion of what your son is when you’re their dad,” Matt Kramer, the Milton coach, said. “It’s the exact opposite with Mo. He pushes those kids in an appropriate manner to become the best players they can be. He pats them on the back and says they played well, but he doesn’t get too caught up in that. It’s usually, ‘On to the next thing and what do we have to do to get better?’ ”Lewis, who last played in the N.F.L. when he was 34, said he reminded his sons that professional sports careers usually last only a few years, and for that reason he said he encouraged them to pursue goals that would help them in the long term. Since Chris Lewis was young, he has been interested in how things work and expressed interest in becoming a mechanical engineer. His goals did not waver even as colleges began recruiting him in middle school.“I was really surprised by how early it started happening,” he said. “But my coaches and my parents made sure that I kept a level head and just kept on working hard.”Lewis is now 6-foot-9 and 240 pounds, and he is expected to grow another inch or two. He also has a 4.0 grade point average and is taking advanced placement physics and calculus, his favorite subjects. Notre Dame, Auburn, Georgia Tech and Miami were among the programs most aggressive in recruiting him.This month, during Lewis’s second visit to Harvard, he met with Coach Tommy Amaker as well as the dean of the engineering school and an engineering professor. He wanted to make sure Amaker would allow him to pursue engineering internships in the summers. When Amaker obliged, Lewis told him he would be playing for the Crimson, which has made three consecutive N.C.A.A. tournament appearances.College coaches are not allowed to discuss recruits until they sign, but Mo Lewis said Amaker was pleasantly surprised with the early commitment.“Why not Harvard?” Lewis said. “Are you following basketball or are you following your 40-year career and what’s going to get you ahead in life? One thing I’m proud about my son, I’m happy that he’s able to understand that four years can go by real fast. Forty years is a long time.”Advertisement