
Campus Corner By                     
TOM PEDULLA

OCT. 10, 2015
WEST POINT, N.Y. —  In order to deliver the game ball to the referee before home games at Michie Stadium, Army engages in a death-defying ritual.If visibility and wind conditions are favorable, five seniors make a 4,000-foot jump to midfield, the target they trained to hit through hundreds of practice sessions.During the performance, the coach of the Black Knights parachute team, Tom Falzone, transforms into a cameraman. He leans out of a black Lakota helicopter to which he is strapped to shoot video that is shown on the stadium’s huge scoreboard screen.Falzone also orchestrates what is called a stack of jumpers out of the helicopter at specified intervals. Maintaining proper spacing is critical; a midair collision could be catastrophic. Each jumper free-falls for 10 to 15 seconds before opening the main parachute based on a reading from an altimeter, which measures height above ground. Each is also equipped with a reserve parachute and an inflatable life jacket to allow for a landing in the Hudson River, which runs next to the picturesque stadium.AdvertisementThe jumper gains control through steering toggles attached by lines to a parachute that matches Army’s black-and-gold colors.“You need to control your descent rate as well as your forward penetration rate, how fast you are going forward,” said David Hart, a senior from Endwell, N.Y., who is on the team. Some members exhibited such great control during a recent practice that it appeared they were almost hanging in midair.Jumpers enter their landing pattern at about 600 feet. The final approach is made at about 125 feet. At that point, the newly designed Black Knights icon comes into view. So does the crowd. The jumpers’ focus, critical throughout, is tested as never before.“You hear the crowd erupt when the first person lands,” Hart said. “It’s a thrill like no other. It’s motivating. You want to hit as close to the target as possible.”A majority achieve the goal of “smashing the 50.” According to Falzone, only two jumpers missed Michie Stadium. Sudden wind gusts forced them to land unharmed at nearby Fort Putnam.Advertisement“They turned away from the stadium because we say, ‘When in doubt, land out,’ ” Falzone said. “You don’t want to land in the stands.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The only injury during Falzone’s six-year tenure as head coach occurred when a student made an unexpected visit to the library during practice, injuring his hip. He returned to jump again.“Our program is about teaching these young men and women about taking responsibility and leadership,” Falzone said. “You don’t just have your own life in your hands, but you have your teammate’s life in your hands because you are checking each other’s equipment.”The parachute team, which was established in 1958 and has been delivering game balls at home games since the mid-1970s, comprises 32 cadets who compete at the national and collegiate level in parachuting and skydiving disciplines. Cadets join the team during their plebe, or freshman, year and train six days a week.Army’s football team, in the process of rebuilding under its second-year coach, Jeff Monken, was set to host Duke on Saturday. The senior running back Matt Giachinta, who is from nearby Cold Spring, N.Y., said the players relished the parachute team’s role at home games.“I’m pretty confident they’ll hit it every time,” Giachinta said of midfield. “It gets the crowd into it, and we’re all about it because we feed off that energy.”A version of this article appears in print on October 11, 2015, on Page SP2 of the New York edition with the headline: When Black Knights Air It Out, the Play Develops at 4,000 Feet.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »