AdvertisementSupported byOn TennisBy Christopher ClareyMELBOURNE, Australia — Once more, it will be Novak Djokovic versus Andy Murray with the Norman Brookes Challenge Cup and the Australian Open title at stake.But much has changed since they last played the final here, in 2013. At that stage, Murray had not yet won Wimbledon and cemented his place as a British sporting icon for the ages. At that stage, Djokovic had not yet made the unexpected move of hiring Boris Becker as his coach, and Murray had not yet made the even more surprising move of hiring Amélie Mauresmo as his.Sunday’s final will also be Team Djokovic versus Team Murray. Members of both squads made their ways through the lounges and hallways of Melbourne Park on Friday.Becker, moving slowly and with a pronounced limp, carried a plate of pasta to the locker room, where the top-ranked Djokovic was recovering after his latest five-set match in Melbourne, against Stan Wawrinka. Earlier in the day, Mauresmo was on site for practice in the wake of Murray’s emotional four-set semifinal victory over Tomas Berdych.Murray, a three-time runner-up here, is in a Grand Slam final for the first time since he won Wimbledon in 2013, beating Djokovic in the final.“Definitely he feels more comfortable on the court,” Mauresmo said of Murray. “He moves much better. His back surgery is something that is now well behind him, and I think that was also the main focus and really the most important thing for him is to feel strong physically going out there on the court so he can at least defend his chances the best way he can.”Murray, the No. 6 seed, has been defending them brilliantly here so far and seems fresh physically and mentally. His forehand — traditionally his telltale stroke — was full of venom against Berdych, and his defense was often extraordinary. But it was Murray’s appetite for competition that was most salient.“You could see yesterday he was very hungry to win that match, and it looks like he’s playing well again,” said Magnus Norman, Wawrinka’s coach. “The final is 50-50 really. Andy is fresh, and he’s playing well and has good confidence and good energy. Novak is playing well on this court and has won here before, and he’s also hungry to win.”The Australian Open remains Djokovic’s happiest hunting ground. He has won four of his seven Grand Slam singles titles here, taking his first in 2008 and then winning three straight in 2011, 2012 and 2013 before losing to Wawrinka in the quarterfinals last year. Djokovic beat Murray in the 2011 final in straight sets, in a 2012 semifinal in five sets and in the 2013 final in four sets.The medium-speed hardcourt has long been perfect for Djokovic’s game, although the consensus is that it has become a slightly faster court in the last three years. Murray won his major titles at the United States Open and Wimbledon, tournaments where the ball has tended to bounce lower than in Melbourne.Djokovic said that might no longer be the case.“Because they are faster, because the ball is bouncing a bit lower, that’s pretty suitable to his style of the game,” Djokovic said of the courts and Murray. “He has a flat backhand and moves around the court pretty well, so it’s going to be a very physical match, no doubt about that.”The fast court also helps Djokovic’s big serve. Over all, Djokovic leads Murray, 15-8, and has won seven of their last eight matches, his only loss coming in the 2013 Wimbledon final.“I’m sure we both know what to expect from each other’s game,” Djokovic said. “The fact that I won last seven out of eight matches, of course it’s going to serve as a great confidence booster coming into the match. But there’s no clear favorite. I think the way he’s been playing, he already knows what it takes to win a Grand Slam title. On the other hand, I’m going to try to use also my own experience and of course motivation to eventually get my hands on the title as well.”For much of his 7-6 (1), 3-6, 6-4, 4-6, 6-0 victory over Wawrinka, Djokovic seemed to be far from peak form. He had no winners in the fourth set and finished with 27 winners in all, compared with 49 unforced errors. After losing his serve just once in his first five matches of the tournament, he was broken five times Friday.He wore a vacant look at times — the kind he used to wear in the heat on days when his allergies kicked in. But this was a cool, pleasant night in Melbourne, which has not been nearly the caldron this year that it was during the 2014 Australian Open. Djokovic attributed his physical difficulties Friday to having to play too much defense as Wawrinka dictated the terms, but Murray, if he maintains his level, will not crack early or easily in baseline exchanges.Wawrinka still liked Djokovic’s chances. “It’s clear, I think, that Andy is playing really well since the beginning here,” Wawrinka said. “But I still feel when Novak is here and he holds up, he will beat everyone. You’ll have to see how he recovers and mentally how he will come into the final, but if I had to put down a wager, I’d put it in Novak.”Djokovic has shown remarkable powers of recovery in recent years, bouncing back to defeat Rafael Nadal in a nearly six-hour final in 2012 just two days after digging very deep to beat Murray in that five-set semifinal.But his elastic defense defines him.“You have to win the point two or three times sometimes against him,” Norman, Wawrinka’s coach, said. “And to do that over five sets is quite tough. Stan is one of those guys who has all the tools in the box to do it, but today was not the day.”One of the keys for Murray will be his second serve, which was one of the big reasons he suffered against Djokovic, Nadal and Roger Federer in 2014, going 0-9 against them. But the second serve was not the only issue.“Andy did great as a counterpuncher, but he did not win his big tournaments by being a counterpuncher,” said Jim Courier, the former No. 1 player who is now the United States Davis Cup captain. “If he doesn’t go back to that more ambitious style of tennis, I think it will be hard for him to win. He’s obviously good at that other style, but it’s not the way to get through the best players.”Murray and Mauresmo, a former Australian Open champion and women’s No. 1, seem well aware of the need for bolder tennis, but he has played a variety of styles successfully here: hitting big against Grigor Dimitrov in the fourth round and Berdych in the semifinals, and deploying plenty of chips and clever changes of pace to defeat the explosive Australian Nick Kyrgios in the quarterfinals.He has quite a few tools in his toolbox, too, but no matter how dazed Djokovic sometimes looked Friday, it is exceedingly difficult to imagine him going down easily Sunday night.Ben Rothenberg contributed reporting.Advertisement