By BEN SHPIGELJAN. 30, 2015
PHOENIX —  Rocky Seto is the Seattle Seahawks’ defensive passing game coordinator.“Am I actually in charge of the pass game?” Seto said. “No.”This, then, is what Seto does do: He spearheads the tackling tutorials, oversees the scout-team defense, delivers the most creative presentations at Seattle headquarters, instructs the safeties, teaches the cornerbacks, draws on Bruce Lee and the animal kingdom to inculcate turnover-forcing techniques, executes special projects, analyzes third-down and red-zone and two-minute tendencies, advises Coach Pete Carroll, assists the defensive coordinator Dan Quinn on game days and assists everyone else every other day.Seto approaches his job with the narrow focus of a position coach and the macro view of a coordinator, jotting down notes, thoughts and ideas. If he were to list all his responsibilities on a résumé, he would need a second page.“Our detail guy,” cornerback Richard Sherman said.Seto, 38, does most of it out of public view, fulfilling similar functions as other assistants around the league, but with a far vaguer title. Much the way Tom Pratt (Cardinals) is the only pass-rush specialist and Jim Bernhardt (Texans) the only director of football research, Seto is the only defensive passing game coordinator in the league. When offered the position in 2012, a promotion from assisting his former Southern California teammate Kris Richard with the defensive backs, Seto said his duties were somewhat nebulous. So he defined them by filling in the voids, by researching intricate projects, watching game tape and coming up with concepts, synthesizing information for the then-defensive coordinator Gus Bradley.Advertisement“Sometimes with those titles, you don’t know what you’re getting, but Rocky was very involved,” Bradley, now the Jaguars’ coach, said in a telephone interview. “No one ever felt threatened that he was intruding on their responsibilities. Everyone — players, staff, coaches — really trusted him.”AdvertisementIn the Seahawks’ hierarchy, Seto occupies a spot somewhere below Quinn but on the top tier of Carroll’s cabinet: a close confidant and a trusted resource — the keeper of all the records, as Carroll put it.“He’s got all the information,” said Carroll, who retained Seto at U.S.C. after being hired in 2001 and has kept him on staff ever since. “He knows everything we’ve ever done and how we’ve done it.”Seto prepares his presentations, given in front of the entire team, to fit the day’s theme. On Competition Wednesdays, he focuses on situational football and playing smart, and later, he will have cheat sheets and indicators uploaded to players’ iPads. Those demonstrations, however critical, pale to Turnover Thursdays and Fundamental Fridays, when Seto intersperses football cutups with clips of whatever he can find on YouTube or Animal Planet that advance a teaching point.When players lunge to tackle, they lose their balance and cannot regroup quickly. Seto showed the team footage of a mongoose using its feet to elude an attacking cobra.Who’s going to win? What color will Katy Perry’s hair be? What about the commercials? Make your Super Bowl picks and predictions and share your ballot with your friends.To show the importance of gaining leverage, he pulled video of rams head-butting one another — the lower ram always won. To demonstrate different methods of dislodging the ball, he plumbed the Internet for tape of boxing kangaroos and Bruce Lee knocking an adversary out of a chair with a strike from close range. To remind them of tackling principles, he found film of a snake coiling around its prey and yanking it to the ground.“That’s what we do — wrap the legs and twist to our leverage side and take our prey down,” cornerback DeShawn Shead said.Seto’s impact is felt throughout a defense that allowed the fewest points and yards in the N.F.L. for the second consecutive season, that again forced 20 fumbles. The Seahawks also rank fourth in the league in fewest yards after contact, according to Pro Football Focus, a statistic that reflects how players have taken to the team’s innovative approach to tackling.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Players are taught to track the near hip of the ball carrier, lead with their near shoulder and strike somewhere between the knee and thigh — a method that allows them to hit just as hard without putting their heads at as much risk. According to the Seahawks’ internal studies, the details of which Seto said he could not share for legal reasons, occurrences of head injuries have decreased sharply.AdvertisementCarroll adopted this manner toward the end of his tenure at U.S.C., his staff refining it every year, but it was not until a football coach at the University of Birmingham, in England, visited the Seahawks’ facility that Seto had a revelation. After listening to Seto explain the team’s tackling philosophy, the coach said, “Oh, you mean a rugby tackle?”“We wondered, can we do the same thing with the face mask on?” Seto said.They could. Seto culled clip upon clip of rugby matches and, during training camp in 2011 — while still a defensive backs assistant — started cultivating a relationship with Serevi Rugby, an organization headquartered in Seattle. He became the conduit between the Seahawks and Serevi, applying elements of rugby to football.“The whole unit is interested in different techniques, in going the three extra inches to do what they do,” said Ross Young, the chief executive at Serevi, “but Rocky’s been the constant.”This is the Seto ethos, and has been ever since he orchestrated an accidental meeting with John Robinson, then the U.S.C. coach, at Heritage Hall nearly two decades ago, bumping into him in a corridor so he could tell Robinson in person that he hoped to walk on at U.S.C. His plea granted, Seto, an undersize inside linebacker, became the fieriest player his teammate Chad Morton said he had ever played with.“He went full speed, whether you liked it or not,” said Morton, the Seahawks’ assistant special-teams coach. “If he was on scout team, he was going to hit you. He didn’t care if it was walk-through or the end of the week. You wanted everybody to go as hard as he does.”With no pro prospects, Seto intended to attend graduate school at U.S.C. for physical therapy — he even sent in his deposit — until the coach at the time, Paul Hackett, offered him a job as a volunteer assistant. So began his foray into coaching, 16 seasons of working with safeties and linebackers, of quality control, of running defenses.And of coordinating passing games on defense, a job he never knew existed. But, like the rest of the Seahawks, he is sure glad it does.A version of this article appears in print on January 31, 2015, on Page D1 of the New York edition with the headline: Vague Job Outline Leads to Defining Role in Seattle.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.