AdvertisementSupported byOn College FootballBy Marc TracyDALLAS — Bevo, the longhorn steer who serves as the University of Texas mascot, traditionally travels here for the football team’s annual Red River Showdown against Oklahoma. Last Wednesday, though, the university announced that Bevo XIV (the current Bevo, dating to 2004) had a life-threatening illness and would not make the trip from Austin.As the Longhorns came off a 50-7 loss to then-No. 4 Texas Christian last weekend and limped toward the season’s midpoint with a 1-4 record at the same time that Bevo fought for his life, the metaphor wrote itself. Prayers are being sent up for Bevo, several Longhorns said after Saturday’s game, but Texas (2-4) gave itself a reprieve with a dominant 24-17 victory over No. 10 Oklahoma (4-1). Several former Texas players had expressed hope that if it emerged from the old Cotton Bowl stadium with a win in one of college football’s greatest rivalries, Texas would get its swagger back.“If we can beat O.U., this’ll really, really help the young guys,” Johnny Walker, a Texas running back in the early 1980s, said before the game.Dan Neil, an offensive lineman who played in the 1990s, added, “If you’re looking to straighten yourself out, O.U.’s the remedy.”Also spared additional pain, for now, was Texas’ second-year head coach, Charlie Strong.“They hear the media; they hear what is said,” Strong said after the game, referring to his players and acknowledging that in recent weeks, the knives had come out for him. “And so what they want to say is: ‘You know something? We’ll show what our coach is all about.’ ”The Longhorns had 313 yards on the ground to the Sooners’ 67. They attempted just 12 passes, instead using motion, misdirection and — in the case of the sophomore D’Onta Foreman’s game-breaking 81-yard run in the third quarter — a sprint draw to confound Oklahoma’s defense.Texas also compiled eight sacks, one more than it had in the previous five games.“They covered us, they pressured us, they controlled the line of scrimmage,” Oklahoma Coach Bob Stoops said after the game. “Did I miss anything?”Still, Texas is just 8-11 over all under Strong. When Strong was hired in January 2014 to replace Mack Brown, the coach of 16 seasons, he was hailed for having established Louisville as a contender during the previous few years. He became the first black head football coach in Longhorns history.Two years later, he has a 6-6 Big 12 record. The man who hired him, Steve Patterson, resigned as athletic director last month after less than two years on the job amid criticism that he was out of touch with donors and fans. Strong earned his stripes as a defensive coach, and in 2013, his final season at Louisville, the Cardinals went 12-1 and finished No. 15 on the strength of the Football Bowl Subdivision’s best defense and its second-stingiest scoring defense. But Texas finished No. 33 in scoring defense last season. This season, heading into Saturday’s game, the Longhorns were ranked 114th in the category, allowing 38.2 points per game. At a news conference last Monday, Strong was asked, “Do you worry that you might not even get to Year 3 at all?” He replied: “Every day is a battle, so I don’t. I have no idea.”At his postgame news conference Saturday, he told the gathered members of the news media, “I knew you guys didn’t think so.” Strong appeared to outcoach Stoops, who has taken Oklahoma to four national championship games, winning one. Not until the second half did the Sooners adjust to Texas’ corner blitzes, finally giving quarterback Baker Mayfield enough time to complete a few long passes. Mayfield finished 20 for 28 with 211 yards and one touchdown.Texas frequently subbed in Tyrone Swoopes for starter Jerrod Heard at quarterback. At the beginning of the fourth quarter, immediately after a long break in play, Oklahoma had to burn a timeout when it saw Swoopes, not Heard, run onto the field. Two plays later, Swoopes threw a touchdown pass to tight end Caleb Bluiett.Last week, Strong’s underclassmen bickered openly with the upperclassmen, who had been recruited during the Brown era. Though Brown’s teams won one national championship and played in a second title game, they were just 30-21 during his final four seasons.A look at the top players in contention for college football’s highest honor.After safety Dylan Haines, a junior, told reporters that some younger players were not putting in the necessary work, wide receiver DeAndre McNeal posted on Twitter, “Us ‘FRESHMAN’ are go getters and we don’t accept mediocre ANYTHING we are here to pull Texas out the drought.”The incident lent credence to one positive narrative about Strong — that he had inherited players from Brown who were high on entitlement and low on talent — while raising the issue of team cohesiveness. The talent deficit is undeniable. In 2014, Texas had no players drafted into the N.F.L. for the first time in 76 years, and it is not expected to have any draftees after this season, either.“I think he’s a really good coach,” Ricky Williams, the running back who won the 1998 Heisman Trophy with the Longhorns, said of Strong, “but I don’t think he has all the players and types of players he’d like to have.” Citing linebacker Malik Jefferson and cornerback Kris Boyd — both freshmen whom Strong recruited — Williams added, “First time I’ve ever seen it with my own eyes, where a good chunk of the leadership came from underclassmen.” In an interview after the game, Jefferson said the entire team had rallied around Strong.“Coach Strong just needs the opportunity, like everybody else,” he said. “Us being his freshman recruiting class, we have his back. But those guys do, too.”After Bluiett, a junior who converted from defensive end before this season, scored his first career touchdown, he and Strong leapt into each other in celebration. Later, Strong’s players gave him a Gatorade bath and hoisted him on their shoulders.All this could be forgotten should Texas finish worse than it did last year, when it went 6-7. The Longhorns’ remaining schedule includes ever-dangerous Kansas State, in two weeks after a bye; high-scoring Texas Tech; and No. 3 Baylor. While it is widely thought that the midseason ascension of the interim athletic director, Mike Perrin, bought Strong another season, that calculus could change should an attractive candidate like the Philadelphia Eagles’ Chip Kelly or Alabama’s Nick Saban, whom Texas reportedly tried to hire to replace Brown, become available.Several observers who understand the new realities of college football suggest that Longhorns fans need to adjust their Texas-size expectations no matter what happens, because scholarship limits, maverick coaching styles and broadly distributed television revenue have conspired to level the competitive playing field.Where Texas was once, by far, the most popular program in the country’s most football-mad state, it must now contend with successful upstarts like Baylor and Texas Christian, a newly turbocharged Texas A&M and national recruiting strategies in which teams from the Pacific-12, the Big Ten and elsewhere routinely raid the Lone Star State for talent.“Everybody can be good today,” said Barry Switzer, who had a 9-5-2 record in the Red River game as Oklahoma’s coach from 1973 to 1988. “Used to be dominant teams. Now, everybody can beat everybody.”Walker agreed.“We’ve always expected kids to come, because we were the team,” he said. “But we’re not the team anymore.”Advertisement