By BEN ROTHENBERGJAN. 30, 2015
MELBOURNE, Australia — As strange as it might seem considering their lifetime head-to-head results, Maria Sharapova had a winning record against Serena Williams until their burgeoning rivalry shifted to Australia.As a 17-year-old in 2004, Sharapova defeated Williams in two of their first three meetings, stunning her in straight sets in the Wimbledon final and then beating an injured Williams in the final of the WTA Championships in Los Angeles.Their fourth match came months later, in the semifinals of the 2005 Australian Open, where Sharapova was seeded fourth and Williams seventh. Sharapova appeared to be in control again at the start of the match, winning the first set, 6-2, before Williams took a tight second set, 7-5.Sharapova again led in the third set, and had three match points on her serve at 5-4. But after Sharapova had an unforced forehand error on the first match point, Williams saved the next two with inside-out forehand winners, and eventually broke Sharapova back and won the third set, 8-6.Although she was disappointed at the time, Sharapova recently said she tried to keep that loss to Williams, then 23, in perspective.Advertisement“Darn it,” she said, laughing, at the memory of the three match points. “This is not a sprint; it’s a marathon, so I’m just riding along. I mean, of course I’m sad, and obviously it’s a tough one to lose, but I’ve got a long way ahead of me.”AdvertisementWilliams went on to win the Australian Open for a second time, the seventh Grand Slam title of her career. On Sunday she will try to win her 19th.Asked about the 2005 match after her semifinal win on Thursday evening, Williams said her main memories came from rewatching it on YouTube a few years ago.“The only thing I remember is the inside-out forehand on match point — I hit it for a winner,” Williams said. “I hit it and I walked to the next side as if I knew it was already going to be a winner. It’s interesting. That’s really the only thing I remember.”Williams struggled with injury and her fitness after that title, and she would neither play Sharapova nor reach the final of any tournament until two years later in Melbourne, when, ranked 81st, she played top-seeded Sharapova in the final of the 2007 Australian Open. Williams had again saved a match point to reach the final, this time in the quarterfinals against Shahar Peer.Though their head-to-head record then was 2-2, their fifth meeting was a complete rout. Williams raced to a 5-0 lead and won, 6-1, 6-2.Williams never looked back after that victory. She won their next match, 6-1, 6-1, that March in Miami, and has since reeled off mostly routine victories in their subsequent 12 matches, losing only two sets to Sharapova on her way to gaining a 16-2 advantage in their head-to-head meetings.Though their rivalry has occasionally had sparks off the court, the two have yet to play another match like their 2005 encounter, even with Sharapova establishing herself as a consistent top player and amassing five Grand Slam titles.Ten years later, Sharapova has another chance to change the course of the rivalry. That opportunity will be played out Down Under, where the rivalry turned upside down for her in the first place.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.