AdvertisementSupported byBy Ken BelsonPHOENIX — N.F.L Commissioner Roger Goodell said on Friday that he had been chastened by a season of embarrassing scandals, contentious battles and growing distrust, but that he had no intention of resigning.“It’s been a tough year; it has been a tough year for me personally,” Goodell said in his annual state-of-the-league address ahead of Sunday’s Super Bowl. “We obviously, as an organization, have gone through adversity, but, more importantly, it has been adversity for me. That is something where we take that seriously. We’ve all done a lot of soul-searching, starting with yours truly.”Goodell refused to say whether he deserved to take a pay cut for the way he has led the league, which has been rocked this season by domestic-violence and child-abuse cases. The league also had a messy showdown with the players’ union about a new personal-conduct policy and issues involving players. Goodell said, though, that he would not argue if the owners chose to cut his compensation, which hit $44 million two years ago.Goodell also fended off suggestions that he has favored team owners like Robert K. Kraft of the New England Patriots, a notion that was voiced publicly by Seattle defensive back Richard Sherman this week.He said it was normal for the commissioner to meet with owners in various settings, including at events in their homes, like the party that Kraft threw before the A.F.C. championship game. “I admire and respect him on a personal level,” Goodell said of Kraft.On Monday, however, Kraft said he expected to receive an apology from the league if his team is absolved of any wrongdoing in what has become known as the “Deflategate” case.Kraft is also on the owners’ committee that determines Goodell’s compensation.Goodell denied that the league had a conflict of interest when it hired lawyers with ties to the N.F.L. to conduct investigations into wrongdoing in the league.“We have had people with uncompromising integrity,” Goodell said of the former F.B.I. director Robert S. Mueller III and others who have been hired by the league.Goodell said that the league-appointed lawyer, Ted Wells, was continuing to investigate whether game balls were deliberately deflated during the A.F.C. championship game in Massachusetts nearly two weeks ago. He said the league had reached no conclusions in the case.“We take seriously anything that affects the integrity of the game,” Goodell said.Though Goodell has been criticized by fans, players and reporters, some of whom have urged him to step down, the league’s 32 owners have stood by him during what has been the most tumultuous year in his eight-year tenure.In July, just a few months after a damning report on rampant bullying among Miami Dolphins players, Goodell was forced to defend his decision to suspend Baltimore Ravens running back Ray Rice for only two games for punching his then-fiancée, Janay Palmer, in an elevator and apparently knocking her out.In the face of outrage from women’s groups, Goodell reversed course and said that players found to have committed domestic violence would be suspended for at least six games.Less than two weeks later, video surfaced showing Rice punching Palmer, who is now his wife, leading to an even fiercer debate about the league’s lax handling of these cases and whether Goodell was lying when he said he had not seen the video before he suspended Rice.Barbara S. Jones, a former federal judge, and Mueller, the former F.B.I. director, both said that Goodell had not seen the video before he initially suspended Rice. But both added that the league did a sloppy job of investigating the circumstances of the case.As often happens at this address, Goodell fielded a host of disparate questions about the league’s business:■ Goodell appeared to support keeping the Rams in St. Louis. “We want all of our franchises to stay in their current markets,” he said. He called a proposed 64,000-seat outdoor stadium a “positive development.”■ Though the Rams owner Stan Kroenke has proposed building a 80,000-seat stadium not far from downtown Los Angeles, Goodell said that “there has been no determination of us going to Los Angeles.”■ The league was exploring whether to stream games on the Internet so fans without cable televisions can watch.■ Goodell was encouraged by the enthusiasm for the league in London, where the N.F.L. now plays three games a season, but he gave no timeline for moving a team there permanently.■ He trumpeted the decline in the number of reported concussions and said the league would soon fill the newly created position of chief medical officer.■ Seattle Seahawks running back Marshawn Lynch, who has stonewalled reporters all season, should speak more to the news media, Goodell said, because “it is part of your job, and there are things that we all have to do in our jobs that we may not necessarily want to do.”Super Bowl XLIX: SEATTLE vs. NEW ENGLAND 6:30 p.m. Sunday TV: NBCAdvertisement