AdvertisementSupported byBy Ben RothenbergMELBOURNE, Australia — Sequels can be irresistible. A cast with great chemistry reprising beloved roles in a similar setting is often a formula for entertainment, if not duplication of the original’s success.But in their third meeting in three years at the Australian Open, Novak Djokovic and Stan Wawrinka wrote a script Friday night on par with “The Godfather: Part III” or “Terminator 3: Rise of the Machines.”After producing two five-set epics that brought out the best in each other, the top-seeded Djokovic and Wawrinka, the defending champion, seemed to bring out the worst in each other in the third meeting, with Djokovic ultimately claiming victory, 7-6 (1), 3-6, 6-4, 4-6, 6-0. Djokovic, a four-time champion here, will face Andy Murray, a three-time runner-up, in the final Sunday.“I’m sure everybody who came to watch the match live and watched it on TV were expecting a five-set match,” Djokovic said. “It’s what we delivered for them.”To say they delivered what was expected of them was debatable. “Describe the match?” Wawrinka repeated back to a reporter at the start of his news conference. “Strange. Not the best, for sure.”Despite having played well in the quarterfinals, neither man was able to sustain anywhere near his best tennis Friday night: The two combined for a whopping 118 unforced errors. Djokovic, who had been broken only once in his previous five matches, surrendered his serve five times to Wawrinka.Djokovic’s previous contests with Wawrinka had been some of his best in Melbourne. He won their 2013 fourth-round encounter, 12-10, in the fifth, and lost their 2014 quarterfinal, 9-7, in the fifth. This time, the 6-0 fifth set seemed like a merciful reprieve from what had been a difficult match to watch.“The battle was great,” Djokovic said. “It was no different this year from the previous two years in terms of, you know, fighting from both sides. The only difference was that the fifth set went completely my way.”Their previous encounters in Melbourne (as well as another five-setter in the semifinals of the 2013 United States Open, which Djokovic won) had been defined by complementary play, with Wawrinka’s cannon-fire groundstrokes pushing Djokovic’s speed and counterpunching skills to their limits. But Wawrinka struggled to control his power Friday night, and Djokovic’s counterattack drifted into passivity. In the fourth set, Djokovic won four games but hit zero winners.Neither player was able to sustain his momentum; when Djokovic led, 2-0, in the fourth set and seemed on track to close out the match, he surrendered an easy, error-strewn break of serve to give control back to Wawrinka.“I did not play on the level that I intended before the match,” Djokovic said. “There were parts of the match where I stepped in and played a game I needed to play, but parts of the match where I played too defensive and allowed him to dictate the play from the baseline.”Wawrinka said he knew his tank was empty before the match began. He felt depleted from a long season last year, which extended into a winning effort in the Davis Cup final in November, as well as his run to the title in Chennai in the first week of this season.“I told my coach before the match and already yesterday that I was mentally completely dead and no battery,” Wawrinka said. “Tough to focus on what I want to do, tough to focus on my game. And that’s what happened today.”The spotty play appeared contagious: The line judges had eight calls overturned by Hawk-Eye reviews.Other airborne contagions may have also played a part in the quality of the match. Djokovic and Wawrinka coughed through news conferences, similar to the coughing fits that have troubled Serena Williams this week. Djokovic appeared uncharacteristically short of breath at times early in the match, panting for nearly a minute after one long rally.Djokovic insisted that he would be fine for the final and suggested that his physical struggles were more the result of tactical missteps.“I think it was more mental in a way because once you back up and start playing defensively, you spend a lot of energy,” he said. “He was the one that was dictating the rallies; there’s no question about it.”Even with low scores for style, Djokovic said he took comfort in having earned a spot in the final, which was, after all, his primary objective.“I have much more positive things to reflect on in my game and in all the matches that I played so far in the tournament than the negative,” he said. “I’m in the finals. In the end of the day, that’s why I’m here, you know, to try to get far in the tournament. Getting to the finals in any way possible is a great achievement.”Advertisement