By TOM PEDULLAJAN. 31, 2015
Geno Smith, meeting with reporters Saturday for the first time since the Jets overhauled their front office and coaching staff, sounded like someone who realizes time may be growing short for him to prove himself as a starting quarterback.“I wouldn’t say it’s my last chance, but it’s a very, very vital off-season for myself and for a lot of people for a lot of reasons,” Smith said at Jets House, an event in which fans interact with current and former players. “I look forward to it.”Smith said he and the Jets’ new coach, Todd Bowles, had talked by phone but had yet to meet.“We both expressed how eager we are to get back to work,” said Smith, who noted that he was already studying film of the spread offense favored by Chan Gailey, the new offensive coordinator.Smith was selected by the Jets in the second round of the 2013 draft, the first overseen by John Idzik, the general manager at the time. Rex Ryan, who was the Jets’ coach, gave him ample opportunity to succeed, but Smith’s inconsistent play contributed to the departures of Idzik and Ryan. The Jets closed last season at 4-12 after going 8-8 the year before.AdvertisementBowles and Mike Maccagnan, the new general manager, have offered little insight into their plans at quarterback. The Jets have the sixth overall selection, which means they would probably have to trade up to get either of the top two college quarterbacks in the draft, Marcus Mariota and Jameis Winston.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Smith said he would understand if the Jets drafted Mariota or Winston. “No matter who it is, there is going to be competition, and I look forward to it,” he said.Smith made some progress in his second season, particularly in the area of turnovers. After throwing for 12 touchdowns and 21 interceptions while starting all 16 games as a rookie, he finished with 13 touchdowns and 13 interceptions in 14 games this season. His completion percentage rose from 55.8 to 59.7, and his passer rating went from 66.5 to 77.5. He averaged 6.9 yards per completion in both seasons. In the 2014 finale, Smith gave the new regime something to ponder by achieving a perfect 158.3 passer rating in the Jets’ 37-24 victory over the Miami Dolphins.Advertisement“The key thing is consistency,” he said. “I’ve got to be a lot more consistent and make winning plays on a consistent basis.”A version of this article appears in print on February 1, 2015, on Page SP8 of the New York edition with the headline: Jets' Smith Gears Up.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.