AdvertisementSupported byN.H.L. RoundupBy The Associated PressTomas Tatar and Gustav Nyquist scored power-play goals, helping the Detroit Red Wings beat the visiting Islanders, 4-1, on Saturday for their seventh win in eight games.Detroit’s backup goaltender, Petr Mrazek, played well after giving up five goals in a loss at Tampa Bay on Thursday. Against the Islanders, the Red Wings overcame five penalties and were outshot by 23-19.Mrazek again filled in for Jimmy Howard, who has been out with a groin injury since Jan. 10.DEVILS 3, PANTHERS 1 The rookie Keith Kinkaid stopped 26 shots, Mike Cammalleri and Steve Bernier each had a goal and an assist, and the Devils topped visiting Florida.Jaromir Jagr also scored as the Devils won for the sixth time in 10 games. Kinkaid got the start as Cory Schneider rested after facing a season-high 43 shots in a 2-1 overtime loss to Pittsburgh on Friday.CANADIENS 1, CAPITALS 0 Carey Price made 36 saves for his second straight shutout, Max Pacioretty scored 3 minutes 8 seconds into overtime, and host Montreal edged Washington for its fifth straight win.It was similar to the Canadiens’ last game, against the Rangers at Madison Square Garden on Thursday night, when Price got a shutout and Pacioretty scored late in the third period for a 1-0 victory. Pacioretty scored the winning goal on Saturday by tipping Tomas Plekanec’s pass over Capitals goaltender Braden Holtby. The Canadiens improved to 15-3-1 in their last 19 games. BRUINS 3, KINGS 1 Chris Kelly broke a 1-1 tie with 5:27 left in the third period, and Brad Marchand added an empty-netter for his second goal of the game as host Boston beat Los Angeles. Tuukka Rask stopped 30 shots for the Bruins. Jordan Nolan scored the only goal for the Kings.FLYERS 1, MAPLE LEAFS 0 Steve Mason stopped all 30 shots he faced, and Michael Del Zotto scored to help Philadelphia beat visiting Toronto, which lost its ninth straight. Mason had his second shutout of the season and the 25th of his career. The slumping Maple Leafs have been held to one goal or fewer in eight of their last nine games. They had scored one goal in each of the last two games.STARS 5, JETS 2 John Klingberg had two goals and two assists as Dallas scored four power-play goals in a victory at Winnipeg. Patrick Eaves, Shawn Horcoff and Jason Spezza also scored for Dallas, and Tyler Seguin had three assists. Winnipeg extended its losing streak to three games.LIGHTNING 3, BLUE JACKETS 1 Cedric Paquette got his fifth goal in the last three games, Ben Bishop made 34 saves, and Tampa Bay beat Columbus for its 10th straight home victory. Brett Connolly and Valtteri Filppula also scored for Tampa Bay. Bishop lost his shutout bid when Ryan Johansen scored with 3:26 remaining. SENATORS 7, COYOTES 2 Mark Stone, Bobby Ryan and Erik Karlsson each had a goal and an assist, helping Ottawa break away from visiting Arizona. Marc Methot added three assists for the Senators.Advertisement