AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressOCALA, Fla. — Amid one of the more tumultuous final hours in recent L.P.G.A. Tour history, Lydia Ko faced a series of tough predicaments. But what came after the round gave her the biggest pause of the day.After reclaiming the lead late Saturday, Ko, 17, double-bogeyed the 71st hole at the inaugural Coates Golf Championship and lost by a stroke to Na Yeon Choi.However, Ko secured a piece of history that could be remembered long after the details of the event at Golden Ocala Golf and Equestrian Club, the tour’s season opener, are forgotten. Ko, a transplanted New Zealander, became the youngest player of either sex to ascend to the world’s No. 1 ranking, breaking the record, set by Tiger Woods, by almost four years.“It’s going to be good,” Ko said of her loss. “I was here to focus on the tournament itself, but I guess I got a great outcome at the end of the day, too.”After leading by four strokes on the front nine, Ko trailed Choi by a shot as they played the par-3 15th. With Choi facing a 6-footer for birdie, Ko slammed in an improbable 60-footer. Choi three-putted for a two-shot swing.Ko’s lead did not last long. She drove into a fairway bunker and then fanned a hybrid shot into a stand of pine trees down the right side of the 17th hole, scrambling to make a double bogey.Choi finished with a four-under-par 68 and a 16-under total. Ko had to salvage a par on the 18th to finish in a three-way tie for second, but that was good enough for her to secure a piece of the record book.Woods, previously the youngest golfer to reach No. 1, was 21 years 5 months 16 days old when he rose to the top in 1997. Ko reached the mark 3 years 8 months 14 days earlier. The men’s rankings date to 1986; the women’s list is nine years old.“It’s a nice consolation, if you want to call it that,” said Ko’s swing coach, David Leadbetter.Ko finished with a 71 to match Jessica Korda (66) and Ha Na Jang (70) at 15 under.Choi, who had fallen out of the top 15 in the rankings, was clearly caught up in the emotion of the win, her first since late 2012 and the eighth of her L.P.G.A. career. “I think I was so nervous out there,” Choi, 27, said while fighting back tears. “I was waiting so long for this moment.”Advertisement