AdvertisementSupported byBy Karen CrouseSCOTTSDALE, Ariz. — Pity the old-timers on the PGA Tour, who have seen their workplace overrun by trophy kids. The millennials, a group that includes Jordan Spieth, Daniel Berger and Justin Thomas, do not hew to the stereotype of the entitled, high-maintenance employee. They deserve the praise lavished on them, they do not have padded résumés and they are respectful, addressing anyone over the age of 25 as “Mister.” Youth has been served — or, as this is the Phoenix Open, the biggest cocktail party on grass, overserved — during the past week. After 54 holes, the top 16 includes a cluster of youngsters who grew up idolizing Tiger Woods. They include the Arizona State junior Jon Rahm, 20; Hideki Matsuyama, 22; Brooks Koepka, 24; Berger, 21; and Thomas, 21. At 29, Russell Knox, who is tied for eighth at eight-under-par 205, feels, well, old.“I was hopeless at 21,” Knox said with a laugh after posting a six-under 65 to move five strokes behind the leader, Martin Laird, who posted a 68. Knox added: “Everyone has just improved so much. And of course, we owe Mr. Woods for that. He’s just made everyone so much better.”With Woods, 39, and Phil Mickelson, 44, having missed the cut — and Woods, as a result, set to fall out of the top 50 in the world rankings for the first time in more than three years — the tournament has the feel of an anemometer measuring the speed of change in men’s golf.Laird, a 32-year-old Scotsman, was the most senior member of his Saturday threesome by 11 years. He played in the final group with Thomas (69) and Berger (71). “I felt like an old man,” Laird said.He also said that he did not believe the youth movement would fade any time soon. “I think this might just be the way it is,” he said.He added: “You know, I guess you call them kids at 19, 20; when they come out, they’re ready to go. They don’t need three or four years to get used to the tour life or used to the golf courses. I don’t think they get intimidated at all anymore. They come out ready to go, put their foot down and go. That’s why there are a lot of them about. It’s a great thing for golf.”After Laird, three of the next five golfers on the leader board are under 25: Matsuyama, a native of Japan, posted the day’s best round, a 63, to move into a tie for second, at 10 under, with Koepka (64) and Zach Johnson (67). They are one stroke ahead of Rahm (66), Thomas and Ryan Palmer (68). Is golf undergoing a changing of the guard? “It has to at some point,” said Robert Streb, 27, who has four top-10 finishes, including a victory, in his first seven starts of the 2014-15 wraparound season. Streb, who carded a 69, was among nine players in a logjam at eighth.The millennial movement started with Rory McIlroy, a 25-year-old from Northern Ireland who became the youngest player to crack the top 50 and who won his first major at age 22. His idol was Woods, and his success inspired Rickie Fowler, 26, who influenced Russell Henley, 25, who won his PGA Tour pro debut after winning a professional event while in college. Henley, in turn, emboldened Patrick Reed, 24, and Spieth, 21, whose four combined official PGA Tour victories have spurred Thomas and Koepka.Thomas, the son of a longtime P.G.A. of America professional, said that Reed “seems like a veteran now, and he’s what, 24? It’s insane.”He added: “I don’t think I’d be where I am today if it wasn’t for Tiger. He was an idol of mine growing up, and a lot of people my age. And Phil as well, seeing the things they did, and being interested in golf, it was kind of hard not to do that as fast as we could.”Koepka, who recorded two top-10 finishes in two tour starts last fall, has won multiple times in Europe. “You know, we have all played golf against each other since we have been 12, 13, 14 years old,” he said, “so we all kind of grew up with each other, playing against each other. We all know how good we are, but it’s just about getting it done on Sundays.”At 28, Keegan Bradley was not sure at the start of the week whether he should be considered a veteran or a young gun. “I don’t know,” he said on Wednesday. “I think you’ve got to be under 25 to be a true young gun.”Playing Saturday in the same group as Rahm, a Spaniard who is one of the top amateurs in the world, Bradley got his answer. Compared with Rahm, he qualifies as a grizzled veteran. Bradley carded a 71, five strokes higher than Rahm, of whom Mickelson said, “I think he’s going to be a real stud on the PGA Tour.”Rahm is competing in his second PGA Tour event. “I’ve got to say, I started really, really nervous because I was playing with two great players,” he said, referring to Bradley and Brandt Snedeker. If Rahm felt overwhelmed by the occasion, his game hid it well. On No. 16, the par-3 party hole, he was the only player in his group to hit the green with his tee shot. How sweet it is to be too young to sport the scars of failure. Rahm hinted at the secret to his success when he said: “I’m honestly not really focusing on the score. I’m just playing golf shot by shot.”Advertisement