By KEN BELSONJAN. 31, 2015
PHOENIX —  When the Super Bowl begins Sunday, 70,000 fans will ease into their seats and suites at University of Phoenix Stadium, munch on hot dogs and pizza, and wash them down with soda and beer.About 15 miles to the south, a few hundred other fans will make do with pink-hued popcorn and sit on metal stools in an enormous room to watch the New England Patriots play the Seattle Seahawks on a flat-panel television mounted to a cinder-block wall.And according to Sheriff Joe Arpaio, who arranged the viewing at the Maricopa County Jail, the inmates should feel lucky to get even that much.For the first time in years, Arpaio, who likes to be called America’s toughest sheriff, will let the 8,500 inmates watch the Super Bowl on televisions throughout the jail.AdvertisementArpaio, who built his reputation on a brass-knuckle approach to law enforcement and a rabid enforcement of immigration laws, got a supporter to pay for 200 pounds of corn kernels so about 10 percent of the inmates could eat popcorn. No butter. No salt. And because the sheriff forces the inmates to sleep on pink sheets and wear pink underwear, the popcorn will be coated with a cherry glaze powder.Arpaio, 82, insists he is not getting soft. Only inmates who are military veterans or have sentences of a year or less will get to eat the popcorn. And if anyone gets out of line, he is turning off the television, no matter how close the score.Advertisement“There’s no constitutional reason I have to let them watch the game,” Arpaio said.Most days, inmates are allowed to watch only three channels: the Weather Channel, the Food Network and C-Span. Given the confines of the jail and the dining options there, the channels are their own distinct form of torture.“They don’t like the Food Network because it reminds them of what they can’t get, and C-Span bores them to tears,” Sgt. Gary Miller said. “But last time we had the Super Bowl on, they were hooting and hollering. The guys went berserk.”Arpaio decided to let the inmates watch the game because he was born in Springfield, Mass., and the Patriots are playing. (No one is certain as to the last time a Super Bowl was seen at the jail, but many recall seeing the 2008 game, which was also played at University of Phoenix Stadium.)But, Arpaio said, he was not a Patriots fan. In his office he showed off a football signed by Tony Romo, the quarterback of the Dallas Cowboys, his favorite team. For good measure, he pointed to a newspaper clipping from 1975 that described how Arpaio — when he was a federal narcotics agent in Massachusetts — arrested a Patriots player for selling cocaine.An inveterate self-promoter and campaigner (he has been elected six times), Arpaio has an ardent following in Arizona.Who’s going to win? What color will Katy Perry’s hair be? What about the commercials? Make your Super Bowl picks and predictions and share your ballot with your friends.Ira Gaines, a theater producer who, like Arpaio, is a transplanted resident from the East Coast, donated $225 to pay for the popcorn. “We are huge supporters and he can do no wrong in my eyes,” Gaines said. “We donate every time he runs.”AdvertisementThe popcorn Gaines paid for was being prepared by several inmates at the jail’s kitchen facilities on Saturday.One 24-year-old inmate who was doing a three-month sentence for violating his parole but did not want his name used, poured a small cup of oil in a movie theater-style popper. Then he added the kernels and the pink powder. The popcorn dropped into a plastic bucket. Another inmate on cooking detail scooped the popped corn into small plastic bags and tied them shut.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Some inmates said they were rooting for the Seahawks, in part because they beat the hometown Arizona Cardinals during the regular season. The sheriff, though, is rooting for the Patriots.Arpaio will not be at the game. Instead, he will watch on television at home with his wife.“If I went to the game, I would probably have to pay $2,000, and if I took a freebie, it would be national headlines,” he said.He will be keeping an eye on the jail, too. If anyone gets out of control, the television will be turned off. “You never know what the prisoners will do,” he said. “If we have any problem, we’ll just put them in lockdown.”A version of this article appears in print on February 1, 2015, on Page SP8 of the New York edition with the headline: At This Party, You’d Better Keep It Down.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.