AdvertisementSupported byBy Colin A. StephensonLike Samson, Cam Levins figures his hair is the source of his prowess.“I would say it supplies me with a certain amount of speed and power,” Levins said of his curly black Afro. “You’d think aerodynamics would go against that, but clearly not, right?”Levins, a 25-year-old Canadian, was the star of the Armory Track Invitational on Saturday, pulling off a stunning double win in the mile and two-mile races at the Upper Manhattan track. He defeated the Olympic silver medalist Galen Rupp, his Nike Oregon Project club teammate, in completing the feat.Rupp, running his first race of the year, had the lead entering the final lap of the two-mile race before Levins decided to challenge him.“When I got to there, I’m like, Oh, man, Galen’s not pulling away from me; maybe I got a shot at it,” Levins said afterward. “I thought he was just going to start hammering that last lap, frankly. And when he didn’t, I’m like, Oh, I’m still here; maybe I can make a move on him. And then he didn’t really respond.”Ben Blankenship, of Nike Oregon Track Club, followed Levins past Rupp, and Suguru Osako of Japan also surged, nipping Blankenship at the end to finish second. Rupp, the silver medalist in the 10,000 meters at the 2012 Olympics, ended up in fourth. Levins’s winning time was 8 minutes 15.38 seconds, with Osako finishing in 8:16.47 and Blankenship in 8:16.53. Rupp finished in 8:17.24. It was a tight victory for Levins, about 30 minutes after he had won the mile in 3:54.74, well ahead of the second-place finisher, Chris O’Hare (3:57.26).Levins stole the show from the United States men’s distance medley relay team, which withstood a late challenge from Ireland to set a world record for the event. The United States team finished in 9:19.93, shattering the old mark in the rarely run 4,000-meter event by more than six seconds. The University of Texas had set the record in 2008, at 9:25.97.“When you break a world record by six seconds, it’s awesome,” said Erik Sowinski, who ran the 800-meter leg in the relay. Sowinski turned over a huge lead to Patrick Casey, who ran the final 1,600 meters. Casey was startled when Ireland’s Ciaran O’Lionaird charged behind him and quickly cut the gap, but Casey was able to hold off O’Lionaird and finish strongly.Casey, who ran a split time of 3:56.48, said: “I knew he had to have run a pretty aggressive first 600, so I knew I had a couple cards left to play. At the same time, you don’t want somebody hanging around that long that’s that talented. But it shook out in my favor, and it was a lot of fun.”He added, “After these guys built up such a big lead, I would have had to die out there to let the lead go.”This was the first year that the Armory meet added a significant number of professionals to what had been primarily a college and high school meet for 14 years. The idea was to make the meet more interesting, according to Ray Flynn, the director of the professional races, and to fuel interest in the Millrose Games, which will be held at the Armory on Feb. 14. Norbert Sander, the executive director of the Armory, added that it was important to include professionals in the meet because it was being broadcast for the first time on television, on NBCSN.Another star of Saturday’s meet was Ajee Wilson, a 20-year-old native of Neptune, N.J., who won the 800 meters in 2:01.63. An expected duel between Wilson and Mary Cain, a 1,500-meter specialist who won the gold in the 3,000 at the World Juniors in 2014, did not materialize, as Cain finished fifth.In other events, Shawn Barber of the University of Akron captured the invitational pole vault, clearing the bar at 19 feet ¼ inch, and the Olympian Will Claye of Nike won the triple jump with a leap of 55-6 ½, nosing out Omar Craddock of Jump Corps, who went 55-4 ¼. Lalonde Gordon of Nike won the men’s 300 invitational, finishing in 32.57 seconds to beat Manteo Mitchell of Under Armour (32.81) and Jermaine Brown of Mizuno (32.91). Jordan Hasay of Nike Oregon Project won the women’s two-mile race in 9:38.28.Advertisement