By KEN BELSONJAN. 31, 2015
Michael Levine, a preservationist and artist based in Arizona, wanted to show the N.F.L. a new way to market its product, so he made an enormous metal cardinal as a tribute to Phoenix’s hometown team.PHOENIX —  The N.F.L. has become a $10 billion behemoth partly through innovative marketing, but also through ruthless protection of its brand. The league, after all, has cracked down on businesses that have used the words Super Bowl in their advertising, one reason some critics called the N.F.L. the No Fun League.Michael Levine wanted do something about it. A preservationist, commercial metal sculptor and artist, he has made a variety of conceptual “art carts” over the years, including a Batmobile, a Cinderella carriage for his kids and a snakehead mounted on a golf cart in honor of the Arizona Diamondbacks, who play a few blocks from one of his warehouses in downtown Phoenix.When the N.F.L. announced several years ago that the Super Bowl would return to Arizona, Levine thought about how to express his interest in the game. The digitized team and corporate logos were uninspiring, he said, so he wanted to build three-dimensional logos for each of the 32 N.F.L. teams that would be mounted on vehicles and driven around Arizona before the Super Bowl.That proved too expensive and time-consuming, so Levine chose to make an enormous metal cardinal as a tribute to the hometown Arizona Cardinals.AdvertisementAfter several months of work and about $50,000 on materials and labor, Levine was set to all but finish the project a day before the Seattle Seahawks and New England Patriots were to kick off in Super Bowl XLIX about 15 miles away, at University of Phoenix Stadium.His interpretive cardinal is imposing at 13 feet high, 18 feet long and 102 inches wide. It weighs just over a ton and sits on a 3,000-pound lift forklift so it can be driven around the neighborhood as a kind of rolling guerrilla art installation.Advertisement“Major league sports make things as simple as possible so they can be rebranded as easily as possible,” Levine said. “With the technology that’s out there, it becomes pretty static. It becomes just background noise.”The cardinal, though, is “a little bit of auto body, a little bit of structural steel; it’s architectural, it’s anthropomorphic, it’s all of the above,” he said.Lawyers for the league had not seen Levine’s creation but said they had no issue with fans using logos as the basis for their creations as long as they did not try to make money by doing so.“We’d have no trouble with it as long as it’s not passed off as commercial and mass-produced, or trading on the good will of the league,” said Anastasia Danias, an N.F.L. lawyer.Levine’s rolling cardinal is a prototype that he hopes to replicate. He has three-dimensional designs for other team logo sculptures if a fan, team or company wants to commission them. The sculptures, he said, could make appearances at tailgating, team parties and charity events.Who’s going to win? What color will Katy Perry’s hair be? What about the commercials? Make your Super Bowl picks and predictions and share your ballot with your friends.“Logos are shorthand for a brand, a brand personality, something that people take much pride in,” said Bob Dorfman, who specializes in sports marketing at Baker Street Advertising. “It is a very emotional symbol, and people really latch on to it.”AdvertisementWhether Levine finds a buyer for his cardinal is unclear. The Arizona Super Bowl Host Committee expressed interest but ultimately balked. The owner of the Cardinals, Michael Bidwill, was approached, but he chose not to investigate further. Given concerns about potential trademark violations and legal liability, Levine is not surprised he did not sell the concept initially.But he said fans reacted positively when he made a metal sculpture of the Phoenix Suns’ logo and the snakehead that he built three years ago. They react, he said, much as they do when they see the Oscar Mayer Wienermobile or attend the Burning Man Festival. Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“The metal material captures the ferocity of the logo,” Ed O’Hara, who designs logos for sports teams at SME, said after being shown photographs of the sculpture. “This has a real presence because it’s handmade and welded.”The cardinal was challenging to build because of its size and complex design, with an internal rib structure made of raw cold-rolled steel, a movable beak, battery-operated lights and elongated tail, all covered in a perforated metal skin. Though it was designed on a computer with 3-D CAD software, Levine and his team of five workers built it without prints to guide them.“It’s like a mash-up of tailgating, Nascar, crash-up derby, greased lightning,” Levine said, adding that it was an appropriate symbol for the N.F.L., “which is strategy and hitting and armor and padding.”“Going to art school, I wanted to make things that were gritty or tougher,” Levine said. “This is both. This has an edge to it. But the geometry, it is seductive.”A version of this article appears in print on February 1, 2015, on Page SP7 of the New York edition with the headline: An Imposing Team Symbol Finds a Niche in the Hoopla.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.