By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSJAN. 31, 2015
Green Bay’s Aaron Rodgers won his second Most Valuable Player Award, and J. J. Watt swept away the voters the way he sweeps quarterbacks off their feet to take top defensive honors.Rodgers, also the 2011 Associated Press most valuable player, won this time in somewhat surprisingly easy fashion over Watt.Roders, the Packers’ starting quarterback, received 31 votes for the 2014 award from a nationwide panel of 50 media members who cover the league.Houston’s Watt, seeking to become the first defensive player to be named M.V.P. since 1986, got 13 votes.Advertisement“It’s special,” Watt said of winning the Defensive Player of the Year Award. “It’s a testament to my coaches and teammates and everything they did throughout the year.”AdvertisementRodgers threw for 38 touchdowns and a league-low five interceptions; he has thrown 512 passes at home without a pick. He led the Packers to two victories at season’s end despite playing with a severe calf injury.“I feel so fortunate to live out my dreams, year after year,” Rodgers said.DeMarco Murray of Dallas won the Offensive Player of the Year Award.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Bruce Arians won his second Coach of the Year Award in three seasons after leading the injury-ravaged Cardinals to an 11-5 record and a wild-card playoff berth.Giants wide receiver Odell Beckham Jr., who made the play of the year against the Cowboys with a one-handed snag of a touchdown pass while falling backward, was voted top offensive rookie.Rams tackle Aaron Donald won top defensive rookie honors. HALL’S NEXT CLASS Junior Seau, Jerome Bettis, Tim Brown, Charles Haley and Will Shields were elected to the Pro Football Hall of Fame.The class of 2015 also includes two contributors, Bill Polian and Ron Wolf, along with the senior selection, Mick Tingelhoff.The induction ceremony is in August at Canton, Ohio.A version of this article appears in print on February 1, 2015, on Page SP8 of the New York edition with the headline: M.V.P. Goes to Rodgers; Watt Wins for Defense.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.