AdvertisementSupported byWinter Sports RoundupBy The Associated PressElizaveta Tuktamysheva won the gold medal Saturday at the European Figure Skating Championships in Stockholm, heading a Russian sweep of the medals in the women’s event.Tuktamysheva was second after the short program, but her free skate to Middle Eastern music featured seven clean triples and a blurringly fast combination spin at the conclusion to push her ahead of her compatriot Elena Radionova. Anna Pogorilaya took the bronze. The Russians were way ahead of the rest of the field. Two Swedish sisters, Joshi and Viktoria Helgesson, finished fourth and fifth, but more than 20 points behind Pogorilaya.Tuktamysheva’s program puts her through several personas, beginning with sedately mysterious strains and reaching an intense, percussive climax four minutes later. “I’ve worked a lot on that; I wanted to show a lot of emotions so it doesn’t get boring for the judges and spectators,” she said.The free skate began with a triple lutz-double toe loop-double loop cascade, followed quickly by a second lutz of notable height. Well after the two-minute mark, she managed a triple salchow-double axel that she said was the watershed point. “I felt good after I did the second lutz, and then the best moment was when I landed the triple salchow-double axel,” she said. “I was like, ‘Yes!’ ”Radionova skated to excerpts from Rachmaninoff’s music and, like Tuktamysheva, landed seven clean triples, along with two double axels in succession. She raised her leg behind her head in a Bielmann spin at the conclusion.The Russian podium sweep was heartening to all three skaters. “It’s not a shame that I lost to these two girls,” Pogorilaya said.AUSTRIAN EXTENDS STREAK The Austrian ski jumper Daniela Iraschko-Stolz won her third straight women’s World Cup event to extend her lead in the overall standings.Iraschko-Stolz, who won both competitions in Oberstdorf, Germany, last weekend, jumped 93.0 and 91.5 meters (300 feet) at Hinzenbach, Austria, to score a total of 251.4 points for her eighth career World Cup victory. The Olympic champion, Carina Vogt of Germany, placed second with 245.6 points, and the two-time overall champion Sara Takanashi of Japan was third with 236.0.DUTCH SPEEDSKATER WINS Jorrit Bergsma beat his fellow Dutchman Douwe de Vries to win the men’s 5,000-meter race at a speedskating World Cup event in Hamar, Norway. Bergsma finished in 6 minutes 17.89 seconds, beating De Vries by 5.15 seconds. Sverre Lunde Pedersen of Norway was third.In the women’s 1,500 race, Heather Richardson beat her American teammate Britanny Bowe for the victory. Richardson finished in 1:57.30, one second faster than Bowe. Marije Joling of the Netherlands was third.LOSS FOR OLYMPIC CHAMPIONS Germany, the Olympic champions, lost a ski jump team World Cup event at home in Willingen to Slovenia.The Slovenian team of Jurij Tepes, Nejc Dezman, Jernej Damjan and Peter Prevc collected a total of 957.9 points, beating the German team of Markus Eisenbichler, Marinus Kraus, Richard Freitag and Severin Freund by 26.2 points. Norway finished third, followed by Japan and Austria, the world champions. Poland was disqualified when Kamil Stoch, who won Friday’s individual event, was adjudged to be wearing a nonconforming ski suit.GERMANS WIN BOBSLEDDING The world champion Francesco Friedrich won a two-man bobsled World Cup race in La Plagne, France, with his fellow German Martin Grothkopp for their second win this season. With the event also counting as the European championship, the German pair won the continental title ahead of the Latvian pair Oskars Melbardis and Daumants Dreiskens, who finished 0.04 of a second behind after the two runs. Rico Peter of Switzerland took bronze with Janne Bror van der Zijde, 0.21 of a second back.NORDIC WIN FOR NORWAY Norway won a second successive Nordic Combined team sprint as Jorgen Graabak and Jan Schmid edged out Germany and Austria in Val di Fiemme, Italy. Germany was second over all, 0.9 of a second behind Norway, with Austria third, 1.6 behind Graabak and Schmid.Advertisement