AdvertisementSupported byChelsea 1, Manchester City 1By Sam BordenLONDON — With only a few minutes remaining on the clock at Stamford Bridge, Manchester City’s James Milner lashed the ball across the face of Chelsea’s goal, a tantalizing cross that could have been turned in by a stray foot, a sliding knee, a wayward ankle. If one of Milner’s teammates had been in the right spot at the right time, this match — and perhaps this Premier League season — would have felt altogether different.But no one was there. The ball rolled all the way through, Milner grimaced and, moments later, the referee blew the final whistle. Manchester City, which had entered the game 5 points behind the league leader, Chelsea, left on Saturday with the same margin after a 1-1 tie.The result was the soccer equivalent of a lukewarm hot chocolate — not good, but not especially bad for everyone, particularly on a windy and cold January night. A victory for either team would have meant a huge swing in the title chase — it would have been hard to envision Chelsea losing an 8-point lead with 15 games to go, while a 2-point margin would have been far more tense — but after each team scored just before halftime, Chelsea Manager José Mourinho in the second half seemed content to take a draw, and City could not break through. “I think our team tried to win from the first minute to the end,” City Manager Manuel Pellegrini said afterward, a statement that many seemed to take as an implication that Mourinho and Chelsea had not done the same.Pellegrini, who carries a distinguished air, would not go that far, and Mourinho was unavailable to offer his opinion, as he has recently been shunning the news media despite a league directive to speak. Chelsea offered no explanation for Mourinho’s missing the postmatch news conference (he also skipped the prematch availability), a move that seemed particularly defiant since the Premier League had touted this game as a global event. A record 26 holders of broadcasting rights from as far as Kazakhstan and Hong Kong provided coverage to 650 million homes in 175 countries, the league said.Perhaps Mourinho felt those broadcasters were a part of the “clear campaign” against Chelsea that he lamented last month. Mourinho’s comments, which drew a fine from English soccer’s governing body, included speculation that referees, other officials and the news media were involved in a conspiracy to hurt the Blues because “they react with Chelsea in a way they don’t react to other teams.”That paranoia — and attendant rancor — only increased last week after his top striker, Diego Costa, was given a three-match suspension for what was judged to be a stamp on a prone opponent during a League Cup game on Tuesday. Costa was suspended retroactively — he was not punished during the game — and Mourinho, as well as most Chelsea fans, were livid because it meant that Costa would not be available to play against Manchester City.Costa undoubtedly would have added spice to this matchup. But he was not the only significant player missing — Chelsea midfielder Cesc Fábregas was also in the stands (wearing a green hat with an oversize pompom), and City was without Yaya Touré and Wilfried Bony, who are with Ivory Coast at the Africa Cup of Nations tournament.Many thought Mourinho would start Didier Drogba in Costa’s place, but he opted instead for Loïc Rémy, the French international forward. It paid off, as Rémy scored the game’s opening goal in the 41st minute, a blast from 6 yards out after an inch-perfect cross from the end line by Eden Hazard.Rémy’s goal lit up the final minutes of what had been a mostly cagey opening half. Minutes after Chelsea took the lead, City responded. Jesús Navas began the play with a sprint down the sideline and a cross that floated in front of the Chelsea goal, where goalkeeper Thibaut Courtois could have — and should have — snatched the ball, but he flailed wildly as it slipped past.The ball fell to Sergio Agüero, who lashed a shot toward the far post that David Silva deflected into the net. On the sideline, Pellegrini danced while Mourinho fumed. A halftime lead was gained and lost so quickly.Such a sparkling end to the first 45 minutes seemed to promise a compelling second half, but the break appeared to suck some air out of the match. Neither team truly threatened again, though the second half did include Frank Lampard, Chelsea’s career leading scorer, returning to his former home field.Now playing with Manchester City — in a convoluted contractual arrangement that is, ostensibly, supposed to preface his starring for City’s brother club, New York City F.C., later this year — Lampard came on as a substitute with about 15 minutes remaining. He received a warm welcome from the fans who had cheered him for 13 years and looked heartened by the reception.“I was excited about the day, but obviously a bit nervous,” Lampard said. “I didn’t know what was going to come of it. It was nice to get a good reception from both fans.”Despite his late entry, Lampard surely would have liked to have the same kind of effect he did when these teams met in Manchester earlier this season. On that occasion, he scored late to help City rescue a draw. This time, though, he had a few scattered touches as the teams played, yet again, to a tie. It was an outcome even Lampard had to admit felt lacking.“I think the draw probably suits them better,” he said. “It was a good game all around — without, maybe, that little bit of electricity that big games sometimes have.”Advertisement