By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSJAN. 31, 2015
WACO, Tex. —  Isaiah Austin has gone from potential first-round N.B.A. draft pick to getting on his hands and knees during Baylor practices, wiping up sweat when players fall to the floor.“I’m a manager,” Austin said, chuckling. “I bring them water whenever they’re thirsty, give them towels whenever they’re sweaty. I do the little things for the team.”These are not exactly the basketball dreams once imagined by the 7-foot-1 Austin, who succeeded in the Big 12 with a prosthetic eye only to find out days before the draft last summer that he was done playing because of a rare genetic disorder that could affect his heart.“Never, never crossed my mind one time that I wouldn’t make it to the N.B.A.,” Austin said.Not even when he publicly revealed a year ago during his sophomore season that he was blind in his right eye from a previous injury aggravated during a routine dunk in middle school. Multiple operations could not fix the detached retina and save his vision. Still, N.B.A. scouts were aware of his partial blindness.AdvertisementThen, a physical exam before the draft discovered Marfan syndrome, which affects the body’s connective tissue. Austin, 21, could be bitter, but instead he relies heavily on his Christian faith while sharing his story.AdvertisementHe works to raise awareness of Marfan syndrome through his foundation, doing so with a positive attitude that he hopes will help others overcome their own obstacles. One of the foundation’s missions is to inspire others to “Dream Again.”Austin said he wanted others to know that if they are going through a difficult time, “it’s not the end of the road at all by any means. You might not know where to turn, but if you bow your head and you get on your knees and pray, God will open another door for you, he’ll guide you in the right direction.”Baylor restored Austin’s scholarship so he could return to the university to complete his business degree while working with the team.On game days he wears a suit. He is often in the middle of things, hyping up players in the locker room before they take the court. He sits behind the bench, offering tips and encouragement.“That’s why he’s so special, because he’s overcome a lot and he does it with a smile,” Baylor Coach Scott Drew said. “Each and every day, I know that he makes people around him feel better.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.During practice, Austin occasionally shoots to help in drills. There are also post-midnight trips to the gym with teammates wanting to do extra work and needing someone to rebound for them.“I know that they’re all chasing the same dream I was,” Austin said.Austin got to hear his name called at the N.B.A. draft when, midway through the first round, he was made a ceremonial pick and presented an N.B.A. cap by Commissioner Adam Silver. The Boston Celtics presented Austin a jersey and named him an honorary Celtic for life during their season opener. He has also been added as a playable free agent in 2K Sports’ NBA 2K15 video game.And, yes, he has played the game. “Pretty good, fairly decent,” Austin said.Cory Jefferson, a rookie with the Nets and a former Baylor player, wears No. 21 to honor Austin.Advertisement“No. 21 reminds me, it reminds everybody, that anything that you do is not really promised,” Jefferson said. “What you love to do can be taken away from you.” He added, “He’s had a positive attitude toward the whole situation.”There is also still a No. 21 on the court for 20th-ranked Baylor. Taurean Prince switched from the No. 35 he wore the last two seasons while playing with Austin.“He’s the same Isaiah now,” Prince said, calling Austin “loyal, a godly man, tough through anything.”“He has an effect on all of us,” Prince said. “We play for him.”Austin has admittedly “gone through my moments” since being informed by his family of the Marfan syndrome diagnosis. But he quickly exchanged his N.B.A. dreams for becoming a role model to others — including his 15-year-old brother and 11-year-old sister — by how he handles his situation.His memoir is set to be published this summer, and speaking engagements fill some of his time between a full load of classes and Baylor games.“I want people to know that with a lot of faith and a positive attitude and the right people around you, that you can push yourself through any obstacle,” Austin said. “I want to be that one person that maybe somebody meets, or I shake their hand, or I smile at them, that I can probably change their life, or turn their day around.”A version of this article appears in print on February 1, 2015, on Page SP2 of the New York edition with the headline: N.B.A. Career Blocked, Ex-Player Dreams Anew .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.