By STEFAN BIENKOWSKIJAN. 31, 2015
GLASGOW —  Rangers and Celtic will renew one of the fiercest feuds in soccer on Sunday when they meet — for the first time in nearly three years — in the semifinals of Scotland’s League Cup. The rivalry, which has spanned 127 years, surely has seen better days.Without doubt, Celtic have had the upper hand in the years since the clubs’ last meeting, winning two straight Scottish league titles after Rangers were relegated to the third division in 2012 as a penalty for serious financial problems. Rangers were expected to complete their climb back to the top division this spring, and thus reignite the clubs’ dormant intracity feud, but lately a new fight over money has imperiled even that long-awaited goal.Two weeks ago, a large crowd of Rangers fans stood outside their club’s half-empty Ibrox Stadium, chanting into the night as snow collected under their feet. Around them, police officers stood at attention, camera crews followed every move and food vendors watched with feigned interest.This was no prematch tradition; it was a rowdy demonstration against the billionaire Mike Ashley’s growing hold on Rangers after his offer to lend the team £10 million, or $15.1 million, in exchange for ownership of its stadium and training ground.AdvertisementThe current financial troubles have Ashley, who also owns Newcastle United in England’s Premier League, and Dave King, a former Rangers director, fighting over control of the club, with a number of fan ownership groups squabbling in the background. This past week, Ashley won the latest round when the board accepted his offer to lend money to the club in exchange for more control.AdvertisementRangers seemed to have little choice. Despite the countless public demonstrations from fans, the club needed to raise $12.5 million by April 1 to stay afloat. It may be slowly moving past the dark days of liquidation in 2012, but few fans would claim to have seen much progress since.Inside Ibrox on the night of the recent protest, Rangers were about 20 minutes into a heated match with Hearts, a club from Edinburgh. Five minutes later, the game was called off because of bad weather, leaving Rangers 13 points behind their opponents in the Scottish Championship standings. Three days later, Kenny McDowall, the club’s interim manager since the departure of his predecessor, Ally McCoist, in December, tendered his resignation after only three games.McDowall will coach the team Sunday, but he would probably prefer he were anywhere else in the world.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.McCoist, a club icon and former manager during the club’s best efforts to turn over a new leaf, left after the team was twice promoted to higher tiers. But his team stumbled when it started playing full-time professionals in the Championship this year, so he departed alongside the star midfielder Lewis Macleod, who joined the English team Brentford for a modest fee of just over $1.5 million at the start of the January transfer window.That has left Rangers without their longtime manager and one of their best players as they face one of the most meaningful games they will play this year.Unlike Rangers, Celtic have never been relegated, and they have dominated the Scottish Premiership without Rangers. But Celtic have also faced uncertainty in the wake of the resignation of their manager, Neil Lennon, last year.Peter Lawwell, the Celtic chief executive, brought in a Norwegian, Ronny Deila, to replace Lennon. And while he differs greatly from the pragmatic, gritty Lennon, Deila is likely to have similar success.He brought with him more engaging tactics, but at times that has left Celtic vulnerable to inconsistency and criticism from a fan base that now demands total success. For now, the change is working. Despite having trailed Aberdeen at the top of the standings on Jan. 1, Celtic is now 3 points ahead with a game in hand. By the fall, it may be preparing for league games against Rangers again.Until then, fans of each side will relish Sunday’s rare reunion. They will gather in Hampden Park, and for 90 minutes the troubles in Rangers’ board room and the numb success at Celtic will momentarily vanish. From start to finish, the two sets of fans, who hate and secretly cherish each other in equal measure, will shout, scream and abuse each other as in the days of old.A version of this article appears in print on February 1, 2015, on Page SP9 of the New York edition with the headline: 127-Year-Old Rivalry Of Celtic and Rangers Resumes in Scotland .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.