AdvertisementSupported byEssayBy Brian GreeneYep, it’s for real. The law firm representing the N.F.L. (Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton & Garrison) has reached out to Columbia University’s department of physics to recruit an expert on “gas physics” to help determine, as has been reported, the “environmental impacts on inflated footballs.” This is one of those rare times when the jocks turn to the nerds, so fellow fans of molecules and momentum — climb out of that gym locker you were stuffed into — this is our moment. Stand tall. And do the wave.O.K. Onward to the exciting world of gas physics. (Note to self: Save all gas physics jokes for when kids get home from school.) Here’s what you need to know:The pressure in a football filled with air (just like that in any container filled with a gas) comes from molecules of the air slamming into the inner walls of the football, pushing the ball’s skin outward. It’s kind of like a bunch of wild kids running around in a room — as they slam into the walls, they too push outward. Now, just as more kids, crammed into a smaller room, running ever faster will result in a greater outward push — a greater pressure — so too will more air molecules crammed into a smaller volume, rushing around faster, yield a greater pressure. Physicists make this precise with a formula — compatriots, time to stand taller still — that dates from the 1800s: PV = nRT. P stands for pressure; V for Volume; n comes from the number of gas molecules; R is, well, trust me, you don’t have to worry about it; but T, the last symbol, is key: it stands for temperature. How did temperature get in on all this? Well, temperature is nothing but the average speed of the air molecules. So, picture it: the hotter the air, the faster the molecules and the more pressure they collectively exert as they careen into the inside of the football’s skin. That’s the role of the “T” in the formula.And that’s where the lawyers come in. They want to talk to a physicist, I presume, to help determine if a drop in temperature — a slowing of the air molecules inside the football — can explain the low pressure that was found in some of the balls used in the A.F.C. championship game two weeks ago between the New England Patriots and the Indianapolis Colts. Or maybe they just want to increase their billable hours.So, could a drop in temperature do the dirty deed? If you want to go full geek, read the fine print below, but the bottom line is that the little formula can explain a drop in pressure to nearly 11 pounds per square inch, while barely breaking a sweat. I’ve heard various numbers tossed around for the pressures of the offending footballs, some in this range, others a touch lower. More exact analyses — which I have little doubt will be forthcoming, resulting in erudite treatises and a handful of well-deserved tenure appointments — will require the nitty-gritty details: What was the temperature when the footballs were inflated? What pressure were they initially inflated to? How accurate are the pressure gauges that were used?Without this information, all we can do is estimate the pressure drop. But it looks to me that mother nature at least provides a reasonable doubt. So, based on what I know now, your honor, I can’t convict. But a word to the wise. All current and would-be ball deflators: You may want to brush up on Physics 1.Now, I’m waiting for the day that the N.F.L. needs some string theory calculations.THE FINE PRINT Assume the footballs were inflated indoors at a temperature of, say, 72 degrees Fahrenheit and the halftime temperature on the field was about 48 degrees. That’s a drop of roughly 5 percent (careful, convert to Kelvin first). The volume of a football hardly changes, so its pressure would decrease by the same 5 percent. Bear in mind that the quoted pressure of a football refers to pressure above that of everyday air pressure (about 14.7 pounds per square inch), so if a given ball were initially pumped to 12.5 p.s.i. (the minimum allowed by N.F.L. regulations), then inside the ball we’d have 27.2 p.s.i. total. Reducing that by 5 percent and subtracting out ambient air pressure gives our answer, close to 11 p.s.i.(P.S. Here’s your prize for getting this far. The next time you hear Alex Trebek say, “This letter is known as the ‘ideal’ or ‘universal’ gas constant,” your response is, “What is R?”) Brian Greene is a professor of physics and a professor of mathematics at Columbia and co-founder of the World Science Festival. In the fifth grade, he played basketball for P.S. 87 in Manhattan. Advertisement