By BENJAMIN HOFFMANJAN. 31, 2015
Patriots vs. Seahawks6:30 p.m. Eastern, NBC Line: Patriots by 1 Tune in to our Super Bowl 2015 Live Blog for live coverage from Times reporters and editors.New England did a remarkable job cobbling together a running game this season by mixing and matching players based on matchups. But when asked to face teams that had a lot of success defending the run, the Patriots tended to abandon that aspect of the game.The playoffs proved to be a microcosm of the season. LeGarrette Blount helped lead the Patriots (12-4) to 177 yards on the ground and scored three touchdowns in the A.F.C. championship game two weeks ago against Indianapolis, but the week before, against the stout Baltimore defense, Patriots running backs combined for just seven carries and 14 yards. Rather than turn to Blount, Shane Vereen or Jonas Gray, New England was content to air it out, throwing the ball 51 times.If quarterback Tom Brady wants to test Seattle (12-4) and its Legion of Boom secondary 51 times, this game could get out of hand quickly.AdvertisementThe defenders in Seattle’s secondary are a threat to make an interception on almost every pass play, but in between those game-changing turnovers they make receivers pay for catching the ball by delivering crushing hits. Rob Gronkowski and Brandon LaFell have the size to take some punishment (though it is questionable if anyone is built to take a hit from strong safety Kam Chancellor); Julian Edelman and Danny Amendola are both small players who will go against defenders who are far larger, far stronger and just as fast.Cornerback Richard Sherman, the voice of the Seattle secondary, says Chancellor should not be underestimated, that his hard shots tend to stick in the heads of opponents.“He goes out there and makes huge impact week in and week out,” Sherman said. “In the Super Bowl, he made an impact from the first play to the last play.”On offense, Seattle passes just enough that the defense cannot focus solely on the run. A healthy Marshawn Lynch is almost impossible to contain anyway, and quarterback Russell Wilson carried the ball more times this season than any Patriots running back.The reigning Super Bowl champions, the Seahawks turned to a grinding style this season after losing several reliable receivers, so viewers are unlikely to see a blowout similar to last year’s 43-8 Seattle victory over Denver. But the Seahawks should be able to put points on the board, which may not be true for Brady and the New England offense, unless the Patriots commit to running the ball and succeed.AdvertisementBlount, like Lynch, is a big runner who is hard to bring down. Even if he is held to just a few yards a carry, giving him steady work throughout the game is New England’s best chance to win.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I don’t care about them being the top defense, that doesn’t bother me,” Blount said. “They were good enough to get here, just like we were good enough to get here. They’re not immortal. They can be beaten.”Unless New England wants to change the way it has approached the game all season, Blount may never get a chance to prove himself right. Pick: SeahawksBENJAMIN HOFFMANA version of this article appears in print on February 1, 2015, on Page SP4 of the New York edition with the headline: Sunday's Super Bowl Matchup.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.