

 Michael Powell
 

SPORTS OF THE TIMES
JAN. 31, 2015
PHOENIX — So you put the questions to the offensive and defensive coordinators whose fate it was to have spent the two weeks before Super Bowl XLIX in a more or less constant state of sleepless agitation:How far do other teams’ tricksters crawl into your cranium? Do you let such worries take nest in your cerebral cortex, the better to devise a counter, or do you try to banish the thoughts altogether?Josh McDaniels, the crew-cut offensive coordinator for the New England Patriots, whose own innovations and tricks inflict so much pain on other teams, smiled. That way lies madness.“You’ve got to be really careful in these two weeks not to chase too many ghosts,” he said. “All of a sudden, you start saying, ‘Hey, I saw this one time in this one game two years ago.’ You get consumed with tricking or thinking too much and you get deluded and then you’re not preparing.”That struck me as a wise and candid answer. Although I had no sooner turned and walked away than the thought occurred to me: Was he playing reporters in hopes of playing the Seattle Seahawks, a team that in turn was trying to play him? The Seahawks have pulled more than a few of their own stunts, including a fake field goal kick that turned into a touchdown pass.AdvertisementAs Dan Quinn, the Seahawks’ defensive coordinator with gray pouches under his eyes, put it: “When you’ve got two weeks to prepare, you have to be careful you don’t overdo it. Then again, you know the Patriots have very specific plans for every team they play. And you kind of wonder.”
                The Patriots and the Seahawks share a knack for the trick play. They make it look like something that the defense recognizes, but it is something entirely different.            Questions keep folding inward.In the nearly 50 years of Super Bowls — the Roman numerals grow more complicated by the year and are a perfectly pretentious symbol of this Roman Imperium of a sport — more than a few of these games have been decided by the odd, the tricky, the fluky and the intentionally misleading. There were flea-flicker passes (quarterback hands off to running back who flips the ball back to the quarterback, who in turn tosses to a wide open receiver for a long gain — or not) and onside kicks and all variety of mayhem.AdvertisementThe Patriots and their perpetually unsmiling master of quantum disruption, Bill Belichick, are masters of spooky action at a distance.In the A.F.C. championship game against Indianapolis, Patriots quarterback Tom Brady tossed the ball 16 yards to Nate Solder, an offensive tackle who for that play lined up as a tight end. Afterward, Solder said the team had practiced the play for years before unveiling it.A game earlier, Belichick enraged the easily combustible Baltimore coach, John Harbaugh, by lining up four offensive linemen, an ineligible running back and a tight end who ran a passing route from the tackle’s spot.If that sounds densely complicated, it is.Most such plays combine chesslike planning and Pentagon precision with a peyote-like daffiness. McDaniels spoke of the plotted legerdemain. “Whenever you use something that is a little bit unique,” he said, “I don’t think those are things that you put in Thursday afternoon.”N.F.L. officials suggested that while the Patriots’ play against Baltimore was legal, the Patriots very likely violated the rules against the Colts. That’s of little consolation to the two coaches, who will watch the Super Bowl in their respective man caves.Oh, have you heard of the questions raised about improperly deflated footballs?It’s like a series of outtakes from director Chris Nolan’s film “The Prestige,” in which intensely competitive magicians keep trying to outdo each other.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Seattle’s coaches insist that they don’t want players to pay much attention to this. Better to scrape the brain clean of detritus. “The mental gymnastics are there,” said Kris Richard, the coach charged with overseeing the Seahawks’ renowned cornerbacks, including the All-Pro Richard Sherman. “But defensive backs play naked out there. I don’t want them overthinking.”AdvertisementSherman, he noted, plays his own tricks, deking and faking and trying to convince quarterbacks he’s out of position. Executed well, his tricks can lead to a brutal sack or an interception. If he fails, it’s there for all the world to see.The Seahawks play their own games, from that faked field goal to a bizarre 2-point conversion against the Green Bay Packers that was not so much trickery as happy pandemonium. It is perhaps worth noting, too, that the Seahawks under their confessional coach, Pete Carroll, have led the league in players banned for use of performance-enhancing drugs. (The incisive Sherman tested positive, but his test was overturned because the urine specimen was mishandled.)Pete Carroll, coach of the Seattle Seahawks, and Bill Belichick, coach of the New England Patriots, praised each other’s team before they meet in the Super Bowl on Sunday.I’m not a fan of players and their Incredible Hulk drug regimens. However, the wrench-your-head-off-your-shoulders gladiatorial nature of the league, which makes billions off the violence, makes it hard for me to work myself into a proper self-righteous lather.Perhaps as interesting as the tricks are the cultural differences. To watch these two teams last week was like watching a reality show: Seahawk Men are from Venus, Patriot Men from Mars. The Seahawks play it West Coast cool, with Carroll showing up in white pants and sneakers, and a modish Nike athletic top. His players talk and talk. Defensive lineman Michael Bennett gives interviews with his legs on the table. At one point, he noted that he considered himself the world’s greatest lover. Although he had the good grace to acknowledge that his wife said this was just his opinion.Belichickville, by contrast, is a world of no less talent. But the style is East Coast Pentagon bunker. Its players happily tell you that they try to talk while saying nothing.On Friday, the two coaches shared a stage. Tell us, reporters asked, how past failures shaped you. Carroll, the white-haired Zen granddad, spoke of getting fired.“I got pounded a couple times and got fired a couple times in the league,” he said. “Everybody likes to have fun with that. My therapist tells me I should always talk about it and that I shouldn’t hide from it.”His therapist? This is an N.F.L. presser?The master of unsettlement was next up. Belichick shrugged, and shrugged again. “I’ve had a couple ups and downs,” he said. “What doesn’t kill you makes you stronger.”Mind game meets real game Sunday.Email: powellm@nytimes.com A version of this article appears in print on February 1, 2015, on Page SP1 of the New York edition with the headline: Sleight of Hand Isn’t Important, Until It Is.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »