By LISA D. MICKEYJAN. 31, 2015
OCALA, Fla. —  Karrie Webb said she was caught by surprise last week when she arrived at the Golden Ocala Golf and Equestrian Club for the L.P.G.A.’s 2015 season opener and realized she had come full circle.“They went through the whole thing in my first-tee introduction — that I’m in the Hall of Fame, I’ve had 41 L.P.G.A. wins and won seven majors — and I was thinking that I’ve come a long way since they introduced me in Ocala back in 1995,” Webb said. “I never, ever dreamed I’d be in the position I’m in now.”Webb’s rise to become one of the L.P.G.A.’s most decorated players started that week in Florida’s rolling horse country. Playing in only her third professional tournament in the United States on what was then the Futures Golf Tour, Webb, an Australian, won the 1995 Ocala event by eight shots and collected her first winner’s check in the United States for $4,500. She finished in the top 10 in all five tournaments she played in that spring, including three top-three finishes.“She was very poised and already had the game when she came here to play,” said Eloise Trainor, founder of the Futures tour. “She didn’t need a lot of development.”AdvertisementWebb, 40, saw her first professional season differently.“It was more raw talent than knowing what I was doing,” Webb said. “I still had a lot to learn and to fine tune.”Mostly what Webb needed was professional tournament experience. She got that in 1995 in the spring tournaments in the United States and playing on the Ladies European Tour that summer.Her Futures tour win in Ocala came in April, and four months later she won the Women’s British Open — which she won again in 2002 as an L.P.G.A. member.“When I won in Ocala, they didn’t have a clubhouse and I think we had to hit balls in a schoolyard because there wasn’t a range, but I wasn’t bothered by that stuff,” Webb said. “I was just keen to play professional golf and try to make a living out of it.”Since that time, Webb has earned more than $19 million on the L.P.G.A. Tour. With her consistently high level of play, she has earned the respect of her peers.Advertisement“I think she’s one of the most underappreciated legends of the game,” said Stacy Lewis, the 2014 player of the year. Lewis said that Annika Sorenstam, in her prime for a decade beginning in 1995, “got all of the attention even though Karrie also did some pretty impressive things.”Webb followed her fellow Australians Jan Stephenson and Jane Crafter to the L.P.G.A. Tour and proceeded to inspire a new wave of talent from her homeland.“In Australia, she’s a national hero and all girls look up to her,” said Katherine Kirk, a two-time L.P.G.A. winner. “There aren’t too many players who have had a career as long and as successful as Karrie.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.At least 10 young Australians now playing on professional tours around the world met Webb while they were amateurs competing on the Karrie Webb Series back home. They competed in 12 amateur tournaments, earning points for their performances.At the end of the series, the top two players are each awarded a $10,000 scholarship and get to attend the United States Women’s Open Championship to walk with Webb inside the ropes.“She was a role model to me and the girls coming up in junior golf,” said the L.P.G.A. rookie Minjee Lee, a scholarship recipient. “She gave us confidence to make it to the L.P.G.A.”Many observers agree that Webb, who behind sunglasses shows little emotion when she is playing, is more likely to show her soft side away from the course.“On the golf course, she’s a bit intimidating and a fierce character who’s not really chatty,” Lee said. “Off the course, she’s really down to earth.”Webb said that when she started her youth series, she wasn’t sure that she had a lot to teach others but wanted to reciprocate because “so many people gave a lot for me to be where I am now.”Advertisement“The girls say they’re very thankful that I do it, but I’ve gotten just as much out of it as them,” Webb said.Webb also returned last week to the Ocala home of Craig and Debbie Mueller, who hosted her 20 years ago. The Muellers have remained close friends with Webb and have seen 14 of her tournament wins, including two United States Opens.“My memories of that week in 1995 are more about them than the golf,” Webb said of the Muellers. “They had traveled to Australia, so we had a connection straight away, and they made me feel comfortable from the start.”That comfort turned into confidence in a 20-year career full of milestones.And coming full circle last week in Ocala, Webb found herself right back where she first learned to win.A version of this article appears in print on February 1, 2015, on Page SP2 of the New York edition with the headline: After Many Milestones, Webb Returns to Where It All Began.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.