AdvertisementSupported byOn OlympicsBy Jeré LongmanAs the 2016 Olympics in Rio de Janeiro approach, the sport of shooting in the United States finds itself caught in a legal crossfire, a bit of intrigue that has involved a top Army marksmanship team.No other country has won half as many Olympic medals as the 107 produced by American pistol, rifle and shotgun shooters. Yet, with the Rio Games only 10 months away, U.S.A. Shooting has taken the rare step of filing a civil lawsuit against some of its athletes and officials in a dispute over management and transparency at the national governing body.One of the athletes being sued, Jason Turner, 40, a bronze medalist in pistol shooting at the 2008 Beijing Games, said the lawsuit was distracting as he prepared for the Olympic trials.“You think about it a lot,” Mr. Turner, a civilian, said. “It spreads you kind of thin.”In August, Mr. Turner and five other current and former athletes and officials filed a grievance with the United States Olympic Committee against U.S.A. Shooting. The federation responded last month with a lawsuit. The U.S.O.C. declined to comment on Friday.The original complaint against the federation has been joined by 38 additional athletes and officials. Among the accusations are that Robert Mitchell, the executive director of U.S.A. Shooting, and two other top federation leaders run a “closed shop,” unresponsive to athletes’ views and independent voices in violation of Olympic bylaws.Mr. Mitchell is accused of buttressing his power with the backing of an influential board member who has overstayed his term limits.The grievance against U.S.A. Shooting also alleges that:■ Federation leaders are inept at raising money and promoting the sport.■ Minutes of meetings of the board and executive committee, and meaningful financial information, are not posted on the federation website.■ There is insufficient oversight of auditing, ethical conduct and financial compensation.Mr. Mitchell and other federation leaders “don’t want to give up their positions of power and their perks,” said Ed Williams, a New York lawyer representing the athletes. “Those blue blazers with the Olympic rings are very important to them, as are those free trips to Europe” for meetings and competitions.Mr. Mitchell called the athletes’ grievance a baseless retaliation against him by those who attempted, and failed, to take control of U.S.A. Shooting’s board of directors in a disputed election in March.“We’ve had a very harmonious relationship with our board and our athletes over the years,” Mr. Mitchell said. Of the current complaints, he added: “Bring it up at a board meeting. We’re glad to discuss those items. But rather than they do that, they filed a complaint.”He also said that U.S.A. Shooting would spend more than $2 million in support of athletes this year, adding, “No one has suffered in any way, shape or form.”Among those filing the grievance against the federation, and being sued, is Lt. Col. Bret Tecklenburg, the commander of the United States Army Marksmanship Unit at Fort Benning, Ga., and a former board member of U.S.A. Shooting.Colonel Tecklenburg accused Mr. Mitchell of threatening and trying to intimidate him and other board members to influence voting at the federation’s board of directors’ election in March.The colonel also accused Mr. Mitchell of creating a “toxic” atmosphere of “fear of retribution” at the federation and of causing “emotional distress” among board members, athletes and employees.Supporters of Colonel Tecklenburg said U.S.A. Shooting responded by trying to have him relieved of his command of the marksmanship unit.Colonel Tecklenburg and other soldier-athletes have been subjected to investigations by the Army after filing grievances against the federation, the sued athletes said. The investigations began “as a direct result” of information sent from the federation to Army representatives, according to a memorandum written by the athletes.“These investigations have caused significant disruptions” to the Army Marksmanship Unit “as a whole and to the soldier-athletes training for the impending Olympic trials,” the memorandum said.Mr. Mitchell said he was exonerated by U.S.A. Shooting’s board of directors after an independent investigation of Colonel Tecklenburg’s claims.Mr. Mitchell also said that he considered accusations by the officer to be “slanderous.” He said he contacted Colonel Tecklenburg’s superiors, telling them that “I don’t feel this conduct is appropriate” and asking that the lieutenant colonel’s behavior be reviewed.Colonel Tecklenburg said Friday through an Army spokeswoman that it would be inappropriate for him to comment, given the pending civil lawsuit by U.S.A. Shooting. The spokeswoman said an Army review of the colonel’s conduct had been completed and that he remained commander of the marksmanship unit.A person familiar with the case, speaking on the condition of anonymity, said Colonel Tecklenburg had been temporarily suspended from his command during the Army investigation and had been reinstated.According to Olympic guidelines, athletes have a right to file a grievance against a national governing body. The disputes are designed to be settled by mediation or arbitration. U.S.A. Shooting chose a different approach, filing a lawsuit against the athletes last month in state court in Colorado, where the federation is based.The federation said it had no choice because the athletes would not agree to binding arbitration. U.S.A. Shooting officials said the legal action “is not a suit against the athletes,” but rather a method for an independent judge to resolve the disputed board of directors election in March.But Mr. Williams, the athletes’ lawyer, said it was “outrageous” and “unprecedented” for a federation to sue its own athletes in a pre-Olympic year. He said federation officials were trying to intimidate the athletes, knowing “they don’t have the money to defend themselves.” A mediation hearing between the two sides is scheduled later this month. Mr. Turner, the bronze medalist, said that while the International Olympic Committee was urging greater transparency in governance, “We haven’t caught up to that yet.”Advertisement