AdvertisementSupported byBy Ben ShpigelCHANDLER, Ariz. — The most automatic play in the Patriots’ offensive playbook over the last 14 seasons involves Tom Brady, but it is not a pass. It is having Brady tuck the ball and lower his shoulder and shimmy into a narrow gap, gaining inch after bruising inch, the quarterback with a fullback’s mentality.Brady is as unstoppable as a crash of rhinos on third or fourth down and 2 yards or less to go, the rushing equivalent of a back-shoulder throw from Aaron Rodgers. Counting the postseason, Brady has run in those situations 115 times, according to play-by-play data from Pro Football Reference. He has gotten a first down or scored a touchdown on 105 of them, a success rate of 91.3 percent. Over one stretch, spanning more than seven years, he converted 60 of 61, including 37 straight.Brady has joked that there is not a single cell in his body that tells him to run when a play dissolves and an opportunity to scramble presents itself. But the closer New England gets to the first-down marker or the goal line, the more Brady submits to his competitive makeup.One of the Patriots offensive coordinator Josh McDaniels’s favorite such memories came three years ago, in the A.F.C. championship game against the Baltimore Ravens. A half-yard separated New England from a go-ahead touchdown in the fourth quarter, and Brady, scanning the defense, did not like the fourth-down play sent in from the sideline.As he had the authority to do, he changed the play, which allowed him to do this instead: soar over his linemen with the ball extended, leaving himself vulnerable to a hit in the back from Ray Lewis, who nearly speared him in two. As Baltimore defenders collapsed on top of Brady, he landed on his head.What this moment illustrated was not Brady’s clairvoyance, competitiveness or even courage, but rather the folly in the Patriots’ not originally telling him to get those last 18 inches himself. Because, of course, he scored on that dive, the decisive points in their victory.“There’s a lot of times where maybe we call that play, maybe we don’t, and he just says, ‘I’m going to get it myself,’ ” McDaniels said, adding: “To go in there and stick your face in there, where there’s a lot of big people ready to hit you quickly, that’s something I’m not sure that every quarterback wants to do. But he’s never been afraid to do it.”Brady, at an angular 6 feet 4 inches and 225 pounds, defies the stereotype of a traditional short-yardage force. He does not have the fire-hydrant build of running backs like Mike Alstott or Jerome Bettis, who bowled over defenders, nor does he have the time they had to read and react as a play unfolded. What he does have is what McDaniels characterized as tremendous leg strength, which allows Brady to get low and drive forward, and a sense of how to manipulate his frame to gain decent leverage as he follows his linemen.Even if the sneak itself suggests football at its most primal, teammates and coaches say that Brady relies more on the qualities that helped him become among the most productive passers in history — vision, anticipation, preparation — than any physical attribute.By the opening kickoff, he and his linemen know every element of the opponent’s short-yardage strategy. They know how those defenses tend to react when leading in the second quarter or trailing in the third or when the score is tied with 10 minutes left.They know which defensive linemen adopt a submarine technique, grabbing the turf and bear-crawling at an offensive lineman’s legs; which plug the voids; and which try to bully and overwhelm. Armed with this knowledge, Brady assesses the situation.“I have a great belief in what our offensive line is doing,” Brady said. “I’m not the biggest guy, so I try to find a spot to sneak through.”He determines where the defense is most exposed, then tries to exploit it. If, say, the Patriots gain 6 yards on second-and-7, he may hurry up the offense to take advantage of smaller defensive personnel and try to grab a few yards, extending the drive. Even if the shortest distance between two points is a straight line, if Brady perceives a favorable matchup outside, he may slink between the guard and the tackle.“It’s not like you’re ever going to hit a critical point within the RAM of Tom Brady’s brain,” the former Patriots left tackle Matt Light, who played 11 seasons with Brady, said in a telephone interview. “He’s got enough gigs in there to compute whatever needs to be done.”Brady has been known to compute so quickly that a running back, thinking he will receive a handoff, runs up to take the ball, only to see Brady carrying it himself. Joe Andruzzi, a former New England guard, said there were times when he did not know Brady’s intentions until a half-second before the ball was snapped.“He’s shown for years how good he is in split-second decisions,” Andruzzi said in a telephone interview. “You can’t correct yourself on the run, so it’s got to be done fast. You’ve got to be one step quicker than the defense.”In those instances, linemen listen for certain words in Brady’s cadence and then adapt. Searching for an analogy, Light compared Brady to Will Ferrell’s character from the comic film “Zoolander,” a fashion mogul who tried brainwashing the eponymous male model played by Ben Stiller.“He’d say one word, and then Ben Stiller would go kill people and be an assassin,” Light said. “Basically, we’re the Zoolander of the football team. When you run stuff four billion times like we do, you’re highly programmable.”Light was exaggerating. The Patriots do not run stuff four billion times. Only three billion. When he coached their offensive line, Dante Scarnecchia would tell players that there was never an excuse to get stopped on third-and-1 or fourth-and-1.“We were very arrogant about that when I was there,” said the former fullback Heath Evans, now an analyst for NFL Network. The Patriots could afford to be arrogant, he added, because they practiced it so often.To diminish the risk of injury, they simulate the play by using a mattress: The linemen get tight, the ball is snapped and everyone falls forward. Other coaches have told McDaniels that they rarely, if ever, work on sneaks, and that dumbfounds him.“Even though it’s such a small thing, it’s always a huge play in the game,” McDaniels said.So it could be again in Sunday’s Super Bowl, much as it was in that A.F.C. championship victory against Baltimore. Recalling Brady’s acrobatic sneak from that evening, Light said he and his fellow linemen would sometimes tell Brady to consider not running, at least not voluntarily. Brady, he said, would just never listen.“You’re like, ‘I thought we said you weren’t going to do it,’ and he’s like, ‘No, man, I felt it,’ ” Light said. “You never know when he’s going to pull it out. That’s the beauty of it.”Advertisement