By TOM PEDULLAOCT. 9, 2015
The return of the International Trot to Yonkers Raceway on Saturday after a 20-year absence had more to do with attempting to resuscitate an ailing industry than the competitive spirit.Ten starters representing six countries pursued a $1 million purse that made the International the richest trotting race in the history of New York State. But the success of the event will be measured by the amount wagered at simulcast centers several thousand miles away.“What we think is very big is the future of simulcasting,” said Tim Rooney, whose family has owned Yonkers Raceway since 1972. “Simulcasting domestically is not growing nearly as strongly as simulcasting internationally.”The proliferation of casinos and state-run lotteries has largely turned harness racing into an afterthought in the United States. It remains popular overseas, though. Yonkers officials tapped into that market almost a year ago by offering some matinee racing on Sundays that is intended primarily for simulcast centers in France.Of the eight cards offered, five generated at least $1 million in wagering overseas. Yonkers added to its overseas product by introducing afternoon racing on Tuesdays at the start of this year, with those cards generating as much as $500,000 abroad. The restoration of the International Trot represents the latest attempt by a modest track to extend its reach.Advertisement“We think it’s the way to go,” said Bob Galterio, Yonkers’s chief operating officer. “At least it’s the way to try, because if we don’t do anything, we’re doomed to failure.”AdvertisementAlthough the Yonkers Raceway site has been bustling since Empire City Casino opened in 2006 and began attracting more than eight million players annually, the same visitors who keep slot machines whirring rarely venture outside to watch or wager on racing.The International, in its first incarnation, ultimately fell victim to the plummeting interest in the sport. It was first run at Roosevelt Raceway in Westbury, N.Y., in 1959 and remained there until Roosevelt closed in 1988. Yonkers hosted the International for the next seven years before financial constraints caused it to drop the event.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Rooney began eyeing the return of the International almost as soon as money from Empire City Casino allowed for purse and other enhancements.“When we had the International before, Yonkers was highly thought of in international markets,” he said. “We’ve lost a little bit of that in the last nine years by not having the International. We’re hoping to get that back again.”And it is spending heavily to do so, incurring expenses that will go far beyond the $1 million purse. The winner of the mile-and-a-quarter race, Papagayo E of Norway, received $500,000 as part of a purse distribution that extended through the first five positions.The whatever-it-takes approach to making sure the International lives up to its name as a competition that attracts elite trotters from around the world may be worthwhile if Yonkers can turn a foothold in France into a broader acceptance of its simulcast signal. Fans through much of Europe and Scandinavia could wager on the International.Joe Faraldo, president of the Standardbred Owners Association of New York, said: “With the decline in racing in the U.S., if we don’t branch out globally, we’re not taking advantage of a huge marketplace that is available to us. If we don’t take advantage of that, we will not have an industry left.”A version of this article appears in print on October 11, 2015, on Page SP14 of the New York edition with the headline: Yonkers Aims for a Global Audience.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.