By JONAH BROMWICHFEB. 2, 2015
Every week, The New York Times will choose one essential game to watch, highlighting hot teams, winning and losing streaks and statistical intrigue in the N.B.A.Los Angeles Clippers at Cleveland, Thursday, 8 p.m. Eastern, TNTMaybe impatience got the better of sports commentators with the Cleveland Cavaliers this season. In October, the focus was on process, as observers noted that chemistry takes time to build. And then, when the Cavaliers looked disappointing, the criticism started. As early as November, The Washington Post ran an article with the headline “LeBron James is one of four things wrong with the Cavaliers.” And as late as the middle of last month, ESPN continued the trend, with a piece proclaiming that the “Reeling Cavaliers” were “way off course.”The day after the second article ran, Cleveland shifted into gear. The team has won 10 games in a row since Jan. 15 and has beaten tough opponents like the Clippers, the Bulls, the Thunder and the Trail Blazers. Even with James missing against Portland, the Cavs found a way to win, mostly on the back of 55 points from Kyrie Irving.So were the critics simply wrong, too impatient to let a promising team find its groove? Not really. The Cavaliers made several moves recently that paved the way for their sudden success. They traded Dion Waiters to the Thunder in a three-team deal that sent the Knicks’ Iman Shumpert and J. R. Smith to Cleveland. And they acquired the big man Timofey Mozgov from Denver in exchange for draft picks.AdvertisementThough he is not a well-known player, Mozgov has been a particularly solid addition for the Cavs. Mozgov is averaging 10 points and 8 rebounds a game during the current winning streak, but his biggest contributions have been on defense. Since he started suiting up for Cleveland, the team’s defensive efficiency has improved noticeably, partly because of Mozgov’s contributions and partly because his work ethic inspires his teammates to do more on that side of the ball.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The new additions have helped, but there is no ignoring the fact that the Cavaliers’ stars have begun to improve their play as well. James looked a step slow in the beginning of the season, whether because of recurring injuries or lack of familiarity with new teammates, but in recent games he has been performing at an M.V.P. level. And even Kevin Love, who may have been disparaged more than any other player through the Cavaliers’ low points, has picked up his game. Interestingly, during the streak, James’s usage rate — a statistic that uses shots, free throws and turnovers to estimate what percentage of a team’s possessions a player used while he was on the floor — has gone up significantly, while Love’s has declined slightly. That suggests that James has been more assertive recently and, perhaps, that Love is responding well to his teammate’s dominance.AdvertisementThe Cavs’ sudden improvement is a reminder to those who would dismiss any team with half a season still to go. As of last week, the Clippers had won three games in a row against bad teams. Since then, they have added decisive wins against four of the five opponents they have faced, including a 105-85 thrashing of the San Antonio Spurs on Saturday night.The Clippers are playing far better on defense than they have for most of the season. They have held their opponents to less than 100 points in five of their last eight games and held the Nets, Jazz and Spurs to less than 90. The Clippers’ big three — Chris Paul, Blake Griffin and DeAndre Jordan — have been terrific during the streak. And the team is getting some help off the bench from players like Jamal Crawford, who scored 23 points, including 21 in the fourth quarter, to help the Clippers come back against Denver.But despite their recent victories, the Clippers still have major issues with depth. That is something that also used to be a problem for the Cavaliers, but it is an obstacle that Cleveland may have surpassed with its recent roster reconfiguration. When the two teams played each other last, on Jan. 16, Cleveland was able to overcome the Clippers with only eight players active. They may not be quite so lucky on Thursday, but given the way the Cavs have been playing, Los Angeles will have to double down on defense to avoid another loss.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.