AdvertisementSupported byBy Brett Michael DykesHere are the best games to watch in N.F.L. Week 5, and who we think will win them:Seahawks (2-2) at Bengals (4-0)1 p.m. Line: Bengals by 3Could this be the year that the Bengals finally break through to become more than a team that is good enough to make the playoffs but never advances? (Cincinnati is 0-6 in the playoffs under Coach Marvin Lewis, who is in his 13th season.) So far in 2015, this sort of progress seems entirely possible.Leading the leap forward has been Andy Dalton, who has gone from a good quarterback to a very good one, a player who can make the big plays that win games. Dalton has completed 67.2 percent of his passes through four games for 1,187 yards, with nine touchdowns and only a single interception. His 123.0 passer rating dwarfs his previous career high, 88.8, in 2013. Dalton’s evolution mirrors the team’s growth. Coincidence? Probably not.The Seahawks, the defending N.F.C. champions, were 0-2 out of the gate, but their defense looks to be back to form after the return of safety Kam Chancellor. Chancellor’s impact could not have been more apparent than it was at the end of Monday’s game against the Lions, when he forced Calvin Johnson to fumble the ball just before he could cross the goal line for what would have almost certainly been a decisive touchdown. Opponents are averaging just 3.86 yards per play when Chancellor has been on the field, and 6.02 when he has not.On offense, quarterback Russell Wilson returns to his hometown to face a tough Bengals defense after being sacked six times by the Lions in Week 4. He may be without the injured Marshawn Lynch once again.PICK: BENGALSRams (2-2) at Packers (4-0)1 p.m. Line: Packers by 9The Rams are perplexing, and have been for a couple of seasons, losing games they should have won or, as they did last week against Arizona, pulling out victories when they should have lost. The Rams handed the Cardinals their first loss of the season, and they will be trying to do the same thing this week in Green Bay, where the Packers have won 11 in a row and have looked unbeatable at times.If the Rams win, you can bet that their pass rush will have played a significant role. St. Louis has a front four that seems capable of rattling Packers quarterback Aaron Rodgers, who has not thrown an interception at Lambeau Field since 2012.The Rams’ offense is suddenly dangerous, too. Running back Todd Gurley is showing signs of being the player he was in college before blowing out his knee. Add to that a corps of explosive receivers capable of making big plays, and you have a recipe for an upset.PICK: RAMSSaints (1-3) at Eagles (1-3)1 p.m. Line: Eagles by 4It is never a good sign when a hashtag calling for your firing goes viral. But that is precisely what happened to Eagles Coach Chip Kelly last week when #FireChipKelly took the Internet by storm after a loss to the Redskins. Speculation about Kelly’s future and questions about his competence are running rampant in the news media. The NFL Network analyst Michael Irvin directed a shout-y monologue at Kelly, essentially imploring him to make some changes to his system for the sake of the team’s future, and the Philadelphia-area writer Buzz Bissinger went so far as to call Kelly “a fraud.”“I think he should be fired after the season,” Bissinger said in a radio interview. “I think it’s clear now the gimmick is over and coaches have figured it out.”Not working in Kelly’s favor is the fact that quarterback Drew Brees and the Saints looked as if they might be getting things back on track. Sure, their thrilling overtime win in Week 4 came against a mangled Cowboys team, but this one does not appear to be a lock for the Eagles as much as it seemed just a couple of weeks ago.These player rankings from the Sablich brothers are for standard and PPR scoring formats and will be updated throughout the season.PICK: EAGLESBroncos (4-0) at Raiders (2-2)4:25 p.m. Line: Broncos by 5While the Raiders-Broncos rivalry has been one of the most competitive of the last few decades — with the Raiders holding a 60-49-2 advantage, including playoff games — the Broncos have owned the series in the Peyton Manning era, outscoring Oakland, 222-85, in the course of six rather easy victories.While the Broncos appear poised to compete for the A.F.C. title, the Raiders present an interesting matchup. Quarterback Derek Carr has made tremendous strides, and Amari Cooper is on a pace to have one of the best rookie seasons any wide receiver has had. If Cooper continues at his current pace, he will finish the season with 96 catches and 1,356 yards. Still, Cooper is not happy with his performance thus far.“There’s always room for improvement,” he said.PICK: RAIDERSRedskins (2-2) at Falcons (4-0)1 p.m. Line: Falcons by 7 ½Although the Falcons have jumped out to a 4-0 start, looking like a different team under their new coach, Dan Quinn, not everyone in Atlanta is happy. Specifically, the star wide receiver Roddy White seems disturbed to be doing more blocking than catching in a system installed by the Falcons’ new offensive coordinator, Kyle Shanahan.“For me, at the end of the day, I want to catch passes,” White told ESPN, adding forcefully and coarsely that blocking was “not what I want to do.”White later tried to dial back his comments, but he was excused from practice Wednesday for personal reasons and rumors were swirling that the team might be trying to trade him.On the other side of the field, Redskins quarterback Kirk Cousins, fresh off a game in which he directed the winning drive in the waning moments, praised Shanahan, formerly Washington’s offensive coordinator, for his role in his development.“I learned a lot about football in the two seasons with him,” Cousins said.PICK: FALCONSCardinals (3-1) at Lions (0-4)4:05 p.m. Line: Cardinals by 3You have to feel for fans of the Detroit Lions, the N.F.L.’s only winless team. The noncall by the officials that cost them a victory against the Seahawks last week inspired a Lions fan (or fans) to buy space on several billboards in and around Detroit insinuating that N.F.L. officials are blind.At this point in the perpetually forsaken-by-the-football-gods franchise’s history, it is almost surprising that there have not been any Sarah McLachlan-narrated public service ads imploring people to take a moment to hug the Lions fans in their lives. Weepy commercials or not, go ahead and hug a Lions fan. You’ll feel better. Everyone will win. Except, of course, the Lions.PICK: CARDINALSBrowns (1-3) at Ravens (1-3)1 p.m. Line: Ravens by 6 ½Lightning-round question: Can you name a Ravens starting wide receiver? Don’t feel bad if you can’t — even hard-core Ravens fans probably have no idea whom quarterback Joe Flacco will be throwing to this weekend. With Steve Smith and the top draft pick, Breshad Perriman, likely to be out with injuries, the Ravens’ starting wide receivers entering Week 5 look to be Kamar Aiken and Marlon Brown. This is kind of sad, given that Flacco throws one of the best deep balls in the league.Still, there is a glimmer of hope. The Ravens have traded for Rams wide receiver Chris Givens, and he is expected to see immediate action.“He’s going to be out there on Sunday,” Ravens Coach John Harbaugh said. “How much he plays depends on how well he does. I’m really hopeful that he plays a lot. It will be up to him and how well he can learn what we’re doing.”PICK: RAVENSBills (2-2) at Titans (1-2)1 p.m. Line: Bills by 2 ½You have to imagine that few things excite Bills Coach Rex Ryan more than squaring up against a team with a rookie quarterback. In Ryan’s six years as coach of the Jets, his teams were 9-2 against rookie quarterbacks.So it probably should come as no surprise that Ryan was his unabashedly confident self when asked about facing the Titans rookie quarterback Marcus Mariota, who is off to one of the best starts to an N.F.L. career.“I don’t think the kid will have his way against us,” Ryan said.PICK: BILLSBears (1-3) at Chiefs (1-3)1 p.m. Line: Chiefs by 9 ½When the Bears were driving late to try to win their first game against the Raiders last week, many fans were probably bracing for a backbreaking Jay Cutler interception to dash their hopes. The popular narrative is that Cutler folds in the clutch, but this time he led his team downfield, setting up Robbie Gould’s winning field goal, and he did so playing on an injured hamstring and without his top weapon, wide receiver Alshon Jeffery, who is expected to return for the first time since Week 1.The Chiefs limp into the game having lost three straight, leading many to question whether they were overrated entering the season. But it should be noted that their losses have come against undefeated teams: the Broncos, the Packers and the Bengals. The Chiefs sort of snatched defeat from the jaws of victory against Denver, so they may not be as bad as their record.PICK: CHIEFSPatriots (3-0) at Cowboys (2-2)4:25 p.m. Line: Patriots by 8 ½What looked on paper to be one of the better games of the season — a potential Super Bowl preview — now appears to be a bit of a dud, as the Patriots have been steamrollering opponents while the Cowboys continue to lose key players to injury.Making matters worse for Dallas, the Patriots are coming off a bye week, so they have had extra time to prepare and rest. The Cowboys got even more banged up last week in a heartbreaking overtime loss to the lowly Saints.This one could get ugly.PICK: PATRIOTS49ers (1-3) at Giants (2-2)8:25 p.m. Line: Giants by 7In another game that once looked promising on the schedule, the Giants and the 49ers are trending in opposite directions. The Giants pulled out a tough road win last week in Buffalo and look to be in a strong position in the N.F.C. East. San Francisco has looked ugly in three consecutive losses. While Giants quarterback Eli Manning has passed well, throwing only a single interception through four games, the 49ers’ Colin Kaepernick has been dreadful, completing just 22 of 44 passes with no touchdowns and five interceptions, two of them returned for touchdowns.On the bright side for the 49ers, Coach Jim Tomsula apparently did not pass wind during a news conference, as many on the Internet recently accused him of doing, so there’s that.PICK: GIANTSJaguars (1-3) at Buccaneers (1-3)1 p.m. Line: Buccaneers by 3Though only about 200 miles separate Jacksonville and Tampa, Sunday’s game between the Jaguars and the Buccaneers will be only the sixth time the teams have faced each other. After winning the first game in Tampa in 1995, the Buccaneers have dropped four straight to Jacksonville. Look for that trend to continue.PICK: JAGUARSTimes are Eastern. Picks do not reflect the betting line. Advertisement