AdvertisementSupported byBy Bill PenningtonAfter the N.F.C. championship game in 2012, as the broadcaster Terry Bradshaw tried to interview players from the victorious Giants, Ann Mara intervened.On national television, Mrs. Mara, then 82, poked Mr. Bradshaw in the arm and said, “You never pick the Giants.”Mr. Bradshaw turned toward the camera and said: “I know. I know. I’m sorry. I’m getting hammered for not picking the Giants.”That upbraiding only made Mrs. Mara, who died on Sunday, more popular with fans, who already considered her the Giants’ matriarch. Since the death of her husband, the longtime team owner Wellington Mara, in 2005, Ann Mara and her children had owned 50 percent of the Giants.The N.F.L. held a moment of silence for Mrs. Mara on Sunday minutes before the coin toss at the Super Bowl in Glendale, Ariz.Her son John K. Mara, the Giants’ president and chief executive, said in a statement that Mrs. Mara, 85, slipped in front of her home in Rye, N.Y., during an ice storm on Jan. 18. She had been hospitalized since with a head injury.““Unfortunately, there were complications,” John Mara said, adding, “She has been the leader of our family in every way.”In a Twitter message, Giants safety Antrel Rolle said, “She was our fighter & backbone.”A prominent philanthropist, Mrs. Mara supported educational organizations and helped children with cancer through the Ronald McDonald House of New York.N.F.L. Commissioner Roger Goodell said of Mrs. Mara in a statement, “Her family and the Giants organization have always reflected Mrs. Mara’s competitive spirit, integrity and wonderful sense of humor.”The Giants were founded in 1925 by Tim Mara, Wellington’s father, and the Mara family was the sole owner of the franchise until 1991.Mrs. Mara was born Ann Mumm in New York City on June 18, 1929. She met Wellington Mara at the Church of St. Ignatius Loyola in Manhattan in 1952 at a 7:30 a.m. Mass. As she told the story, “a little old lady fainted, and we both went to help revive her.”She added, “But I had spotted him before that.”She is survived by 11 children, 43 grandchildren and 16 great-grandchildren. Two of her granddaughters — children of Christopher Mara, a Giants vice president — are Rooney Mara, who was nominated for an Oscar for best actress for “The Girl With the Dragon Tattoo” in 2012, and Kate Mara, who starred in the Netflix drama “House of Cards.”Mrs. Mara remained deeply dedicated to the Giants and followed their play intensely. After the team missed the playoffs for the third consecutive year in the fall, John Mara was asked how his mother felt.“She is not very happy with me right now, believe me,” he said. “She suffers through this probably even more so than I do.”Advertisement