AdvertisementSupported byEssayBy Gardiner HarrisMELBOURNE, Australia — I am an awesome tennis player. Seriously. You should see my one-handed backhand. It usually goes over the net. And my serve? If a guy has a poor backhand, I can sometimes hit it there. Free points, baby, which on rare occasions balance out my double faults.So it was something of a shock when I rallied here with Steve Johnson, an American player ranked 38th in the world, who made his way to the third round of the Australian Open. Johnson, 25, has been on tour for two and a half years, having won the N.C.A.A. men’s singles championship two years running while playing for Southern California. His father, a coach, had him hitting tennis balls from age 2 and entered Johnson in his first tournament when he was 5. Johnson is decidedly in pro tennis’s third tier — below Novak Djokovic, Roger Federer, Andy Murray and Rafael Nadal, and then Stan Wawrinka, Tomas Berdych, Kei Nishikori, Milos Raonic and a few others. It turns out, however, that Johnson is really, really good. Johnson and I both had tennis rackets, and we hit the same fuzzy ball. But those were the only things that we shared.When Johnson hit a forehand, his body swung around like a top, and his arm ended up wrapped around his neck. He was nice enough to hit the ball to me — we were rallying, after all — but it came over so fast and with so much spin that I could barely get it back. And then he served. The first dozen hit the corners of the service box, all aces. I could not come close to touching them. So I asked if, um, he could please hit the ball, like, to me. Sure, he said, and I barely got out of the way before the next one nearly took off my head. On the next ball, I used my racket mostly as a shield. After a few more, I mostly got over my fear and tried to poke the ball back onto the court. Several landed on Johnson’s side, arcing their way out of the sky like lawn darts. Had he wished to crush them, he could have done so easily. He was polite enough not to, even saying each time, “Hey, that landed in!”Thanks.In the aftermath of this drubbing, I still managed to persuade myself that I was, indeed, an awesome tennis player. It’s just that the world’s top players are engaged in a different sport. It wasn’t always this way.Three decades ago, I attended Trinity School in New York City — the same high school as John, Mark and Patrick McEnroe. I didn’t really know the McEnroe boys, but I knew some of their tennis teammates and occasionally played against them. Those guys beat me, but I could win points and occasionally even games. We played the same sport.Since then, the gap between the average club player and the professionals has grown into a chasm. I called Patrick McEnroe to ask when the pros had turned into different beings.“This hit me a couple of years ago, when I was switching to the synthetic strings the players use now, and I realized that the harder I swung at the ball, the more likely it was to go in,” he said. “The more torque you get, the more spin, and that spin keeps the ball in the court.”But winding up like a major league pitcher for each strike of the ball is exhausting, he said. “It’s hard on the body to do that if you’re not training every day,” McEnroe said. “Even if they could technically do it, a decent club player is going to get hurt just trying.”It’s the kind of game Johnson has played since junior high. “You were born to be able to do this, or you weren’t — it’s that simple,” Johnson said with an apologetic shrug after our court time ended.Even for Johnson, the physical demands of the modern game are intimidating. He managed to win the first set against Nishikori in a third-round match but ran out of gas, losing, 6-7 (7), 6-1, 6-2, 6-3. “The physicality of the game has become crazy,” said Johnson, who sometimes watches old tennis matches and dreams about what he might have been able to accomplish then with the skills and the fitness he has now.Justin Gimelstob, a former player and commentator and a coach, said in an interview here that he was awed by the sheer athleticism of today’s players.“I strongly believe that the sport is at the highest level ever,” he said, “and those playing professional tennis now are not just the best professional tennis athletes ever, they are among the best athletes in the world of any kind.”The differences are not just about athleticism. After two weeks of player news conferences, you begin to wonder whether these people were born on this planet. Federer speaks three languages fluently, easily moving from English to French to Swiss German. Djokovic speaks four languages and is said to be learning Mandarin. After one of his news conferences, he cheerfully exchanged a few basic greetings in Mandarin with a Chinese reporter, who giggled. “There’s no question that Federer set a new standard for the top players, and all the other guys are trying to keep up with him now in that regard,” McEnroe said. “Thanks to our teachers at Trinity, I’ve always been able to speak passable French. But nothing like these guys.”Johnson said he was concentrated on improving his fitness, not his communication skills.“I’m still working on English,” he said jokingly. “My Spanish? No es bueno.”Advertisement