AdvertisementSupported byN.H.L. RoundupBy The Associated PressConnor Hutton stopped 21 shots to earn his second career shutout as the Nashville Predators beat the host Pittsburgh Penguins, 4-0, on Sunday.Gabriel Bourque, Roman Josi, Eric Nystrom and Mike Fisher scored, helping the Predators to their first regulation win in Pittsburgh in 11 years.Hutton improved to 3-1-2 while filling in as Nashville’s No. 1 goaltender while Pekka Rinne recovers from a sprained knee that is expected to sideline him for at least another week. The Predators ended a five-game losing streak to Pittsburgh by taking advantage of sloppy play by the Penguins, who have lost six of eight.Nystrom and Bourque pounced on Pittsburgh turnovers — one of them by the captain Sidney Crosby — to give Hutton all the support he needed.Marc-Andre Fleury made 20 saves for the Penguins but received no help from Pittsburgh’s sputtering offense.The Penguins have scored just two goals in their last three games, both in an overtime win on Friday against the Devils.BLUES 4, CAPITALS 3 Alexander Steen had two goals and an assist, Brian Elliot stopped 33 shots, and streaking St. Louis held on to defeat host Washington.Dmitrij Jaskin and Vladimir Tarasenko also scored for the Blues, winners of five straight and 10 of 11. T. J. Oshie added three assists.Washington’s Alex Ovechkin scored twice, giving him a league-leading 31 goals. He became the fifth player in N.H.L. history to start his career with 10 30-goal seasons.Ovechkin, who added an assist, has 15 goals in his last 15 games.Karl Alzner also scored for Washington, which is 1-4-2 in its last seven games.Nicklas Backstrom and Mike Green had two assists each. Justin Peters made 36 saves.COYOTES 3, CANADIENS 2 Lauri Korpikoski scored two power-play goals, Louis Domingue won in his first N.H.L. start, and visiting Arizona beat Montreal.Domingue, 22, who is from the Montreal area, helped end the Canadiens’ five-game winning streak. He got off to a rough start — Alex Galchenyuk scored twice on Montreal’s first four shots in the opening 4 minutes 55 seconds — but wound up making 18 saves.Oliver Ekman-Larsson also scored for the Coyotes against the backup goaltender Dustin Tokarski. WILD 4, CANUCKS 2 Devan Dubnyk stopped 35 shots, and Minnesota beat host Vancouver.Zach Parise, Jared Spurgeon, Thomas Vanek and Jason Zucker scored for the Wild. Zucker sealed it with an empty-net goal with 55 seconds left.Ronalds Kenins and Daniel Sedin scored for the Canucks. Ryan Miller made 16 saves for Vancouver.Vanek scored his 10th goal of the season at 7:20 of the third period to make it 3-0. He took a pass from Mikael Granlund just past center ice, drifted to the right and shot above Miller’s blocker.Kenins and Sedin scored goals just over a minute apart to get the Canucks close.Advertisement