AdvertisementSupported byBy Joe LemireNEWARK — Before the Devils’ rookie goaltender, Keith Kinkaid, made his first career start on Dec. 9, he was too excited to sleep. He had been fortunate enough to learn of his starting assignment on the morning of the game against the Chicago Blackhawks, so he was not awake all night, but he was robbed of his traditional pregame nap.“I don’t really need the nap,” he said, adding with a smile, “but napping’s pretty much my favorite.”A first start is especially memorable — Kinkaid stopped 37 of 39 Chicago shots before losing in a shootout — but each start for a Devils backup is precious and rare. The starter, Cory Schneider, whom the club signed to a seven-year, $42 million extension last summer, set a franchise record by starting the first 20 games of the season and has started a league-leading 43 times, leaving a combined seven games for Kinkaid (six starts) and the veteran backup Scott Clemmensen (one).Kinkaid and Clemmensen have alternated between the Devils, where one or the other backs up Schneider and inevitably sits for weeks at a time, and the team’s American Hockey League affiliate in Albany, where they get regular playing time to stay sharp. The two have already changed places four times, like ships crossing in the night — or, more accurately, like cars passing on Interstate 87.“The drive down is exciting,” Kinkaid said of the trip from Albany to Newark. “The drive back is not as fun.”Kinkaid, 25, grew up in Farmingville, N.Y., on Long Island, where his father is a longtime Islanders season-ticket holder. He starred at Union College in Schenectady, N.Y., and has been Albany’s primary goaltender the past three seasons. Now he is in the N.H.L., which is new enough, but he is also a backup for the first time in his career.“It’s the same game-day routine,” he said. “You’ve just got to practice hard every day because you could go two weeks, three weeks without a start. You’ve got to make the most of each start. You’ve got to work on the little things — you’ve got a lot of time to do that.”Clemmensen, 37, has more experience in the matter, especially having backed up the Devils superstar Martin Brodeur in the early 2000s. In 2006-7, for instance, Clemmensen was with the Devils all season but drew only four starts, the last of them not until Game 82. One tip he has gleaned over the years is to prepare by watching video of a recent start.“I need to watch myself play a game in order to get that feeling again,” Clemmensen said by phone from Albany.Even then, Clemmensen said, it can take a period to shake off the rust. Adding pressure is the realization that each start is an audition — not only so that current coaches have confidence for future starts but also to attract future opportunities. Season statistics can be skewed by one bad start — backups reside in the domain of small samples.“You’re always trying to further your career,” said Clemmensen, who has been playing in the final year of a contract for 11 of his 14 professional seasons. “As a backup, you know you’re not going to get a lot of exposure. Teams aren’t going to know a lot about you except for what your numbers look like come the end of the year.”A few other teams have their backup goaltenders keep track of face-offs or turnovers during games, but with the Devils, their main value is as a resource for teammates. Between shifts, skaters will often ask for insights gleaned from the backup’s stationary vantage point. Now and again, the coach summons the backup goalie into action.“I think that’s the hardest part — going from sitting still for an hour and a half to jumping into an N.H.L. game is one of the tougher things to do in sports, I think,” Schneider said, noting that the transition allowed for “no warm-ups, no nothing.”Schneider is on pace to start 72 of the team’s 82 games, a prodigious workload that only five other goalies have matched in the last five seasons, including the Rangers’ Henrik Lundqvist and Brodeur, both in the 2009-10 season. Schneider can relate to Kinkaid and Clemmensen, however: As a rookie, he joined the Vancouver Canucks when Roberto Luongo was entrenched as the starter.There is a limited number of starting goalie positions, and even in this poor Devils season, Schneider, 28, has largely been a bright spot. He has not been at his absolute best — he has ranked in the top five in save percentage in two previous seasons — but his save rate this year still places him in the top third of the league.After Schneider split time with Luongo in Vancouver and with Brodeur last season, this is the first year in which he is an unquestioned starter. As such, Schneider said he hoped he would start at least 55, if not as many as 70 games, this season, either of which would help him breeze past his previous high of 43 starts. Schneider said he had “felt stronger” of late than he had earlier in the season.“Cory’s our No. 1 goaltender, but at the same time he can’t play every night, especially the way the schedule is,” said Lou Lamoriello, the Devils’ general manager and interim coach, alluding to five sets of back-to-back games in five weeks. “Keith has been broken in, I think, the way he should. Maybe we could have used him a little more in the beginning of the season.”Eric Tulsky, a hockey analyst who has worked for several teams, published a study on the Philadelphia Flyers blog Broad Street Hockey suggesting that goalies should almost never start back-to-back games, because on average, tired goalies had a save percentage one point worse than a rested goalie in the same situation.Schneider’s pace may slow as the season progresses, and his backups may then go from full-time bystanders to can’t-sleep starters.Advertisement