AdvertisementSupported byBy Kelley McMillanBEAVER CREEK, Colo. — The six-time Olympic medalist Bode Miller, who has not raced this season because of a back injury, has confirmed that he will compete in the Alpine world championships, which are set to begin here Tuesday.“I’m going to race the downhill, the super-G, and we’re trying to figure out if I will race the combined,” Miller said by telephone Saturday. “But as of right now, it doesn’t look likely, as I haven’t had any slalom, and my slalom setup isn’t that comfortable for me.”If all goes according to plan, Miller’s first race will be the super-G on Wednesday, followed by the downhill on Saturday and the Alpine combined on Sunday. He was the runner-up in the giant slalom here in 2013 but will forgo the event this year because it is the most taxing on his back.Miller, 37, is recovering from an operation he had in November to repair a herniated disk sustained in a crash while he was competing last March at the World Cup finals in Lenzerheide, Switzerland. “My back seems good,” he said. “It’s obviously the sort of thing where the closer you get to being 100 percent healthy, the more danger there is, because you stop protecting it and you stop being real careful, which you need to do to race well.”Despite his ailing back, Miller, who has collected four world championship gold medals and one silver, is confident in his chances in Beaver Creek.“I wouldn’t be racing if I wasn’t trying to win or get medals,” he said. “I hope to be on the podium, but it’s going to be a challenge, because everyone is skiing well and it’s my first race of the year.”Forest Carey, coach of the United States ski team, agreed that Miller would be a contender.“He’s won this hill three times,” Carey said. “A year ago, he was one of the top three downhillers in the world. As recently as last season, he was skiing at the top, top level, and he’s been doing it for 15 years. He knows what it takes. And he’s Bode, so you never know.”Miller is among the oldest competitors on the hill. He enters the world championships, his seventh, expecting a child in late May with Morgan, his wife of two years — circumstances that are edging him closer than ever to retirement.“I’ve been in the same position a long time, where if everything works out, I’ll continue,” Miller said. “But there’s a lot of things going on, with Morgan being pregnant, that are making it more a challenge to continue. I would say things are consistently pushing me toward retirement, but there’s nothing definitive yet.”Morgan Miller said she was not convinced that her husband was about to retire. “When we met, he said he was going to retire,” she said. “And now it’s two years later, and he hasn’t retired. Going into the season this year, with him saying this could be the end, I don’t really think too much of it.”With six Olympic medals, five world championship medals and 33 World Cup wins, Miller is one of the most accomplished ski racers in history. As he looks back at his career, it is not his collection of trophies and medals that he is most proud of, but the way he won them.“I’ve tried to ski with intensity and with how I believe the sport should be done,” Miller said. “I lived my whole career that way, and that’s something I’m proud of. It’s not easy to do when there’s pressures from outside to adhere to the norm and what everyone wants you to do. It’s been a lot of sticking to what I believe in and seeing things through.”His future after ski racing will focus on his family and several projects he is involved with, including horse racing; the Turtle Ridge Foundation, which supports sports for young people and those with disabilities; and the Grilled Cheese Truck, a food-truck company that employs military veterans.When the time does come, Miller said, he will be at ease with the prospect of retiring.“I’ve raced a lot of races and I can always ski, and that will be great,” he said. “The opportunity to race on some of these great courses is unique, and I’ve had a great, long run.”Advertisement