AdvertisementSupported byCeltic 2, Rangers 0By Graham RuthvenGLASGOW — Sunday’s match between Celtic and Rangers, the Glasgow giants collectively known as the Old Firm, was their first in nearly three years, but for all the hatred and bile, it seemed the two clubs had missed each other.Celtic green versus Rangers blue is a contrast that has colored Scottish soccer for more than a century, even as the rivalry has faded in recent years, with Rangers sent down to a lower division. So while Celtic has undoubtedly relished having the top flight of Scottish soccer to itself, not even league titles are savored like an Old Firm victory.Celtic certainly reveled in its win Sunday, a comfortable, 2-0 victory that secured the team a place in the Scottish League Cup final against Dundee United in May — a reward that almost seemed irrelevant given the context of the semifinal. Much had changed on both sides of the divide since Celtic and Rangers last faced each other, in April 2012. In addition to their banishment from Scottish soccer’s top level, Rangers had endured a financial meltdown and, more recently, a coaching change. Celtic, too, had undergone a change in the dugout, with Ronny Deila replacing Neil Lennon as manager over the summer.Rangers, historically Scotland’s most successful team, has been ravaged by its recent experiences. Forced to start again at the foot of the country’s soccer pyramid after entering liquidation, the club has risen through the ranks on its way back to the top flight. But the team still faces the threat of financial oblivion, and the effects have taken their toll on the sporting side, too.Not one player remains from the Rangers squad that won the 2011 League Cup. Kenny McDowall, who became the team’s caretaker coach after the resignation of Ally McCoist in December, may have selected a team full of internationals and proven Scottish stars for the clash against Celtic, but Rangers’ glory days have never looked more distant. Their performance underlined as much, with Celtic taking a 2-0 lead during a dominant first half. Still, as always in these matchups, the eye was drawn to the stands. Both sets of supporters serenaded the field with chants about religion and politics (which had very little to do with soccer). Celtic fans danced like zombies — in reference to their view that the Rangers of old died when the team entered bankruptcy. Rangers fans in red, white and blue sang of their loyalist beliefs.Scottish soccer fans debate whether these games are a blight or a blessing. Watched around the world — even in Turkmenistan, where Sunday’s match was broadcast live — this is a heavyweight fight in an otherwise bantamweight division. But the rivalry has a dark side.The hostilities started well in advance of the game’s 1:30 p.m. start. Celtic striker John Guidetti had bragged that he would score three goals — in the end, he did not even start — while Rangers fans reminisced about past glory. Articles published on Celtic’s official website before the match lacked mentions of Rangers, as if the club could not even utter the name of its biggest rival.The pub chain J. D. Wetherspoon announced that it would not be showing the game in its bars, for fear of trouble. The police warned the players not to embellish any celebrations to avoid inciting scuffles, although Celtic striker Leigh Griffiths hardly heeded that advice, goading the Rangers fans with outstretched arms after opening the scoring.In addition, a group of Celtic supporters took out a full-page ad in a national newspaper to say that the Old Firm derby died three years ago and that this would be the first meeting between their team and a new club posing as Rangers. A classic Old Firm encounter Sunday’s match was not, but it will provide a landmark in the rivalry’s timeline. Scotland had gotten back its biggest game.Advertisement