By ANDREW KEHFEB. 1, 2015
Just over a week ago, the people in charge of programming at ESPN decided that Sunday afternoon’s contest between the Knicks and the Los Angeles Lakers was no longer worthy of a national television audience.So while the teams played at Madison Square Garden, the network instead aired the CP3 P.B.A. Invitational, a charity bowling tournament organized by Chris Paul of the Los Angeles Clippers and held more than three weeks ago at the Bowl-O-Drome in Torrance, Calif.It comes down to personal taste, ultimately, whether a taped event featuring entertainers like Lil Wayne and Nick Cannon bowling alongside current and former professional athletes was more compelling than the basketball game, which the Knicks won, 92-80. But on paper, at least, there was not much about the matchup at the Garden, which took place in front of a tranquil sellout crowd, that was particularly enticing.Both teams have been abysmal this year; the Knicks improved to 10-38 on Sunday while the Lakers fell to 13-35. And many of the biggest names on the teams’ rosters were out with injuries — the most notable being Kobe Bryant, who had surgery last week to repair a torn rotator cuff in his right shoulder, an injury that will force him to miss the rest of the season. Amar’e Stoudemire, who has a variety of sore body parts, sat out a third straight game and was one of four Knicks sidelined.Advertisement“We should want to embrace these moments right here,” Knicks forward Carmelo Anthony said when asked about the lack of buzz around the game. “We’re all professionals and basketball players.”AdvertisementAmong all the professionals on the court, Anthony was the only star, and it showed: He scored a game-high 31 points. Carlos Boozer, in his 13th N.B.A. season, and Jordan Clarkson, a rookie making his fifth start, led the Lakers with 19 points each.The reserve guard Jeremy Lin, who became an overnight sensation three years ago as a member of the Knicks, finished with 4 points and 7 assists.(The rapper French Montana teamed up with Ronnie Russell, a professional bowler from Marion, Ind., to take home the big trophy at the bowling tournament.)“Both teams still have a lot to play for,” Knicks Coach Derek Fisher said before the game, a statement that begged for some elaboration. “You still have a lot of guys on both rosters that are trying to find out who they are in this league and where their careers are going to go.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.More interesting than the game on some level were the interpersonal relationships. The meeting was the clubs’ first since Phil Jackson, who won five of his 11 championships as a coach while with the Lakers, signed on to become the president of the Knicks last March. One of his first orders of business in New York was installing a staff heavy with former Lakers.Fisher, who played under Jackson on each of his five title teams with Los Angeles, said before Sunday’s game that it was less about having former Lakers around than it was about having “winners,” people who had won championships. The challenge now, Fisher said, is “how do we kind of put our experience and our wisdom and our skills and our talents together to help our players be successful on the court?”The Lakers over the past decade have used high-profile acquisitions to try to stay in the trophy hunt — an approach that has had mixed results. Fisher pointed out that many teams, like the Oklahoma City Thunder and the Portland Trail Blazers, had had success building their rosters through the draft and smart free-agent signings. Such teams, Fisher said, tend to have more stability and longevity than those that make splashy acquisitions.Fisher said the Knicks probably needed to be somewhere in the middle of those two approaches, particularly because of Anthony, who signed a five-year contract over the summer.Advertisement“He’s 30 years old,” Fisher said of Anthony. “We don’t have 10 years to figure this out.”Still, he said, the Knicks cannot afford to “put ourselves in the same positions we’ve been in the last few years, where you try and get a bunch of guys that don’t have favorable contracts or don’t allow you to plan for the future.”Anthony laughed when apprised of Fisher’s comments. Like many athletes, he maintains a lighthearted sensitivity about his age. But he agreed that a measure of urgency was necessary.“I’m tired of hearing that I’m old, man — I don’t like hearing that word,” Anthony said, laughing. “The time is now. The time is now to start building for the future. I don’t think we can wait, not just for my sake, but in general. The time is now, and I think we’ve got to take advantage of that.”A version of this article appears in print on February 2, 2015, on Page D2 of the New York edition with the headline: Knicks Top Lakers in Meeting of Teams Not Fit for National TV.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.