AdvertisementSupported byGlobal SoccerBy Rob HughesLONDON — When the transfer window shuts at the end of Monday in Europe, the most meaningful story might well be the player who decided he was happy to remain loyal and stay with the club he was currently at.That player is Aston Villa’s Fabian Delph. Stories abounded that Liverpool was ready to make him the kingpin of its midfield once Steven Gerrard departs for Los Angeles after the season and that Tottenham Hotspur, among others, was ready to pay him at least twice what he is receiving at Villa.Delph instead signed a new contract to remain at Villa Park until the summer of 2019.The decision surprised Paul Lambert, his coach at Villa. It surprised those he is closest to — the players with whom he shared a fight against relegation last season, just as the club is struggling once again this year to stay in the big money of the Premier League.During the two transfer windows, stories come early and often about players moving on. The main window runs from July to the start of September, and it reopens in January as teams adjust their rosters with deals costing anywhere from tens of millions of dollars all the way down to nothing.The biggest move so far took Wilfried Bony from Swansea City to Manchester City for just over $40 million. Bony will join City’s quest to retain the Premier League title as soon as he is released from national-team duty with Ivory Coast at the African Cup of Nations.He will form, together with Sergio Agüero, one of the most prized attacking duos in the game today.Chelsea, which leads City by five points, is finishing up a move for Fiorentina’s dashing winger, Juan Cuadrado — a trade that will beat the deadline once the Colombian passes a medical examination in London. Typical of the frenzy of transfer D-Day, Chelsea is working on shipping its Egyptian winger, Mohamed Salah, to Fiorentina as part of the exchange. Chelsea will also trade André Schürrle to Wolsfburg of the German Bundesliga to make room for Douglas Costa, one of the Brazilians at Shakhtar Donetsk. Some reports suggest Chelsea will also bid for Enner Valencia of Ecuador, the mercurial player who seems to have been at West Ham United all of five minutes.In fact, it has been a little over six months since Valencia and Cuadrado caught the eyes as veritable forces of nature at the World Cup in Brazil.This time, there won’t be a $100 million deal like when Cristiano Ronaldo or Gareth Bale joined Real Madrid. Their team has traded this month, of course, but it paid relatively modest amounts to acquire Lucas Silva, yet another Brazilian, and a 16-year-old Norwegian wunderkind that half a dozen clubs were chasing, the precocious Martin Odegaard.Odegaard’s time will come, assuming he stays healthy. But for now, Real’s plan is to have him train alongside the superstars but play for its B team under a coach, Zinédine Zidane, whose move from Juventus to Madrid set a record back in 2001.Over the past month, as many as a dozen individuals a day were moved between clubs, sometimes with the players consenting, and other times with them having very little say.We talk, these days, of “player power” in the sport, but many of the moves happen because the players are no longer wanted and have been persuaded that their future lies anywhere but where they were in December.Not every trade involves a transfer fee. Many are loans for the remainder of this season, effectively putting players on tryouts at other clubs. Some are transfers of convenience: Jermain Defoe, the former Tottenham striker who left London last year to try his luck with Toronto F.C. in Major League Soccer, is now back in England — and he scored for Sunderland on Saturday. Defoe exchanged places with Jozy Altidore, the big New Jersey striker who moved to Toronto.In this fickle and transient trade, it is a rare player who says, “Whoa, let me think about this, I’m doing pretty well where I am.”Delph appears to that rarity. He announced his decision first to the club’s television channel, then to reporters the next day.“Financially, I would have been better off leaving on a free,” he said, meaning that had he let his contract wind down, he could have become a free agent a few months from now and been able to negotiate the best salary of his career at a place of his choosing.“I’m not money-minded,” Delph added. “I live a simple life, love my family, and I take care of them. This is my club, and if I can play every week and feel like I’m developing, I’m happy.”He referred to his teammates as brothers. He said he had a good relationship with his coach, Lambert, who helped him progress to a spot on the English national team.Delph also said he owed the Villa owner, who in 2009 paid around $10 million to buy him from Leeds United.“I was a boy,” Delph recalled. “I was injured, and the guy who invested money in me called to say, ‘Don’t worry, you’ll come good.”’No longer a boy at 25, he remembered that call in 2010 after he suffered a serious knee injury.Even though there is speculation that the owner, the American Randy Lerner, might soon sell the club, the player thinks that now is the time to repay that trust.There is suspicion that the club and the player have signed a contract as an insurance policy and that Delph might yet be sold, to the financial benefit of both player and club. But how nice it would be if Villa stays up in the Premier League and Delph stays true?Advertisement