AdvertisementSupported byBy John DuerdenSYDNEY, Australia — The Most Valuable Player of the 2015 Asian Cup may play his club soccer in England’s third tier with Swindon Town, but Massimo Luongo is the toast of Australia after helping the Socceroos beat South Korea in the tournament final.If Luongo, released by Tottenham Hotspur in the English Premier League in 2012, was almost unknown before the tournament began, that is not the case any longer following three successful weeks for Australia both on and off the field.Australia, which joined the Asian Football Confederation in 2006 and lost to Japan in the Asian Cup final in 2011, won its first Asian title in its third attempt with a 2-1 victory on Saturday at Sydney’s Olympic Stadium.Coach Ange Postecoglou took over as Australia coach in October 2013, and the team lost all three of its games at the World Cup last year and suffered poor results leading up to the continental tournament. But after delivering the greatest prize in the Australia’s soccer history, Postecoglou believes it will lead to bigger achievements in the future.“I know the whole country will be off their couches and won’t be able to sleep tonight,” Postecoglou said after the game. “Football is a great game; the greatest in the world. And hopefully us Aussies, we can take on the best in the world because I have a real belief in this whole group and in Aussie football, and we’ll move on from here.”The final was a close, tense affair. South Korea, looking for a third title over all and its first since 1960, had not conceded a single goal in the five games leading to the final. In Son Heung-min, the team possesses perhaps the most exciting attacking player in Asia, and the Bayer Leverkusen player was recently linked to a big-money move to an English Premier League giant like Arsenal, Liverpool or Manchester United.Yet it was Luonga who finally ended that goalless record after 44 minutes. The midfielder picked up the ball outside the penalty area and fired a fierce shot into the bottom corner. The goal came at a time when South Korea was starting to dominate, but in the second half, the 2002 World Cup semifinalists struggled to break down the Australian back line.That changed in the 92nd minute, when Son finally found a little space in the area and silenced most of the 76,000 fans in the stadium.“My only concern was that because we conceded so late, the boys would be so heartbroken they couldn’t pick themselves up in extra time,” Postecoglou said. “But I knew we’d finish stronger. It was just a matter of taking our chance when it came, and we did.”After 105 minutes, Tomi Juric took advantage of a defensive mistake by Kim Jin-su, and James Troisi scored the decisive goal from close range. South Korea tried desperately to even the score, but could not.“We were naïve with the second goal; I think we could’ve cleared the ball,” said Uli Stielike, the South Korea coach. The German took the job in September to replace Hong Myung-bo, who resigned in July following a dismal World Cup in Brazil.At the very least, Stielike, a former Real Madrid midfielder, has helped restore the country’s faith in its national team after the disappointment of last June. According to broadcasters in Seoul, around 18 million people in the country of 50 million were expected to tune in for the final.“It was a game that could have seen victory go to one side or the other,” Stielike added. “I think the best for this game would be a draw and each team takes the cup for two years at home.”The final was an exciting end to an entertaining tournament. Stars like Son and Omar Abdulrahman of the United Arab Emirates confirmed their credentials, while Luongo and Sardar Azmoun of Iran introduced themselves to a bigger audience.More than 650,000 attended the 32 games, easily beating the target of 500,000 set by organizers. The average attendance of just over 20,000 a game has been surpassed just once in the tournament’s history, in China in 2004. “The tournament itself has been tremendous,” the Asian Football Confederation’s president, Sheikh Salman bin Ibrahim Al-Khalifa, said after the final. “Filled with quality and excitement, it was a fantastic festival of football that the whole of Asia can be proud of.In an interview with a Dubai newspaper during the tournament, the sheikh appeared to question if it was desirable for Australia to continue being a part of the Asian confederation due to its unpopularity in some countries, particularly in West Asia. The sheikh, who had been quoted as saying that the country’s presence was an experiment, moved swiftly to say to the Australian media that his remarks had been manipulated when they were translated from Arabic into English.For now, Australia is unlikely to care. Its national team has the continent’s biggest prize and will represent Asia at the 2017 Confederations Cup. One of its clubs, Western Sydney Wanderers, won the Asian Champions League in November. Regardless of what others in the continent may think, Australia is enjoying life atop Asian soccer.Advertisement