
TV Sports By                     
 RICHARD SANDOMIR
 
FEB. 2, 2015
The other day I suggested that even a lousy game can yield sensational Super Bowl viewership, which happened last year. But a game that is incredible, surprising, tightly played and has everything but an elf on the sideline deflating balls?Well, that sort of game can lead to more people in the United States watching a program than have ever watched any other single event.New England’s 28-24 victory Sunday attracted a record 114.4 million viewers, more than the average of 112.2 million who tuned in live to Seattle’s 43-8 rout of Denver last year. (Another 600,000 watched last year within seven days of the broadcast on their DVRs.)Throughout Sunday night, viewership rose, from 99.5 million at the start to 120.8 million from 9:45 to 10 p.m. Eastern, during New England’s fourth-quarter, game-winning drive. In the last 15 minutes, the figure dipped a smidgen to 120.3 million. That level of viewership is the equivalent of just about everyone in Mexico watching.AdvertisementAnd if the job of the halftime show is not to lose viewers to food or nature calls, the extravaganza headlined by Katy Perry performed as if she could throw touchdown passes while riding a mechanical lion. In the half-hour set aside for intermission, 118.5 million viewers tuned in, nearly two million more than in the preceding half-hour of action, and 400,000 more than in the first half-hour of the second half. Perry, who has the most Twitter followers on Earth (64.5 million), now has the most-watched Super Bowl halftime show ever, more than her predecessors Carol Channing, Up with People and the Who.AdvertisementThe fact that as many as 121 million would tune in to a football game almost strains credulity. Then there was Cris Collinsworth’s incredulity at Seattle’s decision to pass on second down with 26 seconds left and less than a yard for a touchdown rather than give the ball to Marshawn Lynch, who had just run four yards on first down.He could not believe the call — and caught the moment’s zeitgeist with a level of righteous astonishment that was as candid as it was engaging.“I’m sorry,” he said, after New England’s Malcolm Butler intercepted Russell Wilson’s pass to secure the Patriots’ win. “But I can’t believe the call. I cannot believe the call. You’ve got Marshawn Lynch in the backfield. You’ve got a guy that’s been borderline unstoppable in this part of the field. I can’t believe the call.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Then, he added, “I don’t believe it. I’m sitting here and I absolutely cannot believe that play call. If I lose the Super Bowl because Marshawn Lynch can’t get in from the 1-yard line, so be it. So be it. But there is no way.” Here, he paused, and said: “I don’t believe the call.”Collinsworth’s disbelief reminded me of Jack Buck’s stunned reaction to Kirk Gibson’s dramatic home run on gimpy legs to win Game 1 of the 1988 World Series. “I don’t believe what I just saw!” he said, and then repeated it.Their calls were fueled by different circumstances. Buck’s derived from Gibson’s poor physical condition and the situation — bottom of the ninth, two outs and a full count with the Los Angeles Dodgers trailing the Oakland A’s, 4-3. Collinsworth’s was about his belief that the Seahawks had called precisely the wrong play at the wrong time.On Monday, Collinsworth said that he was speaking from his gut.“What you got is, if you were sitting next to me in my living room — that’s what I’d say,” he said. He said that he was so certain that Lynch would carry the ball that “my jaw fell open” when he saw Wilson go back to pass. “I just thought the next sequence had to be a run especially because Lynch had just pounded them for four and a half yards.”Even as he was giving voice to his visceral feelings, he considered that if Lynch did not score, Seattle would call a timeout, and “third down would have to be a pass to save yourself for fourth down, the way time was running down.” He sees himself as a “fan first,” and that getting emotional is part of his persona.“I don’t apologize for it,” he said.Email: sandor@nytimes.com A version of this article appears in print on February 3, 2015, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Super Bowl Was a Stunner, and That’s Just the Size of the TV Audience.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »