AdvertisementSupported byBy Kelley McMillanBEAVER CREEK, Colo. — Nearly two years after injuring her right knee in a horrific crash, Lindsey Vonn was primed to compete in Tuesday’s super-G, the opening race of the 2015 Alpine World Championships here.“I don’t have any fear,” Vonn said. “I never have. It’s just who I am. I’m missing something up here,” she said, pointing to her head, after a downhill training run here on Monday, in which she finished fourth, 0.62 of a second behind the leader Stacey Cook of the United States, who posted a time of 1 minute 48.16 seconds. Two years ago at the 2013 Alpine world championships in Schladming, Austria, Vonn crashed off a jump while competing in the super-G, tearing her anterior cruciate ligament and her medial collateral ligament, and fracturing her tibial plateau. She spent nine months rehabilitating the knee and returned to competition in December 2013, only to reinjure her knee less than a month later, requiring another knee operation. As a result, she missed the 2014 Olympics in Sochi, Russia. “It’s been a long two years, but I never really think of the past at all,” Vonn said. “I never doubted myself. I always believed I would be back, I just didn’t know how long it would take.” Since returning to competition in December, Vonn, 30, has quickly climbed back to the top, nabbing five victories and one second place in 10 races. In January, with her 63rd victory, she broke Annemarie Moser-Pröll’s 35-year-old record for wins by a female ski racer.“It’s been a much faster rise to the top than I could have expected, but I’m obviously super thankful for how things have gone,” Vonn said. Vonn, who already has five world championship medals, is one of the favorites to win the super-G and downhill this year. Tuesday’s super-G will be her first competition in a major championship since her injury.“I’m really happy to be here, to be healthy, to be skiing well, and I’m enjoying the moment,” Vonn said after the training run. “I’m a lot more relaxed and a lot more happy than I have been.”Buoying Vonn’s confidence is the fact that the steep and technical one-and-a-half-mile-long women’s Raptor course, on which the downhill and super-G will be held, suits her style. “It was perfect; I really loved it,” Vonn said of the downhill track after her run. “I just have to get the feeling for it over the next couple of days. Super-G, I feel really comfortable and confident. The downhill, I need a little more training.”Despite Vonn’s unfamiliarity with the course, Stefan Abplanalp, the new head coach of the United States women’s speed team, said he believed she would medal here.“She has shown us all season with five victories that she is for sure the one who can win medals and be in the fight to be world champion here,” Abplanalp said.Julia Mancuso said Vonn’s return had benefited the entire women’s squad, which has one of the strongest speed rosters in the world. “You train with her and get inspired by her, so it’s nice to have her back,” said Mancuso, who finished 13th in Monday’s training run and has one top-three finish this season.One of the top downhillers on the American team, Cook, has noticed a change in Vonn since her return. Where Vonn was once isolated from her teammates, traveling the World Cup with her own team within the United States ski team, she has now joined their ranks.“She’s definitely in a friendlier place in her life,” Cook said. “She’s more involved and active and she’s such a talented athlete. Of course you want someone like that around.” Though Vonn grew up ski racing in Vail, Tuesday will be the first time she has competed in a major championship in front of her hometown crowd. She was a volunteer for the 1999 Alpine world championships here.“Today, I had a lot of great memories of the 1999 world championships and being a course slipper,” she said of her role as a volunteer who smoothed out the ruts. “Everything has come full circle. I’m back here, my hometown, racing the world championships, something that most athletes never get to do. I’m just really grateful and looking forward to doing my best tomorrow.”Advertisement