AdvertisementSupported byRangers 6, Panthers 3By Allan KredaFlush with young talent, and with a smattering of accomplished veterans, the Florida Panthers are the leading team among the Eastern Conference’s also-rans, perhaps the only squad outside the top eight that still has a chance at a playoff spot.A visit to the New York area, the Panthers’ first this season, gave the team an opportunity to strengthen its bid for what would be only its second postseason berth since the 1999-2000 season. But Florida lost to the Devils, 3-1, on Saturday, and it fell to the Rangers, 6-3, on Monday, leaving only Tuesday’s game at the Islanders as a chance for the team to salvage something from the trip.The Panthers are led by the young scorers Nick Bjugstad and Jimmy Hayes (the older brother of Rangers forward Kevin Hayes) and defenseman Aaron Ekblad, the top pick in the draft in June, who turns 19 on Saturday. The team has also been bolstered by goaltender Roberto Luongo and defensemen Brian Campbell and Willie Mitchell.Mitchell, 37, the team’s captain, played the past three seasons with the Los Angeles Kings and won the Stanley Cup twice. His outlook appears to have filtered down to his less experienced teammates since he joined the Panthers over the summer as a free agent.“Our goal is to play a mature game, a smart game,” Mitchell said before Monday’s loss at Madison Square Garden. “You look at some of the best teams in the league — the Rangers, Blackhawks and Kings — and they manage the puck very well. That’s what we strive for, and we’re getting better at it.”The Hall of Fame defenseman Denis Potvin, now a Panthers television announcer, said Florida “has to bring energy early in games to be successful,” and the Panthers exhibited that mode from the opening face-off on Monday, swarming the Rangers and outshooting the home team by 12-9 in the first period.Florida’s Aleksander Barkov, the second overall selection in the 2013 draft, opened the scoring 4 minutes 9 seconds into the game. But Rick Nash quelled the Panthers’ momentum with a short-handed score — his 30th goal this season — at 8:49.After the Rangers jumped to a 3-1 lead in the second, with goals from Kevin Hayes and Marc Staal, the Panthers fought back to tie the score, with Brandon Pirri rifling home his fourth goal in five games. That followed a score by Dave Bolland on a broken play in front of Rangers goalie Henrik Lundqvist.The Panthers still appeared to have the momentum early in the third period, but when Rangers defenseman Dan Boyle flipped the puck toward the net in what appeared to be a harmless play, it caromed off Mitchell’s stick and past Luongo with 11:50 left to put the Rangers ahead to stay.“We were playing well, but it’s a game of bounces sometimes,” said Bolland, another off-season Panthers acquisition. “We just can’t let games like this get away against teams we are chasing.”Mats Zuccarello added to the Rangers’ lead 15:58 into the final period, ending a 10-game scoreless drought, and Nash scored his second goal on an empty net at 18:07.“Every game is important, especially against Florida,” Zuccarello said. “They battled hard, and they have a good team. But at the end, we came away with 2 points, and that’s huge.”The Rangers have now won 18 of their last 23 games, and Lundqvist, who made 33 saves, is 16-4-0 in his last 20, the surest sign that the Rangers are on the right track heading into the stretch run.“We had a good feeling in the locker room going into the third,” Lundqvist said. “We felt like we had more to give. We talked about the speed and trying to make plays, and that’s what we did.”The Panthers trail eighth-place Washington by 8 points — with two games in hand — for the final playoff spot in the East.“Every game is must-win for us,” Bjugstad said. “We just can’t afford any nights off.”Advertisement