AdvertisementSupported byAnalysisBy Chase StuartWith less than a minute remaining in the Super Bowl on Sunday, the Seattle Seahawks lined up in a three-wide-receiver set at the 1-yard line. To the right of quarterback Russell Wilson, Ricardo Lockette stood nearly directly behind another wide receiver, Jermaine Kearse, a yard back and on Kearse’s outside shoulder — an alignment commonly used on pick plays.New England Patriots cornerback Brandon Browner stood across the line of scrimmage from Kearse, a couple of yards in front of Malcolm Butler, who was tasked with guarding Lockette. For Seattle, the concept was simple. Kearse would run what is known as a clear-out route: With Browner and Butler aligned so close together (in response to the way the Seahawks’ receivers were set), Kearse’s job was to make Browner backpedal. That would block Butler from cutting across the field to cover Lockette, who was to run a slant to the inside. After the game, critics of the play call said Seattle might have had a better chance at scoring if it had run the ball. According to the website Football Outsiders, the Seahawks’ rushing attack was tied for No. 1 in the N.F.L. in regular-season short-yardage situations, converting for a first down or a touchdown 81 percent of the time, a far better mark than the league average (65 percent). The Patriots’ rushing defense, meanwhile, ranked last, allowing conversions 81 percent of the time. Yet the sort of pick play that Seattle settled on is often called at the goal line because even a small disruption in a cornerback’s angle to the ball can lead to an easy score. If Kearse did his job, Butler would need to loop around both Browner and Kearse to be in a position to defend the pass. That is a lot to ask of any cornerback, particular one who is fifth on his team’s depth chart, as Butler was. And that is why Browner was the real hero of the play.Browner, who at 6 feet 4 inches is one of the most physically imposing cornerbacks in the N.F.L., jammed Kearse at the line from the start of the play, stretching out his long arms as soon as the ball was snapped and gaining superior position. Kearse was barely able to move Browner, which meant that Butler’s path to the football was not disrupted.To Butler’s credit, he read the play correctly from the snap and attacked with the perfect amount of aggressiveness, ending up with an interception that sealed the outcome, a 28-24 Patriots victory. Butler told reporters later that he had been tipped off to the throw by the stacked receivers and by Wilson’s eyes, which allowed him to beat Lockette to a Wilson pass that appeared to be on target. “The guy made a great play,” Wilson told reporters.Still, it was Browner who allowed Butler to become the star.Advertisement