By JOHN BRANCHFEB. 2, 2015
PHOENIX —  In Florida, there is an old coach, now in his late 80s, who still watches football. He occasionally draws up plays and names them for his grandchildren.He does not talk about how his N.F.L. career ended, decades ago.But he knows what it means to be blamed for making a regrettable play call, perhaps better than anyone. Bob Gibson, 87, was the offensive coordinator of the New York Giants in 1978. At the end of a game that the Giants were about to win, he instructed quarterback Joe Pisarcik to hand the ball to Larry Csonka, rather than having Pisarcik take a knee to let time expire.The play went famously awry. Pisarcik fumbled. Philadelphia defensive back Herman Edwards scooped up the ball and ran 26 yards for the winning touchdown.Gibson was fired the next day. He never worked in football again. He rarely discussed the play or his firing, letting the years swallow ignominy like ivy on an old barn. He opened a bait shop and played golf.Advertisement“We never talked about it in our family,” said Travis Gibson, a 31-year-old grandson.Travis Gibson is a digital producer and sports reporter for First Coast News in Jacksonville, Fla. He is a lifelong sports fan who had seen the play countless times on blooper reels. It was only a few years ago that he learned that his grandfather was involved in the play at all. He did not hear about it from a family member, but from a voice on the television while half-watching a documentary feature on the play.Advertisement“I know the history of the game,” he said on Monday. “But I didn’t know about this part of it.”The play, coined the Miracle at the Meadowlands, is regularly resurrected as a laughable chestnut in N.F.L. annals — tragedy plus time equals comedy. But its memory was raised again during Sunday’s Super Bowl.The Seattle Seahawks were on the 1-yard line in the game’s final minute, prepared to score the game-winning touchdown against the New England Patriots. But rather than hand the ball to All-Pro running back Marshawn Lynch, the offensive coordinator Darrell Bevell, with Coach Pete Carroll’s blessing, called for a pass.It was intercepted. The Patriots won. Instantly, the play call was widely panned. Some N.F.L. players called it the worst in history — at least since the Giants-Eagles game of 1978.There was no announcement of Bevell’s firing on Monday, nor is such a thing expected. At 45, he is regarded as one of the better assistant coaches in the league, and has interviewed several times for head-coaching positions. But as Gibson’s case hauntingly illustrates, Bevell will probably be associated with Sunday’s play for the rest of his life, no matter how much he avoids the subject.Travis Gibson knew that his grandfather was the head coach at Bowling Green for a few years in the 1960s, and that he then coached for a couple of teams in the World Football League. Bob Gibson joined the N.F.L. as a running backs coach for the Detroit Lions.By 1977, he was the offensive coordinator and Marty Schottenheimer was the defensive coordinator to Giants coach John McVay. They were lean years for the team, but nothing captured the Giants’ plight in a single moment like the fumble on Nov. 19, 1978.AdvertisementPlayers fumed over the call in the postgame locker room. Pisarcik had knelt down on the previous play, and they wondered openly why Gibson, who had a tense relationship with Pisarcik, would have had his quarterback hand off on the game’s final play.It was the fourth loss in a row on the team’s way to a 6-10 record. General manager Andy Robustelli did not wait. He fired Gibson on Monday morning. Several players felt that Gibson was made the scapegoat for their own foibles.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The handoff from Pisarcik to Csonka was the last meaningful football call Gibson ever made.On the day he was fired, Gibson was reached at his New Jersey home by The New York Times. He said that he “did not feel like making any statements.”“If I do, I might say the wrong thing,” he added. “I’m going to enjoy the rest of my year.”He was 51, married, and the father of three grown boys. After years of scaling the rungs of coaching, he was thrown off and soon disappeared to Sanibel Island, on the west coast of Florida. He opened a bait shop, a liquor store and a restaurant, Gibby’s.If any calls to coach again came his way, he declined them. When reporters called to talk about his last game, he shunned them. And when he talks to his family about his coaching career, he never mentions the Giants.When Travis Gibson heard his grandfather’s name mentioned on ESPN several years ago in association with the Miracle at the Meadowlands, he double-checked with his father. Yes, he was told.Travis Gibson was scared to bring it up with his grandfather. In 2012, he wrote a blog post about the revelation. He mustered the courage to sit down with his grandfather just a year or two ago.“I finally brought it up,” he said. “I don’t want to say much about the specifics, but he never threw anybody under the bus — not Csonka or Pisarcik. He was very matter of fact and very short. And I could tell he didn’t want to talk about it.”AdvertisementBob Gibson was recently told he has cancer, his grandson said, and it has left him nearly too weak to speak. He watched Sunday’s game, but Travis Gibson said that there was no way that his grandfather would break his silence on one of the N.F.L.’s other infamous play calls, even if he could.On Monday, Travis Gibson took to Twitter to voice his thoughts on the matter — the matter of Sunday’s Super Bowl, sure, but something far more personal than that.“Let me go on record,” he wrote. “No coach should EVER be fired based on one play call.”A version of this article appears in print on February 3, 2015, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: For One Bad Call, One Big Toll.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.