By KEN BELSONFEB. 2, 2015
PHOENIX —  The federal judge overseeing the settlement between the N.F.L. and the 5,000 former players who accused the league of hiding the dangers of concussions from them has asked both sides to revise parts of their deal before she would give her final approval.The judge, Anita B. Brody of United States District Court for the Eastern District of Pennsylvania, asked that the settlement be expanded in five ways to ensure that more former players were eligible for benefits.Lawyers for the league and the former players have until Feb. 13 to submit a plan that addresses all of the judge’s concerns.If Judge Brody is satisfied with the revisions, she is expected to complete the deal, which includes a promise from the N.F.L. to pay up to $5 million to players with certain severe neurological conditions.AdvertisementThe judge’s requests are designed to address some of the complaints the former players and their families expressed at a fairness hearing in November.AdvertisementThey include allowing all players to receive credit for the years they played in the World League of American Football, the N.F.L. Europe League and the N.F.L. Europa League. Under the current deal, those years were not used to calculate the size of an award a player could receive.The families of retired players who were found to have chronic traumatic encephalopathy, a degenerative disease diagnosed only after death, would now be able to file claims if the diagnosis was made up to the date of the final approval of the settlement instead of July 6, when it received preliminary approval.Judge Brody made certain dispensations for some plaintiffs who do not have medical records to support their cases.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The judge also asked that the N.F.L. remove the $75 million cap for the baseline assessment program, which is available to all players and designed to provide a benchmark to determine whether or how much a player’s cognitive condition has deteriorated.Finally, the judge asked that the $1,000 fee for appealing a medical claim be waived for players of limited means.“We intend promptly to discuss with class counsel the points addressed in the order and continue to have a high degree of confidence that this settlement, which has been accepted by more than 99 percent of retirees, will receive final approval and provide important and generous benefits to retirees and their families,” the N.F.L. said in a statement.Christopher Seeger, a co-lead counsel for the retired players, said, “We will work with the National Football League to promptly address the issues raised in Judge Brody’s order, and remain confident this settlement will receive final approval.”Legal experts say the fine-tuning of the settlement is appropriate and not a roadblock to reaching a final deal.“The request to include those who died with C.T.E. between preliminary approval and final approval is very reasonable,” said Mark Conrad, who teaches sports law at Fordham University. “The judge’s approval of a settlement in this class action is a matter of time because the alternative is far worse.”A version of this article appears in print on February 3, 2015, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Judge Calls for Sides to Revise Settlement.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.