AdvertisementSupported byBy Bill PenningtonBEAVER CREEK, Colo. — The Alpine World Ski Championships come to the United States for the first time since 1999, with the first races of the two-week competition set for Tuesday. Here are five races to watch:WOMEN’S SUPER-G, TUESDAY Lindsey Vonn enters the first race of the championships, the women’s super-G, as the favorite despite two serious operations on her right knee in the past two years. The injuries caused Vonn, who has two Olympic and five world championship medals, to miss last year’s Sochi Games, but she has returned to the World Cup circuit this season and quickly re-established her dominance in the speed events. Still, Vonn, 30, has not won an Olympic or world championship race since the 2010 Vancouver Games, so her competitors, and the larger ski community, will be watching closely to see if she can deliver another major title.MEN’S DOWNHILL, SATURDAY The glamour race of the world championships, the men’s downhill, was placed in the marquee spot in the competition — the first Saturday of the event. For much of the last year, Kjetil Jansrud of Norway has been the world’s best men’s speed skier, winning a gold and a bronze medal at the Sochi Olympics and three World Cup downhill races this season. However, Jansrud has appeared in four world championships since 2005 but has yet to win a medal. If he is going to take his place among the long list of Norwegian skiing greats — and he has displayed that kind of ability — he will have to make a name for himself this week. Jansrud will face a formidable field, including the American Bode Miller, who is coming off back surgery but plans to race for the first time this season in the downhill and the super-G.WOMEN’S GIANT SLALOM, FEB. 12 The World Cup women’s giant slalom standings this season have been topsy-turvy, with Eva-Marie Brem and Anna Fenninger of Austria and the American Mikaela Shiffrin all vying for the top spot. Predicting a winner when they race at Beaver Creek on Feb. 12 could be difficult. Fenninger is the reigning World Cup overall and giant slalom titleholder, and she won two Olympic medals last year. But Shiffrin, whose best discipline is the slalom, has been trying to establish herself as a giant slalom threat as well. (She won the opening World Cup giant slalom of the season.) A world championship medal in the event would be a bold declaration that she has more than one specialty.MEN’S GIANT SLALOM, FEB. 13 Ted Ligety is the defending Olympic and world champion in the giant slalom, and for the past several years he has been considered the maestro of the event. But winning has not come so easily this winter for Ligety, whose off-season training was interrupted by poor weather conditions and a broken hand. Still, Ligety has won five of the past six World Cup giant slaloms contested at Beaver Creek, including the most recent one, in December. Maybe his luck will change this week. Marcel Hirscher of Austria holds a comfortable lead in the World Cup standings, but Beaver Creek always seems to bring out the best in Ligety. He also has a reputation as a big-event skier: At the last world championships in 2013, Ligety won three times, a rarity.WOMEN’S SLALOM, FEB. 14 Shiffrin, who grew up in the Vail valley and is the defending Olympic slalom gold medalist, will defend her world title in the event on the final weekend of the championships. Like Ligety’s, Shiffrin’s superiority in her best event was well recognized in the last year. But this winter, while she has won two slaloms, she also finished 11th in another and currently ranks second (behind Sweden’s Frida Hansdotter and just ahead of Slovenia’s Tina Maze) in the World Cup slalom standings. Given that, a victory before a home crowd next week could have the feel of a coronation for the 19-year-old Shiffrin.Advertisement