By CHRISTOPHER CLAREYFEB. 2, 2015
MELBOURNE, Australia — Serena Williams is now prepared to confess what led to her stumbling about the grass in a bizarre and brief doubles match at Wimbledon last year.“I have a stopping issue,” she said in an interview on Sunday. “I don’t have a quit button. You just can’t press control-alt-quit with me. The window will stay open. I do not know when to quit. Look, here I am still playing, and I’m 33.”Here she is, and off she goes, heading to Argentina shortly after winning the Australian Open for her 19th Grand Slam singles title.Although Williams said with a chuckle that she had ordered her family and her support team to rein her in for her own good, she still deemed it best to board an overnight flight out of Melbourne on Monday morning for Los Angeles, where she will do a few hours of work for her charity before boarding another overnight flight.AdvertisementDestination: Buenos Aires, where she intends to play in a second-division Fed Cup match for the United States against Argentina on Saturday and Sunday. She will be part of a powerhouse team that is expected to include her sister Venus, Varvara Lepchenko and the emerging 19-year-old star Madison Keys, now up to 20th in the rankings after reaching the Australian Open semifinals.AdvertisementThis is hardly all for the glory of Fed Cup, although Williams says she enjoys playing for her country. She needs to play in the International Tennis Federation’s annual team competition to be eligible for the 2016 Olympics in Rio de Janeiro.Despite resistance from many players and the WTA’s leadership, the international federation increased the requirements to be eligible for an Olympic team. Players now need to be nominated to their national team three times, up from twice, during the four-year Olympic cycle, with at least one of those nominations having been in 2015 or 2016.This will be Williams’s second Fed Cup appearance in this cycle. If she does make it to Brazil to defend her Olympic singles title, and perhaps her doubles titles with her sister, she will be on the cusp of her 35th birthday.“Rio’s always been a goal for me,” she said.The question is whether enduring more jet lag and more competition is the right move so soon after her emotional victory in Melbourne, where she battled a severe cold and, according to Williams, experienced minor back pain. She also threw up off court during her 6-3, 7-6 (5) victory in the final over Maria Sharapova.“I knew in the season the first month would be very difficult and then, you know, after this it will be pretty easy,” Williams said. “I go to Dubai, then I have several weeks off and I’m not playing. I’m only playing two clay court events before the French Open this year. If I can just push through this month, I’ll be fine. And when you win, it all seems to be easier.”She is back to winning the big ones after a difficult stretch in 2014, when she maintained her No. 1 ranking but failed to advance past the fourth round in the first three Grand Slam tournaments. She attributed some of her struggles to “mental exhaustion” accumulated over two seasons of great success and intense effort.But she bounced back in late summer by winning at Stanford, Cincinnati and the United States Open. She then won the season-ending WTA Tour Finals in Singapore after recovering from a round-robin rout by Simona Halep. Williams now has won her sixth Australian Open by thriving and serving big under pressure.AdvertisementShe is only three wins short of Steffi Graf’s Open-era record of 22 Grand Slam singles titles and five short of Margaret Court’s overall record of 24.“We have to keep her motivated at the same level of motivation as the one she has now, and fit,” her coach Patrick Mouratoglou said when asked about Williams’s matching Graf. “If she does that and she plays long enough, she will. Because she’s improving still.”The record book is helpful in avoiding complacency, but she has another source of motivation: a new generation that includes Keys and the 21-year-old Spaniard Garbiñe Muguruza, who upset Williams at last year’s French Open in the second round and took a set from her in Melbourne.“When I lost to Muguruza at the French, I hated it, hated it so much,” Williams said. “But as much as I hated it, I needed it, and I got better. So, thanks.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Williams, who looked trim and quick in Melbourne, can make a tricky game look easy, covering the corners or pounding aces at vital moments, as she did on match point against Sharapova.But there have been high-profile health setbacks in recent months, including the Wimbledon doubles match last year when Williams looked dizzy and incoherent, whiffing on one stroke and struggling to put serves into play before finally retiring.There was initial concern that it might have been a case of medication gone wrong, but she maintained that the culprit was a bad virus that had left her disoriented.“I was just very sick, and that’s all I could say, and that’s all it was,” Williams said. “It’s really difficult for someone to tell me to stop. I did tell everyone in my camp after that, ‘Listen, if I’m sick, just beat me if you have to, hold me down; like, don’t let me go out.’ ”She said she had a similar problem in Wuhan, China, last September when she retired from her second-round singles match against Alizé Cornet, citing a viral illness and more dizziness.Advertisement“I had a bunch of follow-up tests in the fall to see why I was continually getting ill and dizzy and felt like I was going to faint,” she said. “I’m on some new vitamins, and I’ve been really good ever since.”Asked if she regretted going on court at Wimbledon or the confusion and speculation it generated, she thought for some time before responding.“Well, I try not to live life in hindsight,” she said. “I learn from my mistakes, and I try not to make them in the future, and I just think I’m not a quitter. I’ve got fans waiting for me, and I don’t like to let people down in life and in tennis. I’ve realized that — that actually that’s a fault of mine. I always want everyone to be happy, and I’ve always said that. It’s just I always give 100 percent. It doesn’t matter if I’m feeling bad, as you could see through this tournament.”The issue resurfaced in Melbourne when Mouratoglou quickly cut short a Friday morning practice before the final because Williams was feeling poorly.“He took a lot of command,” she said. “And he said, ‘I should have said something at Wimbledon, and you’re not going to play.’ ”She said she and Venus had pulled out of the doubles tournament in Melbourne partly because of her back problems and partly to preserve their chances of doing well in singles. Mission accomplished, with Venus reaching the quarterfinals at a Grand Slam event for the first time since 2010.They played in their first Australian Open in 1998, and 17 years later they were still in Melbourne together. Would Serena still be doing this if Venus were not still doing it, too?“That’s a really good question,” she said. “I don’t want to have to answer that. I’m scared. I hope she doesn’t end on me. I doubt it. I know she wants to get to Rio, too.”Clearly they both do, as a whirlwind trip to Argentina for a second-tier team tennis match makes clear.Ben Rothenberg contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on February 3, 2015, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: For Williams, Triumph and Pain Come at One Speed.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.