By MELISSA HOPPERTFEB. 2, 2015
The New England Patriots quarterback Tom Brady and Coach Bill Belichick spoke on Monday after their team defeated the Seattle Seahawks to win the Super Bowl.PHOENIX — Just past 8:30 a.m. Monday, a visibly exhausted Tom Brady strode to the podium to accept his Most Valuable Player Award and answer just a few more questions about what exactly happened the night before in the desert.The Phoenix Convention Center — the hub of all things Super Bowl this week, from the media center to the N.F.L. Experience — was a ghost town compared with what it had been before the big game.Standing behind the Lombardi and M.V.P. trophies, in a room one-fourth the size of the one that held the halftime news conference, Brady spoke of overcoming a 10-point deficit in the second half to secure his team’s fourth title and third M.V.P. trophy.“We’ve been on the other end of this two times in the last seven years, being ahead late in the game with the chance to win it, and not closing it out,” Brady, his voice cracking, said of the Patriots’ 28-24 victory against the Seahawks. “Coach talked all week about how it was going to take all 60 minutes, and it certainly did.”AdvertisementBrady, wearing jeans and a white sweatshirt, acknowledged that the Patriots’ postgame celebration lasted well into the night. He said he and wide receiver Julian Edelman — the one whom he sometimes affectionately calls babe — could not stop talking about the game, recounting the final frenzied minutes.“He played the game of his life,” Brady said about Edelman, who caught a 3-yard touchdown pass with 2 minutes 2 seconds remaining to put New England ahead, 28-24.AdvertisementBrady said he was proud of all of his teammates, though, especially Malcolm Butler, who intercepted a pass by Seahawks quarterback Russell Wilson at the goal line with 20 seconds remaining to seal the victory.“He’s been doing it to me in practice all season, so it was actually nice to see him pick somebody else off,” Brady said of Butler, an undrafted rookie cornerback.Brady continued: “There was a lot of highs and lows to the game, and that was a great high. It took a great effort, like I said. Malcolm made a huge play to save our season. It took a lot of guys, a lot of effort, and a lot of individual efforts. Collectively as a team, we made plays to get the job done.”As Brady spoke, Commissioner Roger Goodell stood near the stage, looking on and smiling like a proud father. In a season in which the N.F.L. took repeated blows to its image from its handling of the Ray Rice and Adrian Peterson domestic abuse cases, among other things, it was surely a relief that Brady was standing on that stage. The deflation scandal that dogged the Patriots in the lead-up to the game seemed to be in the past, even if the league had not yet released its findings on the matter.For his part, Coach Bill Belichick said he was done speaking about it.“I have twice gone into great detail about everything I knew,” he said. “I have tried to be totally transparent and given everybody as much information as I have. That is all I have to give.”Instead, he preferred to speak about his team, especially his star quarterback, whom he called a “pillar of strength.” Swapping his trademark hoodie for a suit and a tie, he smiled wide and even attempted to make a few jokes before turning serious again.Advertisement“It was a game that came down to the final seconds,” Belichick said. “A yard separated the two teams.”He continued: “It’s a group that never stopped competing, never stopped fighting and never stopped playing. I think last night’s game, for me, was reflective of the entire year, what I saw on a daily basis from that group of players and coaches.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Most of all, Brady, 37, said he felt rejuvenated. He said he could not yet reflect on his legacy because he was still in the midst of his career.“I was just a young kid when we won those first three,” said Brady, who completed 37 of 50 passes for 328 yards and 4 touchdowns. “It’s a hard thing to get here and a hard thing to win the game.”Still, Brady — whose mother would not allow him to play organized football until he was 13 — could not help feeling like a child again. He said he was most looking forward to returning to Boston and celebrating with the fans at a parade.“That should be a lot of fun,” he said. “It’s been a long time.”A version of this article appears in print on February 3, 2015, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Exhausted but Effusive.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.