AdvertisementSupported bySports of The TimesBy Juliet MacurGLENDALE, Ariz. — The cheers did not echo through the desert here when the New England Patriots beat the Seattle Seahawks on Sunday in one of the most exciting Super Bowls ever. Far from it.As silver streamers and red, white and blue confetti rained from the roof of University of Phoenix Stadium, the crowd fell relatively quiet. It was as if the fans still couldn’t believe what they had just seen.The game was beautiful at times, with feats of athleticism like Jermaine Kearse’s bobbling catch that seemed born of divine intervention. And then it was all too ugly, with the teams brawling in the end zone before the final play.The flip-flopping of it all could have made you dizzy. Just like this entire season could have made you dizzy.If you weren’t turned off the N.F.L. for good by the league’s mismanagement of domestic violence cases, by its years of mishandling of head injuries and by its seemingly insatiable appetite for your money, you might have lasted all the way to this Super Bowl. And maybe it’s right that you did, because the game was the perfect example of why fans cannot seem to end their addiction to this violent sport. (Preliminary numbers suggest the game was, like many previous Super Bowls in their time, the most watched event in American television history.)On Sunday, our one final look at the N.F.L. this season offered a little bit of everything that makes the league so enticing. And so frustrating.In the first quarter, Seahawks cornerback Jeremy Lane made an interception. (Yes!) But as he ran it back, he was tackled hard and fell on his left arm, which broke so grotesquely that it looked as if it were made of rubber. (No!)Later, Seahawks defensive end Cliff Avril left the game with a possible concussion, showing that the N.F.L. might just be getting better at identifying head injuries and keeping injured players off the field. (Progress!) But about the same time, Patriots receiver Julian Edelman was walloped on one run with such force that he seemed dazed. Even though he had missed the final two games of the Patriots’ regular season because of a concussion, Edelman played on. (Why?)By the end of the night, Edelman’s eyes appeared glassy, and he wouldn’t comment on his injury. When I asked him how his head was feeling as he walked out of the stadium, all he could muster as a response was, “Ugh.”The game brought regular exchanges of brilliance, then ended with one of the dumbest moves of all time.Did all of it really happen? Was it all really that bizarre? Yes, it was, and the saddest part was every swing of emotion took some of the air out of Tom Brady’s latest record-setting performance. (Pun intended.)Two weeks after the Patriots may or may not have bent the rules in the A.F.C. championship game by using underinflated footballs, Brady set one Super Bowl record after another  as he picked up his third Most Valuable Player Award.Most Super Bowl touchdowns. Most completions. Brady is 37 now, and had lost in his previous two Super Bowl appearances, but he wasn’t about to give up this time, to surrender just as Seahawks quarterback Russell Wilson looked poised to build a legacy of his own with a second straight championship. Instead, Brady led the Patriots back from a 10-point fourth-quarter deficit by throwing two touchdowns in about six minutes to give the Patriots the lead.“We’ve been on the other end of this twice now, and being ahead late and not being able to make the plays to win, and this time we made the plays to win,” Brady said. “Just awesome.”His coach, Bill Belichick, ever the bummer, did not seem at all thrilled by it. Minutes after taking his place alongside Chuck Noll, the only other coach with four Super Bowl titles, Belichick said records did not matter to him. He said watching the Patriots rookie cornerback Malcolm Butler intercept a pass from Wilson at the goal line to seal the win had been “ecstasy,” yet he delivered the word with as much verve as someone describing the taste of dry toast.Belichick, like the N.F.L. itself, is hard to love sometimes. He has been punished for cheating in the past and stands accused of it again now. But even with his history, and his frequent churlishness, at least he wasn’t booed at night’s end. The same cannot be said for Commissioner Roger Goodell.It has been a rough year for Goodell, who has kept his job through public-relations disasters that would have felled executives of many other organizations, largely because he continues to deliver billions of dollars for the owners who employ him. Even so, his season did not end on a high note.What could have been going through his mind when he saw players trading punches in the end zone as tens of millions of viewers watched? Was he disappointed at the poor sportsmanship, or salivating over the expected record ratings?Patriots tight end Rob Gronkowski shrugged off the fight. The league will most likely do the same.“It’s football; things happen,” Gronkowski said. “It’s all good.”Not really, Gronk. Sometimes it’s good. Sometimes it’s bad.Fans on Sunday got both — again. Cheer for it or cringe over it, it’s just business as usual in the N.F.L.Email: juliet@nytimes.com Advertisement