By JOHN BRANCHFEB. 2, 2015
GLENDALE, Ariz. —  Darrell Bevell was 20 miles from home, but he really just wanted to go one yard. That was how far the Seattle Seahawks were from the winning touchdown in the final seconds of Sunday’s Super Bowl. How they would get there was Bevell’s decision.As a teenager, Bevell and his father, Jim, would watch film of games together, pushing the button to make it go forward and back and forward again, analyzing what worked and what did not. Jim Bevell was the coach at Chaparral High School in Scottsdale, Ariz., and Darrell Bevell was his star quarterback.“To be able to play in a Super Bowl here, you couldn’t even dream it up this good,” Darrell Bevell, 45, said last week.And now here he was, with the game’s key calculation, the ball at the 1-yard line, the fourth-quarter clock ticking into the final half-minute, the N.F.L.’s toughest running back on the field.AdvertisementBut Bevell did not call for a handoff to that running back, Marshawn Lynch. Through the headset, he called a pass play, as Coach Pete Carroll wanted. Quarterback Russell Wilson was intercepted, and the Seahawks lost, 28-24.AdvertisementBevell became the goat, not the hometown hero.“That was the worst play call I’ve seen in the history of football,” Emmitt Smith, the former Cowboys running back, wrote on Twitter.Countless critics were equally exasperated by Bevell’s decision not to give the ball to Lynch, nicknamed Beast Mode, who had rushed for 4 yards on the previous play and 102 in the game. Former N.F.L. running backs now in the Pro Football Hall of Fame, like Smith, were most indignant.“WCE!!!” the former Rams back Eric Dickerson wrote on Twitter. “Worst Call Ever. Beast Mode in the backfield and you throw it?”Carroll took responsibility (“There’s really nobody to blame but me,” he said), and Wilson admitted that he had not made his best throw.But second-guessing flooded past them and washed over Bevell, who has been in charge of Seattle’s offense for four years, a period including last year’s 43-8 Super Bowl victory over Denver. History appears determined to cement the interception as a play-calling blunder as head-shaking as any.“I mean, shoot, it didn’t turn out the way I hoped it would, so of course I am sitting here saying, ‘Could I do something different?’ ” Bevell said after the game.The Seattle Seahawks coach talked about how he learned from previous experience coaching the Jets and the New England Patriots.His father, now retired and still living in Scottsdale, was among the family and friends in attendance at University of Phoenix Stadium. Days before, Darrell Bevell, married with three daughters, had allowed himself to dream of a winning ending.Advertisement“That would be extra special,” he said. “You get to share it with your friends and your family a little bit. It is right here in your backyard. Everyone gets to say, ‘Yeah, I remember when he went to Chaparral.’ It is really cool and exciting to be back.”Bevell was born in Arizona, started high school in Tucson and moved to Scottsdale to play for his father. He was an all-city quarterback as a sophomore and a junior, then missed most of his senior season with a broken finger.He went to Northern Arizona and redshirted his freshman season, then went on a Mormon mission for two years. By then, Brad Childress, an assistant coach at Northern Arizona, had moved on to Wisconsin as an assistant. Bevell headed there.He started for the Badgers for most of four seasons. He helped Wisconsin get its first Rose Bowl victory, in 1994 against U.C.L.A. Undrafted by the N.F.L., Bevell moved into coaching, like his father.Childress, who had risen to head coach of the N.F.L.’s Minnesota Vikings, gave Bevell his biggest career break, naming him offensive coordinator. Bevell held that position for five seasons, then went to the Seahawks.Bevell has built a dynamic offense around Wilson, a third-year quarterback, and Lynch, the bruising running back, and is a frequent candidate for head-coaching jobs in the N.F.L. His play call in the final moments of the Super Bowl will probably be a question he will be forced to answer repeatedly.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Seattle had a 10-point lead before New England quarterback Tom Brady led the Patriots on two fourth-quarter touchdown drives. The Seahawks, suddenly losing by 28-24, got the ball with 2 minutes 2 seconds remaining.Wilson lobbed a pass down the sideline to Lynch for a 31-yard gain, and the clock stopped for the two-minute warning with 1:55 left. After an incompletion, Seattle used its first timeout. There was 1:50 left, and the Seahawks were at New England’s 49-yard line.Wilson threw incomplete on second down, but his 11-yard pass to Ricardo Lockette gave Seattle a new set of downs. From the 38-yard line, Wilson lobbed a ball down the right side for Jermaine Kearse, who made one of the more memorable catches in Super Bowl history.AdvertisementIn tandem, Kearse and New England cornerback Malcolm Butler leapt for the ball. It bounced off Kearse’s hand as both men fell backward to the grass, then ricocheted off one of his knees, then the other, then off his hands and into his arms.The Seahawks had a first down at the 5-yard line and called a timeout with 1:06 left.Bevell called to hand the ball to Lynch, who ran to the left for 4 yards. The clock ticked. The Patriots could have called a timeout to give themselves more time on offense if Seattle scored. They could have let the Seahawks score immediately for the same reason.“We would have used our timeouts if that had been a running play,” Coach Bill Belichick said, though that still would have left the Patriots with just about 20 seconds.The championship rested on whether the Seahawks would score a touchdown.“We wanted to be really conscious about how much time was on the clock,” Bevell said. “We wanted to use as much of it as we could. We had one timeout left, so we ran it on first down and changed the personnel up quick from it.”The clock ticked toward 30 seconds. The Patriots inserted their goal-line defense, front-loaded with stout linemen. The Seahawks had Lynch in the backfield, and three receivers.Bevell, speaking into a headset connected to Carroll and Wilson, called for a pass. It was what Carroll wanted, too.“I told him to throw it because of the matchup,” Carroll told ESPN in the locker room.To the Seahawks, the play would either be a touchdown or an incompletion, which would stop the clock. Seattle would have two plays sandwiching its remaining timeout.“At that moment, I didn’t want to waste a run play against their goal-line guys,” Carroll said. “Throw the ball, we’ll come in on third and fourth down, and we can match up. It’s a really clear thought.”AdvertisementKearse and Lockette were lined up to the right, covered by two Patriots. The ball was snapped to Wilson, in the shotgun formation, with 26 seconds left. Kearse was jammed by one defender. Lockette cut inside along the goal line and appeared to be open. Wilson threw. He did not anticipate how quickly Butler would surge forward from a few yards deep in the end zone.“I thought it was a touchdown, honestly,” Wilson said.Lockette never saw Butler, either. Just as the ball arrived to Lockette’s hands, Butler snared it from the air.“In retrospect, we could have easily run it, and we wouldn’t be talking about this,” Carroll said. “We might have got stuffed on third and fourth down. I don’t know. This is what happened.”Butler stole the game. Bevell had questions to answer. It is a part of being the offensive coordinator.“I know I have a hard job because I think everybody feels like they can call plays, whether it’s the guy in his living room or the people in the stadium,” Bevell told The Seattle Times in January 2014. “But there is a rhyme and reason why we do everything.”He added: “And really, I’m my own worst critic. I like to go back and look at everything I do. Why did I do that? I know there are situations where I wouldn’t want to do that again.”A version of this article appears in print on February 3, 2015, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: Derision Lands in Lap of Seahawks’ Offensive Coordinator.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.