AdvertisementSupported byBy Bruce WeberKel Nagle, one of Australia’s greatest golfers, who denied Arnold Palmer’s attempt to win his third straight major tournament when he staved off Palmer’s rally to capture the 1960 British Open, died on Thursday in Sydney. He was 94.The Professional Golfers Association of Australia reported the death on its website. His family said in a statement that he died shortly after midnight.A latecomer to competitive golf, especially by today’s standards, Nagle did not take up the game until he was in his midteens and did not play seriously until his mid-20s. Still, he went on to be the most prolific winner in the history of the South Pacific circuit, now known as the PGA Tour of Australasia. He won 61 tournaments, including an Australian Open, six Australian P.G.A. tournaments, seven New Zealand Opens and seven New Zealand P.G.A.s. He was 39 and largely unknown among golf fans in the Western Hemisphere when he seized the lead in the third round of the 1960 British Open at the St. Andrews course in Scotland. He barely held on. Palmer, then the sport’s biggest star, was making his first trip to the British Open on its 100th anniversary; he had already won six tournaments in 1960, including two majors, the Masters and the United States Open, but he started slowly, and as the final round began, he was four strokes behind Nagle. Mounting a furious charge, Palmer nearly pulled even after scoring birdies on the final two holes. Nagle was on the 17th green, facing a difficult 10-foot putt, when a roar went up at the 18th green: Palmer had made his birdie. If Nagle missed his putt, the score would be tied, but he coolly sank it and finished the round with a par on 18, winning the championship by a stroke. In 1965, after four rounds of the United States Open, played that year at the Bellerive Country Club near St. Louis, he was tied with the South African star Gary Player. Player won the 18-hole playoff the following day, but only after one of the oddest occurrences in golf history. On the fifth hole, Nagle, who was known for his mild and gentlemanly manner — his nickname in Australia was Mr. Modesty — hit a tee shot that veered toward the rough and struck a female spectator on the head, leaving her bleeding and in the care of two nurses, who had cut across the fairway in a golf cart to her rescue. The woman was still lying on the course just a few feet from Nagle as he lined up his next shot. Unnerved, he hit another woman in the ankle.“Of course it upset me,” Nagle said afterward. “When you see a ball go down a fairway, and then you see a woman with blood all over her, it hurts. And especially when your next shot does the same thing.” Neither woman was seriously injured. The woman with the head injury was taken to the hospital and received eight stitches, and she returned to the course in time to speak to Nagle, telling him not to worry, that the injury was not so bad. He reached into his bag and gave her three golf balls.“I’m sorry that is all I have to give you,” he said, “but I’m so glad you are all right.”Player was asked afterward whether he thought the episode had been the turning point of the round, which he won by three strokes.“I don’t know,” he said. Kelvin Nagle (some sources say his full name was Kelvin David George Nagle) was born in the Sydney area on Dec. 21, 1920. He began golfing when he was 15 or 16 after working as a caddie and in the shop at a golf course near his home. He entered military service at 19 and served during World War II.He took up golf again in earnest, and by 1949, he had won his first Australian P.G.A. title. Even so, early in his career he was a long hitter with little control over his shots, and after a trip to the United States in 1951 (during which, he recalled years later, “I was in the boonies all the time — the rough”), he modified his approach, working on a shorter swing and polishing his chipping and putting until he became known for his short game.During the best stretch of his career, from 1960 to 1966, he finished in the top five at the British Open every year but one, and won the French and Swiss Opens in 1961 and the Canadian Open in 1964, edging Palmer again.He played in professional competition as a senior into the 1980s. In 2007, he was inducted into the World Golf Hall of Fame. Information about survivors was not available.Advertisement