AdvertisementSupported byPanthers 4, Islanders 2By Allan KredaUNIONDALE, N.Y. — Life without Kyle Okposo presents many challenges for the Islanders, who are clinging to first place in the Metropolitan Division with a sputtering offense.Perhaps the most glaring problem is the lack of a true right wing to move up to their top line centered by their captain and leading scorer, John Tavares. On Tuesday night at Nassau Coliseum, Anders Lee took on that role and scored two goals, but the Florida Panthers used two scores from Jimmy Hayes and 32 saves by the former Islander Al Montoya to send the Islanders to their third straight loss, 4-2.The Islanders (32-17-1) turned to Lee after primarily using Mikhail Grabovski on the top line the past three games after Okposo was declared out for six to eight weeks with an upper-body injury. Josh Bailey has been the left wing on the Tavares line in recent weeks.“Every team has injuries; you just have to pick yourself up and find ways to win,” Islanders Coach Jack Capuano said. “We have some guys who need to step up.”The combination of Tavares, Lee and Bailey combined for the opening goal 1 minute 44 seconds into the game as Lee completed a slick passing play by depositing the puck behind Montoya.“I thought Lee had a strong game,” Capuano said. “He used his size and protected the puck down low.”The fast start gave the Islanders hope that this contest would not mirror their two previous outings — a 5-2 home loss to Boston and a 4-1 defeat at Detroit — but the Panthers took a 2-1 lead on goals by Hayes and defenseman Erik Gudbranson.Lee struck again with a power-play goal at 12:45 of the second, tipping a Travis Hamonic slap shot past Montoya for his 15th goal.Hayes’s second goal of the night and 15th of the season put the Panthers (22-17-10) ahead to stay at 2:10 of the third. Brandon Pirri added an empty-net goal. The Panthers trail the Boston Bruins by 7 points for the last playoff spot in the Eastern Conference.After the loss, Tavares said there was no reason for panic. “We have a good group and there’s a lot of hockey left,” said Tavares, who played his 400th career game. “We just have to be better in some areas and find a way to win.”The 6-foot-3 Lee, a 24-year-old rookie forward, has primarily skated with Ryan Strome and Brock Nelson, and all three have had success. With Okposo out, the 21-year-old Strome is now second on the team to Tavares with 25 assists, while Nelson, 23, has 15 goals — but just one since Dec. 19.Replacing Okposo — second on the team with 44 points when he left the lineup — is no easy task for the Islanders. Other than Okposo, Strome and the fourth-liner Cal Clutterbuck are the only right-handed-shooting forwards on the team.“You lose one right shot with Kyle, and it changes a lot of positions,” Capuano said after the team’s morning skate. “Josh is shooting the puck more, and Johnny has great puck protection. You’re looking for a guy to create more space for those two. Anders is a big body there.”The 24-year-old Tavares has had many linemates the past several seasons, primarily on his right wing with P. A. Parenteau and Brad Boyes, before Okposo joined his unit last season.Matt Moulson was Tavares’s steady left wing until he was traded to Buffalo for Thomas Vanek early last season. Bailey is the latest addition this season.But goals have been hard to come by for the Islanders since they beat the Rangers, 4-1, on Jan. 27 in the first game after the All-Star break.Grabovski was mostly invisible skating with Nikolay Kulemin and Frans Nielsen, with the new combination of Michael Grabner skating alongside Strome and Nelson also generating little.Now the Islanders have lost three straight — scoring only five goals — as they prepare for a trip to Philadelphia, Boston and Buffalo.Then the Islanders will play nine of their next 11 games at Nassau Coliseum, the home they will leave after this season for Brooklyn’s Barclays Center. They are 17-6-0 at their home rink.Advertisement