AdvertisementSupported byCeltics 108, Knicks 97By Zach SchonbrunThe sad drumbeat continued on Tuesday for the Knicks, who lost to the Boston Celtics, 108-97, in a mostly listless affair at Madison Square Garden between two rebuilding franchises.The Celtics shot 66 percent from the field in the fourth quarter and stamped out a brief rally by the Knicks early in the period. Boston had lost four of its last five, and none of its players were selected to the All-Star team. But they were propelled Tuesday by Avery Bradley and Jared Sullinger, who combined to shoot 22 of 33 from the floor; Bradley was 11 of 14. Boston bounded out to a 12-2 lead, hitting its first five shots from the field, while the Knicks opened by making just 1 of 10. The Knicks managed to cut the Celtics’ lead early in the second quarter, but Boston pulled away at the end of the half, closing on a 17-11 run. “We didn’t start the game with purpose and energy,” Coach Derek Fisher said. “And the Celtics did.”Neither team looked the same as the last time they faced each other, on Dec. 12, in a game in which the Knicks ended a 10-game losing streak before going on to a 16-game losing streak. Both teams have since undergone roster transformations. The Celtics traded the All-Star point guard Rajon Rondo and forward Jeff Green, among others; the Knicks dispatched J. R. Smith, Iman Shumpert and Samuel Dalembert. The results have been difficult to digest for both fan bases as their teams play out the string.While the Knicks have furnished their lineup with N.B.A. Development League call-ups and players on 10-day contracts, the Celtics have developed a few young and exciting players, and they took advantage of the Knicks’ light bench, which was missing Amar’e Stoudemire, Cole Aldrich and Pablo Prigioni, all injured.The Knicks leaned heavily on Jose Calderon and Jason Smith for offense early on, with each scoring 10 points in the first half. But they combined to contribute just 9 points in the second half. The score was 86-82 with eight minutes remaining after the Knicks started the fourth quarter with a 10-4 rally. An offensive burst by Jae Crowder (13 points) and Sullinger, though, quickly pushed Boston’s lead back into double figures.The Knicks had won five of the last seven entering the night, including the last four in a row at home. “They set the tone from the beginning,” Carmelo Anthony said.Before the game, Fisher was asked for his reaction to comments from the team president, Phil Jackson, who said about this season and his plans to integrate the triangle offense, “My experiment has fallen flat on its face.”Fisher responded: “It’s the team; it’s the organization. No one person takes the blame. We all have to take responsibility for where we are.”Jackson, he said, was showing his leadership qualities by shouldering the blame, but he added that others in the organization, including himself, were responsible for saying, “It stops with me.”“I’m not surprised that he’s doing what leaders do,” Fisher said. “And that’s taking responsibility for his group.”Advertisement