AdvertisementSupported byAnalysisBy Chase StuartThe Seattle Seahawks were a yard from history. Trailing by 4 points in the final minute of Sunday’s Super Bowl, Seattle had the ball, on second down, at the Patriots’ 1-yard line. According to the website Advanced Football Analytics, that gave the Seahawks an 88 percent chance of winning the Super Bowl.With a win, Seattle would have become just the ninth team in the Super Bowl era to repeat as champion, and the first since the 2003-4 Patriots. The defense, which had allowed the fewest points in the N.F.L. in each of the last three seasons, would have strengthened its argument to be considered the greatest in football history.But it was not to be. Brandon Browner jammed Jermaine Kearse at the line, and Malcolm Butler shot in front of Ricardo Lockette to make a game-changing interception. For Patriots fans, it was a play to remember forever. For Seahawks fans, it was one they wish they could forget.But where does Super Bowl XLIX rank among the most painful Super Bowl losses in history?10. San Francisco vs. Baltimore, February 2013Trailing by 34-29, with 2 minutes 39 seconds remaining, the 49ers were at the Ravens’ 7-yard line on first-and-goal. After a 2-yard run, the drive ended with three consecutive incomplete passes from Colin Kaepernick to Michael Crabtree. The 49ers came up 5 yards short, a year after having lost in overtime in the N.F.C. championship game.9. St. Louis vs. New England, February 2002The Rams had won the Super Bowl in the 1999 season (more on this game later) and had fielded another dominant team in 2001. They were 14-point favorites, but the team’s explosive offense was limited to 3 points through three quarters. In the final quarter, the Rams scored two touchdowns, including one that tied the game at 17-17 with 90 seconds remaining. But that left just enough time for Tom Brady to drive the Patriots down the field, and for Adam Vinatieri to hit a walk-off 48-yard field goal, ending the Rams’ dreams of becoming a dynasty.8. Dallas vs. Baltimore, January 1971From 1966 to 1969, the Cowboys won 77 percent of their games, the best mark in the N.F.L. But they lost in the postseason each year, often heartbreakingly. In the 1971 Super Bowl, the Cowboys were ahead by 13-6 with less than nine minutes remaining when Craig Morton’s pass to Walt Garrison was intercepted by Rick Volk. Baltimore scored on the ensuing drive, and Jim O’Brien kicked the game-winning 32-yard field goal in the final seconds, giving the Colts a 16-13 victory.7. Arizona vs. Pittsburgh, February 2009The Arizona Cardinals had never been to a Super Bowl. But the team had a Cinderella-like run in the 2008 postseason, and Kurt Warner’s 64-yard go-ahead touchdown pass to Larry Fitzgerald in the Super Bowl with just under three minutes remaining appeared to be the magical finish for Cardinals fans.But with the Steelers trailing by 23-20, Ben Roethlisberger responded with a masterly drive, capped off by one of the most remarkable touchdown throws in Super Bowl history: a perfect strike that somehow made it through multiple Cardinals defenders to reach Santonio Holmes, who made a great catch in the back of the end zone to win the game for Pittsburgh.6. Cincinnati vs. San Francisco, January 1989With 3:04 remaining, the Bengals led the 49ers by 16-13, with San Francisco pinned on its own 8-yard line. From there, Joe Montana led the 49ers on a comeback drive, including a second-and-20 pass for 27 yards to Jerry Rice. With 34 seconds left, Montana hit John Taylor for a 10-yard touchdown, and the Bengals lost in the Super Bowl to the 49ers for the second time in seven years.5. Baltimore vs. Jets, January 1969The story of Joe Namath and the Guarantee is well publicized, but Super Bowl III is rarely remembered from the losing team’s perspective. Baltimore was 15-1 in the N.F.L. that year, and some in the news media were proclaiming the team the greatest in football history. The Colts had allowed just 10.3 points a game, at the time tied with the 1963 Bears for the fewest by any N.F.L. team since World War II. The N.F.L. had easily won the first two Super Bowls against the American Football League’s champions.That made the loss — as 18-point favorites — incomprehensible for the Colts. When they won Super Bowl V two years later, defensive end Bubba Smith’s reaction was hardly pure joy. “I couldn’t really feel as happy as I wanted to feel because I was supposed to look at my other ring from Super Bowl III and say, ‘Well, I got two.’ And I couldn’t do it.”4. Tennessee vs. St. Louis, January 2000As the Titans trailed by 23-16 with five seconds remaining at the Rams’ 10-yard line, Steve McNair completed a pass to Kevin Dyson that went for just 9 yards. Rams linebacker Mike Jones made the Super Bowl-saving tackle.3. New England vs. Giants, February 2008The Patriots were 18-0 and looking to become the first team in N.F.L. history to finish a season 19-0. Tom Brady and Bill Belichick were on the verge of going 4-0 in Super Bowls.The Patriots were double-digit favorites, and while they did not control the game, they held the lead in the final minutes. Then the Giants’ David Tyree caught the ball off his helmet. Four plays later, Eli Manning threw the game-winning touchdown pass to Plaxico Burress, the painful end to an otherwise perfect season for the Patriots.2. Seattle vs. New England, February 20151. Buffalo vs. Giants, January 1991The Bills entered the game as 6 ½-point favorites. With his team trailing by 20-19 late in the game, Jim Kelly drove the Bills to the Giants’ 29-yard line. With eight seconds left, Scott Norwood came on to attempt the field goal that would decide the Super Bowl. The 47-yard try went wide right, the most painful moment in Bills — and Super Bowl — history.Advertisement