By PAT BORZIFEB. 3, 2015
NIAGARA FALLS, Ontario —  A little more than a year ago, the former N.H.L. player Val James handed his wife, Ina, the first draft of his autobiography and asked her to read it.She could not get through it, which did not surprise him.Ina James thought she knew the gist of his story. In 1982, Val became the first American-born black player in the N.H.L., a milestone he said passed without acknowledgment from the league or his team, the Buffalo Sabres. Willie O’Ree, a Canadian, broke the N.H.L. color barrier in 1958, but James is believed to have been only the seventh black player to follow in the next 24 years.Raised on Long Island — hardly a hockey hotbed in those days — James played only 14 games in parts of two seasons, finishing with the Toronto Maple Leafs in 1986-87. He made his mark as an enforcer, mainly in the American Hockey League, when Americans were beginning to push into a sport dominated by Canadians.Along the way, James endured a torrent of racial slurs and taunts from fans in Canada and the United States. Ina met Val late in his career, and he never told her about any of the disturbing events in the book’s early chapters.AdvertisementAfter a game in Boston in 1982, angry fans blocked the team bus of the Sabres, who had two black players that season. The fans fired a beer bottle into the windshield, called James a vile name and demanded he come out. James headed for the door until Coach Scotty Bowman ordered him back to his seat. James also described the first time he heard the nastiest of slurs, from an adult at a youth tournament in Michigan. He was 13.Advertisement“The first 77 pages I read, I cried for a week,” Ina James said recently while sitting with her husband in a Niagara Falls hotel room. “My first question was, why didn’t you tell me?” Then she began to cry.“This is why I didn’t tell her,” he said.This week, ECW Press of Toronto released “Black Ice: The Val James Story,” which James wrote with John Gallagher, a fellow Long Islander and a former New York City police officer who is a federal prosecutor in Philadelphia. The book includes graphic descriptions of racist behavior directed at James, now 57.“When I started skating, I set out to be a hockey player, not a black hockey player,” he wrote. “However, the two concepts quickly became intertwined. And not by choice. From early on, there were some people who were determined to prove that being black and being a hockey player were mutually exclusive.”When a shoulder injury ended James’s career in 1988, he seemingly vanished. Thirteen seasons of insults and taunting left James so emotionally worn out that he needed to get away, he said.Warren Skorodenski, a former Springfield, Mass., Indians goalie who spent parts of five seasons in the N.H.L., recalled Springfield fans yelling racial slurs at James and throwing so many bananas on the ice that linesmen collected them during stoppages of play. A few fans, he said, dressed in Ku Klux Klan-style hoods.“It was disgusting,” said Skorodenski, who is not mentioned in the book. “To be in his shoes, I just couldn’t imagine.”In Salem, Va., in 1981, a CBS News crew filming a report on James recorded fans chanting a racial epithet at him. A producer interviewed a proud teenager who brought a watermelon to the game for James. Gallagher shared a copy of the report with The New York Times.Advertisement“There is the only way I can explain it for people who don’t understand that feeling,” James said. “Let’s start with women. What’s the worst thing you can call a woman? Imagine having one of those words thrown at you every three seconds for 60 minutes. Now multiply that 40 road games a year.”James returned to Long Island for about a year after retirement before relocating to Niagara Falls.He taught at hockey schools for 10 years and briefly coached a midget team, but he otherwise avoided the limelight. These days, James works a graveyard shift maintenance job at a water park. He said he liked the quiet. James does not own a cellphone or a computer.“We’re like two old hippies under a rock,” Ina James said.James said he considered writing a book shortly after he retired but decided he needed more time to decompress.“I had to deal with it in my own mind, and pretty much forgive,” James said. “That’s the only word that comes close to it. Just to cleanse my own mind of it all, and to think.”Because James spent so little time in the public eye, he emerged as a cult figure to that legion of hockey fans devoted to enforcers of the 1970s and ’80s. Gallagher, his co-author, was one of them.Gallagher had rooted for the Long Island Ducks, the rugged Eastern Hockey League team based at Long Island Arena, and he knew James had grown up in the area. When he found James three years ago, James felt ready to talk. Dredging up old memories, however, proved difficult.“It was hard, extremely, because it rehashed all those feelings that you thought were gone and made you wonder why people do what they do,” James said.“The first few months of doing it, it was really affecting me. I could feel it. You’re irritated. You get aggravated very easily. It took about six to eight months for all of that to get out of me while we were writing this. Now I’m O.K. I’m not as aggravated by things.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.At 6 feet 2 and 205 pounds, James was best known for his long reach, huge hands and devastating punching power. Often, James said, he punished opponents for the slurs of their fans.AdvertisementPoor-quality YouTube videos exist of long-ago bouts with the noted tough guys Terry O’Reilly and John Kordic. Paul Stewart, the former N.H.L. enforcer turned referee, called James the toughest opponent he fought. They tangled twice in the A.H.L., he said, with James breaking his nose the first time.“I respected Val,” Stewart said in a telephone interview. “He was big, a little bigger than me. He had long arms. You could hit him, but it was very hard to stun him.”Stewart said he later urged James to become a linesman, but James declined, figuring he would face the same abuse from fans he had heard as a player.James said he encountered little prejudice as a child on Long Island. Suffolk County was largely rural in the early 1960s, when the James family moved from Ocala, Fla., to Stony Brook, N.Y., on the North Shore.James’s father, Henry, was a migrant farmer who found work on a potato farm. At first, James said, the family lived in a one-room dwelling on the farm with no electricity, no running water, a potbelly stove for cooking and heating, and an outhouse in the back. Henry proved so handy as a manual laborer and mechanic that Ben Kasper, who owned the farm as well as Long Island Arena, hired him as the arena’s night watchman.Eventually, Henry was put in charge of all physical operations, from repairing equipment to driving the Zamboni. Val was 13 when Henry bought him his first pair of ice skates. Val, which is short for Valmore, taught himself to skate on the arena ice.In the book, Val wrote that he idolized the Long Island Ducks and imagined himself growing up to be one of them. His family settled in a middle-class neighborhood in Hauppauge, N.Y. There were few rinks and youth leagues in greater New York in those days. James played for the Suffolk Ducks in the Metropolitan Junior Hockey League, co-founded in 1966 by Rangers General Manager Emile Francis to develop local talent.“Val was a big, strong kid and a pretty good skater in his day,” said Lou Vairo, another Met League co-founder and a Hall of Fame coach. “He wasn’t Jean Beliveau, but he was O.K. He was a tough guy. He had courage. But he wasn’t malicious or mean.”AdvertisementWhen James was 16, the former Long Island Ducks player Buzz Deschamps recommended him and three other local players to a friend who coached a Junior B team in Midland, Ontario. All four made the roster, with James impressing more for his brawn than his hockey skill.“If big Americans were seen, first and foremost, as hired hatchet men, how do you think I was viewed?” wrote James, who was drafted in 1977 by the Detroit Red Wings in the 16th round. “I was big, American ... and black. There was not a lot of thought given to developing my overall game.”Though James always worked on his game, and tallied the Calder Cup-winning goal for the 1983 Rochester Americans (coached by a young Mike Keenan), teams relied on him mainly for muscle.“That’s pretty much what it boiled down to,” James said. “A lot of times, that’s the only way to get an opportunity to get looked at.”He never scored an N.H.L. point but accumulated 30 penalty minutes. James remains popular in Rochester, which is planning a night for him Feb. 13.“I still got the experience I set out to do when I was younger,” he said. “I got to play in the N.H.L. I forgot to say I wanted to stay in the N.H.L. I can’t say I didn’t get what I wanted. And the thing was, I got to do it a few times. A lot of guys don’t get to ever do it once. I consider myself extremely fortunate.”A version of this article appears in print on February 4, 2015, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: N.H.L. Trailblazer Finds Forgiveness in the Tip of a Pen.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.