AdvertisementSupported byBy Bill PenningtonBEAVER CREEK, Colo. — As Lindsey Vonn crossed the finish line and took the lead in the super-G at the Alpine World Ski Championships here on Tuesday, her boyfriend, Tiger Woods, shouted and pumped his right fist repeatedly as he watched nearby.It is Woods’s signature celebratory gesture, and even if it has been seldom seen on the golf course recently, it seemed to be appropriate for the moment. Vonn, injured for most of the last two years, appeared on the verge of winning her first major championship in five years. And she would do it just a few miles from her hometown, Vail.But just as no clubhouse lead is safe in golf, Woods learned that no front-runner is assured victory in ski racing. While Vonn entered the race as the favorite based on this winter’s results, Anna Fenninger of Austria, the best skier in the event for the previous year, snatched away the gold medal.Though just 5 feet 5 inches and 132 pounds, Fenninger, the defending Olympic super-G champion, plowed through heavy winds that delayed and shortened the race to edge Vonn by 0.15 of a second. Tina Maze of Slovenia also caught Vonn and finished 0.03 behind Fenninger, whose winning time was 1 minute 10.29 seconds.While Vonn at first looked disheartened in the finish area, she quickly rallied when she recalled that at the world championships two years ago, she tore two knee ligaments and fractured a bone in a tumbling crash. Roughly a year ago, she crashed and shredded the same knee again.“So after two years of injury, third place sounds pretty good,” said the 30-year-old Vonn, who has won 5 of 11 races this season.The result also gave Vonn her sixth world championship medal, the most by any American ski racer. It was the first world championships medal won by an American on home snow since 1989. And finally, Vonn was back on the podium of a major championship race. That has happened only twice since the 2010 Vancouver Olympics.For the 25-year-old Fenninger, it was another step in establishing herself as the world’s most dominant female ski racer. Fenninger, who also won a silver medal in the giant slalom at the Sochi Games, won five World Cup races last winter and finished in the top three 13 times.This season, she is second in the World Cup overall standings and second in the giant slalom, super-G and downhill standings.As the American Julia Mancuso, who finished ninth Tuesday, said of Fenninger: “Right now, Anna is doing things at an obviously high level. She took a lot of risks today, but she’s skiing so confident right now, that’s easier for her to do.”The women’s super-G was the first race of the 13-day championships, which have returned to the United States for the first time in 16 years. But blustery conditions greeted the athletes Tuesday morning, and the race was shortened by five gates to make it safer. Still, the wind disrupted the early portions of the race.Vonn’s ponytail was flapping in the wind as she prepared to exit the start gate. When she was asked what her mind-set was at that moment, she answered, “My mind-set was that I’m screwed.” Vonn burst from the gate, but her early turns were a little passive, which slowed her as much as the wind that was in her face.“I caught a gust of wind, and I was three-tenths out of the lead in the first 20 seconds of the race,” Vonn said. “It’s a little hard to make up that time. I was a little bit nervous before the start. I was maybe a little stiff and a little too round in the first few gates, but I fought my way down.”Vonn was nearly a half-second behind the early leader, Cornelia Huetter of Austria, at the midpoint of the racecourse. She then unleased a charge like those that have made her the most dominant women’s skier of her generation, and the winningest women’s skier in World Cup history. Making clean turns in an aerodynamic tuck through sections of the racecourse that prompted other racers to slow down, Vonn gained speed and roared across the finish as the new leader by 0.11 of a second.The sold-out grandstand erupted in enthusiastic applause as Vonn raised her arms in salute. Adjacent to the racecourse, Woods kept pumping his fist — when he was not hugging members of Vonn’s family.The next racer down the mountain was Maze, and very quickly it was apparent she was gaining on Vonn.“To me, she was the one to beat,” Maze said of Vonn. “I was determined to ignore the wind. When I finished, I saw that I was first. The crowd went silent all of a sudden, but I was screaming with joy inside.”Fenninger followed three skiers behind Maze, toppling to the snow after she realized that she had the fastest time. She lay in the finish area for several seconds.“To have Lindsey and Tina on the podium with me, that’s a special race,” Fenninger said. “That’s a great race.”All three skiers will be medal contenders Friday in the women’s downhill. Vonn will again be the favorite, having already won three World Cup downhill races this winter.“I did my best today,” Vonn said. “Sometimes it works, and sometimes it doesn’t. I wasn’t quite on the right side of the hundreds today. And Anna is skiing very well.“But I’m looking forward to Friday.”Vonn smiled and added, “The weather is supposed to be calm.”Advertisement