By ZACH SCHONBRUNFEB. 3, 2015
Columbia has hired Peter Pilling, a vice president at IMG College, the sports marketing firm, to be its next athletic director, the university said Tuesday.It will be Pilling’s first experience with the Ivy League. A graduate of Brigham Young, he spent the last nine years at IMG College. Before that he held senior roles in the athletic departments at Brigham Young and Villanova.In a phone interview, Pilling said he considered the appointment to be the fulfillment of a lifelong dream, in which he gets to oversee the athletic department at an academically rigorous institution.“When I talked to people about this position, everybody described it as a special place,” said Pilling, who will replace M. Dianne Murphy, who announced in September that she would step down and is set to do so April 13. “I feel very fortunate to be offered this position and excited about the future.”AdvertisementPilling arrives at a critical moment for Columbia athletics, particularly the moribund football program, which is searching for a coach. After a second consecutive 0-10 season, Pete Mangurian resigned in December amid accusations that he verbally and physically abused several players.Columbia currently holds a 21-game losing streak and has not had a winning season since 1996.Pilling responded “absolutely” when asked if remaking the football program was a priority.“That’s one of the key aspects,” Pilling said. “I truly believe Columbia can win in the Ivy League. The hiring of a new coach will be priority No. 1 in this capacity, and making sure we hire an individual that is a program builder, that understands what the university represents and really being a leader of men.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In a letter to football alumni in late November, Columbia’s president, Lee C. Bollinger, promised a comprehensive review of the program and hired Rick Taylor, a former coach and athletic director, to oversee it. Included in the overhaul was the promise of hiring an athletic director qualified to revitalize the program.Pilling said he already had “the ball rolling” on putting together a list of potential candidates to replace Mangurian. Chris Rippon, the team’s defensive coordinator, has been serving as interim coach.“I’ve talked to some potential candidates, informally, based upon the assumption I would become the athletic director,” he said. “I recognized early on that this was a big priority.”AdvertisementIMG College is among the nation’s largest collegiate sports marketing companies, managing the multimedia rights for more than 200 institutions, as well as the N.C.A.A. Its duties include handling corporate sponsorships, licensing, marketing and radio and television programs, and maintaining the programs’ digital platforms.Pilling, who holds a master’s degree in sports management from Ohio University, focused on IMG’s partnerships with the Mountain West Conference, the West Coast Conference and the Big 12 during his time with the company.“Peter brings to this important assignment not only professional expertise in sports management, but a deep and abiding commitment to the academic, research, cultural and civic mission of higher education,” Bollinger said in a statement. “He impressed everyone who has met him with his vision of the role athletics, health and wellness can play in enhancing the educational experience of all our students, as well as his respect for the unique values of the Ivy League in the larger landscape of intercollegiate athletics.”A version of this article appears in print on February 4, 2015, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: Marketer to Oversee Athletics at Columbia.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.