AdvertisementSupported byBy Tim RohanPORT ST. LUCIE, Fla. — Not far from the right-field line of Tradition Field, the Mets’ spring training home, a private fitness center has opened for business.That the gym is operating on the site of a team complex is unusual, as is the fact that it is not just members of the public who are paying customers. Mets players are paying, too, even though the operator of the gym, Mike Barwis, has been associated with the team since 2011 as a consultant and has now taken on a more substantial role with the club, overseeing all of its strength and conditioning programs.About 30 Mets players have gathered at different points this winter to work out with Barwis at the gym. The group includes some of the most prominent players in the organization, first-round draft picks and established stars like David Wright. To a man, they speak positively of Barwis’s methods. And to a man, they appear to be writing checks for his services, with major leaguers paying more than those on the minor league level.The fact that Mets players are paying to, in effect, work out at their own complex in the off-season has raised some eyebrows, although the money the players pay is going to Barwis and not to the Mets. The arrangement has also attracted the attention of the players’ union, which is looking into the matter.From the Mets’ point of view, there is nothing questionable going on. They clearly think highly of Barwis, a former strength coach for the University of Michigan football team who now runs a fitness business called Barwis Methods in addition to working with the Mets.And while the players are paying to train with Barwis in the off-season, the Mets point out that they are picking up a sizable portion of the travel and lodging costs and are directly subsidizing some of the workout fees. In addition, players can still work out at other parts of the complex and not pay anything to Barwis. Last winter, the Mets sent a handful of players to train with Barwis at one of his gyms in Michigan. Those players paid, too. For the most part, they were prospects and unproven major leaguers fighting for jobs, and the Mets considered the camp successful. Looking trimmer, Lucas Duda had a breakout season in 2014, hitting 30 home runs. Wilmer Flores emerged as a possible starting shortstop. Juan Lagares won a Gold Glove in center field.This winter, the Mets went a step further. They had an empty space at their spring training site that had been viewed as a potential second clubhouse if another major league team were to join the Mets at Port St. Lucie. Instead, the Mets fixed up the space and rented it out to Barwis, reasoning that more of their players might be open to working with him in Florida during the off-season than in wintry Michigan. The arrangement has raised questions as to whether players, particularly those who are still trying to establish themselves, might feel they are not in a position to say no to working out with Barwis in the off-season, even though they have to pay for it. “That would make me feel uncomfortable, if a ball club said, ‘If you pay this money, it’ll help you,’ ” said Joshua Kusnick, an agent whose clients include Mets minor leaguers who did not receive big signing bonuses. “That’s just bizarre to me. I wouldn’t be comfortable with any of that.”One of the players Kusnick represents is Tyler Badamo, the Mets’ 24th-round pick in the 2014 draft. He said it was a “real possibility” that Badamo might not be able to afford the fees minor leaguers have to pay Barwis. As it is, the Mets have directly encouraged some players to take part in the Barwis training, while others have heard about it by word of mouth.“It’s not mandatory; it’s optional,” said Dominic Smith, the team’s first-round pick in 2013. Smith, a 19-year-old first baseman, attended the program last winter in Michigan and is participating in the one in Port St. Lucie. He said that the Mets had asked him to attend both camps but that he had not felt pressured to say yes.“I didn’t have to do anything if I didn’t want to,” he said. “But they said it was good for my career.”For minor leaguers like Smith, the Mets cover the cost of airfare and a hotel stay and more than three-quarters of Barwis’s fee. In all, working out with Barwis for about nine weeks in Port St. Lucie will cost Smith about $2,000 in fees, plus other expenses.The major leaguers pay more. For some of them, the Mets pay hotel expenses and a smaller portion of Barwis’s fee, but not airfare. The highest-paid players on the team, like Wright, receive no financial help. Still, Wright said that what he had paid Barwis was comparable to what he would have paid another trainer in the off-season if he were not in Port St. Lucie. “He’s very accomplished, very intelligent,” Wright said of Barwis. “He’s the first to explain to you why you’re doing this type of exercise, how this exercise can help you on the baseball field.” Sandy Alderson, the Mets’ general manager, said in a phone interview that the Mets would spend more than $100,000 this winter to help underwrite the Barwis training program at Port St. Lucie.Asked why the Mets had not subsidized the entire program so that players would not have to pay Barwis at all, Alderson said the club felt that would be counterproductive.“We didn’t cover all the costs because we want the players themselves to be invested in their careers and in their off-season development,” Alderson said. “We want them to have something at risk as far as their commitment is concerned.“This is a pretty good deal for them,” he added. “But it’s not an absolutely free lunch.” Alderson also disputed any notion that the Mets viewed Barwis’s fitness company as an investment opportunity and thus were seeking to funnel customers to him. He said the Mets saw Barwis as someone who could play a valuable role in turning the team into a contender. “We’re lucky to have Mike,” he said.Barwis, who was not available to be interviewed last week, first came to the Mets’ attention while he was working under Rich Rodriguez, who was then the football coach at Michigan. Jeff Wilpon, the Mets’ chief operating officer, met Barwis during a visit to the university. Fred Wilpon, a Mets owner and Jeff’s father, is a Michigan alumnus and has donated to the university. Barwis was hired by the Mets as a consultant in 2011 and, for a while, checked in with the team a few weeks each year. Then came last winter’s training regimen in Michigan, followed by this winter’s version in Port St. Lucie. A Barwis disciple, Dustin Clarke, has become the Mets’ new full-time strength coach.According to the Barwis Methods website, Barwis also operates several gyms in Michigan. He also sells supplements online, a tricky issue for the Mets and Major League Baseball because the items have yet to be independently certified as free of banned substances. The Mets have directed Barwis not to sell his supplements at the Port St. Lucie site or to allow any Mets players to use them until such certification has been secured.As for Major League Baseball, it is aware of the Mets’ multilayered relationship with Barwis and has signed off on it, at least for now. “Players are free to work out on a voluntary basis during the off-season with any fitness consultant approved by the club,” Pat Courtney, a baseball spokesman, said in an email. “The financial arrangement between the consultant and the player is left to the parties.”Barwis seems to have built a loyal following among the players he has trained. Some describe him as being something of a character, with a distinctly macho attitude and a raspy voice. In an interview with The New York Times last winter, Barwis mentioned that he had a background in mixed martial arts but was reluctant to discuss it further.He was also once featured on “American Muscle,” a reality show on the Discovery Channel. Now he is increasingly a part of the Mets’ reality programming, which consists of eight straight years without a postseason appearance. The next 162 installments begin in April. However it turns out, Barwis will be in the credits.Advertisement