By HARVEY ARATONFEB. 3, 2015
There were 60 million good reasons for Phil Jackson to accept the formidable challenge of rebuilding the Knicks along with one intangible benefit that could not be banked. Some might think the one he chose, however, borders on obsession: to resurrect his beloved triangle and prove to the world that it is an offense for the ages.But it didn’t take long after Jackson sat down for a recent interview over lunch to admit that his debut as an N.B.A. executive has been sobering, stressful and, during early morning reflections, doubt-inducing.“Like nothing I’ve seen before,” he said of the Knicks’ first 41 games, of which they lost 36, a half-season of hell. “So far, my experiment has fallen flat on its face.”In retirement from coaching, Jackson lived the celebrity life in sunny Los Angeles, basking in a record 11 N.B.A. championships, flirting with those who wished for him to return to the Lakers while knowing his age and physical limitations would not allow it.AdvertisementLife was good, he said. His companion, Jeanie Buss, of the Lakers’ ownership family, told him it could be better.Advertisement“She said, ‘You’re sitting on some stuff that you should really look into,’ ” Jackson said. “I said, well, I wrote a book. She said, ‘That’s not enough.’ ”By last spring, James L. Dolan, the executive chairman of Madison Square Garden, had offered Jackson a reported $60 million over five years, autonomy in running the Knicks as team president and — for the sake of his legacy beyond wins and losses — the opportunity to plant the triangle in the heart of another premier N.B.A. market.“It was part of my thinking,” he said of — once and for all — popularizing the system he learned from its innovator, Tex Winter, when both were assistant coaches in Chicago. “There are some principles of the offense that I did feel were being overrun, or disregarded.”Way back in 1999, Bill Fitch, who was Jackson’s college coach at North Dakota, told him: “There’s not going to be any more midrange shots. It’s going to be a 3-point shot or right around the basket — that’s the way the game is evolving.”Having won six titles with the triangle in Chicago, Jackson did not want to believe that. He could not understand why teams would not emulate the Bulls after what they had done.“He pretty much predicted the state of the game,” Jackson said of Fitch. And the overall N.B.A. game, in Jackson’s opinion and much to his dismay, did become much too predictable, much less pure.On the afternoon that a blizzard was supposed to blow into New York, Jackson chose the Redeye Grill, on Seventh Avenue at 56th Street, near where he lives and about 25 blocks north of the Garden. The restaurant was almost empty, devoid of disgruntled Knicks fans — though Jackson said most people he had encountered on Manhattan streets had been respectful and supportive, unlike the more venomous attacks on social media.AdvertisementHis fame and his 6-foot-8 frame make it difficult to hide — as past Knicks executives have done in the face of failure. Winter notwithstanding, he always loved Manhattan, “the energy it brings.” So Jackson walks the streets, mingles with the masses.To the loyal and long-suffering Knicks fan base, he would express a belief that the team, in requiring what he called “a three- to five-year” reconstruction, would eventually rise as he uses the ample salary cap space he will have by next summer and the increased resources he will have by 2016-17, when the N.B.A.’s new television contracts kick in.A sound argument can be made that if the Knicks were going to be bad, they might as well have been very bad in a rare year in which they have their first-round draft pick. With a prize rookie, a couple of well-chosen free-agent signings and a healthy Carmelo Anthony, this could all look very different by next season.But as to skepticism about whether he can make the triangle work in a league in which no one else plays it, Jackson said: “I’m not daunted by the number of people who have commented that this way of playing is arcane, that the game has moved on. The game has moved on.”He also believes that the game, stylistically, moves in mysterious ways.“I think it’s still debatable about how basketball is going to be played, what’s going to win out,” he said, leaving no doubt of his disdain for the point-guard-dominated concept of “screen-and-roll, break down, pass, and two or three players standing in spots, not participating in the offense.”Jackson said that positional principles of the triangle were evident in most coaches’ schemes — including that of Gregg Popovich in San Antonio, “in a very fluid form” — but that total immersion had not been embraced beyond short-lived and unsuccessful head-coaching stints by former Jackson lieutenants like Bill Cartwright, Kurt Rambis and Jim Cleamons. Rambis and Cleamons are currently assisting the Knicks’ rookie head coach, Derek Fisher.If imitation is the greatest form of flattery, the N.B.A. has anointed Popovich, not Jackson, as its paternal guide. Popovich has won five titles during the Tim Duncan era, and several of his protégés have fanned out across the league in coaching and front-office positions.Seeking to InfluenceThe most noteworthy apple to fall from the Jackson coaching tree has been Steve Kerr, who is enjoying a rousing debut season with Golden State. But Kerr, who also played for Popovich, rejected Jackson’s offer to coach the Knicks and did not install the triangle with the Warriors. Implicitly, Kerr was saying that the triangle is no one-size-fits-all formula, or that it did not make sense to force change upon the young shooting stars Stephen Curry and Klay Thompson.AdvertisementJackson said influence, not acknowledgment, was what he was seeking. “It’s not who I am, it’s what I can impart,” he said.At the outset of training camp, he predicted the Knicks would be a playoff team. But the feeling on the N.B.A. grapevine is that force-feeding the triangle to players who struggled to grasp its numerous options and who didn’t have enough job security to be invested in the process was akin to demanding that one-and-done college players take advanced calculus.Perhaps unintentionally, the system was oversold as a strategic panacea, replete with a Spike Lee tribute that was shown on the Garden’s cable network.“It’s really hard to run the triangle with bad players because most bad players don’t understand the game,” said Jerry Krause, who as general manager endorsed Jackson’s use of the offense with the Bulls, in order to integrate Michael Jordan’s otherworldly skills into a more cohesive attack. “You’re not going to win with bad players running any system. But with the triangle you particularly have to have intelligent players who can be patient. And I’m not talking about math intelligence. I’m talking about basketball intelligence.”As much as Jackson has argued that the triangle is just an organizational means of executing basic basketball, providing a foundation of order to empower the players, he conceded that leaguewide perceptions of the system as too complex could create a compromised reality in relation to free agent recruiting.“Of course it’s a concern of mine, the perception that it’s too difficult to learn or too difficult for today’s players to embrace,” he said. “But I think anyone that believes he’s a total basketball player is going to want to do it. A sound offense incorporates all the basic skills of any player you have, whether you’re a center, a power forward, whatever. There are isolation spots in the triangle, but the only thing that precludes a player really fitting in is someone who has to have the whole side of the court to go one on one.”Many who have watched the Knicks the past few seasons would argue that Anthony will be exactly that ball-stopping peg trying to fit into a round role. But Jackson, who initially struck a tough negotiating stance with Anthony before awarding him a near-maximum contract with assorted perks, said he had had no regrets, even as Anthony, 30, has been slowed with a balky knee, which Jackson said might require shutting down after the Feb. 15 All-Star Game in New York.“He’s responsible, there’s a character base there that I’ve acquainted myself with, where I feel he has the nerve for the job, he’s not afraid,” Jackson said. “He has the capability of being a fourth-quarter guy who is going to make the shots. You need that kind of guy when you’re in the playoffs to win close games. You can run your triangle for three and a half quarters and it still comes down to having someone who is a little extra special down the stretch.”AdvertisementThat is the point made by those who have questioned or even mocked the triangle as effective only when the likes of Michael Jordan or Kobe Bryant have been available to salvage possessions. Charley Rosen — Jackson’s longtime friend and co-author — suggested they revisit the 1993-94 season, when the Bulls won 55 games without Jordan.Triangle Run ‘to a T’If not for a disputed foul call that the referee Hue Hollins made against Scottie Pippen at the end of Game 5 of a second-round playoff series against the Knicks, “they would have been in the conference finals,” Rosen said. “That was the best coaching job Phil ever did.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Krause went a step further, calling it “the best-coached team I’ve ever seen, and they ran the triangle to the T.” But he cautioned that Jackson’s Bulls, even without Jordan, were a defensive-minded, high-basketball-I.Q. team with a core that was years in the making. With a news media mania developing upon Jackson’s hiring last March, so much attention was focused on the triangle that everyone — Jackson apparently included — overlooked the likelihood that the Knicks had been left defenseless by overvaluing point guard Jose Calderon because he figured to be a good fit in the system. Calderon was acquired in a deal with Dallas that cost the Knicks Tyson Chandler, the defensive backbone of their 54-win season in 2012-13.“Let’s face it, moving Tyson Chandler kind of backfired,” said Jeff Van Gundy, the network analyst, who was a Jackson antagonist as the Knicks’ coach in the 1990s, when he called Jackson Big Chief Triangle.Chandler, in the final year of his contract, has had a resurgent season in Dallas. Injured to start the season, Calderon has played poorly and struggled with the triangle. “My guesswork, my anticipation in that regard, was kind of eye-opening for me,” Jackson said.He nonetheless expressed no misgivings — “not one moment” — over trading Chandler, whose defensive presence would have helped this season but who, in Jackson’s view, did not have the matching skills to play in the triangle going forward.While rationalizing that injuries and demoralizing close defeats precipitated the 5-36 start, Jackson said he was moved to “weed out certain guys” — meaning J. R. Smith, Iman Shumpert and Samuel Dalembert — during a 16-game losing streak. Anthony aside, the rebuilding became more of a tear-down.Suddenly his coaches were telling Jackson that practices were livelier, crisper. Replaced by seemingly hungrier players like Langston Galloway, Lance Thomas and Lou Amundson, along with Anthony’s return to the lineup, the Knicks showed a competitive pulse, easing Jackson’s wee-hours angst.If he can deal Calderon, as he reportedly has been trying to do, he will have more than $30 million to spend next summer, though an unrestricted free agent would have to take less money than his existing team would be able to pay him under maximum contract terms.AdvertisementWhile the fan base and the news media focus on landing premier free agents like Memphis’s Marc Gasol and Portland’s LaMarcus Aldridge, Jackson called that thinking part of a quick-fix mentality that had been the Knicks’ undoing in most of the years since their last championship team, on which he was a valuable bench player, in 1973.Not that he would turn down Gasol, Aldridge or especially Kevin Durant, a prospective 2016 free agent, but Plan B, he said, might in the long run be better.“You do need great players to win the championship, but having to always chase the best talent in free agency eventually becomes a mind-set of, well, the best talent wins as opposed to who plays the best team basketball — which is what San Antonio showed last season,” he said. “Their play was special, a team that really values passing, a system where they’re not just standing around, spacing out shooters. That’s also what Atlanta and a couple of other teams are showing this year.”He added: “We’re not going to punch all the right buttons in the process of doing this. But we’re looking for multiple talents, drive, intelligence, guys that will play defense. We hope to develop a team, and there are a lot of agents out there looking to find a good spot for their players.”Jackson won his last title with the Lakers in 2010, hardly ancient history. But the league has a short collective memory, and Jackson’s résumé may not be the attraction the Knicks hoped it would be, especially since he has said he will not coach under any conditions. By hiring Fisher, a former players’ union president and respected veteran, he at least could hope that the coach would be a draw himself.Not necessarily, if the perception is that Fisher was hired only to carry out his boss’s X’s and O’s agenda. Fisher has never publicly indicated that he was not sold on the triangle, which he excelled in as a big-moment shooting guard with Jackson’s Lakers. But whispers have circulated in the league about Fisher’s ability to be his own man, and the issue is likely to be used against the Knicks in the free-agent wars.Jackson argued that the triangle was not an inflexible system. As much as he disliked the emerging overreliance on the 3-point shot, he saw the game moving in that direction, and “we did more with it during the last two championships in L.A.” Now, he said, he would even endorse a 4-point shot being implemented a few feet behind the 3-point line.Empowering a CoachJackson has told Fisher that he is free to tinker, create his own version. “I did things that were altogether different from what Tex ran with his old teams,” he said. “So I told Fish, you’re going to have your own stamp that you put on it, but players need to know that they have a base to perform out of. That’s his role, to do the innovation with today’s type player.”Phil Jackson has brought his famous triangle offense to New York, and the Knicks. Now everyone — including both players and fans — has to learn it.Red Holzman, Jackson’s original pro coaching mentor, was never known for overstructuring his offense, much less branding it. He relied on his players’ instincts to move the ball and hit the open man. In his later years, Holzman believed that celebrated systems were a crutch: If the system worked, the coach could be hailed a genius. If it didn’t, it was because the players did not fit the system.AdvertisementWith a five-year contract, Jackson has plenty of time and resources to remake the Knicks in his own image, or Fisher’s, but as Van Gundy said: “If you’ve had as much success as he’s had, and your system is the triangle, I understand you’re going to believe in it. But it’ll be interesting to look back in five years and ask: Was playing so different than other N.B.A. teams a positive or a negative? And was that the way Fisher really wanted to play no matter which players he had?”In disclaiming the quick fix, Jackson said that it would take that long to render judgment on his methods and that Dolan had asked him to “set up something that would be long-lasting, that may go beyond my being here.” He continued, “That was exactly what I’d been thinking of, building a foundation, a way of playing basketball, getting a bunch of guys that can do it. If I’m not here four or five years down the road, then I have a young coach I believe in who will complete it.”He is 69 and is not planning on bearing the New York winters and making personal sacrifices for the long haul.“It isn’t ideal,” Jackson said, referring to the alternating monthly visits with Buss. “It was not something I would necessarily bargain to do, to live away from the companion I’ve had for 15 years. But she said, ‘We’ll be fine.’ And there is something about being fruitful, purposeful in life.”A Balance of GoalsIs it a championship in New York or the bequeathing of his preferred style of play that is the foundation of Jackson’s remaining ambition? If those elaborate goals are equal in weight, that doesn’t necessarily make them mutually beneficial.He said he was enjoying the planning of the puzzle, how to add the best-fitting players in the anticipation that the league is trending toward versatile, deeper teams. If Anthony was wondering how the three- to five-year time frame would complement his remaining prime years, Jackson took him to dinner during the Knicks’ recent London trip to explain how his 30s could drastically differ from his 20s.Lower point totals, maybe, Jackson said, but more productive.“I told him I wanted him to be the guy who was blending his game in the style of basketball we were going to play — a mentor, a teacher,” Jackson said. “I’ve been around this game long enough to know that time waits for no one, but we see a lot of players playing at a very high level who are considerably older. I felt some of Michael’s most productive years came in the late 1990s — he wasn’t dunking as often, but his gamesmanship, his knowledge, were at their peak.Advertisement“So I see Carmelo as a heady enough ballplayer to be proficient as he ages. I wanted him to understand that it wasn’t going to be the usual renovation, adding another story to the house, and we’re just starting this process. We know what’s going on with our salary cap. We’re going to be in a position the next couple of years where we’ll be blessed.”To that end, Jackson also knows he could use the same divine intervention that landed Duncan for Popovich in San Antonio in 1997 in the June draft. And yes, Jackson said, he also knows that reconstruction could be as tricky as installing the triangle, and the trust he has — from Dolan and long-suffering Knicks fans — may not last long.That is why he offered his mea culpa for this season at a news conference last month and perhaps why, a second time, he referred to his work to date “as an experiment that certainly hasn’t worked.”If calling his work an experiment conjured up the notion of Jackson as an eccentric alchemist trying to create the perfect triangle, he wisely closed with a more relatable metaphor.“This is just the first chapter,” he said.Whatever comes next, Jackson can at least make book on one thing. At this job, at the Garden and in New York City, there will be plenty more publishable material for the novice team president and veteran best-selling author.A version of this article appears in print on February 4, 2015, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Slowly, a Plan Takes Shape.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.