AdvertisementSupported byBy Kelley McMillanBEAVER CREEK, Colo. — Fresh off her third-place finish in Tuesday’s super-G and gearing up for Friday’s downhill, Lindsey Vonn announced that she would also compete in the super combined and the giant slalom next week here at the Alpine world ski championships.The announcement came as a surprise because Vonn has not competed in a giant slalom or super combined event in more than two years. Her last giant slalom race was in January 2013 in Maribor, Slovenia, an event she won. In December 2012, she was disqualified from her last race in the super combined — which features one downhill leg and one slalom leg — after failing to complete the slalom. While Vonn is the most dominant skier in women’s World Cup history, she has struggled with the slalom in recent years.“I’m going to wing it,” Vonn said in a telephone interview Wednesday. “I’ve done slalom my whole life. I don’t know how fast I’ll be, but I’ll for sure be able to do it.”She added, “I haven’t skied slalom in two and half years, so after the downhill race on Friday, I’m going to take a couple of days to train some slalom.”With her third-place finish on Tuesday, Vonn won her sixth career world championship medal, edging her teammates Bode Miller and Julia Mancuso, who each have five, to become the American skier with the most world championship hardware.“I’m not focused on records or anything else,” Vonn said. “I’m just focused on skiing my best and wining as many races as I can.” Vonn is looking for a victory in Friday’s downhill, her best event. “For the downhill,” she said, “I’m going to change my plan of attack a little and make sure I’m going on the absolute limit. I think that’s what it’s going to take to win.”Vonn was edged by Anna Fenninger of Austria, who finished first, and Tina Maze of Slovenia. Fenninger won the gold medal in super-G and the silver in giant slalom at the 2014 Sochi Olympics, and Maze is the 2014 Olympic downhill and giant slalom gold medalist. Both women will most likely challenge Vonn for podiums throughout the world championships and the rest of the ski season.“They’re the two most well-rounded athletes on the tour right now,” Vonn said. “As far as multiple event contenders, those two are the big ones.”Sidelined for two years because of a knee injury, Vonn finished in third place soon after breaking the 35-year-old record for most World Cup wins by a woman.“It’s an incredible accomplishment and something I never imagined I would be able to achieve in my career,” she said, “and I think it’s going to be something special when I retire and say this is what I did in my life, in my skiing career. I’m really proud of it. It’s my legacy.”When Vonn’s world championships end next Thursday, she will start the Lindsey Vonn Foundation, an organization to help young women realize their goals by supporting them through scholarships, educational programs and mentoring. “I was inspired by Picabo Street when I was a kid,” Vonn said, “so hopefully I’m able to have a positive effect on these girls.”Advertisement