AdvertisementSupported byBy Tim RohanSoon after Jim Harbaugh returned to the college ranks to coach at his alma mater, Michigan, he started a new Twitter account. He sent out motivational messages, occasionally retweeted the pope and offered a glimpse into his intense psyche. Harbaugh appears genuine and entertaining, especially for a football coach. He has about 176,000 followers on Twitter. But the account seems to be strategic, too.In the world of college football, it is another way to connect with young players. Harbaugh follows only 54 accounts, and many of them are top recruits. “Attacking this day with Enthusiasm Unknown to Mankind,” he wrote Jan. 15, the first day he was allowed to meet with recruits in person under N.C.A.A. rules.Harbaugh knew he had to hit the ground running. Ohio State, Michigan’s bitter rival, had just won the national championship with its third-string quarterback. Harbaugh and Urban Meyer, the Buckeyes’ coach, should be fighting for recruits for years to come. Each has the kind of résumé matched only by Alabama’s Nick Saban. And each has obsessive tendencies.Wednesday’s national signing day had the makings of a potential turning point for the Big Ten, and Midwest programs in general. Penn State, for instance, recruited a full class for the first time since the N.C.A.A. freed the program of scholarship restrictions stemming from the Jerry Sandusky scandal.Harbaugh had his work cut out for him. He had inherited a recruiting class from Brady Hoke that was in shambles. He started with only six verbal commitments. So Harbaugh hit the road aggressively over the last few weeks and was able to flip six players who had previously committed to other programs. He nabbed them away from Texas, California-Berkeley, Nebraska and Iowa. He tried to woo Mike Weber, a celebrated running back from the Detroit area, but failed. Weber had committed to Michigan, but as the Wolverines’ season spiraled out of control, he looked elsewhere. Ultimately, he signed with the Buckeyes.By Wednesday, however, Harbaugh had somehow salvaged the class, as much as could be expected. Michigan ended the day with 14 commitments, including several four-star prospects.The class ranked 49th on Rivals.com over all, behind those of lesser programs like Virginia, Kentucky and North Carolina State. But Michigan ranked 21st when the players’ individual ratings were averaged. Meyer had the highest-rated recruiting class in the Big Ten this year. Two of his better signings were Justin Hilliard, a linebacker from Cincinnati, and Torrance Gibson, an athlete from Florida. But even after he won his third national title, at a second university, Meyer’s class was still not among the best in the country. The traditional powers Southern California and Alabama jostled for the top spot, and several Southeastern Conference teams were ranked ahead of Ohio State. The Big Ten could at least boast that Penn State was on its way back, having compiled a top-15 recruiting class, the second-highest in the conference.James Franklin, the Nittany Lions’ coach, had promised to “dominate the state” when he was hired at Penn State before the 2014 season. This year he did. Penn State signed seven of the top-10 prospects in Pennsylvania, according to Rivals.com. But Franklin will need probably another year or two to nurse the program back to full strength.Notre Dame, which is not in the Big Ten but is in the region, also had a top-15 recruiting class. But the Fighting Irish have not generally lacked talent or hype under Brian Kelly. They started 6-0 last year and were considered a top-five team until they lost five of their next six games. Everett Golson, the embattled starting quarterback, was benched. Now there are rumors Golson may transfer. Solidifying the quarterback position will be Kelly’s top priority. Harbaugh will have to choose a quarterback, too. Hoke did not leave him many options. Shane Morris, a former five-star recruit involved in a concussion controversy last season, has been a disappointment. The other candidates, including two recruits in this class, are young and inexperienced. Amid the signing day circus Wednesday, Harbaugh conducted a phone interview with CBS Sports, and Hoke happened to be one of the commentators. Their exchange was not as awkward as one might expect. Harbaugh repeatedly praised the foundation Hoke left him and gushed over his recruiting class.It seemed sincere, but what else was he to say?This is the one day college coaches can get away without telling the whole truth.“It’s going great — I have not redecorated the office at all,” Harbaugh said.Hoke chuckled. “This was immaculate and perfect,” Harbaugh added.Advertisement