By MARC TRACYFEB. 4, 2015
On the fourth Thursday of November, Americans gather with their families to give thanks. On the last Monday of May, they remember those who gave their lives for their country. And on the first Wednesday of February, they scan Twitter to find out where several dozen talented 18-year-olds have decided to go play college football.National signing day is the name for the first day that high school seniors can sign national letters of intent — binding agreements that pledge them to a college.Unofficially, it signifies the beginning of next season. Officially — in Alabama, at least — it’s yet another day to celebrate the Crimson Tide: ’Bama has notched the top-rated class for the fifth straight year, according to the ratings put out by 247Sports.com and Scout, two of the three main recruiting sites (the third, Rivals, put Alabama in second, behind Southern California).As college football has grown in popularity and social media has empowered athletic departments and players alike with the ability to tell their own stories, the day has evolved into hours of unmatched pageantry, with staged announcements, university-specific songs and comic gimmicks.AdvertisementThis year included four adults dressed as Teletubbies anxiously waiting by the Nebraska athletic department fax machine; a wide receiver donning a retro Tennessee helmet; and a top running back — Soso Jamabo — explaining on Twitter his choice of U.C.L.A. with a reference to “Asian girls everywhere.” He later clarified that he was quoting the lyrics of the rapper Childish Gambino, though he did not walk back the sentiment itself.AdvertisementLaugh or cry if you want, but for college football die-hards, Wednesday was, unequivocally, the biggest day of the year.
            Are they taping an ESPN SportsCenter commercial in the Nebraska recruiting office? #Huskers pic.twitter.com/9AsM2w18xR “I don’t know any other day, including the Super Bowl, where there’s as much to cover and follow,” said Mike Farrell, national recruiting director for Rivals, a Yahoo Sports site, which on Wednesday afternoon promised an “Exclusive Interview” that revealed, “LB Roquan Smith still not 100% sure on #UCLA or #UGA.”“It’s Christmas, Thanksgiving, Fourth of July, birthday, anniversary all wrapped into one,” said Lou Somogyi of the Notre Dame magazine Blue & Gold Illustrated, whose post-national-signing-day issue is the longest and most popular of the 20 it publishes every year.“We joke that we can’t wait till the season starts so we can slow down a little bit,” Somogyi added.The news media’s and the fans’ increasing, mutually reinforced sophistication has transformed the day into a unique spectacle. Even better, with no wins or losses yet on their team’s résumé, it is a way to keep score.“People may not know recruiting, but if you show them what it is and make a mild attempt to explain it, it pays dividends,” Spencer Hall, editor of the sports website SB Nation, said, adding, “Everyone wants to know whether they won something or lost something.”In the case of the top-ranked player in the country, who won and who lost was not immediately clear throughout the day. Byron Cowart, a defensive end, appeared to commit to Auburn live on ESPNU. Auburn coaches were shown celebrating around a conference table in a tableau reminiscent of the Situation Room photograph during the Osama bin Laden raid.AdvertisementThen reports emerged that Florida was still in play. By 4 p.m., alas, Auburn had received Cowart’s letter by fax.The action was hottest in Los Angeles, where U.S.C., newly freed of sanctions, secured as many as seven of the top 15 Californians, according to Farrell.U.C.L.A.’s prizes included the four-star wide receiver Cordell Broadus, whose father is the noted ex-U.S.C. fan Snoop Dogg.The winner in the country’s richest recruiting state was Texas A&M, which held onto quarterback Kyler Murray despite a late effort from Texas, which had lost its quarterback prospect to Jim Harbaugh’s Michigan.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mississippi may have underachieved on the recruiting trail, losing likely prospects to Mississippi State and Tennessee. And Miami, which from 1983 through 2001 rode South Florida talent to five national championships, was unable to secure one of this year’s top 25 classes.As for the players, Wednesday marked the end of the rankings’ relevance.One tweet that circulated during the day went: “Annual reminder that it’s not all about how many stars you have or how many cameras show up at your signing. It’s what you do next.”The admonition was like saying, “Eat your spinach,” and tomorrow’s stars might be inclined to dismiss it, coming as it did from a former two-star prospect who committed to Central Michigan on national signing day in 2007.His name? J. J. Watt, two-time N.F.L. defensive player of the year for the Houston Texans, who last year signed a six-year, $100 million contract. He’s worth listening to.A version of this article appears in print on February 5, 2015, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: A Day of Grand Displays, but the Pen Is Mightiest.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.