AdvertisementSupported byOn GolfBy Karen CrouseLA JOLLA, Calif. — Using his wedge, Tiger Woods hit two dozen balls from just off the second green of Torrey Pines’ North Course. His compulsive chipping called to mind someone hoping that with enough swings of a fly swatter he could silence the buzzing around his head. There is nothing wrong with Woods’s short game that one solid chipping round could not cure. Unfortunately, his pro-am Wednesday was not that round. Because of dense morning fog, the outing was shortened from 18 holes to nine. By the time Woods finished, the fog had lifted, but the haze over his short game remained. “Even if I do happen to make a bad swing, I know what the fix is,” Woods said, adding: “My good is really good. Unfortunately, my bad is really bad.” Coming off his worst round as a pro, an 82 on the second day of the Phoenix Open last week, Woods is back at a course where he has a long and storied history of success as an amateur and as a pro. Can those sweet memories override the unpleasant flashbacks that threaten to hijack his thoughts every time he stands over a chip? What resonates in Woods’s technical speak about old and new release patterns and impact points is that he is lost with his once-trusty wedge in his hands. A decade ago, when his short game was the envy of his peers, Woods’s instincts around the greens were extraordinary. He would see the shot, feel the shot and then make the shot. No longer does he execute his chips as smoothly as an autograph with his dominant hand. Around the greens now, Woods evokes someone trying to remember his lines instead of inhabiting his character. His fluidity is gone, replaced by hitches and hesitations that are evidence of a mind in overdrive. Woods’s swing consultant, Chris Como, walked with him Wednesday and whispered suggestions. He was joined inside the ropes by Fred Couples, a 15-time PGA Tour winner who is so mellow that his next swing thought will probably be his first. Couples on occasion could be seen huddling with Como and swinging an invisible club as Woods struggled to hit fairways and greens. Instead of seeking out swing technicians, Woods might want to talk to stars of the theater, many of whom know what it is like to wrestle with dialogue that once rolled effortlessly off their tongues. A few would be able to relate to Woods, who in golf has long carried the production. They would understand how those stakes can stultify the process. The actor Lee Grant made an observation in her memoir, “I Said Yes to Everything,” that suitably frames Woods’s predicament. “The problem when you are a star, when the money rests on you as an actor,” she wrote, “is that your freedom to fail is gone. You can’t take chances. If you can’t take chances anymore, what kind of actor are you?” Eighteen months have passed since Woods’s last official victory. He has tumbled from atop the rankings to No. 56, jeopardizing his participation in next month’s World Golf Championships event at Doral, a course where he has won four times. Tim Finchem, the PGA Tour commissioner, who has overseen a boom market on Woods’s watch, was asked if he was worried about the state of his leading man’s game. “I think if you asked me as a fan, if I was doing something else, I would say yeah because I want to see him challenge and continue to challenge the big records,” Finchem said. He added: “If you ask me from the standpoint of my current job, I would say not so much because it’s fascinating to fans. I think that — candidly, I think when he tees it up this week, everybody in the world’s going to want to see how he’s going to play because here you had a guy who was so incredible for such a long time and he’s struggling out there.” Woods’s difficulties, while alien to him, are not unusual in golf. Thirty years ago in The New Yorker, a summation of one star’s travails read: “It was the old story of the youthful sensation who becomes a standout at an indecently early age because he plays the game by feel. Somehow or other, he later loses that feel, and he must then learn how to consciously make the moves on which his natural swing was based.” The writer was Herbert Warren Wind, and his subject was Ben Crenshaw, a can’t-miss kid from the 1970s. In 1985, at the time Wind wrote that passage, Crenshaw was one year removed from winning his first major, at Augusta National. Crenshaw won a second Masters in 1995. He was 43 then, with a game whose obituary had been written by many of the same people now administering last rites to Woods’s career. “In Tiger’s case, there’s no question he’s trying to gain his imagination and feel back,” Crenshaw said this week in a telephone interview. “He’s very much filled with mechanical thoughts. That’s what it looks like to me.” Crenshaw added: “Golfers at one time or another are always afflicted by way too many extraneous thoughts. This is what I see with Tiger. I don’t have any qualms about him getting his game back.” Neither does Stan Utley, a one-time tour winner turned short-game specialist whose clients have included Bill and Jay Haas and Darren Clarke. As Utley sees it, all Woods needs is three or four solid chips in a competitive round to reboot his confidence.“I’m not too worried about Tiger’s short game,” said Utley, who does not work with Woods. “I don’t think in the long term he’s broke.” Woods said he could see progress. “I just still need to stick with it and keep doing it,” he said. Referring to Como, his consultant, Woods added: “Chris and I are working our tails off to try to get this. I want to get this. I want to be ready come Augusta and the rest of the majors.” Advertisement