AdvertisementSupported byRangers 3, Bruins 2By Joe LemireHosting the Bruins and coping with Henrik Lundqvist’s unexpected absence on Wednesday night, the Rangers started Cam Talbot, the backup goaltender known as much for his “Ghostbusters”-themed mask as for his sturdy, if sporadic, play.The Rangers’ skaters supported Talbot with a one-goal lead before he even faced a shot: Rick Nash scored his N.H.L.-leading 32nd goal on a breakaway after 5 minutes 50 seconds had elapsed in the first period.Talbot faced his first Boston shot after nearly eight minutes had passed, and although he had a head start, it did not last long as the Bruins’ Milan Lucic and Patrice Bergeron scored goals about two minutes apart. Talbot then settled down, stopping the final 15 shots he faced, and the Rangers’ front-line speed led to two second-period goals for a 3-2 victory in the first start of a stint that could extend to several games for Talbot.“I just look at it as an opportunity for me to go in there and prove that I can shoulder the load,” Talbot said, “and hopefully get a few big wins for us when I can.”On Wednesday morning, Coach Alain Vigneault made the surprising announcement that Lundqvist would be unavailable because of the effects of a puck that had struck him in the neck four days earlier.“It’s not a concussion, but it’s related to the shot,” Vigneault said. An afternoon update declared Lundqvist’s status as day to day. Vigneault said it was possible that Lundqvist would not be ready to play this weekend.The timing of the shutdown was curious. Lundqvist finished the game in which he was injured, played all of Monday night’s game against the Panthers and even made an appearance at the 92nd Street Y on Tuesday night alongside the former Rangers goalies Mike Richter and Ed Giacomin. The Rangers had won eight of Lundqvist’s 11 starts in the new year, during which time he had a 1.87 goals-against average and a .943 save percentage. He has been durable, never failing to start at least 62 games in a full season since his 2005-6 rookie year.Now the Rangers will turn from one of the league’s marquee goalies to his largely unknown backup. Talbot now has a 1.51 goals-against average, a .946 save percentage and three shutouts over his last eight appearances, which date to Nov. 15. He had not played in three weeks before receiving a text message Tuesday night telling him to be ready in case he was needed. “It’s the life of a backup,” defenseman Marc Staal said. “You don’t know when you’re going to get the call. Everyone in this room has the utmost confidence in Talbs.”Vigneault had praised the Bruins — 9-1-4 over their last 14 games — as one of the two best teams in the league right now. That the back-and-forth pace led to a slim final margin came as no surprise: 22 of these two teams’ last 29 regular-season meetings have been decided by one goal.Bruins Coach Claude Julien conceded that the Rangers had a superior speed game, which was evident on their three goals. Nash scored his on a breakaway. In the second period, center Chris Kreider outskated a Boston defenseman for a loose puck and later fed Derick Brassard for the tying one-timer. The Rangers scored again late in the second on another rush up the ice, when Derek Stepan deposited the puck for the go-ahead score.The Bruins managed only 20 shots on goal, which Lucic said was insufficient.“He played a strong game for them,” Lucic said of Talbot, “but for the most part I don’t think we generated enough to score more than the two goals we scored.”Talbot, who recorded 18 saves, said the Bruins seemed to be throwing pucks at the net in hopes of generating rebounds, and he credited his defensemen with gathering the loose pucks.“I don’t think Cam got a lot of work tonight, but I do think, when he did, he made the saves that he had to make,” Vigneault said.He added, “He gave us a chance to win, and that’s what we expect from him.” Advertisement