By JONATHAN CZUPRYNFEB. 4, 2015
GAINESVILLE, Fla. —  Will Muschamp used to spend his days on the recruiting trail trying to persuade Lacroria Wilson that the University of Florida would be the best place for her son, Byron Cowart, to play college football.After Muschamp lost his job with the Gators and started a new one as the defensive coordinator at Auburn, it was no surprise that his opinion changed.Muschamp’s firing left Cowart, one of the nation’s top recruits, with a difficult decision: Should he follow a man he says he loves to Auburn or stay in Florida and help the Gators’ new coach, Jim McElwain, turn around a struggling program?On Wednesday morning, in the Armwood High School auditorium in Seffner, Fla., Cowart slipped on an Auburn Tigers cap, revealing his decision to stick by Muschamp. But in a televised interview, Cowart, a defensive end, said his family’s relationship with Muschamp was not the main reason.Advertisement“Auburn was in my top five way before Will even went to Auburn,” Cowart said. “So, I mean, he played a role a little bit, but I told people, regardless, if I was to get hurt, if I could never play football again or if Will was to leave, I still could see myself at Auburn University.”AdvertisementIn the end, though, Cowart chose a man he has known for two years over one he has known for two months.Martez Ivey, a native of Apopka, Fla., also considered Florida and Auburn. He, too, was considered one of the nation’s top prospects, and his primary recruiter, Mike Summers, remains on Florida’s staff. Ivey, a 6-foot-7, 271-pound offensive tackle, signed with Florida.“It’s where I want to be at,” Ivey said. “I don’t want to go to the state of Alabama. I want to stay here in Florida.”The dismantling of Florida’s coaching staff after Muschamp’s departure was not unusual. Most new coaches bring in their own personnel. Muschamp, however, made his recruits’ decisions harder by staying in the Southeastern Conference, and he complicated matters further when he took his top recruiter, Travaris Robinson, a defensive backs coach, with him to Auburn.Trying not to miss a beat, Muschamp began contacting prospects as soon as he walked out of his introductory news conference at Auburn, he said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“As soon as we get done and walk out that door, we are going,” Muschamp said.McElwain said he knew he was in for endless days of travel at Florida.“Get to as many places as humanly possible from the recruiting standpoint because it’s one of those things: Recruit daily, or die now,” McElwain said.The Gators signed the highly regarded running back Jordan Scarlett, but as of Wednesday, they had only 21 of the 25 scholarship players who will make up their 2015 recruiting class.AdvertisementMcElwain, most recently the head coach at Colorado State, was named Florida’s coach in December. Within days of his hiring, two recruits who had committed to Florida switched their allegiances, to Tennessee and to Louisiana State. Since then, he has battled Muschamp for recruits.Cowart, defensive end CeCe Jefferson and linebacker Jeffery Holland were among them. Jefferson said the three players, who live within a three-hour radius of one another, wanted to attend the same program. Like Cowart, Holland chose Auburn on Wednesday, but Jefferson chose Florida.By successfully recruiting two of the three, Muschamp got some karmic revenge against his former university and left McElwain to recover from a rough start at Florida.A version of this article appears in print on February 5, 2015, on Page B15 of the New York edition with the headline: A Coach’s Move Complicates a Recruiting Rivalry in the SEC.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.