By CHRISTOPHER CLAREYFEB. 4, 2015
Serena Williams announced Wednesday that she intended to play next month in the annual tennis tournament in Indian Wells, Calif., ending her 14-year boycott of the event.Williams, 33, last played the event in 2001, winning the title after her older sister Venus had withdrawn from their semifinal, citing knee tendinitis.Venus Williams’s withdrawal, announced just minutes before play was to begin, drew boos from some in the crowd and fed speculation that the sisters and Richard Williams, their father and coach, were trying to avoid an intrafamily match.Two days later, when Serena Williams faced Kim Clijsters in the final, there were more boos from the crowd when Richard Williams and Venus Williams arrived to take their seats in a courtside box. Richard Williams shook his fist in the direction of some spectators and later said he had been subjected to racist taunts. Serena Williams was also a target of booing during the match.AdvertisementSerena and Venus Williams have long vowed not to return to the tournament. But on Wednesday, in a video released online and in a first-person article published on Time magazine’s website, Serena Williams announced her intention to play.Advertisement“Indian Wells holds a special place in my heart,” she said in the video. “It’s where I won my first professional match, but it’s also where I lost a piece of myself. For a long time, I just couldn’t imagine revisiting one of the darkest moments of my career.“Over the past few years I’ve grown tremendously as a tennis player and, even more importantly, as a human being. That’s why I’ve decided to return to Indian Wells.”Venus Williams has yet to announce whether she will return. Carlos Fleming, Venus Williams’s longtime agent, wrote in an email Wednesday, “Venus has not told me that she will be playing.”Raymond Moore, the chief executive of the tournament, said in a telephone interview that he had had no direct contact with Venus Williams but that he intended to reach out to her. Moore said the tournament was keeping a wild-card slot available for her, just as it had for Serena Williams. Neither sister was on the original official entry list for this year’s event, which will run from March 9 to 22.Moore also said he hoped Richard Williams would return.“We’ll see what happens in the next month, whether we can make a few more things happen,” Moore said.Indian Wells, a combined men’s and women’s event, has grown into one of the most prestigious tournaments outside the four Grand Slam events. Moore, one of the tournament’s founders, said he was “over the moon” because of Serena Williams’s change of heart.Moore said her decision came after discussions extending more than a year. Stacey Allaster, the WTA’s chairwoman and chief executive, played an intermediary role.Advertisement“Serena has been missed at the tournament, and I know she will be warmly received by the fans at Indian Wells,” Allaster said in a statement.Katrina Adams, the new president of the United States Tennis Association, mentioned the importance of the country’s top women’s tennis player returning to one of the country’s top tournaments.“Serena’s decision to return is another sign of her maturity in understanding that although many people show signs of ignorance, not all are,” Adams, the first African-American and the first former professional player to lead the U.S.T.A., wrote in an email. “The past is history, but the present is a gift. She has millions of fans in California that would love to see her play in person, and what a treat they will be in for.”Williams entered the tournament last year for the first time since 2001, but she withdrew well before the start.“I think what happened — and this is just my guess — is that when she got home and discussed it with her family and friends, they said to her, ‘Don’t do this,’ ” Moore said. “And I think pressure was put on her. I don’t know that for a fact. I just don’t think she was quite emotionally ready to face this, and I think that now she is.”Moore said that Lawrence J. Ellison, the American software billionaire who bought the tournament in 2010, spoke directly with Serena Williams at her request in early December.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I had two calls with Serena directly,” Moore said. “The first one was through Stacey, and Serena was, I think, on her way at that time to the WTA finals in Singapore. And she said, ‘All right, let’s talk when I get back.’ And when she got back, she said to me, ‘I take everything you say, but Larry owns the tournament, and I’d like to hear from Larry.’ ”Moore added: “He paid respect to her as a great athlete and said, ‘Serena, I will do everything to make you comfortable and welcome in Indian Wells.’ So that went a long way.”Since 2009, Indian Wells has been one of four Premier Mandatory tournaments on the WTA Tour, which all leading players are required to play or face penalties. The Williamses, who will be in Buenos Aires this weekend to play in the Fed Cup for the United States, remained firm.Advertisement“There hasn’t been one single tournament since 2001 that I haven’t had the question of, when are you going to get the Williams sisters back?” Moore said. “It comes every single year, and it is kind of a blot on our copy book. It’s not of our making, and it’s not of Serena’s or Venus’s making. It’s just what happened.“People talk to me about it, and there were no winners here, none. The Indian Wells community, the city, was branded unfairly. In fact, the mayor at the time was African-American. The tournament lost the opportunity to display two of the greatest women’s players, and I think that ultimately the Williams sisters or the Williams family also faced criticism. So, in my opinion, there were no winners in this entire thing, and I think that Serena has now turned it around.”Richard Williams has provided details — in interviews and in his recently published autobiography — on the nature of the racist taunts he said he heard at Indian Wells in 2001.Tournament officials at the time said they had not heard reports or received complaints about racist taunting that day from anyone other than Richard Williams.In her first-person piece for Time, Serena Williams wrote: “The false allegations that our matches were fixed hurt, cut and ripped into us deeply. The undercurrent of racism was painful, confusing and unfair. In a game I loved with all my heart, at one of my most cherished tournaments, I suddenly felt unwelcome, alone and afraid.”Through a publicist, Williams declined an interview request Wednesday, saying she wanted her first-person piece and her video to stand on their own for now.She wrote that the crowd’s reaction “haunted” her and her family for a long time.“But most of all, it angered and saddened my father,” she wrote. “He dedicated his whole life to prepping us for this incredible journey, and there he had to sit and watch his daughter being taunted, sparking cold memories of his experiences growing up in the South.”Williams’s announcement seemed designed to draw attention to her work with the Equal Justice Initiative, which provides legal representation to indigent defendants and prisoners. Nearly half of her video promoted the initiative.AdvertisementWilliams said she had gradually changed her perspective on playing at Indian Wells. She said in the Time article that the swift condemnation by the WTA and the United States Tennis Association of mocking comments made last year about the Williams sisters by Shamil Tarpischev, the president of the Russian Tennis Federation, reminded her of “how far the sport has come and how far I’ve come, too.”Tarpischev referred to the Williamses as “the Williams brothers” on a Russian television program in October. He said he was joking, but he was fined $25,000 and was suspended from any involvement with the WTA for a year.“I’m fortunate to be at a point in my career where I have nothing to prove,” Williams wrote. “I’m still as driven as ever, but the ride is a little easier. I play for the love of the game. And it is with that love in mind, and a new understanding of the true meaning of forgiveness, that I will proudly return to Indian Wells in 2015.”A version of this article appears in print on February 5, 2015, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: After a 14-Year Boycott, Serena Williams Plans to Play at Indian Wells.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.