By JERÉ LONGMANFEB. 4, 2015
HARRISBURG, Pa. —  Like his father before him, State Senator Jake Corman represents the district that includes Penn State, his alma mater, in the Pennsylvania General Assembly. In his office as Senate majority leader, he keeps a box of Wheaties autographed by Joe Paterno, a model of Beaver Stadium and a small statue of the university’s Nittany Lions mascot.It was Mr. Corman’s legal maneuvering — and what he considers a strategic mistake by the N.C.A.A. — that ultimately led to the governing body’s retreat from its original, harsh penalties against Penn State in the Jerry Sandusky child molestation case.In a mid-January settlement, the N.C.A.A. agreed to restore 111 victories that it had rescinded from Mr. Paterno, again making him the coach with the most victories in major-college football.The N.C.A.A. also acceded to Mr. Corman’s most insistent demand — that a $60 million fine imposed on Penn State be spent entirely within Pennsylvania on programs to treat and prevent child sexual abuse, as opposed to only 25 percent, as the N.C.A.A. had wanted.Advertisement“The N.C.A.A. has surrendered,” Mr. Corman, 50, declared in words that became a bold front-page headline in The Centre Daily Times of State College, Pa., home of Penn State.AdvertisementThe N.C.A.A. had a different interpretation.Compromise is not surrender, said Everett Johnson Jr., a Washington lawyer who represented the N.C.A.A. The governing body, he said, got what it most urgently sought: confirmation that Penn State was obligated to pay $60 million, avoidance of years of potential delay in disbursing the money to victims and acknowledgment by the university that the N.C.A.A. had a “legitimate and good-faith interest” in the case.“I think the N.C.A.A. feels today as it felt then, that it acted completely appropriately in the face of unprecedented, extraordinary circumstances,” Mr. Johnson, who is known as Kip, said in reference to a 2012 consent decree between the N.C.A.A. and Penn State.Yet after Mr. Corman filed a lawsuit against the N.C.A.A. in January 2013, the governing body found itself on the defensive during two years of legal battles. The January settlement averted a trial set to begin on Feb. 17.Over time, the lawsuit evolved from a dispute over control of the $60 million fine to the validity of the consent decree itself and the N.C.A.A.’s authority to impose any penalties on Penn State in the Sandusky case.Shortly after filing his lawsuit, Mr. Corman also introduced a bill that quickly became a Pennsylvania law. It was known as the Endowment Act, and it required that the $60 million fine be spent on child-abuse programs in the state. The fine was a rough equivalent of the football program’s annual gross revenue.After all, Mr. Corman reasoned, Penn State received more than $250 million annually in public funding. And payment of the $60 million fine from a football reserve fund and an internal athletic department loan would, in part, come out of the pockets of Pennsylvanians.“These were Pennsylvania dollars,” said Mr. Corman, who was chairman of Pennsylvania’s Senate appropriations committee at the time. “If they had to put up some sort of foundation to fight child abuse, it should be done in Pennsylvania.”AdvertisementEarly on, said Matthew Haverstick, a Philadelphia lawyer who represented Mr. Corman in the lawsuit, the senator would have settled for “table scraps” and split control of the $60 million with the N.C.A.A.Instead, the N.C.A.A. appeared arrogant and unwilling to compromise, said Mr. Haverstick, who added that he was told by one of the governing body’s lawyers: “We’re as important to the national economy as Walmart and Coca-Cola.”Mr. Johnson, the N.C.A.A.’s lawyer, disputed the characterization of arrogance and said that the governing body had been more than willing to compromise.The N.C.A.A. sought to have most of the $60 million fine spent outside Pennsylvania, he said, because not all of the money, Penn State students or fans came from the state, nor did all sexual abuse victims, including some molested by Mr. Sandusky.It was important, Mr. Johnson said, “that victims everywhere could benefit from the fine that Penn State was paying.”In April 2014, the N.C.A.A. had an apparent setback when the case expanded from oversight of the $60 million fine to an examination of the validity of the consent decree.At the time, the N.C.A.A. was challenging — unsuccessfully — the constitutionality of Pennsylvania’s Endowment Act. In its legal arguments, the N.C.A.A. brought up the consent decree, saying it had been a good-faith, bargained contract with Penn State to correct violations of the governing body’s constitution and bylaws.That was a tactical error and left the N.C.A.A. vulnerable, Mr. Corman and Mr. Haverstick said.“If the N.C.A.A. hadn’t made allegations it didn’t have to make about the consent decree, none of this would have happened,” Mr. Haverstick said of the eventual settlement. “The case would have been purely about the Endowment Act and the $60 million.”Instead, in a ruling made in April 2014, the Commonwealth Court of Pennsylvania questioned the legitimacy of the consent decree. The court is an appellate court that also serves as a trial court for some civil cases involving Pennsylvania state government.AdvertisementWriting for the majority, Judge Anne Covey noted factual disputes in the case and discrepancies between the consent decree and the N.C.A.A. bylaws.The consent decree “expressly recognizes the N.C.A.A.’s questionable involvement in and its dubious authority pertaining to a criminal action” against Mr. Sandusky, a former Penn State assistant coach who was no longer a university employee, and involving abused children who were not Penn State students, Judge Covey wrote.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Until that moment, Mr. Haverstick said, “never in my wildest dreams” did it occur to him or Mr. Corman that they would have a legal basis to challenge the consent decree. “Now we were going in this great new direction, and we felt we had the N.C.A.A. on the ropes,” Mr. Haverstick said.There was no tactical mistake, said Mr. Johnson, the N.C.A.A.’s lawyer. He noted that Mr. Corman had not challenged the validity of the consent decree to that point and that both sides were ready to resolve the case on purely legal issues until the court decided to consider the decree.“About that, no party had any final control,” Mr. Johnson said.Emails obtained during the discovery phase that followed became public in November. They depicted N.C.A.A. officials questioning whether they had the authority to punish Penn State. One official said she told Mark Emmert, the N.C.A.A.’s president, that sanctions would be a “bluff” and that he “basically agreed.”In December, another email emerged, written in November 2011 by Mr. Emmert as the Sandusky scandal mushroomed. It was unfortunate, Mr. Emmert wrote, adding, “However, we cannot miss the opportunity to leverage the moment.”The N.C.A.A. said Mr. Emmert was unavailable for comment.Had Mr. Corman’s lawsuit gone to trial, Mr. Haverstick said, he planned to use the word “leverage” as often as possible in an attempt to show that Mr. Emmert and a small group of N.C.A.A. officials had subverted the normal infractions process, coercing Penn State into accepting the consent decree under threat of the so-called death penalty, a ban on play, for the football team.When the consent decree was signed, Mr. Haverstick noted, the N.C.A.A. was involved in what it would later acknowledge was a mishandling of a booster-related case against the University of Miami, while also attempting to project a vigorous commitment by Mr. Emmert to enforce its rules.AdvertisementThere was a “new sheriff in town; this was going to show the N.C.A.A. as a tough, effective enforcer,” Mr. Haverstick said. “Penn State just happened at the right time for them.”Penn State signed the consent decree, not under duress, but “knowingly and voluntarily and in its own best interest,” Mr. Johnson said. Amid widespread outrage and clamoring for the death penalty, he said, the N.C.A.A. administered harsh penalties but provided Penn State an opportunity to keep playing and appearing on national television.As a February trial approached on Mr. Corman’s lawsuit, the N.C.A.A. lost an attempt in federal court on Jan. 13 to challenge Pennsylvania’s Endowment Act. Three days later, a settlement was reached and trial was averted.“They couldn’t win,” Mr. Corman said. “They knew where the evidence was going.”After the settlement, Mr. Corman, a Republican, was widely praised by Penn State supporters. So was Pennsylvania’s state treasurer, Rob McCord, a Democrat, who had joined the senator’s lawsuit. (Mr. McCord resigned from his office Friday in an unrelated matter and plans to plead guilty to federal extortion charges.)“A large measure of the wrong has been righted,” the Paterno family said in a statement.But there was also widespread criticism of both Penn State and the N.C.A.A.Jeff Anderson, a lawyer from St. Paul who represented two of Mr. Sandusky’s victims in cases settled out of court, said the N.C.A.A. acted with “cowardice” in retreating.He described Penn State and the N.C.A.A. as “good old boys” trying to protect each other. “The message sent to the victims is they don’t count as much,” Mr. Anderson said. “It’s a slap to their face.”Michael Boni, a lawyer from suburban Philadelphia for one of the victims who testified in the Sandusky case, criticized as “gloating” and “insensitive” the response by some Penn State supporters to the Jan. 16 settlement.AdvertisementThe Penn State men’s hockey team wore “409” stickers during a game — a reference to Mr. Paterno’s total of career victories — and many supporters called for a restoration of Mr. Paterno’s statue outside Beaver Stadium.A number of people who had disputed a 2012 investigation of the Sandusky scandal by Louis J. Freeh, a former F.B.I. director, now seemed to be confirming one of its central accusations, that the culture at Penn State was “football über alles,” or football above everything else, Mr. Boni said.If opposing sides could agree on one thing, though, it was this: A $60 million fund had been created to assist victims and deter child sexual abuse in Pennsylvania.“This is real money that is going to do some real good,” Mr. Haverstick said.A version of this article appears in print on February 5, 2015, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: A Boost From the State Capitol.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.