AdvertisementSupported byBy Katharine Q. SeelyeBOSTON — In response to skeptical questions, Mayor Martin J. Walsh pledged Thursday night that Boston taxpayers would not pay a dime in cost overruns if the city ended up hosting the 2024 Summer Olympics.“We’re not going to mortgage the future of the city away,” Mr. Walsh told a standing-room-only crowd. “I wouldn’t sign any document that would make the city responsible for a $10 billion overrun or a $1 overrun.”Since Jan. 8, when the United States Olympic Committee picked Boston over Los Angeles, San Francisco and Washington as the nation’s entry in the international competition, a robust opposition to holding the Games in Boston has materialized. On Thursday night, the city got a glimpse of just how much opposition there is. At its first public meeting regarding Boston’s Olympic bid, a few hundred people, many of them skeptics, crowded into a hearing room and an overflow room at Suffolk University Law School in downtown Boston, despite the single-digit temperatures outside.For more than three hours, the mayor and the principals of Boston 2024, the committee of private citizens that organized the bid, answered questions, some of them hostile, some of them laudatory, and some from people who said they were potentially supportive but had concerns.Those concerns included the lack of transparency about the process. Many questioned why, since this meeting was sponsored by the city, only the principals of Boston 2024 made a presentation and responded to questions; there were no representatives from NoBostonOlympics, the primary vehicle against hosting the Games, at the podium, although they were in the audience.“You’re pushing this down our throats,” one woman said. “Even the way you set this venue up tonight does not feel like a conversation to me.”Many people had concerns about specific sites, objecting to proposals like staging beach volleyball on the Boston Common.There were philosophical questions — if, as the promoters of the bid have said, the Games are a catalyst to do necessary long-term planning for the city and spur development of more affordable housing, one man asked, “Why pile on top of that a very expensive event?”But the most common theme running through the dozens of questions involved the costs, asked multiple different ways. Cost overruns are a sensitive subject here after the Big Dig, an enormous federal highway project that was initially estimated to cost $2 billion; the final bill was $22 billion.Mr. Walsh said repeatedly that no taxpayer money would be spent on sites or facilities. He said some would be spent on infrastructure, but those were outlays the city would make anyway.John Fish, a prominent builder who is overseeing the bid, assured the audience that for the actual bid, “There’s been no taxpayer funding for the bid process and there won’t be taxpayer money.” He said he was raising money privately for it and also donating money himself “to support this particular opportunity.” Questions have mounted in recent weeks about the process as details of the bid have emerged.The organizers did not check first with several landlords whose properties they have designated as venue sites — including the food distributors who occupy the proposed site for the 60,000-seat Olympic stadium, and the landowners whose properties would be part of the athletes’ village. Nor did organizers check with landlords and tenants before suggesting that thousands of international visitors could stay in off-campus student housing; that plan has since been scrapped.Perhaps most alarmingly, the recent record snowfall and Arctic temperatures exposed severe vulnerabilities in the city’s creaking, underfunded subway system and commuter rail lines. Breakdowns, delays and citywide gridlock prompted many to ask how the city could manage the additional passenger load of Olympic visitors.Also, initial steps have been taken to allow voters, both in Boston and statewide, to vote on whether they want to host the Olympics. In Boston, City Councilor Josh Zakim, who says he is neither for nor against hosting the Olympics, wants to put four nonbinding questions on the November ballot: Should Boston host the Games? Should the city commit public money to support the Olympics? Should the city promise to cover cost overruns? Should Boston use eminent domain to take private land on behalf of the Games?To appear on the ballot, the questions need to be approved by a majority of the City Council and Mayor Walsh, who has said he opposes a referendum but would not stand in the way of one.On Thursday night, he was asked if he would drop the bid if voters opposed it. He said that if it were a binding referendum and the voters said no, the bid would be over. But, he added, if it were nonbinding, “it’s a different conversation.” Statewide, Evan Falchuk, a failed candidate for governor in 2014, is preparing a referendum on the Olympics that would appear on the November 2016 ballot.The mayor, who was initially an Olympics skeptic but is now fully on board, said Thursday that when Boston was announced as the winner of the domestic contest, 85 million tweets about Boston went out around the world.“This is an opportunity for us to continue to sell our city and bring more industry to our city,” he told the audience.But he also insisted that if the final plans did not enhance the city and help it fulfill its own goals — especially for 2030, when the city will celebrate its 400th anniversary — Boston would walk away from the bid.“This is not a done deal by any stretch of the imagination,” he said.NoBostonOlympics handed out signs in advance of the meeting saying “Better Schools, No Olympic Games,” “Better Transit, No Olympic Games” and “Better Housing, No Olympics Games.”After the meeting, Mayor Walsh told Chris Dempsey, one of the leaders of NoBostonOlympics, “Those are my priorities too.” The mayor is meeting with the group on Friday.Advertisement