By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSFEB. 5, 2015
Top of the division is nice. Winning the Eastern Conference sounds even better for the surprising Islanders.Cal Clutterbuck scored the deciding goal in the seventh round of a shootout to lead the scuffling Islanders to a needed 3-2 win over the Flyers on Thursday night in Philadelphia.“There wasn’t really a plan, just hit a hole,” he said.Clutterbuck hit the open one, and the Islanders remained firmly in the hunt for the top spot in the East after a three-game losing streak.“It was a lot more the way we wanted to play than the last couple have been,” the Islanders’ captain, John Tavares, said.AdvertisementClutterbuck scored just his fifth goal of the season in regulation, and Mikhail Grabovski scored his eighth. Frans Nielsen got a puck past Steve Mason on the first shot of the shootout, and Wayne Simmonds scored on Philadelphia’s last tying attempt in the third round.AdvertisementAfter Clutterbuck’s wrister got past Mason, Sean Couturier was denied by Jaroslav Halak and Philadelphia’s season-high four-game winning streak was over.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Nick Schultz and Chris VandeVelde scored in regulation on a scarcity of shots for the Flyers.With the N.H.L. points leader Jake Voracek and his fellow All-Star Claude Giroux unable to get on track, the Flyers struggled to generate any offense. But the Flyers did make the most of their limited opportunities, scoring twice on their first eight shots on Halak, who had 16 saves.LIGHTNING 5, STARS 3 Tyler Johnson scored two third-period goals, lifting Tampa Bay to victory in Dallas. Johnson tipped Brian Boyle’s shot from the top of the left face-off circle down between goalie Kari Lehtonen’s legs to break a 3-3 tie with 3 minutes 37 seconds remaining.CAPITALS 2, SENATORS 1 Alex Ovechkin scored the winning goal as Washington won in Ottawa. Evgeny Kuznetsov also scored for the Capitals, and Braden Holtby picked up his 25th win by stopping 25 shots.DUCKS 5, PREDATORS 2 Jakob Silfverberg scored two goals, and Anaheim took sole possession atop the N.H.L. standings by winning in Nashville. Frederik Andersen made 44 saves in tying the Predators’ Pekka Rinne with his 29th win.BLUES 3, SABRES 0 Jake Allen stopped 23 shots and St. Louis set a franchise record by extending its point streak to 13 games with a win in Buffalo. Buffalo was shut out for the ninth time this season — one short of matching a franchise high.PANTHERS 3, KINGS 2 Brandon Pirri scored with 3:05 remaining to lift Florida over struggling Los Angeles. Nick Bjugstad and Aleksander Barkov also scored for the host Panthers, and Roberto Luongo stopped 29 shots.A version of this article appears in print on February 6, 2015, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: Islanders Edge Flyers in the Seventh Round of a Shootout.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.