AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressJACKSONVILLE, Fla. — Doug Marrone, the former Buffalo Bills coach, now has a home in Jacksonville.And he did not rent, he bought.Speaking publicly for the first time since he surprisingly opted out of his contract on Dec. 31, departing with two years remaining on a four-year deal, Marrone said Thursday that he left Buffalo with no assurances of getting another job.“In this profession, you can’t really have that,” Marrone said. “You really don’t know. It’s a league where anything can happen. But I didn’t have that going in. I knew that it was all open.”Days after he left the Bills, Marrone emerged as a front-runner with the Jets to replace Rex Ryan, who became the Bills’ new coach. Marrone also interviewed with Chicago and Atlanta and was in the mix in Denver, but did not receive any offers.He eventually was hired in Jacksonville as the offensive line coach, a move that raised eyebrows around the N.F.L. and drew laughs in Buffalo. He has said he is happy to be near his wife’s family and is ready to move forward as a position coach. He closed on a house Thursday and already has his wife and three children in town.“At the end of the day, I had two outstanding years in Buffalo,” Marrone said. “I really can’t say enough for the people within the organization, from the trainers, from the P.R. department, from the equipment people. They were outstanding. At the end of the day, I had a three-day window on my contract, which was obviously difficult because of the time aspect of it. My family and I made a decision to leave.”But Marrone offered little insight into why he wanted out or why he sent a mass text to his players announcing his decision.Most outsiders assumed he expected to get another head-coaching job, and that when it did not happen he settled for a position job with the rebuilding Jaguars.Marrone stepped down after leading the Bills to a 9-7 record in 2014, the team’s first winning season since 2004. The opt-out clause in Marrone’s contract went into effect after Terry Pegula and wife, Kim, bought the team in October.“Everyone understood the situation,” he said.Not everyone seemed to agree, though.Terry Pegula said he was shocked by Marrone’s departure. Safety Aaron Williams posted on Twitter, “Lost all respect!!” on the day Marrone announced he was leaving. Running back Fred Jackson referred to Ryan as “an upgrade” and told a Buffalo radio station that Marrone’s departure felt like he “got punched in the stomach.” And Ryan said at his introductory news conference that the Bills deserve to have a loyal coach — a clear shot at Marrone.Jaguars Coach Gus Bradley first talked to Marrone in January. Once it became clear that Marrone was not getting a head-coaching job, Bradley offered him the offensive line position, an important one since Jacksonville allowed a franchise-record 71 sacks last season.“I felt the humility,” Bradley said. “When I say humility, I just felt like he said, ‘Gus, I think I want to grow in multiple areas both professionally and personally, and I think this culture is a good fit for me. I want to get back to coaching guys with their hand in the ground. I’ve had some success doing that.’ “If you look at his past and his offensive coordinator experience, he has done a tremendous job developing offensive linemen,” Bradley added.Advertisement