AdvertisementSupported byN.B.A. RoundupBy The Associated PressLeBron James scored 23 points, Kevin Love had 24, and the Cleveland Cavaliers pushed their winning streak to 12 games on Thursday night with a 105-94 victory over the visiting Los Angeles Clippers, who also lost their composure.The Cavaliers built a 32-point lead in the third quarter, allowing James and Love to sit out the fourth and rest. With its longest winning streak since a franchise-best 13-game stretch in 2010, Cleveland moved into first place in the Central Division. The Cavaliers were seven games behind the Chicago Bulls when the streak began with a victory over the Los Angeles Lakers on Jan. 15.The Clippers were whistled for five technical fouls, including four in a contentious third quarter when they lost their cool and forward Matt Barnes was ejected.Blake Griffin scored 16 and Jamal Crawford 13 for Los Angeles, whose substitutes made the score respectable in the fourth.On Jan. 16, the Cavaliers beat the Clippers, 126-121, for the second win in their streak. Cleveland was a different team back then, “in disarray,” as Clippers Coach Doc Rivers put it before the game. But the Cavaliers are now connecting at both ends of the floor; their first-year coach, David Blatt, has his team’s attention; and Cleveland is looking every bit like an N.B.A. title contender.The Clippers figured to be a strong test for the Cavaliers but were no match as Cleveland won its eighth straight over Western Conference opponents.HORNETS 94, WIZARDS 87 Gerald Henderson scored 27 points, and host Charlotte rallied to earn its second win over Washington this week. Henderson shot 10 of 15 from the field as the Hornets beat the Wizards for the fifth straight time. Charlotte won at Washington on Monday night, 92-88.Brian Roberts had 12 points and provided a huge lift late in the third quarter after Charlotte had fallen behind by 11 points. Charlotte picked up its defense in the fourth quarter, holding the Wizards to 5-of-19 shooting from the field.ORLANDO FIRES COACH The Orlando Magic fired Coach Jacque Vaughn after a 15-37 start to the season.The Magic ended the two-and-a-half-year tenure of Vaughn, who had been a first-time N.B.A. head coach, after a series of lopsided defeats during a 10-game losing streak. It is Orlando’s second skid of five games or more since the start of 2015. The Magic were also 15-37 through 52 games last season.James Borrego, a top assistant, was named the interim head coach. Rob Hennigan, the Magic’s general manager, did not give a timeline for appointing Vaughn’s successor but said that the team was “100 percent” behind Borrego and that he would have a chance to vie for the full-time job.Vaughn, 39, ended his Magic tenure with a 58-158 record. His dismissal came after Orlando picked up the fourth-year option of his contract last off-season.Advertisement