AdvertisementSupported byBlue Jays 5, Rangers 1By David WaldsteinARLINGTON, Tex. — Troy Tulowitzki’s three-run homer Sunday will never be compared to the three-run shot that Joe Carter hit in Game 6 of the 1993 World Series. Few home runs could ever surpass that one for its dramatic timing and historical significance.Still, Tulowitzki’s homer was the first since Carter’s to help propel the Toronto Blue Jays to a postseason victory, and that alone is something. Twenty-two years and three playoff games later, Toronto finally has another postseason win to celebrate.Tulowitzki’s sixth-inning blast against Chi Chi Gonzalez sailed over the left-field fence and helped ensure the Blue Jays’ 5-1 win over the Texas Rangers in Game 3 of their American League division series. Texas leads the series by two games to one, with Game 4 set for Monday afternoon. If the Blue Jays win again, the series will return to Toronto for a decisive Game 5.“Hopefully tomorrow we can do the same thing,” Tulowitzki said, “get back to Toronto and see what Game 5 is.”Toronto was already leading Game 3 by 2-0 when Tulowitzki struck, but the game was still nerve-racking for the Blue Jays, who could not break through offensively. Four double plays turned by the Rangers helped snuff out rallies, including one in the at-bat just before Tulowitzki came to the plate in the sixth. So when he unleashed his first postseason home run since 2007, when he was with the Colorado Rockies (a stretch of 70 homerless plate appearances), the Jays could exhale at last.“I think it was definitely huge,” Tulowitzki said. “In the moment, I was definitely pumped up. I got back to the dugout, and everybody’s obviously excited to put us up by five. A little breathing room.” The other star of the game was Marco Estrada, Toronto’s starting pitcher, who held the Rangers to one run in six and a third innings. He was paired with catcher Dioner Navarro instead of Russell Martin because Estrada and Navarro had settled into a formidable tandem. Still, Martin knows what has made Estrada so impressive.“He has one of the best changeups in the game,” Martin said.In Game 4, Toronto will go with R. A. Dickey, a veteran knuckleballer who has never pitched in the postseason. He will oppose Derek Holland.Hours before the Blue Jays took the field for Game 3 on Sunday, Dickey was asked if it was odd to prepare for a game that might not take place.“Why wouldn’t it happen?” Dickey asked with a straight face.Dickey was being playful; he knew that if the Blue Jays lost that night, they would be on vacation. Dickey has waited through 13 regular seasons to pitch in the postseason, and he called it poetic that his playoff debut would come against the Rangers, the first major league team that signed him, in 1996. Dickey was a Ranger when he made his major league debut in 2001.He faces a difficult challenge. The Blue Jays won 93 games in the regular season to capture the A.L. East title and reach the playoffs for the first time since 1993, but they are trying to become only the third team to win a best-of-five series after losing the first two games at home. The 2001 Yankees pulled off such a comeback in a division series against the Oakland Athletics, and the 2012 San Francisco Giants did it against the Cincinnati Reds. Dickey was asked to compare his task in this series with climbing Mount Kilimanjaro. It may seem an odd comparison, but Dickey was part of an expedition that scaled Kilimanjaro, the highest mountain in Africa, in January 2012, when he was with the Mets. “Well, I don’t feel as nauseous as I did when I was halfway up the mountain; that’s for sure,” Dickey said. “You know, like I said before, this is not an insurmountable peak.”A comeback by Toronto will be a little more realistic, too, if Tulowitzki continues his breakout. Tulowitzki, a shortstop, made an immediate impact when he joined the Blue Jays in a trade from Colorado on July 28, but he broke the scapula in his left shoulder on Sept. 12 and started slowly in this series.“It’s definitely not 100 percent,” he said of his shoulder. “I said that at the beginning of the series, but it’s good enough to go, good enough to play with tons of treatment, to be honest with you. I could do it all day. But just go out there and play and see what happens.”Manager John Gibbons, who confirmed that he would stick with Dickey for Game 4 and not have David Price pitch on short rest, knows how much Tulowitzki’s resurgence could mean to the Blue Jays. They looked anxious in their 14-inning loss in Game 2, with many of their hitters trying to win the game with one mighty swing.“If he catches fire,” Gibbons said, referring to Tulowitzki, “we’re real dangerous.” Advertisement