AdvertisementSupported byBy Kelley McMillanBEAVER CREEK, Colo. — Hurtling down the super-G course at the Alpine world ski championships at 60 miles an hour on Thursday, Bode Miller was putting down the kind of daring, electric run for which he was famous. Then came a terrifying crash that severed his right hamstring tendon and most likely ended his brilliant career. Miller, 37, a six-time Olympic medalist, was taken to Vail Valley Medical Center and had surgery on the tendon. By late afternoon, Miller was out of surgery and tweeted: “Out of a successful surgery for a severed hamstring tendon. Feeling lucky since things could have been way worse.”The recovery time for such an injury is usually a couple of months, according to the United States Ski Association spokesman Tom Kelly, and with Miller’s possible retirement looming over his world championship bid, Thursday’s run was probably his last on the World Cup circuit.The crash came during a difficult race that was won by Hannes Reichelt of Austria with a time of 1 minute 15.68 seconds. Dustin Cook, a Canadian who has never finished in the top three of a World Cup event, was the runner-up, and Adrien Theaux of France finished third, 0.24 of a second behind Reichelt. Miller’s teammate Ted Ligety placed ninth, the top finish by an American.Miller, who until Thursday had not competed this season because of an injured back, was in signature form, making an aggressive run that gave him an early lead on the treacherous Birds of Prey super-G. Three-fourths of the way down the course, in a section called the Abyss, Miller hooked his arm on a gate, spinning him around in the air and causing him to crash on his neck and back. As he somersaulted and slid for about 400 feet, his skis came off, and one of them sliced through his suit, causing a deep cut in his right calf. “I know he spun around and tumbled several times,” said Sasha Rearick, coach of the United States ski team’s men’s speed squad. “In that process, his skis came off, and thankfully they did. In order to get a gash like that, he must have rolled over or landed on the ski that was tumbling with him.”Rearick, who watched the crash unfold from a slopeside vantage point, added, “I’m certain that’s how it must have occurred.”Rearick also said, “This was a horrific crash — the brutal nature of being twisted around and then tumbling backwards.”Miller skied to the finish line under his own power. At the bottom of the course, he limped to the sideline, where he spoke to his wife and children while a ski patroller wrapped his wound with gauze. He also spoke with a teammate, Travis Ganong. “When I talked to him after the run, he said his whole body was numb, that everything hurt,” Ganong said. “So, it’s going to be tough.”Miller was transported to Vail Valley Medical Center, where he underwent surgery. With six Olympic medals, five world championship medals, two World Cup overall titles and 33 World Cup victories, Miller is widely considered the most successful male ski racer in United States history. Beyond his vast trophy collection, what defined Miller’s skiing was his high-risk, high-reward style that often produced spectacular results.Two years ago, he married the professional volleyball player Morgan Beck, and the couple are expecting a child on May 24. Miller has two children from previous relationships and has embraced fatherhood. Perhaps that was why, in recent months, he had begun to reconsider the consequences of his high-stakes approach and whether he was willing to keep risking it all. “After seeing Kitzbühel and seeing the Streif movie, my family, they’re all more hesitant to encourage me to race because there is real danger,” Miller said in reference to a recently released documentary about the Hahnenkamm race that takes place each January in Kitzbühel, Austria, and is widely considered the world’s most dangerous downhill. “I’ve always known about it, it’s always been a part of what I accepted, but for people who aren’t used to it, it can be tough to face that reality.”As recently as last week, Miller’s participation in the world championships was in question because of his back, which he injured in a crash last March.Bode Miller had a spectacular crash in the super-G at the Alpine world ski championships on Thursday.Miller said in a recent phone interview that he knew that he risked injury while racing and believed that the closer he was to full health, the greater the likelihood he could reinjure himself. “It’s obviously the sort of thing where the closer you get to being 100 percent healthy, the more danger there is, because you stop protecting it and you stop being real careful, which you need to do to race well,” Miller said.While Thursday’s super-G was Miller’s first race of the season, he was in prime form.“Bode was skiing outstanding,” Rearick said. “He was going for it. Absolutely sending it from top to bottom.”While the weather was clear and sunny Thursday, five inches of snow had fallen overnight. The new snow combined with warm temperatures made for challenging conditions that posed problems for many racers. Sixteen skiers failed to finish the race.“The snow conditions are not ideal,” said Ganong, who skied out. “You really have to readjust your plan and give yourself some extra room and set up a little bit.”Kjetil Jansrud of Norway, a favorite to win the race, was also transported to Vail Valley Medical Center to evaluate his left shoulder after clipping a gate. He was uninjured and will probably race in Saturday’s downhill. Stacey Cook of the United States crashed in a downhill training run, sustained a left arm contusion and sprained her right thumb. After being transported to the medical center, she was cleared to compete in Friday’s downhill.Advertisement