AdvertisementSupported byBy Bill PenningtonBEAVER CREEK, Colo. — In an Alpine downhill race, there is no more lonely and solitary position than standing over a pair of skis hurtling down the mountain at 80 miles an hour.The racer’s only companion is noise. In the merciless and nervy world of the downhill — the original extreme winter sport — sometimes the louder things get, the better. During a fast and sleek descent, the wind whistles around the body and through the small breaches in a skier’s helmet, creating an unmistakably shrill whistle that is one of several welcomed audio responses every competitor uses as feedback.“There is a sound to going fast,” said Kjetil Jansrud of Norway, who enters this weekend’s men’s downhill at the Alpine world championships as the top-ranked contender. “You seek the sound of the wind whistling through your helmet and whirring over your shoulders.“And sometimes going fast means lowered noise. You find an aerodynamic hole in the wind. You can hear that, too.”For anyone standing on the side of a downhill racecourse, the racers whizzing past leave an inimitable, distinct acoustic wake not unlike that of a bullet or a missile.“About 20 seconds into the race, you do feel like you’ve been shot out of a cannon,” said T. J. Lanning, a former world junior champion who is now a United States ski team coach. “Your skis are screeching at you, some guys are yelling at themselves in disgust or worry, and the air turbulence can be almost deafening — like sticking your head out of a car going 80 miles an hour.“It is the noisiest place on earth, and yet you’re all alone.”And all the while, the loudest, if hidden, sound the racer may be registering is tacit: the inaudible mental deliberations necessary to keep the skier upright and charging.“Your brain is racing right along with your skis — telling you to hunch your shoulders, to drive through the turn or throw yourself down the hill,” said the American Steven Nyman, one of the world’s top-ranked downhillers this season. “Every little sound or sensation on the course is telling you something, and your brain is processing it all — at high volume and high speed.”The skis chatter. On the sides of the course, cowbells clank and coaches yell encouragement, and near the finish line is a grandstand packed with thousands of fans who cheer and holler. The downhill racer takes enormous comfort in the cacophony because the one thing the racer does not want to hear is silence.Too much quiet means a life-threatening crash may be about to happen.“You always go airborne before you crash, and it’s as if time stops and you’re in a black hole of noiselessness,” said Jan Hudec, a Canadian downhiller and a bronze medalist at the Sochi Olympics. “Even if there are people cheering, they gasp and then there’s a hush. It’s not a pleasant sound.“Everyone is waiting for you to land — and not on your skis.”After contact with the snow, everything gets very loud again.“It sounds like throwing all your ski gear — poles, skis and boots — into the washing machine and turning it on,” Lanning said. “Plastic, carbon, wood and steel crashing together. It’s a terrible feeling, but you can’t be afraid of it either. You’ve got to keep chasing the line.”The line is the path that is the fastest way down the racecourse while also going around all of the gates. Staying on it is a delicate dance with gravity — and the gravity of the situation.“It is about balance,” Jansrud said. “And not just physical balance. The feedback in your ears and your other senses create a kind of mental balance.”An unexpected auditory intrusion can be disruptive. Jansrud recalled one race when he heard the race announcer call out his time midway through the course. It was a good time, but it ruined his concentration.“I lost my focus and my composure because it was not what I expected,” he said. “I just totally lost it, and I certainly did not win that race.”Nyman has had a similar experience, albeit not in a downhill.“Someone yelled at me from a lift once, and I started thinking about who it might be,” Nyman said. “I wondered, Is that one of those cute girls? It wasn’t a good racing thought.”Coaches standing near a downhill racecourse hear all kinds of verbal communication, although little of it is meant to be heard.“There’s a lot of cursing,” Lanning said. “Guys getting angry with their skiing. They’ll yell, ‘You idiot,’ or a sarcastic ‘Nice turn.’ Everyone understands. It’s a pretty stressful situation.”The tension begins well before the race, when the entire field is sequestered near the windblown, imposing peak of the mountain, often perched on a bluff where race organizers have erected a makeshift start-house tent. The temporary structure often looks as if it might blow away at any moment and be repositioned on another mountain range, if not in another country.There is the murmur of conversation; some racers prefer to be chatty. Others are mute. But a constant, inescapable sound that adds to the apprehension is the beep, beep, beep of the starting mechanism, a countdown alerting racers that there are 10 seconds, or five, or four, before it is time to hurl themselves down the racecourse.Some racers say they hear the beeping in their sleep.“It becomes part of your subconscious,” Hudec said. “Yeah, it’s there: ‘Beep, beep, beep.’ ”Jansrud said the beeping had become a signal to the rest of his body.“I hear the beeps and my heart starts to race — I can hear my heart beating faster,” he said. “The beats are kind of magic. They mean that it is time to go, to get your stuff on. If I think of the beeps just sitting in a chair, my heart beats faster.”Once a skier is out of the gate, there are other sounds.“People roar or yell or grunt,” Nyman said. “I’ve made the sound of a racecar, like when you just slam on the accelerator.”Even when the race is over, the clamor does not stop.Good runs will yield wild cheering not only from the grandstand; the racers are known to let out primal screams.“It’s where you release your fear or anger or ecstasy,” Hudec said. “It’s just been such an emotional two minutes or whatever, and you can’t contain it. You just want to make some noise.”The downhill is ski racing’s most fundamental and elementary discipline, and the methodology and mission are simple: First one down wins.It is also the sport’s most dangerous and unpredictable race, and as it happens, it comes with a noisy soundtrack.Nyman said he had thought about wearing earplugs during his downhill runs.“I question sometimes,” Nyman said, “if I’ll go deaf later in life.”Advertisement