By EMMA STONEYFEB. 5, 2015
WELLINGTON, New Zealand — The main battle will start later this year, but the opening shots will be fired Friday when Wales and England kick off this year’s Six Nations in Cardiff, Wales.It is a blockbuster start to European rugby’s biggest tournament, and not just because of the rivalry between the two countries or the 30-3 hammering that the Welsh dished out in their last game in Cardiff in 2013. Friday’s game is a preview for this year’s “Group of Death” at the Rugby World Cup.Wales and England have been drawn in the same group as Australia, Fiji and Uruguay in rugby’s showcase event, which starts in England on Sept. 18. Only two teams from each of the four pools will advance to the knockout stages, so one of rugby’s heavyweights will miss out in Group A.Wales and England have tried to play down the significance of their match in Cardiff. They are right in that the team that wins Friday won’t automatically take their rematch in the World Cup on Sept. 26, but the winning team will have the knowledge its game plan can succeed.AdvertisementEngland has not swept the Six Nations — beating all five opponents (Ireland, Scotland, Wales, France and Italy) in one season — since 2003, when it also won the World Cup. Its last Six Nations title came in 2011.AdvertisementEngland Coach Stuart Lancaster has around a dozen of his top players unavailable because of injuries. It is a lengthy list that includes Owen Farrell, lock Joe Launchbury and loose forward Ben Morgan, who all will miss the whole tournament; center Manu Tuilagi; locks Courtney Lawes and Geoff Parling; loose forward Tom Wood and backs Brad Barritt, Kyle Eastmond and Ben Foden.Some of those players may return as the Six Nations progresses, and the England captain Chris Robshaw last week played down the significance of losing so many frontline players.“We’re confident in our squad,” he said. “Guys are going to step in.”England will face an experienced, established and injury-free Welsh team on an upswing after its victory against South Africa in November.Under Coach Warren Gatland, Wales has struggled against the Southern Hemisphere powers — South Africa, Australia and New Zealand — but it has swept the Six Nations twice (2008 and 2012) and grabbed another title in 2013 when it denied England a Grand Slam.The wily Gatland is not being lulled by England’s current injury problems. He pointed out that England fielded a team last June that was missing a number of its normal starters, yet it very nearly beat New Zealand, the world champions.“It does not matter what team England put out, they are going to be strong,” Gatland told reporters at the Six Nations launch event last week. “The challenge for us is to make sure we don’t allow the injuries to become a distraction with people talking us up too much. England have a huge amount of strength in depth in a lot of positions.”While the match between Wales and England has generated the biggest buzz, it is Ireland that is the favorite to retain the crown after it won the Six Nations last year for the first time since 2009.AdvertisementIreland went 3-0 against South Africa, Georgia and Australia in November, capping off an excellent year that saw the team lose just one of its 10 tests and move up to No.3 in the world, behind New Zealand and No.2 South Africa.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.While Ireland will be missing the retired Brian O’Driscoll, Coach Joe Schmidt has a strong and exciting group of players, including flanker Peter O’Mahony, hooker Rory Best, scrum-half Conor Murray, winger Tommy Bowe and inside back Robbie Henshaw. Flanker Sean O’Brien (shoulder) is also expected to return from a lengthy absence, so only flyhalf Jonathan Sexton (concussion) is missing for the opening-round match against Italy.The Irish play France and England at home later in the tournament, which could be a big advantage in the title race, though the team’s captain, Paul O’Connell, said the team is only concerned about its match Saturday in Rome.“It avoids any of those distractions of looking at the bigger picture,” O’Connell said. “All we’ve done is prepared for Italy and ignored everything else.”Italy and France have been drawn in the same World Cup pool as Ireland, although there is not the same level of intrigue as in Pool A because Italy is nowhere near the same class as France or Ireland.Italy lost all five Six Nations matches last year and has won just 11 of 75 Six Nations matches over all.Scotland, under its new coach Vern Cotter, has shown considerable improvement but faces a tough opening match at France.Cotter, a New Zealander like Schmidt and Gatland, took the reins midway through last year and has guided his team to five wins in his seven tests so far.Cotter and Schmidt worked together at the French club Clermont Auvergne, and Schmidt described his friend as a “smart man” who will “bring an edge” to Scotland.AdvertisementCotter has Scotland, which beat Argentina and Tonga in November and barely lost to New Zealand, playing a much more attacking style of rugby that has generated plenty of tries.But his team is young, with four players who have never played international rugby, so a lone victory at home against Italy could be the best it can hope for this tournament.The French are as difficult to fathom as ever. They have not won the championship since 2010 and had a mixed time in November, beating Australia but losing to Argentina. They finished fourth in the Six Nations last year.They have experienced forwards Pascal Papé, Nicolas Mas and their captain Thierry Dusautoir, and some creativity in the backs in Wesley Fofana, Camille Lopez and Brice Dulin. But, per usual with the French, their title chances will be determined by how consistent — or inconsistent — they are.A version of this article appears in print on February 6, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.