By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSFEB. 4, 2015
Frank Borghi, who gave up baseball to become a soccer goalkeeper and went on to help preserve the United States’ 1-0 upset victory over England in the 1950 World Cup by making a save in the final minutes of the game, died on Monday. He was 89.The National Soccer Hall of Fame announced his death but did not say where he died. The entire 1950 American team was inducted into the hall in 1976.The 1950 World Cup, held in Brazil, was the first after the end of World War II. Borghi had served in Europe during the war.He was a catcher in the St. Louis Cardinals’ organization, playing two years in the minor leagues, before switching to soccer and playing for the Simpkins-Ford club in St. Louis.AdvertisementHis coach, Joe Numi, shifted him from an outfield player to goalkeeper.“I had no ball skills or passing ability,” Borghi told the St. Louis Soccer Hall of Fame in 2009. “I knew I could catch a ball and throw it 50 yards. Joe says, ‘Yeah, go ahead.’ It worked out really good for me.”AdvertisementThe United States lost its 1950 World Cup opener to Spain, 3-1, after leading through 80 minutes, and it was a big underdog against England, a world power.The average age of the American players was 26 ½. Most were married and played soccer only on weekends.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“We all had jobs,” Borghi told the website STLToday.com in 2011. “I drove a funeral car. We had a mailman on the team.”Joe Gaetjens’s 38th-minute header put the United States ahead, and Borghi withstood all of England’s shots. He was carried off the field by the Brazilian spectators, who saw England as the biggest threat to their national team.His most memorable save came in about the 80th minute, after Charlie Colombo, an American player, fouled Stanley Mortensen just outside the American penalty area. Off the free kick, Billy Mullen bounced a downward header, and Borghi lunged to his right and reached back to palm the ball away. The defender Harry Keough cleared it.England claimed that the ball had gone over the line, but the Italian referee Generoso Dattilo thought otherwise.The 1950 victory was the basis of a 2005 movie, “The Game of Their Lives,” in which Gerard Butler played Borghi.The Americans went on to lose to Chile, 5-2, in the final match of the opening round.Borghi is survived by his wife, Rosemary, and seven children. The defender Walter Bahr, 87, is the last living member of the 1950 United States team.The New York Times contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on February 6, 2015, on Page A21 of the New York edition with the headline: Frank Borghi, 89, Who Saved a World Cup Upset by the U.S.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.