By ANDREW KEHFEB. 6, 2015
While Barclays Center was fizzing with applause late Friday night, Jarrett Jack and Alan Anderson of the Nets came together to perform an elaborate celebratory handshake near midcourt.Jack had just made a 3-pointer with 13.8 seconds left to help seal the Nets’ 92-88 win over the Knicks, and as his teammates were sauntering back to the bench for a timeout, he stopped a moment to perform one last shimmying dance move.“I don’t even know what I did, to be honest,” Jack said afterward with a sheepish look on his face. “It probably was terrible.”Terrible or not, such spontaneous expressions of joy are becoming more common around the Nets, who this week appeared to be righting themselves after spending much of the season adrift. They beat the Los Angeles Clippers on Monday night and the Toronto Raptors on Wednesday, and pulled out a gritty victory over the lowly Knicks on Friday, keeping themselves on the fringes of the Eastern Conference playoff picture.AdvertisementIt was one last night of enmity between the interborough rivalries before they join forces next weekend to host the N.B.A.’s All-Star weekend. Both teams have had their troubles this season, but while the Knicks’ season has spiraled into nothingness, the Nets retain hope of salvaging things.AdvertisementTheir win Friday, which improved their record against the Knicks this season to 3-0, was another step in that direction.“It is humbling when you see your team start coming to together to play,” said Nets Coach Lionel Hollins, who compared the team’s recent run to a growth spurt. “They’re starting to see what I see and understand what I mean in different situations, and that’s a lot of fun. That’s what this business is about.”Hollins’s pleasure was obvious late Friday when he leapt off the bench, flashed a big smile and clapped his hands to celebrate Jack’s shot. His team had absorbed a furious comeback from the Knicks and responded with its own grit.The Knicks, who trailed by as much as 17 points, took their first lead of the game with just under three minutes left in the third quarter, when Lance Thomas finished an up-and-under layup along the baseline. They headed into the final period leading, 70-68.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Things remained close to the end. Carmelo Anthony missed a turnaround from midrange with 37.8 seconds left in the game that would have given the Knicks a 1-point lead. The Nets took a timeout, and on the other end, Joe Johnson (13 points, 11 rebounds) encountered a double team. The ball made its way to Jack, who was wide open in front of the Knicks’ bench.After pausing and eyeing the basket, Jack coolly hit the shot, unleashing a torrent of noise from the sellout crowd.“It was just a miscommunication — if there was communication at all,” said Anthony, who had 21 points and 7 assists. “You don’t want to give the game up to someone that’s wide open.”The Knicks began the day as the Eastern Conference’s worst team, a half-game behind the Philadelphia 76ers. Only the Minnesota Timberwolves, who started the day 9-40, had fewer wins.AdvertisementThe Nets, on the other hand, have been finding their footing. Their newfound confidence will be put to the test when they play their next eight games on the road while the Ringling Brothers and Barnum & Bailey Circus takes over Barclays Center.“You just deal with it,” Hollins said about the quirky scheduling. “All we can do is, if they schedule it, you’ve got to go play it. As Bill Russell used to say, If you’re going to play it, you might as well go win it.”The Nets did that Friday, showing the sort of fortitude they have lacked much of the season. Brook Lopez came off the bench to score a team-high 22 points and had six blocks. A few minutes before halftime, Kevin Garnett blocked Anthony twice on the same possession, which the Nets’ public relations staff noted gave him more blocks than he had recorded in any previous game this season. The Nets held the Knicks to a 38.2 shooting percentage from the field, while shooting 50 percent themselves. The Nets limited Amar’e Stoudemire, playing his first game for the Knicks since Jan. 24, to 9 points in 19 minutes.It was another emboldening step, celebrated with some impulsive dance steps.REBOUNDSBefore the game, unprompted, Lionel Hollins advocated a change to the All-Star selection process that would help players like Kevin Garnett get recognition. Commissioner Adam Silver said this week that he would support expanding the game’s 12-man rosters to allow more players to participate. Hollins suggested that the commissioner be allowed to make three selections on his own and use them to reward veteran players who have made significant contributions to the league. “I think guys like Tim Duncan or Kevin Garnett, who helped build this league and sustain this league, when they get to the end, they should have the opportunity to be a part of the All-Star experience,” Hollins said.A version of this article appears in print on February 7, 2015, on Page D2 of the New York edition with the headline: Before Rivalry Yields to Cooperation, Nets Hold Off Knicks.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.