AdvertisementSupported byBy Karen CrouseSAN DIEGO — If the six-month gap in Dustin Johnson’s golf career were any more mysterious, Rose Mary Woods would be summoned from the afterlife to explain it. In his first competitive start in six months, Johnson missed a birdie putt on his last hole Friday that would have put him above the cut line at the Farmers Insurance Open.“It’s really close to being good,” Johnson said, referring to his game, after signing for a two-under-par 70 on Torrey Pines’ North Course. He carded a two-over 74 in his opening round on the South Course to finish at even par. There were 74 players at one under or better after 36 holes. At 10 under, Harris English holds the midway lead.“I think that the last two days, I think normally I probably would be at least five or six under right now, instead of even par,” Johnson said, “but I’m happy with where it’s at. Just a little rusty, that’s all.” Johnson was not the only big name to miss the cut. Phil Mickelson, playing in his hometown tournament, finished at two over to miss his second consecutive weekend on the tour for the first time since 2002.Johnson’s hiatus lasted exactly as long as a drug suspension, but he has been adamant that his leave was voluntary. Officials with the PGA Tour have been equally resolute in refusing to confirm a written report that Johnson on three occasions tested positive for recreational drugs.Tim Finchem, the tour commissioner, said he was comfortable with golf exhibiting less transparency than other professional sports, including the National Football League, which this week announced that the Cleveland Browns receiver Josh Gordon was officially suspended for at least a year for a repeat violation of the league’s substance-abuse policy. “We take the view that there isn’t any necessity to broadcast when we have conduct issues,” Finchem said. “We feel like the level of the conduct issues that we deal with, almost a hundred percent, do not require us from a fan interest and demand.”He added, “If we had a situation where we felt like, ‘Look, we just have to say what’s going on because of this conduct,’ we reserve the right to do that.” Finchem was asked if he was comfortable with rumor filling the void left by the absence of hard facts about Johnson’s situation. “I never like to see distractions and rumors and innuendo drive distraction,” he said. “But on balance I have to say our policy has worked quite well.”In recent interviews with ESPN and Sports Illustrated, Johnson volunteered that he abused alcohol to relieve stress. His drink of choice, he said, was vodka, which made for an awkward juxtaposition during his first round Thursday. Less than 100 paces from his first tee box, a Grey Goose tent was doing brisk business. During his time away from the tour, he and his fiancée, Paulina Gretzky, spun a cocoon by staying close to her family. With the arrival last month of their first child, a son, Tatum, and Johnson’s return to the competitive arena, the stresses figure to be greater than ever. Asked how he will cope without resorting to his old partying habits, Johnson said, “Go to the gym a lot.”When he left the tour last August, Johnson was playing some of the best golf of his career. He placed in the top 10 seven times in 17 starts, including a victory and two runner-up finishes. During his time away from the Tour, Johnson recorded two 61s and a 63 at Sherwood Country Club, the home course of his future father-in-law, the Hockey Hall of Famer Wayne Gretzky.That game did not survive the 150-mile journey south from Thousand Oaks. Johnson found only one fairway on his second nine Friday and 12 in two rounds. He hit 24 of 36 greens and averaged 30 putts.“I thought I rolled the putter very well, just it wasn’t going in, just had a lot of lip-outs,” Johnson said. “And I didn’t drive it in the fairway enough.”His first drive Thursday came to rest on a cart path to the right of the fairway. Before taking a free drop, Johnson consulted a rules official, which was a good sign. At the 2010 P.G.A. Championship, he cost himself a spot in a playoff with Martin Kaymer and Bubba Watson when he drew a two-stroke penalty for grounding his club in one of Whistling Straits’ well-trod bunkers. He acknowledged afterward that he failed to consult the sheet that was distributed to all players explaining the local rules on the bunkers.Johnson, 30, won eight times in his first 142 PGA Tour starts. Widely seen as the best American golfer of his generation, he watched the next generation assert itself in his absence. The first 11 official events of the wraparound season produced six winners under 29, including the 24-year-old Brooks Koepka last week at the Phoenix Open.After a few of Johnson’s better shots, like his holed 8-iron for an eagle Thursday on No. 4 on the South Course, some people in his gallery clapped and shouted, “Good boy.” They may continue to see Johnson as youthful, but during his absence he clearly crossed a Rubicon. His gallery Friday contained a handful of men toting babies like kangaroos in front pouches.“Yeah, there were a few,” Johnson said with a laugh. He added, “It’s great.”Advertisement