By SARAH LYALL and JACOB BERNSTEINFEB. 6, 2015
Bruce Jenner has been an Olympic superstar, the hunk on the Wheaties box, a Playgirl cover boy, the author of inspirational sports books and a sometime actor and celebrity game-show contestant. In recent years, he has also been an ancillary but vivid participant in the bizarre public spectacle that is the Kardashian family.Now Mr. Jenner, who muscled his way into American consciousness when he won the gold medal in the decathlon in the 1976 Montreal Summer Games and was anointed the World’s Greatest Athlete, may be entering the newest and most surprising phase of his multi-act career. Though he has not confirmed it, he is widely reported to be in the midst of making a transition from male to female.Other prominent people have been here before. But never has the process been played out quite like this — at the intersection where celebrity exhibitionism meets public voyeurism. Never before has it involved someone of such public ubiquity whose transition, at least so far, seems to be unfolding before our very eyes.Dwight Stones, a former Olympic high-jump medalist who has known Mr. Jenner for years, said that his apparent transformation presented a “phenomenal opportunity.”Advertisement“I think he is going to have a tremendous impact on popular culture,” said Mr. Stones, who is now a broadcaster for NBC. “The parents of kids who are suppressing this, or trying to find a way to reveal themselves to the people they care about, are going to know who Bruce Jenner is. That might smooth the way or make the reality a little less difficult.”It is no secret that Mr. Jenner has been having plastic surgery procedures for many years. Kardashian followers and consumers of celebrity news have been monitoring other changes for months: his sudden hot-pink manicure, his increasingly long and bouncy hair, his new makeup regimen, his altered physique that already includes, possibly, breasts.But for people from his early days in sports, this latest development is a shock. They remember Mr. Jenner the gifted athlete, the big personality, the charismatic wheeler-dealer who parlayed a single towering Olympic achievement into a lifetime of success and fame beyond sports.Advertisement“He was a hell of an athlete,” said Keith Jackson, who covered Mr. Jenner’s Olympic triumph while working as a sportscaster in 1976. “Women would stand in line just to shake his hand; young people responded to him — the Olympians at all levels, as far as I could tell. The announcer for the high jump used to give Bruce the business for being so attractive to everybody.”In recent days, Mr. Jackson said, he has talked to friends and former colleagues who competed against Mr. Jenner. “They were just like me, with their mouths open,” he said.Advocates for transgender issues declined in interviews to discuss specifics about Mr. Jenner’s situation, saying that until he announces what is going on, it is wrong to make any assumptions. But at the very least, they say, his prominence has provided momentum for a continuing national discussion on the topic.Denise A. Norris, the director of the Institute for Transgender Economic Advancement, said that the United States was going through what she called a trans-peak, with the issue often in the news.Besides Mr. Jenner, she mentioned Laverne Cox, a transgender actress in “Orange is the New Black,” and the online show “Transparent,” among other things.“Right now we have a potential trans celebrity, and this creates a conversation,” Ms. Norris said of Mr. Jenner.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.There have been other prominent transgender people in recent years: Chastity (now Chaz) Bono, whose parents are Sonny and Cher; Larry (now Lana) Wachowski, a producer, director and screenwriter; and Bradley (now Chelsea) Manning, the soldier convicted of leaking classified documents in the WikiLeaks case. The most famous example in sports remains the tennis player Renee Richards, who started life as Richard Raskind, had gender reassignment surgery in 1975 and won the right to play on the women’s tennis circuit.Popular culture has indeed moved on since Ms. Richards’s time.Zackary Drucker and Rhys Ernst, two transgender artists who live together in Los Angeles, were among the most discussed participants at the 2014 Whitney Biennial. Barneys New York and the jewelry designer Alexis Bittar have both featured transgender models in recent advertising campaigns.The memoir “Redefining Realness,” by the transgender campaigner Janet Mock, became a New York Times best-seller last year. Last summer, Ms. Cox was on the cover of Time magazine, the star of an article titled “The Transgender Tipping Point.”Advertisement“If we look at historic trans-peaks, we get celebrities out there — they may be great, they may be bad — but regardless of what the celebrity is doing, this creates a conversation,” Ms. Norris said. “And then the activists come in and lock every bit of gain we can out of it.”Mr. Jenner’s potential problems include the multitudes of people — and not just sympathetic transgender campaigners — who are trying to squeeze every bit of gain they can out of him. He has lived so long in the public eye that it will be difficult for him to harbor an expectation of secrecy now.Not that he is seeking secrecy, at least from what is known so far. Mr. Jenner is reportedly in negotiations with Diane Sawyer over an exclusive tell-all interview. There are also talks of a reality television show about his transition.Then there is Mr. Jenner’s extended stepfamily, the Kardashians, who have their own media needs. There is the reality television show “Keeping Up With the Kardashians,” which for years has followed every nuance and banality in their lives.There are its various spinoffs, including the careers of many young women whose names start with K: Kourtney, Khloe, Kendall, Kylie and especially Kim, the ultimate Kardashian. Even though Mr. Jenner has never seemed particularly comfortable with the sturm und drang of Kardashian family life, he is implicated in it by his very presence in its midst.Mr. Jenner and Kris, his third wife and the mother of Kim, Khloe and the rest, divorced in December. But Mr. Jenner’s situation has had all sorts of familial repercussions. When he reportedly sat the family down to announce his intentions to make the gender transition, Mr. Jenner, his next reality-television project in mind, made sure that the cameras were rolling.Marcia Ochoa, chairwoman of the feminist studies department at the University of California, Santa Cruz, said that much of the publicity swirling around Mr. Jenner, especially the obsession with his physical changes, had been ugly and prurient.“It’s such a courageous act, if she’s going to be transitioning publicly and subjecting herself to that kind of ridicule,” Ms. Ochoa said, using the feminine pronoun to describe Mr. Jenner. “In some ways, this is changing the whole landscape of it, because ultimately it looks inhumane, and she is a person who deserves to be happy.”Richard Sandomir contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on February 7, 2015, on Page A1 of the New York edition with the headline: The Transition of Bruce Jenner: A Shock to Some, Visible to All.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.