AdvertisementSupported byKeeping ScoreBy Benjamin HoffmanBaseball, it seems, is always trying to take records away from Ferdie Schupp.It was with great fanfare that Jake Arrieta of the Chicago Cubs was reported to have set a record when he compiled a 0.75 E.R.A. in the second half of the season, from July 19 onward. By the modern definition, in which “second half” means after the All-Star break, that is truly a record. But in 1916, there was no All-Star break, and Schupp’s 0.71 E.R.A. after July 16 was better than Arrieta’s.It was not the first time Schupp’s remarkable 1916 season for the New York Giants had been pushed aside by modernity. For decades, Schupp’s 0.90 E.R.A. in 1916 was considered the major league record, but after World War II, the record was taken away because he did not reach the modern innings requirement to qualify for the title. It did not matter that Schupp had qualified under the rules observed at the time. Regardless, Schupp is one of the few players of the modern era who can lay claim to a stretch as dominant as Arrieta’s, which was extended into the postseason when Arrieta threw a five-hit shutout against the Pittsburgh Pirates in the National League’s wild-card game last week. Arrieta’s next start is set for Monday in Game 3 of the Cubs’ National League division series against the St. Louis Cardinals.In their streaks, Schupp had the advantage in innings pitched, with 1131/3 to Arrieta’s 1071/3, but Arrieta had a large advantage in strikeouts: 113 to 68. Schupp held batters to a .151 average, while Arrieta held them to .148. They both allowed just nine earned runs. Other pitchers have had dominant second-half streaks: Kris Medlen’s in 2012 for the Atlanta Braves, Roger Clemens’s in 1990 for the Boston Red Sox and Tom Seaver in 1971 for the Mets. But none had the sustained magic of Arrieta and Schupp.Before their remarkable and dominant streaks, Arrieta and Schupp were well-regarded prospects who struggled to find consistency early in their careers. Whereas the Baltimore Orioles eventually gave up on Arrieta, trading him and Pedro Strop to the Cubs for Scott Feldman and Steve Clevenger, the Giants let Schupp toil away in the bullpen until halfway through the 1916 season, when he was 25. In the aftermath of Schupp’s breakout season, reporters sat with Andy Coakley, the head coach of Columbia’s baseball team, to watch Schupp pitch early in 1917. Coakley described Schupp the way people describe Arrieta now. “He sat around on the bench a long time, but it didn’t do him any harm,” said Coakley, a former star with the Philadelphia Athletics. “This is really his first year as a regular, but he knows all the tricks of a veteran of half a dozen years of twirling.”Committing to Schupp as a starter was as fortuitous for the Giants as trading for Arrieta was for the Cubs. Promoted from the bullpen on Sept. 7, Schupp beat the Brooklyn Robins with a one-run complete game, and the Giants would not lose again until the second game of a doubleheader on Sept. 30, setting a major league record with 26 consecutive victories. In the streak, Schupp won six of the 26 games, throwing a complete game in each start. He allowed two earned runs and 17 hits in 54 innings, with an E.R.A. of 0.33. On Sept. 25, the day of Schupp’s fifth win of the streak, the Giants won both halves of a doubleheader for their 21st win in a row, breaking the previous record of 20. The New York Times did not hold back its praise of Manager John McGraw’s Giants the next day: “About 10,000 spectators saw the Giants’ great feat. In years to come they will tell their children and their children’s children about that day way back in 1916 when Ferdinand Schupp and Pol Perritt pitched the Giants to a double victory and established the new mark of twenty-one straight games. And, please be it remembered, this daring band of McGraw’s isn’t through yet. They may keep right on winning games for a while.”The one thing Arrieta’s streak has that Schupp’s did not was a no-hitter. But Arrieta’s memorable feat came with some controversy, as some observers said a grounder that ricocheted off second baseman Starlin Castro’s glove should have been ruled a hit rather than an error. Schupp’s best effort during his streak, a one-hitter in his penultimate start, also featured a controversy involving his team’s second baseman — at least it did according to Schupp.In a 1967 article for Sports Illustrated, Harold Peterson recounted the Giants’ streak, and Schupp, whom Peterson described as “much-despised,” made his feelings clear.“Buck Herzog, who was playing second base, was beefing over something with the Braves’ first-base coach,” Schupp said. “So when Big Ed Konetchy, their first baseman, hit a dribbler Herzog didn’t even make a move for it, and I lost my no-hitter.”Schupp kept his hot streak going in 1917, with a 1.95 E.R.A. in 272 innings, but a shoulder injury early in 1918 derailed his promising career. He would pitch in the majors until 1922, and in professional baseball until 1930, but he was never the same. Once unhittable, he faded into a footnote.For the Cubs to win it all, Arrieta will have to dominate for several more starts. Should he do that, giving the Cubs their first championship since 1908, it is a safe bet that unlike Schupp, Arrieta will not be quickly forgotten by sportswriters and record books.Advertisement