By TIM CASEYFEB. 6, 2015
 At his home in Maryland, Adrian Dantley was a proud alumnus as he watched the Notre Dame men’s basketball team overcome a 10-point second-half deficit to defeat Duke last week. The victory continued the Fighting Irish’s improbable success this season, made the senior guard Jerian Grant a national player of the year candidate and brought back memories of when Dantley starred for Notre Dame four decades ago.Dantley has never met Grant or spoken to him, but he knows the two have similar backgrounds. Grant is the first player from DeMatha Catholic High School, a basketball powerhouse in Hyattsville, Md., to play for Notre Dame since Dantley left the university in 1976. Entering Saturday’s rematch at No. 4 Duke (19-3, 6-3 Atlantic Coast Conference), Grant is averaging 17.3 points and 6.4 assists per game and is on track to become the second Fighting Irish player since Dantley to be named a first-team all-American. And the No. 10 Fighting Irish (21-3, 9-2) are off to their best start in 36 years.Dantley is impressed by Grant, who was suspended for the second semester last season for what Notre Dame called an “academic matter.” University officials have declined to discuss details of the punishment, but Grant, who briefly contemplated turning professional, was allowed to return last summer and vowed to make up for his mistake.“He could’ve easily bailed out,” said Dantley, who averaged 24.3 points per game in 15 N.B.A. seasons and was inducted into the Basketball Hall of Fame in 2008. “You’ve got to admit he’s got some perseverance and stick-to-itiveness to come back and have a good year. You’ve got to give him credit for that.”AdvertisementGrant is the latest member of his family to excel on the court. His father, Harvey, and uncle, Horace, were first-round N.B.A. draft picks, and each played more than a decade in the league. When Grant was not watching games growing up, he participated in physical matchups against his brothers, Jerai, a former forward at Clemson who plays professionally in Latvia; Jerami, a rookie with the Philadelphia 76ers; and Jaelin, a senior at DeMatha.AdvertisementAt 6 feet 5 inches, Grant is taller than most guards he faces, but he is smaller than his father, uncle and brothers.“I’ll tell you what: He does not like people to say, ‘Yo, you’re the shortest one,’ ” Harvey Grant said, laughing. “Oh, that gets under his skin.”Jerian Grant said: “None of them can beat me just because they’re taller. They still can’t. I’m a better player.”Grant learned his competitive spirit from his high school teammates as well. At DeMatha, he started alongside Duke guard Quinn Cook, Pittsburgh guard James Robinson, Georgetown forward Mikael Hopkins and Orlando Magic guard Victor Oladipo. Grant’s mother, Beverly, referred to Oladipo as her fifth son because he was around her house so often.Still, Notre Dame Coach Mike Brey chose to redshirt Grant as a freshman. Brey, who also attended DeMatha and in the 1980s was an assistant coach there, thought an extra year of development would help Grant, who would not have played much behind the senior point guard Ben Hansbrough, the 2011 Big East player of the year. A disappointed Grant told Brey he was not sure if he would stick around.“He was definitely adamant about me staying,” Grant said. “I definitely talked to him a lot about how he was going to take care of me, that this is the best decision.”Grant started as a sophomore and a junior and entered last season as a preseason first-team all-A.C.C. selection. He averaged 19 points and 6 assists in Notre Dame’s first 12 games before his academic-related suspension. With Grant out, Notre Dame lost 13 of its final 20 games and finished with its worst record, 15-17, since Brey arrived in 2000.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Although he was far from campus, Grant remained part of the team’s group text messages and sent emails to Brey after each game with feedback and suggestions. He spent a few weeks in California working out with his uncle, Horace, and he traveled to visit his godparents, grandparents and friends. When he was home, he lifted weights, played pickup games and trained under the guidance of DeMatha Coach Mike Jones and Keith Stevens, Grant’s former club coach. Grant briefly considered declaring for the N.B.A. draft before realizing he had unfinished business at Notre Dame.AdvertisementSoon after Grant returned in mid-June, Brey noticed a more fit, determined, consistent and vocal player. Joe Carr, a sports psychologist, worked with the Fighting Irish players during the summer and encouraged them to share their feelings. Brey said some of Grant’s teammates told him that he had let them down the previous season but that they forgave him. Brey said Grant understood he had to prove himself.“He was never a guy that had great eating habits,” Brey said. “He was never a guy maybe that had great practice habits. He was not a guy that would be engaged defensively consistently. All that has changed, and he’s handled himself like a man.”Grant is scheduled to graduate with a sociology degree in May, and he will probably become the first Notre Dame player since Ryan Humphrey in 2002 to be a first-round pick in the N.B.A. draft. His assist-to-turnover ratio is better than three to one, and his ability to make smart decisions when running the pick-and-roll is an important skill in the N.B.A. He is also reliable late in games.In the final 71 seconds against Duke last week, Grant scored as the shot clock expired, found a teammate for an open 3-pointer and blocked a shot to help clinch the victory. Three days later, he had 9 points in the final three minutes, but Notre Dame lost to Pittsburgh by 4.Since 2007, the Fighting Irish have missed the N.C.A.A. tournament only twice, but they have lost in the first round four times and never advanced past the second round. Grant is eager to change their recent history, which does not surprise Oladipo, one of his best friends and training partners.“This past summer, I saw how locked in he was and ready to play,” Oladipo said. “He had a minor setback, but it was just a setup for an even bigger comeback. He’s ready, man. He’s ready to lead them and help them win.”A version of this article appears in print on February 7, 2015, on Page D4 of the New York edition with the headline: Notre Dame Star Thrives After a Ban.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.