
On Pro Basketball By                     
 HARVEY ARATON
 
FEB. 6, 2015
When Diana Taurasi announced recently that she would not play in the W.N.B.A. in 2015, she did not have to explain herself to Sue Bird. After all these years, rest for rubles, Bird knew what Taurasi had earned.Bird had spent enough time braving Russian winters with Taurasi, her old college running mate at Connecticut, before rushing back to suit up in Seattle in the spring-summer N.B.A. women’s annex.“In your 20s, you’re on autopilot, you don’t think about it,” Bird said. “But between playing in Russia and the W.N.B.A., you’d get maybe a week off — and I’m not saying that to be dramatic. That’s how little time there was.”Taurasi’s decision was also an unavoidable commentary on the state of the professional game in the United States, just now short of two decades old, not far removed from its developmental cradle. The growth of the W.N.B.A. notwithstanding, its long-term forecast remains partly cloudy and it may never provide a lucrative, full-time living for its talent.AdvertisementBut in acceding to the wishes of her Russian team, UMMC Ekaterinburg, and not playing for the Phoenix Mercury for the coming season, Taurasi was heeding a competitive global market. Perhaps the W.N.B.A.’s most well-known and entertaining player for the past decade, she would have made close to the league’s maximum salary of $109,500, plus potential bonuses. Her contract in Russia for the current season is about $1.5 million and the team offered her more to sit out the summer.AdvertisementPlaying for the women’s basketball cause would now seem to be secondary to the state of an individual’s career, and that, in the grander scheme, is progress.“It does show that there’s opportunity out there,” Bird said. “But more so, this is about Diana being smart with her body and her career. It’s easy to be nearsighted but you’ve got to take in the full body of work. Do you want Diana to play two more years, or five?”Taurasi is 32 and, like Bird, has been playing professionally year-round for a decade, saving time for the national team, too. There has never been any doubt where the good money has been, always abroad, where, Bird said, even the minimum salaried W.N.B.A. player can triple her pay.With some Russian clubs, the owners’ largess wasn’t dependent on attendance revenues and television ratings. When Taurasi and Bird were teammates for the Spartak Vidnoe Moscow team from 2006 to 2010, tickets were free and the team paid for broadcast privileges. That’s not all that the owner at the time, Shabtai von Kalmanovic, doled out to make himself a big-time operator and paternal women’s basketball figure.Von Kalmanovic, a construction magnate and onetime spy for the K.G.B., lavished his favorite players with cash bonuses for victories and diamond-studded jewelry. He took them on shopping sprees to Paris and Venice and on quick escapes from frigid Moscow to more hospitable climates, including trips to Israel.He called Bird “my Jewish daughter” and Taurasi “my Italian daughter” and gave them palatial housing with a pool, a chef and a piano. In 2008, Taurasi comically told Sports Illustrated that by comparison, “the W.N.B.A. is, like, communist.”Of von Kalmanovic, Bird said: “He used to say: ‘Some people with a lot of money, they gamble, buy 15 cars. I love women’s basketball — why not spend it on something I feel passionate about?’ ”AdvertisementLife overseas isn’t so grand at every Russian outpost, and certainly not in other countries. And no self-respecting American sports capitalist would consider the Russian business model to be a blueprint for everlasting success.Von Kalmanovic was 59 when he was gunned down in Moscow inside his car in 2009, in what the police called a professional hit related to business activities. Bird mourned with Taurasi and attended the funeral in Israel. They eventually moved on to the team in Yekaterinburg, where another well-heeled ownership continued to pay and treat them like international luminaries.This season, Bird — a point guard from Syosset, N.Y. — decided to stay home. At 34, she can’t play forever, at least not year-round. She has appeared as an analyst on ESPN and the regional cable network SNY, which broadcasts UConn women’s games. She has spent overdue quality time with family and friends. Her playing preference remained the W.N.B.A., “the more physical game,” the more competitive challenge.Laurel Richie, the league’s president, would not touch the loaded if lighthearted question of whether the Taurasi maneuver might be the handiwork of Russian President Vladimir V. Putin in response to American-led sanctions for his aggression in Ukraine. Besides, Taurasi had indicated she would return to the Mercury in 2016. At least that is the plan right now.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I have great respect for Diana as a player and after 10 years of playing year-round, I completely understand,” Richie said.She mentioned younger stars — Elena Delle Donne, Brittney Griner — who are in the process of anchoring the league, and a number of veterans who have remained stateside (Bird, Kara Lawson, Swin Cash) to pursue vocational opportunities for their post-playing futures.What Richie wanted to say was that there would be no shortage of stars, but the league should understand that Taurasi may not be a singular case. The oligarchs want what they want and the W.N.B.A. may have to do more than its own overseas deterrents — bonuses it offers players for limiting commitments to three months.“I think this could be unique to a small group of players,” Bird said. “Unfortunately for the W.N.B.A., that’s going to be their best players.”Play less, earn more? Sounds like an offer Taurasi couldn’t refuse.A version of this article appears in print on February 7, 2015, on Page D1 of the New York edition with the headline: Taurasi Can Rest Easy, but W.N.B.A. Can’t.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »