AdvertisementSupported byBy Allan KredaRangers goaltender Henrik Lundqvist will be sidelined at least three weeks after sustaining a vascular injury when he was hit in the throat in a game last Saturday.Lundqvist was struck during the second period against the Carolina Hurricanes, but he stayed in the game, a 4-1 win. He also played in a 6-3 victory over the Florida Panthers on Monday.But the backup Cam Talbot started Wednesday against Boston, making 18 saves as the Rangers beat the Bruins, 3-2. At the time, the Rangers listed Lundqvist’s status as day to day.“We have been conferring with leading medical experts to ensure the best possible care,” the Rangers said in a statement Friday after practice. “Henrik will remain sidelined at least three weeks, until he is re-evaluated and we have completed the process of conferring with the medical experts.”The New York Post reported earlier Friday that Lundqvist, the franchise’s leader in wins with 334, would be out of action for a month.If Lundqvist is out for three weeks, he will miss 12 games, including Wednesday’s, which would be the longest injury-related absence of his career. He was sidelined for seven games because of a hip flexor injury in 2005-6, his rookie season.The Rangers play at Nashville on Saturday and host Dallas on Sunday before starting a four-game trip.“This is a medical issue that we will have to deal with,” Rangers Coach Alain Vigneault said. “My players’ focus is totally on a team that’s playing extremely well, and that’s the Predators.”The Rangers have won 19 of their last 24 games, thanks largely to Lundqvist, who is 16-4-0 with a 1.82 goals-against average in his last 20 contests. He is 25-11-3 with five shutouts in his 10th season with the Rangers.The Rangers are in a tight race in the Metropolitan Division. Through Friday’s games, they are in fourth place with 64 points, only 3 behind the first-place Islanders. Talbot was 12-6-1 last season, his first as Lundqvist’s backup. He is 5-4-1 with a 2.14 goals-against average and three shutouts this season. Talbot, 27, has never started more than three games in a row since joining the Rangers.“I’m not going to change anything in my approach,” he said Friday. “Right now, I’m focusing on not missing a beat. We’ve been on a bit of a roll here.”The Rangers recalled Mackenzie Skapski, 20, from Hartford of the American Hockey League on Wednesday to back up Talbot.DEVILS 4, MAPLE LEAFS 1 Patrik Elias scored his 400th career goal, and the Devils handed visiting Toronto a franchise-record 11th straight loss. Cory Schneider had 33 saves. The Devils won their third straight. (AP)CAPITALS 3, DUCKS 2 Evgeny Kuznetsov and Nicklas Backstrom scored shootout goals, Philipp Grubauer stopped 23 shots in his first N.H.L. action of the season, and Washington won at home over Anaheim.  (AP)BLUE JACKETS 7, BLUES 1 Nick Foligno set a career high with his 19th and 20th goals of the season and added an assist to lead host Columbus past St. Louis.  (AP)BLACKHAWKS 2, JETS 1 Brandon Saad scored in overtime to help Chicago end a two-game skid with a win at Winnipeg. (AP)JETS’ KANE OUT Winnipeg forward Evander Kane will have surgery on his left shoulder and will be out of the lineup for four to six months. (AP)Advertisement