

 Marc Tracy
 

ON COLLEGE FOOTBALL
OCT. 11, 2015
DALLAS — If — when? — Louisiana State running back Leonard Fournette wins the Heisman Trophy, three of the last four and six of the last nine Heisman winners will have been underclassmen. Fournette, a sophomore, further helped his case Saturday with 158 yards and a touchdown on 20 carries in L.S.U.’s 45-26 victory over South Carolina.But it’s not only on the field that greener participants are making the biggest splashes. In recent years, many of the most successful coaches have been atop their programs for only a couple of seasons.Consider: The last 10 coaches to win a national championship at a new program — in other words, counting Nick Saban at both L.S.U. and Alabama, and Urban Meyer at both Florida and Ohio State — had been tenured an average of just three and a half seasons at the time of their first title. Of the 10, only Mack Brown, at Texas, required more than four seasons.There are fewer coaches who took a while to become successful, partly because there are fewer coaches who get a while to coach. Because wins are a must and contract buyouts can be absorbed through the untold millions in program revenue, coaches who fail to perform are more likely to be dragged offstage quickly.AdvertisementBut the trend is real. And one result is a relentless focus on how coaches are faring in their third, second and even inaugural seasons. This past weekend provided several notable instances of relatively new coaches headed in one direction or the other.
                A look at the top players in contention for college football’s highest honor.            Before the Red River Showdown here, Ricky Williams, who won the 1998 Heisman Trophy as a running back at Texas, said of Longhorns Coach Charlie Strong, “If he can have enough success in the last half of the year to convince himself and the team and alumni and the fan base, then I think he’ll be able to accomplish all the things he wanted to when he took the job.”AdvertisementIt sounded as if Williams were talking about someone struggling through his fourth or fifth season. But this is only Strong’s second year in Austin. And Texas’ 24-17 upset victory over Oklahoma, dropping the Sooners to 4-1 and to No. 19 from No. 10, almost certainly gave Strong another season, even though his team is 2-4.A mirror image of the Strong situation played out Thursday night in Los Angeles, where Southern California (3-2, 1-2 Pacific-12) lost to Washington, 17-12, and then dropped from the top 25.U.S.C. Coach Steve Sarkisian entered his second season with the wrong kind of fanfare, insulting the Trojans’ rivals at a pep rally, and it was announced Sunday that he was taking a leave of absence after he missed practice.After Thursday’s loss, knowing the Trojans were headed to South Bend, Ind., to face No. 14 Notre Dame, Sarkisian told reporters, “Now is a critical moment for our program to be tight, be together and hang together.”Especially jarring Thursday was the contrast with Washington (3-2, 1-1) and its coach, Chris Petersen, who is also in his second season. Petersen was hired from Boise State after Washington had gone 35-29 the previous five seasons — under Sarkisian. With the Pac-12 North newly open, thanks to Oregon’s decline (the Ducks dropped to 3-3 on Saturday with an overtime loss to Washington State), the Huskies look like a program on the rise.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Maybe the biggest surprises this season have been two first-year head coaches.One is Jim McElwain, who was hired from Colorado State and has led Florida to a 6-0 record and a No. 8 ranking after Saturday’s 21-3 win at Missouri. McElwain seems to be the cure for what ailed the Gators during the middling Will Muschamp era. Muschamp is a defensive guru (he is now Auburn’s defensive coordinator); McElwain is an offense guy. The stellar defensive personnel Muschamp recruited have been a great complement to McElwain’s offensive acumen. The Gators head to No. 6 L.S.U. on Saturday but have already cemented a sizable lead in the Southeastern Conference East.AdvertisementThe other high-achieving new guy is a little-mentioned coach who returned to the obscure Midwestern university where he played quarterback 30 years ago: Michigan’s Jim Harbaugh.The offense-first Harbaugh inherited a defense built by the defense-minded former coach Brady Hoke. He also hired the defensive coordinator D. J. Durkin from, yes, Florida.The Wolverines began the season unranked but are now No. 12 with a 5-1 record, the one loss coming to Utah on the road.The combined score of Michigan’s past three games was 97-0; on Saturday, the Wolverines hammered then-No. 13 Northwestern, 38-0. It had been 20 years since a top-tier team recorded three consecutive shutouts.Under Harbaugh, Michigan is peaking sooner than expected. And Saturday’s game against No. 5 Michigan State cannot come soon enough.A version of this article appears in print on October 12, 2015, on Page D4 of the New York edition with the headline: Like Heisman Winners, Top Coaches Lean to Green .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »