By MARK SCOTTFEB. 6, 2015
LONDON — For many, soccer remains the beautiful game. But for others, it has become more like moneyball.Just how much the sport has been transformed into a business was on show on Friday as the television rights for the English Premier League, the world’s most-watched domestic soccer league, were auctioned off to the highest bidder.The price of the television rights for British broadcasters is expected to rise more than 50 percent, to around a combined £4.5 4.5 billion pounds, or $6.9 billion, for the three-year period starting in 2016. The Premier League will likely pocket an additional $3 billion when it sells the rights to international broadcasters, including those in the United States, later this year.Friday was the final day to submit bids for the television rights, and an announcement about which companies won the auctions could be made as early earlier as Saturday. A second round of bids may be required if several broadcasters submit similar offers, which may postpone an announcement until next week.AdvertisementAs part of the process, the Premier League is selling the rights to 168 soccer games that are divided into seven TV packages, each of which must be bid for separately. No broadcaster can win the rights to show more than 75 percent of the games.AdvertisementDespite the high price tag, live sports are an ever-important strategy for broadcasters and advertisers.As people turn to online streaming services like Netflix to watch television programs and movies, sports programming is one of the few remaining television categories to consistently attract large audiences.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.That is particularly true for the English Premier League, whose games are broadcast to more than 170 countries and are watched regularly by more than three billion people worldwide, according to the English Premier League. In contrast, roughly 160 million people tuned in to watch NFL’s Superbowl earlier this month.In Britain, the TV rights sale has pitted the satellite TV-provider Sky, which is part-owned by Rupert Murdoch’s 21st Century Fox, against BT, the country’s former telecom monopoly, which has pushed aggressively into offering live sports alongside its traditional broadband services.A number of other potential bidders, including Discovery Communications, the American television group that is partly controlled by the billionaire John C. Malone, may also bid for the right to broadcast games that include global soccer brands like Manchester United, Chelsea and Arsenal.Currently, Sky broadcasts 75 percent of the 154 English Premier League games a year, while BT has the right to show the remaining 38 games. With the popularity of the country’s national sport remaining strong, analysts say the price that broadcasters must pay to hold onto the TV rights is expected to rise.“This year’s rights auction will show how far BT and Sky are prepared to go to keep hold of what they see as an essential asset for their future success,” said Paolo Pescatore, a media director at the consultancy CCS Insight. “With so much at stake, we can expect to see a frantic bidding process.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.