By MIKE TIERNEYFEB. 6, 2015
ARCADIA, Calif. —  At 77, Art Sherman is old enough to recall horse racing’s heyday. A half-century ago, he was an exercise rider for Swaps, nicknamed the California Comet, and marveled at the supercharged throngs lured to the track by the thoroughbred.While that era has given way to quieter grandstands and clubhouses with considerable elbow room, thinned out partly because bettors can now indulge their habit with computers, Sherman yearns to recreate a semblance of those bygone scenes.So when the owners of California Chrome, the 2014 Kentucky Derby and Preakness Stakes winner, recently weighed whether to retire him after his 3-year-old campaign, Sherman, his trainer, argued against it. Sherman built his case around the hope that another go-round would energize a sport plagued by a shortage of enduring headliners. With his modest pedigree, California Chrome is unlikely to draw top dollar as a stallion. Still, the common path for a Kentucky Derby winner honored as the horse of the year at age 3 leads to the breeding barn. The temptation for the horse’s owners, Steve Coburn and Perry Martin, to send California Chrome in that direction was palpable.AdvertisementBut they decided against it.Improbably, the owners of nearly every other high achiever from 2014 reached the same conclusion. All 10 horses in the season-ending National Thoroughbred Racing Association poll for premier 3-year-olds remain in training and are set to race this year. Of the five older entrants on the honor roll for all ages, only one, Goldencents, has closed the book.AdvertisementThese unlikely returns to the track set up several appealing events, starting here at Santa Anita Park on Saturday. California Chrome will square off in the San Antonio Stakes against Shared Belief, who was unbeaten until a controversial bumping at the start of the Breeders’ Cup Classic in November dropped him to fourth place, just behind California Chrome, who finished third.It is a rare matchup of former champions — Shared Belief ruled the 2-year-old division in 2013 — early in their 4-year-old campaigns. Bayern, the Classic winner, was also scheduled to run, but his trainer, Bob Baffert, changed that plan because of a sore foot.Baffert swapped out Bayern for Hoppertunity, who was projected as the second betting choice at last year’s Kentucky Derby until he was scratched because of an injury. Hoppertunity’s presence illustrates the depth of this year’s cast.Racing aficionados are unaccustomed to this kind of fortune.“It seemed like every time a horse got good, poof, he was gone,” Rick Hammerle, the racing secretary at Santa Anita, said. “We got very lucky this year.”There has also been a dearth of injuries, which often prompt owners to choose reproducing over running for their horses. Some owners might have been swayed by an outbreak of big-money races. Last year, 17 races outside the Triple Crown events and the Breeders’ Cup series offered purses of at least $1 million.Another factor may be the ever-shrinking foal crop, which has declined by about 40 percent from 2006. This trend has reduced opportunities for stallions, whose fees have dipped from peak periods. (The handlers of Shared Belief, a gelding, will not face this decision.)And in the end, some owners might have simply decided that they preferred to cheer on their horses rather than make the sometimes financially prudent choice to shift them to breeding.Advertisement“Generally, it’s the purse money that keeps horses on the track, combined with the sportsmanship of the owners,” Rick Baedeker, executive director of the California Horse Racing Board, said.No comeback was more unexpected than that of Palace Malice, a 5-year-old.At 4, Palace Malice, a winner of multiple stakes who was coping with bone bruises and had been offered about 10 chances to soon stand at stud, seemed to be winding down his career. The ailments he was facing meant “you are more inclined to call it a day,” said Cot Campbell, the horse’s owner and the president of Dogwood Stable.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Campbell reversed course when Three Chimneys Farm acquired a half share of Palace Malice on the condition that he stay active for another season. Three Chimneys will eventually assume full control of the horse.“I do see a change, and it’s certainly welcome,” Campbell said of the recent tendency to continue racing horses beyond their usual finish line. “People are not quite so quick to retire a 3- or 4-year-old.”Three Chimneys’ motivation is not entirely altruistic, even as it recognizes that fans will enjoy seeing Palace Malice run in up to five more races. The farm is taking a chance that his stud value will climb with more visits to the winner’s circle.“We’re making a bet that he improves,” Robert Clay, Three Chimneys’ founder and co-owner, said. “This is market-driven. It’s all about money at the end of the day.”The contemporary gold standard for longevity at the elite level is Zenyatta, with 20 starts, the last 18 in Grade I or II stakes races, before she retired in 2010 at age 6. For Jerry Moss, the recording executive who co-owned Zenyatta with his wife, the joy of being around the horse, as well as her popularity among track patrons, factored into the length of her career.“The greatest thrill is going to the races,” Moss said. “It’s a good feeling.”He added: “What’s good for the game is on your mind. You like to get fans to the racetrack.”Ultimately, Moss said, the call on whether to continue racing a horse should be made case by case, based largely on the financial interests of the owners and on the fitness of the horse.Advertisement“If you get a good 3-year-old that’s distinctively bred and wins some races,” Moss said, “naturally, he’d probably go to the breeding shed.”Hammerle, the Santa Anita official, said he would like to believe that owners as a whole “are a little more sporting than what we’ve had before.”If so, the group of owners with fans’ interests in mind includes California Chrome’s owners, and Sherman, the horse’s trainer, is grateful for that.“We’ve lost our stars,” Sherman said. “You lose a lot of fans by not having stars.”Among Sherman’s fondest memories, deep into the twilight of his professional life, are some that are still fresh — like delighted fans screaming, “Chrome, Chrome.”“The money part — you can only use so much money, you know?” Sherman said. “I just love to see people enjoy the sport.”A version of this article appears in print on February 7, 2015, on Page D1 of the New York edition with the headline: Champs Keep Going; Fans Are Set to Follow.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.