AdvertisementSupported byAstros 4, Royals 2By Billy WitzHOUSTON — When Chris Carter dropped a throw at first base, when he bungled a potential double-play grounder and when he was thrown out trying to reach second base on a ball that bounced off the left-field wall — all in the first three innings — it was not necessarily viewed as a disaster for the Houston Astros.It was simply collateral damage.Carter owes his spot in the lineup to his ability to hit the baseball. All the rest — the shaky fielding, the high number of strikeouts and the slow-as-a-Southern-drawl base running — is just part of the package.The Astros were more than happy to live with it on Sunday, when Carter’s double and booming home run nicely complemented Dallas Keuchel’s sterling pitching as the Astros beat the Kansas City Royals, 4-2, to take a two-games-to-one lead in their American League division series.“He’s hung in all year,” Astros Manager A. J. Hinch said of Carter. “It hasn’t been an easy year for him. To see him come up in the biggest moments is really gratifying because we know how much work he’s put in; we know how much he cares.”Keuchel was not as flawless as he was in shutting out the Yankees for six innings in the wild-card playoff on Tuesday, nor did he look as impregnable as his record at home, now 16-0 this season, would suggest.But Keuchel, a left-hander with a bushy beard that is long enough to tickle his sternum, was at his crafty best when circumstances demanded it. He stranded runners at second or third in the fourth, fifth, sixth and seventh innings — striking out Lorenzo Cain, who had homered in the fourth to give the Royals a 1-0 lead, to end the seventh. “At times with runners in scoring position, we probably swung at some balls that probably wouldn’t have been called strikes,” Royals Manager Ned Yost said. “But that’s what good movement does.”The strikeout of Cain came on a 3-2 fastball over the outside corner with Keuchel’s 124th and final pitch, and just after he had been paid a visit by Hinch, who did all the talking but never suggested removing his ace.“He probably knew I was going to bite his head off,” Keuchel said. “It’s the playoffs, so it doesn’t matter, the pitch count. You can throw that out the door.”Tony Sipp and Luke Gregerson closed out the victory for the Astros, though not without some drama. Gregerson, who got his first four-out save this season, gave up a leadoff homer in the ninth to Alex Gordon, whom Keuchel had retired to end the fourth and sixth. Gregerson struck out Cain, who represented the tying run, for the final out, putting the Astros a win away from the American League Championship Series.But Sunday’s game, and perhaps the series, turned in the fifth inning. After Luis Valbuena drew a one-out walk from Royals starter Edinson Volquez, Carter, who up to that point had the only hit, lashed a double into the left-field corner, putting the tying and go-ahead runs in scoring position. Jason Castro has been invaluable defensively as a catcher, particularly framing pitches for Keuchel, but he has been a cipher at the plate: Since he came off the disabled list Sept. 17, he was 6 for 50 at the plate.But Castro hit a 1-2 pitch past Volquez and into center field for a single. Valbuena and Carter scored to put the Astros ahead, 2-1. The Astros added another run in the sixth on Carlos Gomez’s two-out, run-scoring single and another in the seventh when Carter homered off reliever Danny Duffy’s first pitch, a 393-foot drive to left.With Carter, the Astros accept the bad with the good.Carter, who batted .199 this season with 24 home runs and 64 R.B.I., is a prime example of the type of player the Astros value to fill around their franchise cornerstone infielders Carlos Correa and Jose Altuve. Strikeouts and batting average do not matter as much as driving the ball out of the park.It is a philosophy with its roots in Moneyball, which makes it not surprising that Carter was drafted by the Oakland Athletics. When the Astros acquired Carter, he promptly led the American League with 212 strikeouts in 2013. But last season, he led the league with one home run every 13.7 plate appearances.This season, though, the struggles became so severe that he was benched in early August, when he was hitting .181 with a meager .679 on-base plus slugging percentage. But with the Astros floundering, Hinch turned to Carter in mid-September and he helped them across the finish line. If the time off gave Carter a chance to clear his head, it also gave him an opportunity to clean up his swing. He has been better at not pulling off the ball, he said, focusing more on not trying to hit home runs. And yet he has.Since Sept. 18, Carter has batted .370 with seven home runs, 13 R.B.I. and a 1.384 O.P.S. He hit a three-run, game-tying home run in a 7-6 win over Seattle in the final week, as the Astros won the second wild-card berth on the final day of the season. On Sunday, he had his first three-hit game of the season.“It means a lot to me to have my organization behind me like this,” Carter, said, noting that he usually struggles early in the season but pulls it together.Carter added, “But it’s nice to have that feeling that they have confidence in me that I’ll still come around and come through.”Advertisement