AdvertisementSupported byN.H.L. RoundupBy The Associated PressThe Boston Bruins’ Loui Eriksson quickly found a puck near his skates, and goalie Tuukka Rask seemed to see every shot all night. Eriksson scored a go-ahead goal with 7 minutes 34 seconds left in the third period, and Rask stopped 39 shots to lift the surging Bruins to a 2-1 victory over the visiting Islanders on Saturday night for their ninth win in 12 games.“It’s one of many lately,” Bruins Coach Claude Julien said of Rask’s night. “He’s been in a zone, really good for us and focused and intense.”Patrice Bergeron added a first-period power-play goal for Boston, which has collected points in 14 of its last 16 games (10-2-4).John Tavares had a power-play goal for the Islanders, who have lost four of five. Chad Johnson, a former Bruin, made 34 saves.“We had some chances, but we have to find a way to score some goals,” Islanders Coach Jack Capuano said.CANADIENS 6, DEVILS 2  Tomas Plekanec and Dale Weise each scored twice, and P. K. Subban assisted on three power-play goals for host Montreal in a victory over the Devils.Andrei Markov, Lars Eller and Plekanec scored in the second period to put Montreal ahead, 3-1. Plekanec and Weise scored 30 seconds apart with about seven and a half minutes remaining in the third, and Weise scored again with 4:42 left.Michael Cammalleri and Jacob Josefson scored for the Devils.RED WINGS 3, COYOTES 1  Petr Mrazek stopped 22 shots, including a third-period penalty shot, and visiting Detroit moved into a first-place tie in the Eastern Conference with a win over Arizona.KINGS 4, LIGHTNING 2 Justin Williams had two goals as Los Angeles got a rare road win, ending Tampa Bay’s franchise-record 10-game home winning streak. BLUE JACKETS 4, SENATORS 1 Curtis McElhinney stopped 34 shots, and Columbus scored four goals in the third period to beat host Ottawa.MAPLE LEAFS 5, OILERS 1  The interim coach Peter Horachek scratched David Clarkson and started James Reimer, and host Toronto beat Edmonton, ending an 11-game winless streak. Reimer made 32 saves.SABRES 3, STARS 2 Jhonas Enroth made 38 saves, and Chris Stewart assisted on all three goals for Buffalo as the Sabres earned their first victory at home in more than a month. WILD 1, AVALANCHE 0  Charlie Coyle scored and Devan Dubnyk stopped 18 shots for his fourth shutout in nine starts with Minnesota, leading the Wild over visiting Colorado for their fifth straight win.Advertisement