AdvertisementSupported byWarriors 106, Knicks 92By Andrew KehSteve Kerr hesitated for a split-second and smiled as he walked out of the visitors’ locker room at Madison Square Garden late Saturday afternoon and noticed a pack of reporters, several rows deep, waiting to speak to him before his Golden State Warriors played the Knicks.“This is what it would have been like,” a reporter covering the Warriors said to Kerr, making him laugh.Almost nine months have passed since Kerr turned down an opportunity to coach the Knicks, deciding to take a far more appealing offer from Golden State. On the West Coast, Kerr has been closer to his family; has inherited an immensely skilled team; and has, presumably, had far fewer reporters trailing him than if he had chosen New York.It has been plain to see that Kerr made the right choice. He has not needed to look back. Still, because the Knicks — who ended up hiring Derek Fisher after Kerr’s rebuff — have been so disastrous this season, a certain amount of retroactive analysis and hypothetical thinking about his decision has felt natural.So as the Warriors rolled over the Knicks, 106-92, it was as if Kerr’s current path and a conjectural one were intersecting. It was the Warriors’ 40th win. It was the Knicks’ 41st loss.The Warriors have established such a high standard this season that a 14-point win was insufficient to satisfy Kerr, who thought his players looked unfocused and fatigued. “Man, that was tough to watch,” he said after the game. “We were horrible.”Hours earlier, when Kerr was asked whether anything around the Warriors had gone wrong this season, he struggled to offer an example.“It’s been fun,” he said.Fisher, on the other hand, could not credibly use the same adjective to describe his own experience. The things that have gone wrong within his club form a long list — and he has needed to talk about them almost every day.Before the game on Saturday, for instance, Fisher insisted that any suggestion that the triangle offense — which he has installed with guidance from the Knicks’ president, Phil Jackson — was to blame for the team’s record was “patently ridiculous.”He said far too much focus was placed on the systems that teams chose to run, and he invited reporters to watch the Warriors and observe the simple reasons they had been, and would continue to be, so successful.“There won’t be a lot of fancy things they’re running offensively,” Fisher said of the Warriors. “It’ll be because Steph Curry is pretty good, Klay Thompson is pretty good, Harrison Barnes is pretty good, and on down the line.”Against such firepower, the lowly Knicks had no chance. It did not help that Carmelo Anthony, who will represent the team at the All-Star Game next Sunday at Madison Square Garden, sat out to recuperate after playing almost 37 minutes against the Nets on Friday night. Fisher said the Knicks would show extra care with Anthony, who missed six straight games last month while trying to recover from a sore left knee, whenever they had two games scheduled in two nights.The Warriors, therefore, were on cruise control throughout the game — and almost to their detriment. Curry and Thompson, Golden State’s two All-Star guards, shot a combined 4 for 16 from the field through the first two quarters, and the team still had a 64-48 lead at halftime.But the Knicks kept fighting, and they cut the Warriors’ lead to 5 points with a little more than four minutes remaining in the game. That stirred Curry to life, and he sank two 3-pointers in a 26-second stretch to pull his team away.“We hold ourselves to a high standard and high expectations, and we’re kind of disappointed with the way we played,” said Curry, who had a team-high 22 points.Thompson finished with 16 points, shooting just 5 for 22 from the field, and Draymond Green contributed 20 points and 13 rebounds. Langston Galloway led the Knicks with 15 points, but he went only 5 for 19 from the field.Kerr has been reluctant to look back to last year, but he was happy on Saturday to have a chance to see Jackson, with whom he regularly exchanges emails. Kerr said the hardest thing about picking Golden State had been turning down Jackson, who was his coach on the Chicago Bulls and whom he considers a mentor.Still, Kerr emphasized that he had moved on. He was asked before the game how he thought Jackson was handling the tough season, with all the losing. The interview session at that point was entering its ninth minute. Betraying only the slightest impatience, Kerr shrugged.“Honestly, I don’t even know how to answer that question,” he said. “We’re kind of busy doing our stuff.”And then his Warriors, doing their stuff, whizzed past the Knicks, hardly breaking a sweat.Advertisement