AdvertisementSupported byOn BaseballBy Tyler KepnerCHICAGO — The legitimacy of the Mets’ loss in Game 2 of their National League division series will forever be in doubt. Joe Torre made sure of that late Sunday when he suspended the Dodgers’ Chase Utley for Games 3 and 4.Whether or not Utley wins his appeal, Major League Baseball has given its verdict. Torre, as executive vice president for baseball operations, ruled that the umpires got it wrong on Saturday. He said all the right things, defending the difficulty of the decision in real time, but he called Utley’s slide into the Mets’ Ruben Tejada a “rolling block that occurs away from the base” — that is, illegal.That means the Mets should have been out of the seventh inning with a 2-1 lead. The four runs that followed Utley’s slide should never have scored.Of course, baseball is not the N.C.A.A.; no vacated victories here. The Mets and the Dodgers remain tied at one game apiece, and the issue of protection for middle infielders now moves to the forefront of baseball’s on-field agenda. We know how this usually turns out.“If it’s a big-time name, or it’s in a big-time situation, things change,” the Chicago Cubs’ Chris Coghlan said Sunday. “That’s just the nature of the business. It’s not fair, it’s not right, but that’s just the way it is. If it’s not in the postseason, or it’s not somebody that everybody knows, they probably don’t even talk about it that much.”Coghlan would know. He was on deck four years ago in San Francisco when the Marlins’ Scott Cousins plowed into Buster Posey to score the winning run of a game. That was a clean play, Coghlan insisted, and so were his own slides — in 2009 and again last month — that sent two middle infielders to the operating room.Yet M.L.B. changed the rules on home-plate collisions after Posey’s injury. After Utley’s hard, late slide on Saturday, which broke Tejada’s right leg, the rules might change again.Even at Wrigley Field, with the Cubs and the St. Louis Cardinals tied in their own best-of-five series, the topic was close to the surface. As the Cubs gathered for a light workout Sunday morning — with breakfast steam trays behind the plate and the N.F.L. on the video board — they buzzed about the Utley play.“We were talking about it today: What’s the difference?” the Cubs’ Anthony Rizzo said. “We’re not allowed to slide into home and run over the catcher with gear on, but you can go and almost tackle the shortstop or second baseman? It’s crazy.”Torre said Saturday that baseball would now require players in the Arizona Fall League to slide directly into the bag. But that was not the real problem with Utley’s slide; he was still close enough to second base that he could have touched it with his hand.“I don’t necessarily think that’s the issue,” Cubs catcher David Ross said. “It’s the lateness of the slide. The lateness of the slide is where it gets dangerous. If your intent’s to slide to the base, then you start your slide so your foot hits the base,” not, he added, so your backside does.Tejada is the second shortstop from an N.L. playoff team to sustain a season-ending leg injury while trying to turn a double play. The Pittsburgh Pirates’ Jung Ho Kang was the first, on a play in September in which Coghlan slid into him.Kang, who is from South Korea, quickly absolved Coghlan of blame in a statement. Coghlan said that while he wished Kang had not been hurt, he had no remorse because his slide was legal. He said he got death threats.“I get it; you’re a fan of the player, and you never want to see somebody get hurt, especially when you have a whole nation behind you,” Coghlan said. “But that’s the way you play the game.”He added: “My slide’s not the same as Chase’s. I think anybody who watches the replay, you can put them side by side and see for yourself.”Cubs Manager Joe Maddon said Coghlan’s slide was clean, just as it was in 2009, when Coghlan, then playing for the Marlins, injured the knee of Tampa Bay’s Akinori Iwamura. Maddon was the Rays’ manager then and said he accepted it.“I never cried about that,” Maddon said. “It happens. Listen, everybody wants to put everybody in a bubble anymore. I mean, my God, I’m really not into that. I don’t like the kneejerk overreaction to anything, I really don’t. Let’s utilize the rules that are in play right now.”Those rules, Maddon said, already govern a circumstance like Saturday’s.“That’s the part that really staggers me,” he said. “If, in fact, the umpire thinks he did it on purpose, it should have been a double play. And beyond that, if you wanted to attach any kind of penalty, it would almost be like the equivalent of the flagrant foul in basketball. If you want to attach something like that, I think that can be considered.”Maddon called the rule banning home plate collisions “ridiculous,” saying it was foolish to change a rule based on a bad technique by one catcher on one play. Cardinals Manager Mike Matheny, whose catching career was cut short by concussions, was in favor of it.“We’re trying to keep our players on the field and put a better product out there, and we can maintain the deep roots of this game by small adjustments that keep players — or at least increase the odds of keeping them — safe and on the field,” Matheny said. “And this will probably be something that’s addressed this winter.”As for Utley, who turns 37 in December, he is probably not wired to do anything else. He has always been among the game’s headiest and most aggressive base runners, and while he did not want to injure Tejada, the risk of doing so was irrelevant.Utley’s intent was to break up the double play and help the Dodgers. He injured Tejada in doing so, but he could have injured himself, just as easily, with a knee to the head.“It’s not like Utley doesn’t give his body up,” said one baseball person, with admiration, speaking on condition of anonymity to protect his relationship with Utley. “This is a body that’s been beaten up — day after day, year after year, with bad knees. He’s going to sell out for that play. There might not be three guys in the game that play like that anymore, but he’s one of those freaks that still do. That’s what he’s done his whole career.”Coghlan has played many games against Utley, his former N.L. East rival with Philadelphia, and said Utley’s intent was pure. Coghlan called him a gamer.“You can question whether it’s borderline dirty or not, but that’s his style,” Coghlan said. “It’s completely in the rules. If it’s in the rules, what are you going to do?” On Sunday night, Torre showed what he could do. It could not salvage Game 2 for the Mets, or repair Tejada’s leg. But it could redefine the notion of acceptable behavior on the bases.Advertisement