By MIKE TIERNEYFEB. 7, 2015
ARCADIA, Calif. — As California Chrome surged in front on the backstretch, the persistent buzz from the crowd at Santa Anita Park escalated to a small roar.About 21,500 fans had been drawn to Santa Anita to view the charismatic Chrome, more than double the customary turnout on a Saturday afternoon in February, injecting the San Antonio Stakes with a mini-Triple Crown feel.California Chrome, the people’s choice, coming off a year in which he took the sport by storm, gave them a thrill by sweeping past the pacesetter, Alfa Bird.Then it was time for the bettors’ choice to step up. Shared Belief, the even-money favorite, chased down California Chrome, last year’s Kentucky Derby and Preakness winner, well before the finish line to win by one and a half lengths in the Grade II event, which covered a mile and an eighth.AdvertisementWhat had been billed as a virtual match race, with seven others filling the starting gate, evolved into just that at the start of a racing season bubbling over with promise.Advertisement“You might be looking at the two best 4-year-olds in the country,” Art Sherman, California Chrome’s trainer, said. “It was a great race.”Shared Belief’s jockey, the normally loquacious Hall of Famer Mike Smith, was rendered nearly speechless.“I’m at a loss for words, and I’m not usually at a loss for words,” Smith said. “It’s probably the best he’s ever looked.”Smith said he was in “awe” of Shared Belief and added, “He ranks right up there with the best five horses I’ve ever been on, with room to grow.”Not since the mid-1980s had top horses from the same crop of yearlings clashed at the start of their 4-year-old campaigns. Shared Belief was judged the best in his class at age 2 in 2013, with California Chrome winning the honor among 3-year-olds last season.Although based on the West Coast, the two horses had met just once — in November’s Breeders’ Cup Classic, which neither won.Shared Belief, at that point unbeaten in seven outings, was obstructed at the start by Bayern. Bayern’s first-place finish was less of a surprise than the track stewards’ decision to uphold the outcome rather than penalize him for interference.AdvertisementShared Belief’s trainer, Jerry Hollendorfer, who was magnanimous after his horse placed fourth in the Classic, dismissed any notion of vindication on Saturday.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I care what happens right now and in the future,” he said.Hollendorfer welcomes the budding rivalry between the two horses’ camps. He and Sherman share a friendship that dates back decades, to when both were grinding out a living at Northern California tracks.Hollendorfer, 68, although often short of deep-pocketed clients, piled up enough wins and purse money to gain entry into the Hall of Fame. Sherman, 77, is less accomplished, although most trainers can only dream of the ride on which his horse has taken him.The humbly bred California Chrome has amassed $4.32 million in earnings, plus trophies for winning the Kentucky Derby and the Preakness. He became only the third in his age group since 2002 to be named horse of the year, a designation that customarily goes to elders.California Chrome’s connections resisted the urge to retire him to stud, and on Saturday the crowd showed its appreciation with nearly constant cheers. A few hundred people shoehorned themselves into an area in front of his paddock stall, recording the moment with cellphone videos and snapshots, as if the horse were a runway model.Initially, at least, the owners’ decision to keep racing him was vindicated with a showing that was solid, if not as inspiring as that of Shared Belief, whose pedigree suggests he might have a higher upside.“They both ran a great race,” Sherman said. “Jerry had the best horse today. That horse is the real McCoy.”The trainer Bob Baffert had intended to enter Bayern on Saturday, but a foot abscess knocked him out. Still, Baffert challenged Shared Belief for the fifth straight race, sending out Hoppertunity instead. Usually a formidable stand-in, Hoppertunity wound up a distant third and was never a threat.Shared Belief loomed in third from the outset, waiting for the ideal moment to strike. Almost as if drafting behind California Chrome, Shared Belief followed him as they blew by the front-runner.AdvertisementA stirring stretch duel seemed imminent until Shared Belief doused the suspense, and Smith put away California Chrome with limited drama.“In the big races, I’d rather have Mike more than anybody,” Hollendorfer said. “He timed it perfectly.”New to the spotlight, the personable but attention-shy Sherman found some consolation in the result.As his colleague posed for photos in the winner’s circle, Sherman said of Hollendorfer, “The pressure is more on Jerry now.”Because of an editing error, an article in some editions last Sunday about Shared Belief’s victory over California Chrome at the San Antonio Stakes referred incorrectly to Shared Belief’s future. He has a higher upside than California Chrome as a racehorse, but not “at stud.” (As a gelding, Shared Belief is castrated and therefore cannot be used in breeding.)A version of this article appears in print on February 8, 2015, on Page SP3 of the New York edition with the headline: Shared Belief Edges California Chrome in a Showdown That Lives Up to Its Billing.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.