By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSFEB. 7, 2015
NASHVILLE —  Mike Ribeiro scored with 7 minutes 14 seconds left in the third period to help the Nashville Predators recover from a rare home loss and beat the Rangers, 3-2, on Saturday.Rick Nash increased his N.H.L.-leading goal total to 33, and Ryan McDonagh also scored for the Rangers. They had won three straight coming into the game, but they could not complete a comeback on Saturday after tying the score early in the third period.“We have to find a way to win that one, especially coming back in the third,” Nash said.Cam Talbot got his second straight start in net for the Rangers, with Henrik Lundqvist out for at least three weeks with a vascular injury after a puck hit his throat on Jan. 31. Talbot had a shutout win last season in his last game at Nashville, 90 miles from where he played college hockey in Huntsville, Ala.The Rangers had performed well against Western Conference teams this season, especially on the road; they were 7-1-0 in away games against the West entering Saturday. They had also won four straight in Nashville.The Predators, coming off their third regulation loss at home this season, against Anaheim on Thursday, improved to 11-0-1 after regulation losses this season. Pekka Rinne made 30 saves in his second game back from a knee injury.AdvertisementRibeiro’s goal was his 700th career point. Roman Josi and the captain Shea Weber also scored.“A couple of those goals against, the puck had eyes and just found the holes,” Rangers Coach Alain Vigneault said. “But we spent a lot of time in their end. We had some real good looks, like the way we played, and we’ll get back at it tomorrow night.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Nash scored on a backhander from in front off an assist from Martin St. Louis at 11:49 in the first period for a 1-0 lead.AdvertisementThe Predators finally got the puck past Talbot late in the second. First, Josi scored his 10th of the season on a slap shot at 18:39. Then Weber scored his 12th, on a slap shot from the back edge of the right circle at 19:20, to put Nashville ahead by 2-1.The Rangers started the third with a flurry in front of Rinne, and McDonagh scored his fourth at 1:37 with a wrist shot from the left circle.Ribeiro wound up on the left side and beat Talbot with a slap shot at 12:46, giving Nashville a 3-2 lead that Rinne made stand.A version of this article appears in print on February 8, 2015, on Page SP4 of the New York edition with the headline: Rangers Toppled in a City They Usually Enjoy.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.