By KAREN CROUSEFEB. 7, 2015
SAN DIEGO — Jimmy Walker interrupted golf’s youth migration Saturday with this news flash: He did not take his first formal lesson until his junior year in college.Walker, who graduated from Baylor, posted a two-under-par 70 on Torrey Pines’s difficult South Course to put himself in the hunt for his second victory of the season and the fifth of his late-blooming career. After three rounds of the Farmers Insurance Open, Walker is in a five-way tie for third at eight-under 208, one stroke behind the leaders, J. B. Holmes (68) and Harris English (73).After failing to win in his first 187 starts on the PGA Tour, Walker, 36, has won four of his last 32 tour events. He is the FedEx Cup leader on the strength of three top-10s in his first five starts of the wraparound season.Walker turned professional in 2001 and joined the tour in 2005. “I feel like I’ve been ready for this for a long time,” he said, adding: “It’s been fun to go out and play good. I think anybody would say that.”AdvertisementThe lesson of his journey, Walker said, is that golfers are “never too young or old to start playing good, I think.”AdvertisementEnglish, who said he was 8 or 9 when he received his first formal lesson, is near the opposite end of the spectrum. At 25, he is a two-time winner on the tour. English said his history of instruction, which began with Rob Little and Jack Lumpkin, included “a lot of good guys to help lead the way and show me how to play golf.”English has no map for the journey he faces on Sunday; he has never had a share of a 54-hole lead on tour.“I love being in this spot,” English said. “This is why I play golf. Since I was 10 or 11 years old, this is what I want to be doing.”He added: “I love the nervous butterflies on the first tee, and especially when all the people start watching on the back nine. That’s awesome.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.With Tiger Woods, Phil Mickelson, Justin Rose, Jordan Spieth and Dustin Johnson having failed to make the cut, the tournament’s marquee turned over like an electronic sign board on Saturday. Suddenly, all eyes were on players like Walker, the Australian Jason Day and the Englishman Ian Poulter, who played in a three-man group with as much star wattage as any on the course.Day made an eagle from the fairway on his second-to-last hole on his way to a 71 and a 54-hole total of seven under. Walker split the fairway with his drive and hit a perfect 3-wood shot to set up an eagle putt on the last hole, though he had to settle for a tap-in birdie. And Poulter got to eight under after playing the front nine in two-under before giving back both strokes over the final four holes.The group’s gallery had no gaps, and, indeed, Poulter realized he was a focal point Friday night. He pulled his car, loaned by the tournament as a courtesy, into a parking spot recommended by his caddie, who said he had parked there the previous night. After they had dinner, they returned to the lot to find that the courtesy car was gone.Poulter said he reported to a security guard that his car had been stolen. The guard told him that his car had been towed because he had parked in a space reserved for another restaurant. “My first tow,” Poulter said wryly.AdvertisementHe could not retrieve the impounded car because he could not prove it was his. “So I had to leave it there and get a taxi,” Poulter said. “So, Uber to the rescue.”The par-5s have been Poulter’s salvation this week. He has played them in eight-under. Known for his clutch putting, he finished last season tied for 141st in putts from 15 to 20 feet. When he saw that statistic, the reality was hard to ignore. It was as if a man who had considered himself trim stepped on a scale and saw he had gained enough pounds to be considered overweight.“The numbers don’t lie,” Poulter said. “When you think areas of your game are good and you find the reality is very different from the numbers, you have to adjust.”After taking eight weeks off, Poulter said he was pleased with his progress. He has the drive to win this tournament, he said, even if he no longer possesses the actual wheels.An article in some editions last Sunday about the third round of the Farmers Insurance Open at Torrey Pines misstated Jimmy Walker’s score on the last hole. He made birdie, not eagle. The error was repeated in a picture caption.A version of this article appears in print on February 8, 2015, on Page SP8 of the New York edition with the headline: Late Bloomer Chases Victory at Event That Has Mowed Down Top Talent.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.