AdvertisementSupported byN.F.L. RoundupBy The Associated PressRobert Alford returned an interception 59 yards for a touchdown in overtime Sunday, securing a 25-19 win over the Washington Redskins that kept the host Atlanta Falcons undefeated.The Falcons are the first team to trail in the fourth quarter of four games and still start 5-0.The Redskins had the first possession of overtime, but on a second-and-8 from the 50, Ryan Grant slipped while trying to adjust to a pass from Kirk Cousins. Alford was in perfect position to snag the ball.Atlanta’s other starting cornerback, Desmond Trufant, wears No. 21 — the number that Deion Sanders made famous in Atlanta — but Alford provided the fitting tribute, holding the ball high with both hands and high-stepping toward the goal line.The play provided some redemption for Alford, who had committed a pass-interference penalty in the fourth quarter that set up a Washington touchdown.Atlanta trailed, 16-12, before Devonta Freeman scored on a 6-yard run with 24 seconds left in regulation, making him the first N.F.L. player with seven rushing scores in his first three starts. Freeman finished with 153 yards on 27 carries.A 52-yard Washington field goal on the final play of regulation forced overtime.BENGALS 27, SEAHAWKS 24 Andy Dalton rallied host Cincinnati from a 17-point fourth-quarter deficit to an overtime victory over Seattle, keeping the Bengals undefeated.With Cincinnati (5-0) trailing, 24-7, as the fourth quarter began, Dalton threw for a touchdown, ran for another and led the Bengals on a 69-yard drive without a timeout. Mike Nugent tied it with a 31-yard field goal on the final play of regulation.Nugent was good again from 42 yards with 3 minutes 36 seconds left in overtime, the ball deflecting off the left upright before going through. It matched the second-biggest comeback in Cincinnati’s history when the Bengals trailed in the fourth quarter.EAGLES 39, SAINTS 17 Sam Bradford threw for 333 yards and two touchdowns, overcoming two red-zone interceptions to lead Philadelphia to a home victory.The Eagles’ Fletcher Cox forced two fumbles on sacks, and although he threw for 335 yards and two scores, New Orleans quarterback Drew Brees committed three turnovers, leading to 17 Philadelphia points, as the Saints fell to 1-4. PACKERS 24, RAMS 10 Aaron Rodgers had his N.F.L.-record streaks of 587 pass attempts and 49 touchdown passes at home without an interception end in the first quarter when St. Louis linebacker James Laurinaitis made a diving grab of a tipped ball, and Rodgers threw another interception in the second quarter and lost a fumble on a sack in the third. Still, throwing for two scores and 241 yards, he outperformed his Rams counterpart, Nick Foles, to help Green Bay secure a win.Foles threw a career-worst four interceptions and completed just 11 of 30 passes.CARDINALS 42, LIONS 17 Matthew Stafford was benched after throwing a third interception in a home loss for Detroit, which is the N.F.L.’s only winless team and at 0-5 is off to its worst start since 2008, when it became the league’s first 0-16 team.Stafford and Dan Orlovsky, who replaced him in the third quarter, combined to set an N.F.L. record with 70 pass attempts in a regulation game, surpassing the 69 the Jets threw in 2000 against Baltimore, according to Stats. PATRIOTS 30, COWBOYS 6 Although sacked five times in the first half, Tom Brady threw for two touchdowns and had a 1-yard plunge for a score to help New England pull away from host Dallas, which lost its third in a row with quarterback Tony Romo and receiver Dez Bryant sidelined by injuries.The Cowboys had just 59 yards at halftime, and they trailed by 20-3 before their first long drive, which ended with a field goal late in the third quarter.BEARS 18, CHIEFS 17 Jay Cutler, playing without his top two wide receivers and working behind an offensive line missing three starters, led Chicago to two touchdowns in the closing minutes, the second an alert toss to Matt Forte with 18 seconds remaining that sealed a comeback win at Kansas City.The Bears trailed, 17-3, early in the third quarter when Chiefs running back Jamaal Charles was hurt. That allowed Chicago to seize the momentum, and after a field goal got the Bears going, Cutler led an 88-yard drive that he capped with a 22-yard scoring pass with 3:05 left. An ensuing 2-point attempt came up short, but the Bears’ defense responded by forcing a quick three-and-out.On the next drive, Cutler took a snap from the shotgun, dropped the ball, picked it up and spotted Forte running past safety Husain Abdullah in the end zone, hitting him for the go-ahead score.BUCCANEERS 38, JAGUARS 31 Tampa Bay ended an 11-game home losing streak that dated to December 2013, the same month when Jacksonville began an equally agonizing road skid that now stands at 12.The Buccaneers’ Doug Martin ran for 123 yards and three touchdowns, helping the rookie quarterback Jameis Winston avoid costly mistakes and rebound from his worst performance. Winston, who had five turnovers in a loss to Carolina last week, threw for 209 yards and a touchdown without an interception.BRONCOS 16, RAIDERS 10 Chris Harris Jr. returned a fourth-quarter interception 74 yards for a score, and visiting Denver overcame a shaky day from Peyton Manning, who failed to lead the Broncos to an offensive touchdown for the second time in five games this season. Oakland was in position for a go-ahead field goal when Derek Carr threw the critical interception.Raiders defensive back Charles Woodson, who turned 39 on Wednesday, had two interceptions, becoming the oldest N.F.L. player with more than one in a game.BROWNS 33, RAVENS 30 Travis Coons kicked a 32-yard field goal in overtime to lift Cleveland at Baltimore, which fell to 1-4 for the first time. The Ravens had taken a 27-22 lead with 5:56 left but could not hold on, going three-and-out on the first possession of overtime.BILLS 14, TITANS 13 Buffalo’s Stephon Gilmore intercepted a Marcus Mariota pass with 1:32 left to ensure that host Tennessee — which fell to Indianapolis, 35-33, before its bye week — lost another close game. As they did against the Colts, the Titans blew a double-digit lead.Advertisement