FEB. 7, 2015
‘No More,’ From N.F.L., Only Begs For ActionTo the Sports Editor:Re “Cheering. Cringing. Loving It. Hating It. But Watching,” Feb. 2: The N.F.L. would have us believe that it is taking a serious stance against domestic violence. It paid for a fantastic public service announcement to run during the Super Bowl, and even lent some players to say “No More” to domestic violence.While I applaud the efforts, I am confused and discouraged that they seem to stop after the well-produced commercials end. I do not believe that the N.F.L. is solely responsible for solving domestic violence. However, I do believe that the league should play a significant role in addressing healthy masculinity. We pay these men millions of dollars to exhibit violence and brutality on the field, which positively reinforces aggression. We ultimately reward and idolize their hypermasculinity.So let’s start talking about “real strength” through nonviolence and respect for all genders.COLBEY RICKLEFS, BostonSaluting a True PioneerTo the Sports Editor:Re “Charlie Sifford, Who Shattered a Barrier of Race in Golf, Dies at 92,” Feb. 4: It took true grit to endure the indignities of racial intolerance and become the PGA Tour’s first black golfer. Charlie Sifford was indeed a pioneer, who helped to break the color barrier. Being the first, Sifford bore the brunt, but he will not escape history. Bravo.AdvertisementJOANN LEE FRANK, Clearwater, Fla.The Cost of Paying to TrainTo the Sports Editor:I am amazed to learn that Mets players must pay a fee if they wish to take advantage of the team’s off-season workout facility. (“Raising Fitness Levels and Eyebrows,” Feb. 3.)AdvertisementIn the textile mills of Lowell, Mass., at the onset of the Industrial Revolution, women paid for the thread they used. The system gave way to worker protests, and ultimately provided a justification for establishing labor unions.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.One can only imagine the outcome of the Mets’ pay-to-train system. Team productivity during the regular season is one possible outcome. Another is resentment that will diminish the compulsion to play winning ball games.MICHAEL H. EBNER, Lake Forest, Ill.Shushing SharapovaTo the Sports Editor:It astounds me that tennis authorities and other players permit Maria Sharapova to continue making horrible noises while playing. That it is technique and not mere habit is proved by the fact that her shrieks stop as soon as she hits a ball into the net.The ESPN commentator Darren Cahill observed that they get longer and louder as a match progresses. Her behavior makes me invariably root for her opponents and relish her defeats.Tennis authorities have almost five months before the next grand slam to stop her from injecting such ugliness into what we who love tennis think of as a beautiful game. Perhaps Wimbledon, the most traditional tournament, will be the first to take the necessary action.DAVID R. KORNREICH, Katonah, N.Y.A version of this letter appears in print on February 8, 2015, on Page SP6 of the New York edition with the headline: ‘No More,’ From N.F.L., Only Begs for Action.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.