AdvertisementSupported byBy Richard SandomirWhen the longtime ESPN anchor Stuart Scott quietly agreed to write a memoir last year, appendiceal cancer and chemotherapy were weakening him. His appearances on the network were dwindling. His life was slipping away.There was no assurance that he would survive until late May, when Blue Rider Press expected to publish his book, “Every Day I Fight.”So last fall, when Scott was in the midst of a hospitalization that lasted 75 days, a decision was made to advance the publication to early March. Perhaps Scott would live until then.“He was very much aware that the clock was ticking,” said Larry Platt, Scott’s collaborator on the book. “We were talking about whether he wouldn’t be here when the book came out, and I said, That’s just you having the last word on cancer: ‘Yeah, you thought you’d silence me, but you didn’t.’ ”David Rosenthal, the president and publisher of Blue Rider, a division of Penguin Random House, said, “If he had gone into remission, it would have been a wonderful miracle.”But Scott died on Jan. 4. Seventeen days later, ESPN’s website carried an excerpt from the book, the existence of which was not widely known, even among some of Scott’s closest associates.“I had no idea — no idea,” said Sage Steele, a friend of Scott’s and the host of ESPN’s “NBA Countdown” show. “Then I kept racking my brain, asking, ‘Did he tell me anything about it?’ ”John Skipper, ESPN’s president, said he learned about the book only shortly before the excerpt appeared on ESPN.com.The book was not conceived as a secret project, but Blue Rider never announced that it had acquired the rights to Scott’s story.“We weren’t so much trying to keep a lid on it, but we didn’t do anything to publicize it,” Rosenthal said. “But it wasn’t a state secret.”Sometime after Scott’s cancer diagnosis in 2007, he began talking to David Black, a prominent literary agent, about wanting to write a memoir.“He really wanted to write a book, and as time went on and cancer really became the focus of his life, the most important thing for him was to write a book for his children,” Black said, referring to Scott’s daughters, Taelor and Sydni. “So it became a story about his fight to live. That was the story he had to tell. He wanted his girls to be able to know their dad, and this was one way he could do it.”About half the book covers Scott’s life before his cancer diagnosis: his upbringing in North Carolina, early jobs before he was hired by ESPN in 1993, and the popularity he built with his exuberant personality and use of hip-hop terms in his broadcasts. “By the time I got to ‘SportsCenter,’ ” he writes, “the impact of hip-hop was everywhere ... except in the sports broadcast booth. My industry seemed black-and-white in the Technicolor hip-hop world, with our well-coiffed, deep-voiced anchors and their perfect diction.”The rest is a narrative about Scott’s recurring cancer and the growing acknowledgment that his time with his daughters was ebbing.“I’m forty-nine,” he writes. “There’s a good chance I’m going to die a helluva lot earlier than I ever wanted to. There’s a good chance I’m going to die soon. And I know it.”Platt first met Scott, at Black’s suggestion, last February. Until then, Platt had not developed much of an impression of him despite Scott’s high profile on television.After a day together, Platt said, “I knew it was a project, but not just a cancer memoir, but a media memoir about a guy who’s fought back on every level — personally, professionally and healthwise.”They signed a deal with Blue Rider in May and created the book through a series of in-person interviews and phone calls, Platt said. The publisher is planning a sizable first printing of 100,000 copies.“In a way, doing the book was a welcome relief for him, a temporary respite from cancer,” Platt said. “He was always up for it, which doesn’t mean there weren’t constant interruptions. But I never had to chase him.”The book details a medical siege that began with appendicitis that struck Scott before he was to host a “Monday Night Football” pregame show in November 2007, and how that led to the detection of appendiceal cancer. Surgeons removed part of Scott’s large intestine and 28 lymph nodes; nine of them were cancerous.No cancer was detected again until 2010, when three big tumors and parts of his small intestine and colon were removed. More would come. In 2012, a tumor on his prostate was removed. In 2013, a tumor and a lot of scar tissue were removed in a 10-hour operation. Last July, before the annual ESPY Awards, where Scott delivered a memorable speech about fighting cancer, he was coping with kidney failure and problems with his liver; four operations were performed in seven days. The 75-day stay at NewYork-Presbyterian Hospital last fall was used to treat blood clots and grotesque swelling in Scott’s legs, and to insert stents to keep veins and arteries open. Scott writes that he lost track of how many operations and procedures he endured during that period.Platt last saw Scott in September and turned in his manuscript in November. Scott left the hospital just before Thanksgiving. Their final conversation was in early December.“By the end,” Platt said, “we joked that we had mind-melded. We’d be on the phone, silently reading passages from the manuscript, and he’d stop on something and say, ‘I don’t know if I’d say it like that,’ and we’d change or add something. “There were times while we were on the phone when he was getting Demerol and he’d say, ‘Hold on, man, I’ve got to take this,’ and he’d come back and say, ‘That was good.’ ”Advertisement