By ANDREW KEHFEB. 7, 2015
The 1968 N.B.A. All-Star Game, at Madison Square Garden, was a special one for Lenny Wilkens, whose deep respect for the arena started when he was growing up in Bedford-Stuyvesant.In his college days, Wilkens, 77, noticed that New York crowds had a good understanding of basketball’s subtleties. And when he returned to the Garden as a professional, and for the fifth of his All-Star Game appearances, he appreciated the building’s growing aura and history.“Anytime I played in the Garden, I knew I’d have a good game because I was so excited to be there,” Wilkens said.The All-Star Game will return to New York next weekend and build on the history of the four previous games in the city.AdvertisementThe N.B.A.’s fourth All-Star Game, in 1954, was the first held in New York. It was the last All-Star Game without a shot clock — which partly explains why it was the last such game in which neither team surpassed 100 points, despite overtime. Bob Cousy of the Boston Celtics scored 10 points in the extra period to help the Eastern Conference to a 98-93 win.Madison Square Garden hosted the event again the next year, with Cousy leading all scorers with 20 points. It was his Celtics teammate Bill Sharman, though, who was named the game’s most valuable player after scoring 10 of his 15 points in the final quarter of the East’s 100-91 victory.AdvertisementThe 1968 All-Star Game was among the last major events held at the old Garden, on Eighth Avenue between 49th and 50th Streets. Wilkens, then a member of the St. Louis Hawks, started for the Western Conference and scored 14 points. Hal Greer of the Philadelphia 76ers — known for his deadly midrange game — made all eight of his field-goal attempts and scored 21 points to earn the M.V.P. honors.Marv Albert, who called that game on the radio, recalled that the biggest cheers of the night were for Dick Barnett of the Knicks. “It was hard for a Knick to make the All-Star Game in those days,” Albert said. “There was a lot of competition at the time.”It was 30 years before the game returned to New York. The 1998 game essentially became a one-on-one showdown between Kobe Bryant, who was 19 at the time and making his first All-Star appearance, and Michael Jordan, who was set to retire later that season. (Jordan returned to the league three years later.)“It was Kobe’s first All-Star Game, and he was taking it personal, wanting to take on Jordan,” said Grant Hill, who was selected as an Eastern Conference starter that year. “It was the Jordan-versus-Bryant show.”Bryant scored 18 points, but he sat out down the stretch. Jordan, fighting a fever, recorded 23 points, 8 assists, 6 rebounds and 3 steals and was named the game’s most valuable player.“It’s the mecca of the game in New York,” Wilkens said. “So Madison Square Garden, wow, everybody wants to compete there.”A version of this article appears in print on February 8, 2015, on Page SP2 of the New York edition with the headline: New Generation of All-Stars Will Add to Legacy at the Garden.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.