By BILL PENNINGTONFEB. 7, 2015
BEAVER CREEK, Colo. —  When the Alpine world ski championships were last on American soil, in 1999, no member of the United States team won a medal. With the championships back in Colorado this month, the event was expected to be a chance for the American racers to show how far they had come as an international power.Instead, during the first week of competition, the Americans’ lone reason to celebrate was Lindsey Vonn’s bronze medal in the super-G.By Saturday, the pressure on the Americans was mounting. The United States racers, many of whom were unheralded in the country, had to enter the men’s downhill, the championships’ marquee event, without their best-known teammate, Bode Miller, who severed a hamstring tendon in a tumbling crash Thursday.But in a startling recovery, three American racers burst into the top 10, led by Travis Ganong, who won the silver medal Saturday with a fearless, stirring descent that left him 0.24 of a second behind the winning time of Patrick Küng of Switzerland, who finished in 1 minute 43.18 seconds. Another Swiss skier, Beat Feuz, was third, 0.31 of a second behind his countryman.AdvertisementMore shocking than the American revival was this result: For the first time, no Austrian was in the top 10 of a men’s downhill at the world championships. The event was first held in 1931.AdvertisementSteven Nyman was fourth, and his American teammate Andrew Weibrecht was tied for ninth.Ganong, 26, has long been considered a rising star on the United States ski team, but he did not display that promise in competition on the worldwide stage until the Sochi Olympics last year, when he was fifth in the downhill. Late last year, he won his first World Cup event, a downhill in Santa Caterina, Italy.Start-house beeps, chattering skis, wind in their ears and the eerie silence of a fall; some of the top ski racers in the world describe the sounds of a World Cup downhill.Ganong’s silver medal and the strong performances by Nyman and Weibrecht, who each briefly held the lead, buoyed the United States team at a key juncture in the competition.“Today, the great champion that everybody expected to do something was unfortunately missing because of a bad accident,” Sasha Rearick, the United States men’s coach, said, referring to Miller. “But the rest of the guys stepped up and threw down some great runs. That’s going to be a boost moving forward.”Küng and Feuz won their first world championship medals. Küng has two wins on the World Cup tour, including a victory in a Beaver Creek super-G two years ago. Feuz has five World Cup victories.With Miller’s career perhaps over, Ganong may be poised to become the new face of the American men’s downhill effort. A Californian who was mentored by Daron Rahlves, the 2001 world champion in the super-G, who is also from Northern California, Ganong said he had only recently learned how to prepare himself for the stress of racing at the highest level.“In training, I’ve often been as fast as the top guys,” Ganong said Saturday in the finish area. “But I wouldn’t have the same speed on race day. I’d be having good runs and overthink it from there. It took me a while to not get tight when I was doing well in a race.“I woke up this morning, and obviously there were some nerves, but I reminded myself that I had dreamt of being in this position. I said to myself: ‘So now you’re here. Let’s have some fun.’ ”AdvertisementGanong had also spent several hours with Rahlves in Beaver Creek. Together, Rahlves and Ganong watched the video of Rahlves’s 2003 World Cup victory on the Beaver Creek downhill course. Rahlves also accompanied Ganong during the prerace inspection of the course.“Daron teaches me to look for aerodynamics in specific places on the course,” Ganong said. “It’s about being in the right place on some turns. You can’t be aerodynamic if you’re getting tossed around in the turns.”Rearick added, “Daron was an inspiration for Travis this week.”Ganong was 22nd in the start order Saturday, skiing after the favorites. Küng had taken the lead after top-ranked Kjetil Jansrud of Norway bounced his way through several choppy turns in a run that ended up being the 15th fastest.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Nyman, who had started with bib No. 10, was in third place when Ganong left the starting gate. Ganong quickly took the lead, quicker at the top than Küng had been. Ganong was about even with Küng for most of his daring charge down the mountain, electrifying a crowd that filled the finish area grandstand and lined one side of the racecourse for 200 yards up the hill.But in the final interval of the race, Ganong slowed just enough to drop into second place. Weibrecht, racing from the 35th spot, roared to the lead through the first three intervals but faded slightly in the final stages.Küng had the most consistent trip down the racecourse, pressing to keep his speed but making no major mistakes that cost him time. He was also the fastest in the final two intervals.Küng is the first men’s downhill world champion from Switzerland since Bruno Kernen in 1997.“It’s a dream because the downhill is so difficult, and you have to have the perfect run,” Küng said. “But my skis were incredibly quick, almost too quick for me. I’m glad I could stay with them.”With six individual races remaining in the championships — super combined, giant slalom and slalom for men and women — Ganong hoped that his surprise medal performance might jump-start the Americans.“We’re here trying to showcase ski racing for all Americans,” Ganong said. “Today, it was good to give the country something to get excited about and to remember.”A version of this article appears in print on February 8, 2015, on Page SP1 of the New York edition with the headline: U.S. Men Make Stunning Leap in the Downhill.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.