By BRENDAN PRUNTYFEB. 7, 2015
It has been a long season for Creighton Coach Greg McDermott, one filled with disappointing days and disappointing performances and disappointing results. Saturday was no exception. As he leaned against the wall outside his team’s locker room after an 84-66 loss to St. John’s at Madison Square Garden, McDermott wiped his face and exhaled.Somehow, he found a positive.“To these seniors’ credit, even though we haven’t won at the level that we hoped we would, our attitude has been good,” he said.The last time Creighton played at the Garden was in March, in the Big East championship game. The Bluejays came within a couple of possessions of winning the tournament title in their inaugural season in the league. But much has changed since then.The coach’s son, Doug McDermott, is in the N.B.A. He was one of the nation’s top scorers and the winner of the 2014 Wooden Award, given annually given to college basketball’s top player.AdvertisementThree other seniors — Ethan Wragge, Grant Gibbs and Jahenns Manigat — are also gone. They were the nucleus of a program that made three consecutive N.C.A.A. tournament appearances.It had been expected that this season would be difficult for Creighton. But it had not been expected that Creighton would enter this season’s stretch run with an 11-14 record over all and a 2-10 mark in the Big East.“It’s been difficult,” said the junior guard James Milliken, who scored 10 points off the bench. “We start our practices on defense, and then to come out and have an afternoon like this? It’s tough.”Against a St. John’s team they had beaten 10 days earlier for their first conference win, the Bluejays found themselves in trouble from the opening tip. Coach McDermott, who rarely uses all of his first-half timeouts, called his third and final one with two minutes left in the half.The first one was called after St. John’s (15-8, 4-6) started the game with a 7-0 run.The second was after St. John’s had gone ahead by 21-7, less than seven minutes in.AdvertisementThe final one was after St. John’s had extended its lead to 20 points, at 43-23.“We were just throwing gas on the fire,” McDermott said. “It didn’t seem to matter which defense we switched to; there were some communication mistakes. I just didn’t think we played well. It just didn’t have the teeth that it needed to have.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.McDermott called those timeouts in hope of finding some answers. Instead, he found himself staring at more problems — a running theme this season.Losing four seniors will do that to a program, especially when one of them is a dynamic player like McDermott’s son, who was a lottery pick in the June N.B.A. draft and accounted for 33.8 percent of Creighton’s offense last season.“Less than two years ago, we were in the Missouri Valley Conference,” Greg McDermott said. “In a lot of ways, we were built to compete in that league, not in this league. Our guys have continued to work and compete, to put us in position to have a chance. Today, we obviously weren’t good enough.”Rick Kreklow, a senior walk-on who transferred to Creighton from California in the off-season, said he had known that the roster would undergo a major overhaul and that the success of the previous three seasons was likely to take a hit. But he also knew that while the team might struggle, there were a number of upperclassmen left over who could keep the winning going.Unfortunately for the Bluejays, that has not been the case.“We haven’t given up,” Kreklow said. “These guys have been part of successful teams. People aren’t accustomed to losing. It’s something you strive to do. You’ve got a lot of the right kind of pride, in terms of not laying down and giving up on a season, because it would be easy to do that at this point.”Creighton has six games remaining in the regular season before returning to New York for the Big East tournament.As they left the room after the news conference, McDermott and his players ran into the St. John’s players and their coach, Steve Lavin. McDermott teased Red Storm guard D’Angelo Harrison, who scored 21 points, saying he had taken it easy on them. McDermott and Lavin exchanged pleasantries, with the Creighton coach saying that they hoped to meet up again in the tournament.Last season, the Bluejays were the No. 2 seed.This year, they will most likely be the No. 10 seed.Not what Creighton had expected, but as the Bluejays have done all year, they will not feel sorry for themselves. Some of the losses have been blowouts, but others have been close. As McDermott said, part of the culture is learning how to get through the trying times as well as the successes.“It’s been hard,” McDermott said. “There was really no way to prepare for the transition that we would have to make. Last year was a perfect storm, because you had that group together that had played together forever. It allowed the transition to appear easier than it was going to be. But we’ll get there. It’s just going to take a little time.”A version of this article appears in print on February 8, 2015, on Page SP9 of the New York edition with the headline: A Year Later, Stumbling Creighton Grasps at Hope.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.