AdvertisementSupported byBy Benjamin HoffmanWith the N.B.A. All-Star Game returning to Madison Square Garden next Sunday, there is sure to be a good deal of talk about New York, and the way the city and its famous arena have long been viewed as basketball meccas, even if many of the best players now come from elsewhere. Mention will surely be made of the city’s playgrounds and the formidable players who graced them.But what exactly qualifies someone as a New York City player?If you tried to define New York City basketball strictly by birthplace, you would include players like Michael Jordan, who was born in Brooklyn but grew up elsewhere. And you would exclude Julius Erving, who was born in Nassau County, next to but not part of the city, but who helped to enhance the New York style of play with his wizardry at the famous Rucker Park playground in Harlem before going on to star for the New York Nets and the Philadelphia 76ers. So clearly there is more to the definition than an original address.And even if you can agree that a player should basically be considered a New York City athlete if he went to high school in one of the five boroughs, is there anything else that traditionally sets apart a New York City basketball player?“You would know just by his toughness and his moxie,” said Kemba Walker, a star point guard for the Charlotte Hornets who was born in the Bronx, gained national prominence at Rice High School in Harlem and led the University of Connecticut to an N.C.A.A. title in 2011.Brooklyn-born Chris Mullin, who played his high school ball in the city and was the N.C.A.A.’s player of the year for St. John’s in Queens in 1985 before becoming an N.B.A. All-Star, said he often watches college games and finds himself thinking a player is likely to be from his old stamping grounds based on the way he carries himself on the court.“I think most New York players handle the ball extremely well,” Mullin said. “There’s a certain confidence that borders on cockiness because of the different stages they went through to prove themselves.”Dolph Schayes, who was born in the Bronx in 1928 and starred for DeWitt Clinton High School in that borough and then for New York University, was one of the N.B.A.’s early stars. A 6-foot-7 power forward who could shoot from outside, somewhat akin to Dirk Nowitzki, Schayes was ahead of his time and said he was greatly influenced by the playground games of his youth.“Even though I was really tall, I never played inside, because in the three-on-three game, it was frowned upon,” Schayes said. “We just played the pure game of pass, cut, pick and roll, spread the floor. It was a game of motion. It was a game of movement, so we moved.”Walker came along 62 years later but said his time with the New York Gauchos, an Amateur Athletic Union team, played a part in developing his style, just as Schayes’s playground days shaped his game.“With the Gauchos, we played four guards, one big,” Walker said. “It was unbelievable, and we won a lot of the major tournaments. It definitely had a huge impact on my entire career.”Perhaps the safest thing to say about New York City basketball is that in so large a city, there are bound to be numerous influences — church gyms, A.A.U. teams, playgrounds with bent rims — on how the game is learned and polished.All of which leads to next weekend’s All-Star Game, the first to be held in New York since 1998.In what might be considered an elaborate homework assignment, the N.B.A. set out to try to tell the story of New York City basketball in a comprehensive, if inevitably subjective, way. The league, in a project that began last April and will be unveiled on Monday on NBA.com, produced a detailed map and a mobile application that looks at the city’s basketball roots at multiple levels.There are, of course, the numerous N.B.A. stars who come from Brooklyn or Queens, or the Bronx. But there are also female standouts, there are players from the city who joined the Harlem Globetrotters and there are even those, like Joe Hammond, whose success never extended past the playground.Paul Hirschheimer, the N.B.A.’s senior vice president for content production, said the league relied on in-house resources, “our team of history people” and singular experts like Peter Vecsey, the Queens-born, longtime N.B.A. columnist for The New York Post, and the high school hoops guru Tom Konchalski, also from Queens.The standard criterion for determining whether a player belonged in the map and the app was where he or she went to high school, although some exceptions were made. Both projects embrace decades of history. Red Holzman is there. So are World B. Free, Kenny Smith and Ernie Grunfeld. The N.B.A. is also expecting names to be added, at least to the app, as time goes on.“If we missed something somewhere, we’re going to add it immediately,” Hirschheimer said.There will, however, be no asterisk noting that the local game isn’t quite what it once was.Plenty of theories exist as to why players from New York City high schools are no longer as dominant on the national stage as they were in earlier decades. There are, some argue, just more good players in more places than there once were, reducing the city’s influence. High schools with strong football programs also seem to be producing good basketball players, perhaps because of their strength programs. New York City doesn’t have particularly strong high school football.Mullin contends that the problem is that the best players no longer end up sticking around, often leaving for prestigious academy schools outside the city before they get to high school and count as New York City players.“When I was growing up, we had built-in role models in every neighborhood,” Mullin said. “I’m from Brooklyn, so I heard stories of Billy Cunningham and Lenny Wilkens, Tiny Archibald, the King brothers, Mike Dunleavy. So many people were from your neighborhood.”Leaving the city used to be a foreign concept, even when it came time for college.Schayes recalled Purdue University’s trying to recruit his entire high school team, but he said neither he nor any of his teammates wanted to leave town.His hand was forced when it came time to turn professional. He had been drafted by the Knicks, then of the Basketball Association of America, in 1948. He had also been drafted by the Tri-City Blackhawks of the National Basketball League, with his rights traded to the Syracuse Nationals. The Knicks offered him $5,000, and the Nats offered $7,500. With no idea that the leagues would eventually merge, Schayes felt he could not pass up the extra money and left home.“At the time I thought I was going to the North Pole when they said Syracuse,” Schayes said.Mullin, who spent two years at Power Memorial Academy in Manhattan and two years at Xaverian High School in Brooklyn, had his choice of colleges and was close to signing on as part of Mike Krzyzewski’s first recruiting class at Duke, but he decided he did not want to leave New York.“Everything was right there for me, and so when I took my visits to other schools, I really asked if there was something there I wasn’t going to get at home,” Mullin said. “And the answer was no,”Now, all these years later, he is part of the map and the app. So is Schayes. And Walker. And Lance Stephenson. And Bob Cousy. And Sue Bird, who played at Christ the King High School in Queens and went to star at UConn and in the W.N.B.A.Hirschheimer said the N.B.A. planned to distribute 5,000 of the maps to community-based organizations and schools, and hoped that perhaps it would serve as inspiration for some seventh grader in Queens to play professionally and bolster that long — if not quite as unrivaled as it used to be — list of New York City players.Mullin, meanwhile, said he was looking forward to looking at the map. “I’ve got this idea of where these people came from and what their background was,” he said. Now he’ll know for sure.Advertisement