AdvertisementSupported byOn GolfBy Karen CrouseSAN DIEGO — In the 1969 Ryder Cup, Jack Nicklaus took a strong hand and, through the alchemy of grace, turned it into golf’s trump card. On the 18th hole, Nicklaus conceded Tony Jacklin’s 2-foot par putt to halve the final match and create the first tie in the event’s history. Nicklaus’s act of sportsmanship did not go over well with the United States captain, Sam Snead, who groused, “We went over there to win, not to be good ol’ boys.” Most people took the longer view, seeing in Nicklaus’s gesture all that is honorable about this gentleman’s game.From offering an opponent who has run out of golf balls a fresh sleeve to conceding a final putt in a well-played match, golf is full of stories of players forgoing the technically appropriate route for the noble one.  It is worth considering these generous acts when contemplating the lawsuit filed against the PGA Tour in federal court last week by more than 80 caddies over unpaid endorsement fees. The caddies said the tour had turned them into walking billboards by requiring them to wear bibs with the title sponsor’s logo without sharing any of the proceeds, valued by lawyers for the caddies at roughly $50 million annually. The lawsuit was filed after a year of negotiations failed to produce a settlement. The tour commissioner, Tim Finchem, said he had not studied the complaint. He also said the players and their caddies were independent contractors, with the caddies working for the players, not for the tour. It would seem that he is contradicting himself by saying the players are the bosses of the caddies but are also under the thumbs of the tour brass. The policy also does not take into account that caddies may have personal convictions that go against the corporate grain. Consider the caddie who told the story of being forced to wear an R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Co. bib at a senior event in the early 2000s despite the fact that his father had died from lung cancer caused by smoking. Finchem displayed the myopia of Snead rather than the grace of Nicklaus when he said: “We think that’s been a good system. The extent to which this lawsuit challenges that system, for whatever reasons they have in the lawsuit from a legal standpoint, it is what it is, but we would like to continue that system and let it go on.” As a trained lawyer, Finchem can light the path to constitutional correctness. But why not follow the lead of the many sportsmanlike players in the game and choose the higher road? If charity begins at home, why has the PGA Tour said that it has given more than $2 billion to other worthy causes since 1938, but resisted contributing in a meaningful way to the health and pension plans of the caddies, who are integral to the show? The caddies receive a $2,000 annual stipend for health insurance. There are roughly 200 who worked at least 15 events last season. Finchem was asked Wednesday if he would consider increasing the sum for that group. “Over the last 15 years, we and our tournaments have taken a number of steps to make the experience for a caddie as good as possible,” he replied. “That includes support on site, how they’re handled from a parking standpoint, good. We also do the insurance subsidy.”He reiterated, “So we think it’s a good system.”The 39-page lawsuit was filed Feb. 3, the week after the PGA Tour’s big-bucks bacchanal at the Phoenix Open at TPC Scottsdale. Kevin Na’s caddie, Kenny Harms, one of the plaintiffs, said the timing was coincidental. But it does not take much squinting to see the Phoenix Open the way the caddies might. As they trudged past the patrons’ vehicles, parked by valets closer to the tournament grounds than their own, or dodged a hailstorm of aluminum beer bottles on the 16th hole after Francesco Molinari’s ace, why shouldn’t they have felt as if they were party crashers, not full participants?  On Tuesday at the Farmers Insurance Open, caddies arriving midmorning at Torrey Pines in San Diego to meet their players for practice rounds were turned away from a parking lot on the site. They were directed to a satellite lot with spotty shuttle service. It did not seem a shining example of the tour’s commitment, as stated by Finchem, “to make the experience for a caddie as good as possible.” Finchem said Wednesday there had been a miscommunication. “It’s a work in progress,” he said, adding, “There’s obviously things we can do better.” The next day, the caddies were not permitted to wait out the two-and-a-half-hour fog delay in the clubhouse, which was off bounds to them. They have a tour-subsidized trailer, which is near the range but a long walk or short cart ride to the first tees on the North and South courses.  The setup looked suspiciously like a remnant of golf’s elitist roots. Stewart Cink, a tour veteran and one-time major winner, said it was simply a question of space. The players’ locker room, he said, is connected to the Torrey Pines Lodge, and the quarters are cramped. “It may sound a little harsh,” Cink said, “but I have a hard time feeling a lot of sympathy toward that just because of the space limitations.”With equipment representatives and players both trying to do their work, Cink said, “You run out of space eventually.” The caddies have run out of patience with the status quo. For every Joe LaCava, Tiger Woods’s caddie, who has been able to turn the job into a salaried position, there are dozens who lose money on any given week when their players fail to survive the cut. For every Jim Mackay, Phil Mickelson’s caddie, who can attract sponsors for his hat and sleeves, there are dozens of others who depend on bonuses from a tour-sponsored deal with Nature Valley granola to make ends meet.  “I want the best for my fellow caddies,” Harms said. “I’m standing up for what I believe is right.” Advertisement