

 Jeré Longman
 

ON COLLEGE BASKETBALL
FEB. 7, 2015
South Carolina travels to Connecticut on Monday night for a meeting of the top two N.C.A.A. women’s basketball teams. The matchup will tell us something about the present and raise a thorny question about the future.In this turbulent, uncertain period of college sports, how long can UConn sustain its dominance as one of the few women’s basketball powers not affiliated with a Power 5 football conference? The reflexive answer for many is: for as long as Geno Auriemma remains head coach.That seems reasonable enough. But he will turn 61 next month and will not remain at UConn forever. History suggests that his successor will not recreate Auriemma’s success. Even with the Hollywood allure of Los Angeles, U.C.L.A. could not maintain the greatness that John Wooden brought to men’s basketball there from the mid-1960s through the mid-1970s.“I don’t know how much longer I’m going to be there; after I leave, I have no idea what’s going to happen,” said Auriemma, whose contract extends through the 2017-18 season and pays him more than $2 million a year.Advertisement“But we haven’t had any problems recruiting players,” Auriemma said. “We haven’t had any problems in terms of what our goals are to win a national championship. That hasn’t been an issue at all. Will it become one? Not as long as I’m there.”Last Tuesday, Auriemma won for the 900th time in 1,034 career games. No men’s or women’s coach has free-climbed to that perch so quickly. He made it 901 on Saturday. In April, he can match the record 10 national titles that Wooden won at U.C.L.A. And Breanna Stewart, UConn’s 6-foot-4-inch forward who is considered the nation’s top player, still has another season on campus.“As long as it says, ‘Connecticut Head Coach Geno Auriemma,’ they ain’t going nowhere,” said Tyler Summitt, the first-year women’s coach at Louisiana Tech.And yet Summitt understands as acutely as anyone that there are two sides to the athletic coin. He grew up watching his mother, Pat, win eight N.C.A.A. championships at Tennessee. Now he is trying to revive a Louisiana Tech program that collected three national titles in the 1980s and trails only the Lady Vols in overall victories but has struggled to remain relevant while lacking the resources of elite football powers.“Money inevitably is the driver behind a lot of this,” Summitt said.Like Tennessee, top-ranked South Carolina (22-0) belongs to the Southeastern Conference, which has a raft of national football championships and its own television network and is soaked in money as much as beer. Six SEC women’s teams are ranked among basketball’s top 25.AdvertisementSecond-ranked UConn (22-1) competes in a rump league called the American Athletic Conference, or A.A.C., where the level of football is as middling as the league’s finances.Forbes reported that the SEC paid each of its universities an average of $19.4 million in 2013-14 from television deals, the NCAA basketball tournament and bowl games, while the A.A.C. paid an average of $6.55 million.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.That does not include conference swag from the first College Football Playoff, which earned $87.5 million for the SEC and $12 million to $17 million for the A.A.C., according to the Business of College Sports website.The Power 5 conferences — the SEC, the Big Ten, the Big 12, the Pacific-12 and the Atlantic Coast Conference, plus Notre Dame — can offer scholarships that cover the full cost of attendance. Those leagues’ athletes can also borrow against future earnings to buy “loss of value” insurance. And as legal challenges to the N.C.A.A. seek unionization and free-market compensation, these power conferences seem best prepared to offer everything from bank shots to bank accounts.“The SEC has always been what it is, and UConn and Geno have always been what they’ve been,” said Dawn Staley, the Hall of Fame player and women’s coach at South Carolina. “I think everybody will hold serve on paper, but it is my aspiration to make South Carolina the best team in the country year in and year out.”Like Kim Mulkey, who has guided Baylor to two N.C.A.A. titles, Staley belongs to a generation of former star players and Olympic champions who have become top-level coaches. She landed the nation’s top recruit — the 6-5 freshman forward A’ja Wilson — by applying full-court pressure to keep Wilson in her native South Carolina and away from prominent suitors like UConn, Tennessee and North Carolina.Staley pitched Wilson on the dream of leading South Carolina to its first Final Four. Wilson joined throbbing crowds for every Gamecocks home football game as a high school senior, Staley said, and knew she would play regularly on national television on the SEC Network.“We’ve got football,” Staley said. “Football is driving college sports.”There are basketball outliers, of course. The UConn men and women are reigning national champions. And it is impossible to predict the future. Perhaps the A.C.C. will reconsider and accept UConn to fortify its seaboard base from Miami to New England. Or maybe the Big 12, snubbed in the first football playoffs, will come calling as it seeks enough football teams to stage a conference championship game.“For us to remain who we are, it doesn’t matter what league we’re in,” Auriemma said. “Everybody aspires to make as much money as they can, but all that money doesn’t guarantee an opportunity to win championships.”AdvertisementTrue, Auriemma has held his own against the SEC, winning seven of his national titles while his chief rival, Pat Summitt, coached at Tennessee. And UConn alone has won more women’s championships than the A.C.C., the Big 12 and the Big Ten combined. But, ever candid, Auriemma said: “Any place that’s had tremendous success, you know it can’t last forever. It’s not supposed to.”And surely it won’t help if UConn continues to face a disadvantage in its bottom line once he leaves the sideline.“Does every university want to be in a league where you’re getting a check for $30 million just for showing up?” Auriemma said. “The answer would probably be yes, but it’s not anything we can control.”A version of this article appears in print on February 8, 2015, on Page SP1 of the New York edition with the headline: After Auriemma’s Reign, UConn Could Lose Clout.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »