By SAM BORDENFEB. 7, 2015
QUIBERON, France —  The slow buildup to this summer’s Women’s World Cup has not featured the same level of competitive worry for the United States national team as it did for the men’s team in 2014. The women’s team qualified easily for its tournament, which begins in Canada in June, and will enter the field as one of the clear favorites to win the trophy.But that does not mean there has not been a measure of drama. During the past nine months, the United States players have navigated a coaching change, a failed lawsuit over the use of artificial turf at the World Cup, and troublesome injuries to key players that have raised questions about the sturdiness of the team as it prepares for the grind of a tournament it has not won since 1999.Even the most experienced American players concede that this has been a strange spell. Shortly after finishing a training session last week ahead of the United States’ exhibition game against France on Sunday — to be played in nearby Lorient, which has one of this country’s few top-division artificial-turf fields — Abby Wambach did not conceal a sigh.“There’s no question,” she said, “that there have been some things happening.”The most notable issue has been the plight of Hope Solo, the team’s longtime goalkeeper. Solo, 33, has played every minute of every World Cup or Olympic game for the United States since 2008, providing a steady and superior presence at the back of the American defense.AdvertisementBut off the field, she has repeatedly run into trouble. Solo lost her place on the national team after clashing with her coach in 2007, and she has picked regular battles with former national team stars on social media. She was arrested on domestic assault charges last summer — they were later dropped — but was suspended for 30 days by U.S. Soccer last month after she and her husband were stopped by the police while driving one of the team’s vans during the final days of a training camp in California. Solo’s husband, the former N.F.L. player Jerramy Stevens, was arrested on a charge of driving under the influence.AdvertisementSolo’s suspension meant she was not included on the roster of players who will compete against France or play in the team’s match at England on Friday, and her teammates say they cannot avoid considering the chance that they may have to play in the World Cup without her.“I’ve definitely thought about that, and that is a possibility,” midfielder Megan Rapinoe said. “If she’s not being professional, you have to look at that and know that the federation people may make a decision.”Rapinoe added: “It has been a tough six months for her, and some of that is self-inflicted, and some of it is not. I hope that she takes advantage of this time and can see where there are areas where she can improve and where she makes life difficult for herself. I don’t think anyone is writing her off. I’m certainly not.”At a minimum, though, Solo’s troubles have forced the team to take a closer look at its goalkeeping, an area that, for years, has been among its most settled.As of Friday, Coach Jill Ellis had not named a starter for Sunday’s match, but she has three goalkeepers on the roster for these two games. Nicole Barnhart, 33, has been Solo’s longtime backup, but Ashlyn Harris, 29, who plays for Washington in the National Women’s Soccer League, has also drawn praise. The third goalkeeper, Alyssa Naeher, started one game on the Americans’ trip to Brazil in December.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Further clouding the situation was the recent departure of the team’s goalkeeping coach, Paul Rogers, who left the national team after six years to take a job in Major League Soccer. Harris said she was not concerned about any reserve goalkeeper needing extra time to get in sync with the United States’ defenders — “we spend so much time together as a team that it isn’t an issue” — and made clear that she was not especially interested in tracking developments in Solo’s situation.“My focus isn’t on Hope,” she said. “I think a lot of people think I spend a lot of time thinking about her or what she’s doing, but when I show up every day, my focus is on me and what I’m doing. I have to be prepared to play at any given moment, and if I’m not prepared, I’m not doing my job.”AdvertisementEllis, who spoke briefly after a training session, appeared to be weary of questions about Solo. It has been a challenging start to Ellis’s tenure in charge, which began in May. The previous coach, Tom Sermanni, was fired after 15 months in charge despite having signed a contract that would have carried him through the World Cup and the 2016 Olympics. (U.S. Soccer said it needed to “go in a different direction” in explaining the decision.)Ellis filled in as the interim coach for several months before U.S. Soccer hired her full time last fall. Her history with the players is considerable; she worked as an assistant under the former coach Pia Sundhage and has been involved with U.S. Soccer in various capacities for more than a decade.That familiarity with the players has helped her manage the various personalities on the team, and Solo’s situation — as well as injuries to players like Rapinoe and the captain Christie Rampone, who are not with the team on its current trip — has reinforced Ellis’s desire to increase the depth on the roster.Many of the players who are expected to take part in the World Cup are older, so Ellis has focused on identifying backup plans at every position. It is not only at goalkeeper, she said — for a team of experienced players, depth is critical.“If we have two outside backs, I want to be sure I have at least three players who have gotten the minutes and are in position to step in and play,” she said. “That’s one thing that’s clear: For every player, you have to have a Plan B.”A version of this article appears in print on February 8, 2015, on Page SP4 of the New York edition with the headline: Trouble, on Field and Off, for Mighty U.S. Before Women’s World Cup.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.