By DAVID WALDSTEINOCT. 11, 2015
ARLINGTON, Tex. —  Of all the unusual scenes that took place over 23 innings in the two American League division series games in Toronto last week, the ones that were seared into the minds of Blue Jays fans were those involving the equipment on the appendages of the Texas Rangers’ Rougned Odor.Whether it was his oven-mitt sliding glove touching home plate, or his right spike clinging safely at second base — or not — Odor’s presence in the first two games of the series has been ubiquitous.Almost every time there was an important moment, Odor seemed to have a hand or a foot in it, inspiring his teammates to a 2-0 lead in the best-of-five series. The Blue Jays won Game 3 on Sunday, 5-1.“I thrive off of him,” said Mike Napoli, the veteran whose critical pinch-hit single in the eighth inning of Game 2 scored the tying run. “He’s one of my good friends on the team, one of the guys I’ve become close to.”AdvertisementIn the first two games, Odor was hit by two pitches, hit a home run, shrewdly grabbed an extra base, made a slick barehanded play in the field and did not get called out at second base on a disputed play in the 14th inning of Game 2.AdvertisementMost of all, he has been a cyclone on the basepaths.Odor scored five of the Rangers’ 11 runs in the series, combining his aggressive approach with an enviable athleticism and craftiness well beyond his 21 years.“There are certain players that I alluded to yesterday that just completely will yourself to score,” Rangers Manager Jeff Banister said. “And that’s where I think Rougned Odor is.”Odor is one of the emerging young stars in the game, a second baseman from Maracaibo, Venezuela, who plays with vast quantities of energy, confidence and talent.He was born Feb. 3, 1994, four months after the Blue Jays’ previous playoff appearance. The Rangers signed him in January 2011, a month before his 17th birthday, and pointed him toward the major leagues. He made his debut three years later in May 2014 at age 20 and this year was the Rangers’ opening-day second baseman.After a rough month when he batted only .144, Odor was sent back to Class AAA Round Rock to work on pitch selection. He had 25 strikeouts in 90 at-bats to go with only seven walks.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Refusing to grow despondent over his demotion, Odor rediscovered his swing in the minors and came back as one of the better second basemen in the major leagues. On the day he returned, June 15, he went 3 for 3, and from there until the end of the season he batted .292 with 15 home runs, 52 runs batted in and an .861 on-base plus slugging percentage.Over all, he batted .261 with 21 doubles, 16 home runs, 61 R.B.I. and a .465 slugging percentage. The 16 home runs were the second-most by a second baseman under the age of 22, according to the Rangers’ statistical information. The Hall of Famer Bill Mazeroski had 19 in 1958.AdvertisementSome of Odor’s postseason accomplishments, based on age, are also remarkable. In Game 1, he became the third-youngest player to homer in his first postseason game. The youngest was a 21-year-old Jimmy Sebring for the 1903 Pittsburgh Pirates in the World Series, and Brian McCann did it for the Atlanta Braves at 21 in the 2005 National League division series, 19 days younger than Odor.Odor’s home run, off David Price, was merely one moment. Odor had so many in Toronto it was difficult to keep track. Before the homer in Game 1, he was hit by pitches twice and scored both times, willing himself, as Banister noted, the next 270 feet.In Game 2, he was even better. In the second inning, he walked, and then, when Chris Gimenez hit a high chopper, Odor noticed no one was covering third, and he passed second base in full stride and did not stop running until he slid safely into third.He then scored on a shallow sacrifice fly by deploying an amazingly skillful slide. The throw from center fielder Kevin Pillar was nearly perfect, but Odor extended his left hand, then pulled it back as catcher Russell Martin went to apply the tag.At top speed, Odor yanked the left hand back and reached around with his right hand and touched home plate safely with his clawlike sliding glove. Martin seemed stunned, but he did not argue.Odor wears the glove on his hand because of an injury to his right middle finger in which he tore a fingernail and missed five games in late August.“I just want to protect it,” he said. “I don’t like it, but I have to use it.”In the 14th inning, with two outs and the score tied, 4-4, Odor was almost tagged out at second base when the Blue Jays threw behind him. According to the umpires and the replay officials, Odor’s foot never came off the bag. Replays showed his spike clinging to the base, but moving, and it was simply impossible to see if it actually lost connection with the base.Thousands, if not millions, of Canadian fans disagreed with the umpires, but Odor scored the eventual winning run on a single by Hanser Alberto.Odor said he was not worried even slightly while the umpires checked the replay. He said he knew his foot never came off the bag. The way he had been playing, it was not surprising it went his way.Advertisement“Some guys get intimidated,” Napoli said. “He’s not intimidated at all, even on this stage. It’s been really nice to watch. He’s a young kid that fears nothing.”A version of this article appears in print on October 12, 2015, on Page D3 of the New York edition with the headline: From Hitting to Sliding, Young Ranger Inspires Team .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.