By BENJAMIN HOFFMANOCT. 11, 2015
The Dallas Cowboys’ defense was breathing fire. Led by recently-activated Greg Hardy, the Cowboys sacked Tom Brady five times in the first half, limiting the high-powered New England Patriots offense to just 13 points. But Brady, as he has done so many times, stayed cool and led his team to an easy 30-6 victory.Under pressure from a Cowboys front-seven all day, Brady did not give in, completing 20 of 27 passes for 275 yards and 2 touchdowns. The Patriots defense took care of the rest, keeping Brandon Weeden and the Cowboys out of the end zone and limiting them to 264 total yards.It has been a difficult season for the Cowboys. Dez Bryant was lost to a foot injury in Week 1 and Tony Romo broke his left clavicle in Week 2. Weeden has completed a high percentage of his passes but has failed to put up a consistent amount of production. The team that started 2-0 is now 2-3.This week the team’s defense added back Hardy, who had been suspended four games over domestic violence allegations, and Rolando McClain, who was suspended four games for a violation of the league’s substance abuse policy. The addition of Hardy in particular provided plenty of controversy. His suspension, handed out by Roger Goodell, originally called for him to miss 10 games but had the ban reduced by arbitrator.AdvertisementHardy, whose signing drew plenty of criticism, did not help the team’s public relations issues when speaking with the media last week. When asked if he had any remorse over the incident, Hardy said he was “sorry I couldn’t be here for my teammates.”AdvertisementHardy had 3 tackles, 2 sacks and a forced fumble in the first half, hitting Brady three times. The Cowboys’ defense fell silent in the second half, though, allowing New England to put the score well out of reach.Julian Edelman was New England’s leading receiver for the day, grabbing 4 catches for 120 yards and a 59-yard touchdown in which he left several Cowboys players falling down as he cut back and forth across the field.The Patriots, one of six unbeaten teams in the N.F.L., will now travel to Indianapolis for a game against the Colts that serves as a rematch of last season’s A.F.C. championship. That game was the subject of great controversy when it was found that the Patriots had played much of the game with footballs that did not reach the minimum threshold for inflation. While the team accepted its punishments from the N.F.L., Brady challenged his four-game suspension, beating the N.F.L. in court at least for now.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.