By PAT PICKENSFEB. 8, 2015
Since he entered the N.H.L. in the 2005-6 season, Henrik Lundqvist has been a mainstay as the Rangers’ goalie.So he said he was “shocked” when he found out he would have to miss at least three weeks after being struck in the neck by a slap shot on Jan. 31, resulting in a blood vessel injury. But after finding out that excess physical activity with such an injury could lead to a stroke, he accepted his rest period.“You can’t take a risk on this,” Lundqvist said Sunday, speaking to the news media for the first time since his diagnosis. “I have to listen to the doctors. I feel great walking around, but I don’t want to push this injury.”In the meantime, the Rangers have turned their net over to Cam Talbot, who made 22 saves in a 3-2 overtime loss to the Dallas Stars on Sunday. He has won one of three games since Lundqvist was sidelined Wednesday.AdvertisementLundqvist was hit by a Brad Malone shot in the second period against the Carolina Hurricanes and finished the game. He also played last Monday night in a 6-3 victory against the Florida Panthers but said he had headaches afterward. The following day, Lundqvist had two throat scans, administered by Rangers doctors.AdvertisementLundqvist said he was initially cleared to play Wednesday against the Boston Bruins, but a specialist saw something irregular and called for a second scan, which discovered the injury.“It was mixed emotions when I found out,” Lundqvist said. “I was happy the staff and the doctors found it, because the consequences could’ve been pretty bad, but it’s also disappointing because I want to play, especially this time of the year — there’s so many exciting games to play. But again, it could’ve been worse.”Lundqvist said he would be able to do some “light cardio” and expected to be able to skate in one to two weeks, but added a “no pucks” caveat to that. He will be re-evaluated in two or three weeks but said he would not return until he was 100 percent.“I’m trying to accept that I’ll be out awhile,” said Lundqvist, 32, whose longest previous injury layoff was seven games during his rookie season. “Now it’s just about figuring out the best way to come back as soon as I can, when it’s safe to play. Also, I want to be sure I’m on top of my game when I’m ready to play.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Talbot, 27, has been the Rangers’ backup the past two seasons and has played well this season, with a .920 save percentage and three shutouts in 13 games entering Sunday’s contest. Mackenzie Skapski, 20, has been recalled from Hartford in Lundqvist’s absence.“Cam has been playing really well,” Lundqvist said. “He’s not 21. He’s been around, playing a lot of hockey. We’re all confident in him; the team is confident with him in net.”Although Talbot and the Rangers dropped their second game in two days, Talbot put forth a strong effort Sunday. He stopped Antoine Roussel’s first-period, short-handed breakaway and kept the Rangers in the game during a second-period stretch in which Dallas registered seven straight shots.“In the first 30-somewhat minutes, he kept us in,” Rangers Coach Alain Vigneault said. “He’s doing what a goaltender is supposed to and gives his team a chance to win.”AdvertisementStarting on consecutive nights for only the second time in his N.H.L. career, Talbot said: “I felt good tonight. I thought I came up with some big saves, especially in the second period.”Still, Talbot was beaten cleanly on two shots — Ales Hemsky’s game-winning goal at 1 minute 2 seconds into overtime and Erik Cole’s goal at 18:05 of the second period that gave Dallas a 2-1 lead. Talbot said that Rangers forward Carl Hagelin redirected Cole’s shot in the second period and that he was screened on Hemsky’s goal.“I didn’t see the game winner,” Talbot said. “I saw the release, but after that, I lost it.”Trailing, 2-1, after two periods, the Rangers put forth an onslaught in the third, outshooting the Stars, 20-2, in the final 20 minutes of regulation. They finally tied the score when Chris Kreider shuffled a rebound past Kari Lehtonen on the power play at 18:40 after John Klingberg was penalized for delay of game.A version of this article appears in print on February 9, 2015, on Page D2 of the New York edition with the headline: With Lundqvist Missing, Rangers Fall to the Stars.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.