AdvertisementSupported byBy Karen CrouseSAN DIEGO — For most of the contenders at the Farmers Insurance Open, the final round stretched before them like a tightrope between La Jolla’s sandstone cliffs. Finding their footing on the PGA Tour has been treacherous for players like Spencer Levin, Harris English and Jhonattan Vegas, who grew up watching Tiger Woods raise the ceiling on performance while winning multiple times a season. For every step forward, there have been nasty spills down leaderboards or injury-induced setbacks. Lately, Woods has struggled, too, abruptly retiring during the first round here. His travails have been all the more shocking because for years he closed out tournaments more convincingly than anyone since Billy Casper in the 1960s. Charlie Sifford’s death Tuesday, Woods’s withdrawal Thursday, Casper’s death two days later at age 83, and a four-man playoff Sunday, which was won by Jason Day on the second hole of sudden death, provided a panoramic snapshot of the sport’s tidal currents. Athletes rush in and eventually recede, inexorably altering the landscape.With a birdie on the 72nd hole, English (72) joined Scott Stallings (69), J. B. Holmes (72) and Day (70) in the playoff at Torrey Pines, each golfer at nine-under-par 279. Holmes narrowly missed a 19-foot birdie putt on the 72nd hole that would have averted a playoff. “I had a putt to win,” Holmes said. “You can’t ask for more than that. I thought I made the putt; I made a really good putt. But that’s how it goes sometimes.”English and Stallings, the defending champion, were eliminated on the first extra hole, the par-5 18th, when they failed to make birdies. Day won after Holmes’s tee shot on the par-3 16th sailed long. The victory was Day’s third on the tour and his first since last February’s Match Play Championship. With the win, he moved to No. 4 in the world rankings, which is where he was last February, before a wrist injury slowed his progress.Day, 27, whose favorite player while he was growing up in Australia was Woods, said of the game: “It’s evolving into a fantastic, powerful sport where everyone’s hitting long drives, and it’s exciting. But we got blessed with that 15-year span of Tiger just dominating for so long, and he made it look very, very easy.”Day added: “I played my first seven tournaments on the PGA Tour in 2006, and Tiger was still dominating then. The game’s kind of changing; it’s evolving into one with very young, tall, big, strong-looking guys out there that hit it a mile and have fantastic touch. It’s getting tougher. It’s really tough to win out here.” English, 25, who had never before gone to sleep with a 54-hole lead, said he took a lot of positives from the day. “I felt like I was under the gun a lot the past two days, and I felt like my game stood up,” he said, adding: “I’m glad I gave myself a chance to know what it feels like to be in a playoff. That’s a good feeling.”Growing up in South Georgia, English developed a temper on the course because he expected to pull off the difficult shots that he saw Woods routinely make, he said Saturday with a laugh. English, as well as others in the first generation of professional golfers who were inspired by Woods to take up the sport, discovered a truth that those who preceded Woods on the tour considered incontrovertible: Sustained excellence is hard.“Not to echo what people say, but it’s really hard to win out here,” said Charles Howell III, who closed with a 68 to finish tied for fifth, one stroke out of the playoff.Howell, 35, who was considered the Rory McIlroy of his day when he turned professional in 2000, has gone 234 starts since his last victory, at a 2007 tournament in Los Angeles. He has 14 career runner-up finishes, including two here, both times finishing behind Woods.“A lot of people of my generation are used to getting our heads bashed in by Tiger, where these guys don’t really seem to be afraid of anything,” Howell said, referring to the players in their 20s.For players his age and older, Howell said, “where Tiger used to be the motivating factor, these young kids are now.”Vegas, of Venezuela, was one of three players to hold an outright lead Sunday (Holmes and English were the others). Since tying for third at this event in 2011, Vegas has had one top-three showing in 81 starts. Vegas, who was slowed by a shoulder operation in 2013, closed with a 73 on Sunday to finish tied for 11th at six-under 282 in a group that included Levin (74).Levin, whose progress was hindered by 2012 thumb surgery, was among seven players who held at least a share of the final-round lead. The difference between gracing the playoff and finishing just outside the top 10 “is such a fine line,” he said. “Just a couple putts here and there.”In 2004, Levin finished 13th at the United States Open as an amateur. The next year, he turned pro. Levin, who is winless in 152 tour starts, said: “Players keep getting better younger, which is making the level of golf go up and up. It seems if you have three good rounds and one O.K. round, you can’t win out here.” Holmes had cracked the top 25 only twice since a victory at the Wells Fargo Championship last May. “When I won, my schedule completely changed,” he said. “I got into some tournaments I wasn’t planning to, and I played more golf than I normally do. To be honest with you, I was a little bit tired at the end of the year.” Day feels rejuvenated after a 2013-14 season that was emotionally enervating. He was playing as well as anyone in the world from November through February. But he lost momentum when he was injured. “I’m hoping for a good year, hoping to stay healthy and really try and challenge for No. 1,” he said.Advertisement