By KELLEY McMILLANFEB. 8, 2015
BEAVER CREEK, Colo. —  After spending four days in Park City, Utah, training on his home hill, doing laundry and sleeping in his own bed — basically enjoying the amenities of home after four months on the road — Ted Ligety won a bronze medal Sunday in the super combined at the Alpine world championships.Ligety finished the Alpine combined, which features one downhill and one slalom leg, behind Marcel Hirscher of Austria, who took gold with an aggregate time of 2 minutes 36.10 seconds, and Kjetil Jansrud of Norway. Ligety’s medal came a day after his teammate Travis Ganong won a silver in the downhill, the world championships’ marquee event.Ligety’s respite from the World Cup circuit seemed to be just what he needed to resurrect his season. With only three podium finishes this winter, compared with six at the same time last year, Ligety was having one of his worst seasons in recent years.“I’m skiing pretty poorly this year for sure,” Ligety, the 2014 Olympic gold medalist in giant slalom, said in an interview Thursday. “I’m not skiing anywhere close to where I have been.”AdvertisementAfter the opening run of the Alpine combined, it appeared as though Ligety’s rut would continue. He finished 29th in the downhill, more than three seconds behind Jansrud, the run’s leader.Advertisement“I thought there was no chance for anybody to come out of that far back for a medal,” Ligety said after the race.Believing he had no shot at a medal, he risked everything in the slalom, skiing an aggressive run that landed him in second until Jansrud, who ran 30th, edged Ligety into third.“I skied with reckless abandon, not really thinking there was any chance,” Ligety said.Ligety also benefited from his position in the starting order of the second run. In the combined, the top 30 skiers race in the reverse order of where they finished in the downhill, so the racer who places 30th in the downhill starts first in the slalom. In Sunday’s warm and sunny conditions, the starting order for the second run greatly favored Hirscher and Ligety, who ran one-two in the slalom.“It was dumb luck, good strategy I guess, running one and two,” Ligety said. He added, “We were more lucky than anything else.”Another twist of fate helped Hirscher. Ondrej Bank of the Czech Republic crashed violently off the downhill’s final jump before sliding across the finish line. He technically completed the run, but further analysis showed that he had not cleared one of the final gates, disqualifying him from the race. Had he not been disqualified, Bank would have finished 25th. That meant Hirscher would have finished outside the top 30 and, under the rules, he would have started the slalom leg 31st, probably eliminating his chances for a podium.Bank was taken off the course in an emergency sled and transported to the Vail Valley Medical Center, where it was determined that he had sustained a concussion, a bruised leg and facial lacerations.Hirscher put the Austrians back atop the podium one day after they were shut out of the top 10 of the men’s downhill at the world championships for the first time.Advertisement“It is unbelievable,” Hirscher said of his medal. “My plan for this championship was to catch one medal. It didn’t matter which color. I reached my goal, and everything that happens now is super good.”Ligety’s bronze medal comes during one of his most disappointing seasons in recent years. A five-time World Cup giant slalom trophy winner, Ligety opened the season with a 10th-place finish in that event in Sölden, Austria, a race that he had won the previous three years. In November, Ligety injured his left hand in a training accident, a mishap that required four screws. Since then, he has recorded one victory and finished second in two other events.For most racers, three top-three finishes would be a tremendous season, but Ligety is used to recording at least seven podium finishes in a year, and often winning races by huge margins.“If I had this kind of season four years ago, people would say I was having a good season,” Ligety said. “It’s just because I’ve had a few phenomenal seasons that it’s considered a bad one now. It’s not like I’m in disaster mode. I know I have it in me still. I know I can find it.”Ligety attributes his lackluster results to a difficult preseason training period, which was hampered by bad weather in Chile — where the United States Ski Team trains during the North American summer — and to his injured hand and a long season on the road.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.And each year, from October to mid-March, the United States team travels the World Cup circuit, living out of suitcases and hopping from hotel to hotel, mostly in Europe. While the team races in some of the world’s most breathtaking ski locales, the vagabond lifestyle and time on the road can take a toll.“It’s such an understated thing with World Cup skiing — if you’re from Austria, you have a three-hour drive home from every venue,” Ligety said. “It’s a huge advantage to them when they’re having a tough time, whereas for us, if you’re having a couple of bad races, there’s no escape.“That’s why I think North Americans will go through a bit of a rut and be in that rut for a little bit longer than a European will be, because we can’t take that mental break, because we’re stuck in Europe.”But Ligety said he believed his time at home was just what he needed to reboot his season.“It’s the first time I’ve been home in February since I was about 18 years old,” said Ligety, who is 30. He said that practicing on the hill he grew up skiing on “was fun, and I think it was definitely good for my skiing.”He added, “It was nice to get the groove back.”A version of this article appears in print on February 9, 2015, on Page D4 of the New York edition with the headline: Home Respite Helps Lift Ligety to Bronze Medal Amid Lackluster Season.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.