
On Pro Basketball By                     
 HARVEY ARATON
 
FEB. 8, 2015
It was a night of imagery, not intrigue, at Madison Square Garden, beginning with Carmelo Anthony being ceremonially handed his All-Star jersey by those distinguished Knicks alumni, Walt Frazier, Allan Houston and John Starks. Then Anthony, in a handsome tapered suit, took a seat on the bench, where he should surely remain with his sore knee for the Knicks’ final 15 home games after he exhausts his right shoulder shooting jump shots in Sunday’s dunk-and-pony show at the self-proclaimed World’s Most Famous Arena.After Anthony was again treated like the Knicks legend he isn’t, Steve Kerr took his place on the Golden State Warriors’ bench and no doubt had a horrifying vision of being on the other side of the floor, or the inverse of 40-9, his team’s record after a sloppy 106-92 victory over the 10-41 Knicks on Saturday night.Kerr mentioned that he had emailed with the Knicks’ president, Phil Jackson, whose offer of a coaching job he rejected last spring, and said he was “indebted” to Jackson for most of what had happened in his career (including the suggestion that he take the coaching job he was most comfortable with).There was also a photogenic sighting of Amar’e Stoudemire posting up David Lee. They were once two power forwards passing in the night, in and out of New York, and are now bench players for their respective teams, with similar outlooks on veteran N.B.A. life.Advertisement“I’ve had plenty of years averaging big numbers and being on a losing team,” Lee said after a tidy 10-point, 10-rebound, 5-assist effort in 22-plus minutes. “Right now it’s all about being on a winning team and winning that championship, which we have a shot at.”AdvertisementStoudemire presumably feels the same way — play for a ring before his knees cry “No más” — except for the part about his current surroundings. With an expiring contract that was once supposed to signal an era of Knicks excellence, Stoudemire could land with a contender if Pharaoh Jackson will let the hard-luck student of all things Israel go with a buyout.“No comment,” Stoudemire said after accumulating 13 points, 6 rebounds and 3 assists, in almost 17 minutes, when asked whether conversations to that end had taken place. Translation: Help!In the Warriors’ locker room, a gracious Lee paid his respects to the memory of Stoudemire as a Knicks savior, saying, “That first year, I’m not sure there was anybody playing better in the league — an M.V.P. candidate.”Then Anthony arrived, courtesy of the ownership’s obsession to pacify price-gouged fans with the kind of quick fix that Jackson calls anathema to the team’s latest rebuilding. Stoudemire sustained various injuries, a couple of them self-inflicted, and at 32 has devolved into a role player who, when upright, can still power the ball to the rim and hit a midrange jumper.Injuries have also cost the ambidextrous and rebound-hungry Lee court time and his starting position with the emergence of the dynamic Draymond Green. “I’ll take whatever role I can get and try to make the most out of it,” Lee said, exactly the attitude that endeared him to Knicks fans when he was the last pick in the draft’s first round in 2005 and wound up five seasons later as the Knicks’ first All-Star since Houston and Latrell Sprewell in 2001.Lee had one special fan in those days: Mario M. Cuomo, the recently deceased former New York governor, who was notorious for throwing vengeful elbows in Albany pickup games.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“He played center for you, he gave up his body and now he has to go?” Cuomo bellowed in a 2010 interview. “Why? To bet on some superstar to be your savior? How many times have we seen that before?”Lee smiled when told what the prescient Cuomo had said. He still runs a summer camp in the New York area and said he had heard such sentiments around town. “You know how much I loved it here,” he said.AdvertisementIn a league trending toward deep and versatile teams, Lee, 31, would, unlike Stoudemire, still be an important rotation guy had the Knicks resisted the risk on Stoudemire’s knees and retained him. But Lee also knows that the story of the team’s subsequent misfortune is rife with complexity. And Stoudemire is too easy a scapegoat.Had Anthony placed winning as his No. 1 priority — as he claims it is now — he would have waited until after the 2011 labor dispute to sign with the Knicks as a free agent and would not have forced them to surrender the multiple players and draft picks they did. They might have survived Stoudemire’s misfortune.If Anthony wants to contribute something potentially meaningful this atrocious season, he should shut down the knee after next week, let the Knicks’ summer league roster scrap as it did Saturday night and continue to lose, and in doing so enhance the likelihood of landing the No. 1 pick in the 2015 draft.The fans will survive. If they had any basketball sense, they wouldn’t be there in the first place. So sophisticated is the current Knicks crowd that Kerr’s introduction did not even draw boos for his rejection of Jackson. But, hey, they celebrated Anthony’s tainted All-Star status, to which they had contributed with their votes, and were thrilled to see Baron Davis, a Knick for 29 games in 2011-12, flash on the big screen.As Lee said, “Once a Knick, always a Knick — there’s some truth to that.”Something of an intangible door prize for most of this season’s Knicks, on the way out.A version of this article appears in print on February 9, 2015, on Page D6 of the New York edition with the headline: Diverging Fates of Two Veterans Encapsulate the Knicks’ Misfortune.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »