

 Scott Cacciola
 

NOT THE KNICKS
FEB. 8, 2015

CreditBrendan Bannon for The New York Times        ROCHESTER —  Lou Dunbar seems happy. He smiles a lot. He laughs constantly. He claims that his job has never felt like a job because he enjoys it too much. And it all begins to make sense once you consider that Dunbar, who goes by Sweet Lou, is the winningest basketball coach in the world.“Well,” Dunbar said as he mulled his career record, “I know I’m undefeated.”Dunbar, 61, coaches the Harlem Globetrotters, who made their way to Blue Cross Arena on a blustery night late last month to tackle a familiar foe, the Washington Generals. Few people have deeper connections to the Globetrotters than Dunbar, who has spent the past 40 years with the organization — the first 24 as one of the team’s fast-talking stars, more recently as its head coach and director of player development.An hour before tipoff in Rochester, Dunbar acknowledged that he liked his team’s chances. He cited the Globetrotters’ 15,071-game winning streak, dating to 1971, against traveling opponents like the Generals. Dunbar, who favors tailored suits and buckets full of confetti, was asked if he ever felt sorry for his hapless rivals.“I can’t remember losing any sleep over it,” he said.One of the great pleasures of watching the Globetrotters’ brand of basketball is that it is impossible to know what they will do next. Seconds after turning a four-man weave into an acrobatic dunk, they could just as easily decide to rifle through a woman’s purse at midcourt.A cultural institution since the 1920s, the Globetrotters still manage to make their routine feel fresh, even if the components — the fancy dribbling, the slapstick gags — are as familiar to audiences as the melody to “Sweet Georgia Brown.”AdvertisementEach performance comes with a knowing wink, of course. Dunbar has a script, and the Generals’ total inability to act like anything other than a bunch of klutzes makes them almost lovable, or at least pitiable. But when so many other basketball teams have so much trouble winning, the Globetrotters continue to make the game appear effortless night after night. They are as dependable as an open layup.Advertisement“I don’t think I’ve ever heard a professional athlete in any sport say they get tired of winning,” said Shane Christensen, a 10-year veteran known as Scooter who owns a place in Guinness World Records for the highly specialized skill of spinning the ball on his nose — 5.1 seconds.Nate Lofton, a center known as Big Easy, said he had not lost a game since 2005, when he was a senior at Southeastern Louisiana.“I get to experience joy every day,” he said. “The Generals are supposed to lose, and we’re supposed to win. It’d be like if Santa Claus didn’t come on Christmas. All the kids would cry. We can’t let that happen.”When Sam Worthen, the longtime coach of the Generals, joined Dunbar for an interview before the game, the contrast between them could not have been more stark. Worthen’s only victory with the Generals has been keeping his job. A former star at Marquette, Worthen was not above asking a reporter for advice.“If you see something that we need to do that could help, please let me know,” he said.Worthen, 57, did not exactly go out of his way to win over the crowd. As starting lineups were set to be introduced, he commandeered the microphone.“Rochester is the worst place we’ve ever been to!” he shouted. “You’re all a bunch of losers!”But that hardly qualified as Worthen’s most audacious statement. Instead, it was his guarantee that the Generals would win — a considerable leap of faith, given their history.Advertisement“Hey, that’s what dreams are made of,” Dunbar said with a shrug.It was clear early on that some unusual stuff was in the works. The court featured designated areas for 4-pointers. The Globetrotters posed for selfies with young fans and invited several to join them in a pregame huddle. Tim Wilson, the game’s lone official, paid the scoreboard operator a visit.“No matter what happens,” Wilson told him, almost in a whisper, “when I say to score it, score it.”On the opening possession, one of the Generals whipped off his uniform to reveal that he was wearing a second uniform underneath — a Globetrotters uniform. The Generals, suddenly down a man, looked genuinely bewildered by this turn of events.The player in question was Jonte Hall, a 5-foot-2 guard known as Too Tall.And then there was Lofton, the latest in a long line of showmen — the player responsible for narrating the action and orchestrating the high jinks. Lofton escorted two late-arriving fans to their seats, threatened to leave for Buffalo if the crowd did not cheer more passionately, and lifted Wilson’s shirt over his head, momentarily blinding him and exposing his belly.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Oh, Lord!” Dunbar shouted from the bench. “Don’t show that!”But Lofton was just getting started. He ventured into the crowd so he could take a bite from a man’s ice cream cone. He flirted with a young woman sitting courtside and congratulated her husband for overachieving. And after procuring a security wand, he used it on Wilson. The wand stopped beeping when it reached Wilson’s brain.Dunbar, a showman during his playing days, said the challenge was making it all look easy.“Try running up and down the floor shouting, ‘Hey, give me that thing one time!’ ” he said. “And then shoot a jump shot, run back and play defense, and keep doing that for two hours.“We’re human. We get up on the wrong side of the bed sometimes. But you can’t let anyone know that.”The players grind out an itinerant schedule, spending months at a time on the road, busing from city to city, from Youngstown, Ohio, to Rochester to Syracuse. This winter, the Globetrotters actually have three units that are touring different parts of the country simultaneously — a result being that they are tripling their win total.Success comes at a price. Players are away from their families. They live out of suitcases. Lofton packs his knees in ice at night, not that he minds.Advertisement“I think this is what I was born to do,” he said.Against the Generals in Rochester, the Globetrotters got away with an awful lot of extracurriculars. They interrupted the game so they could teach a girl how to spin the ball on her finger. Saul White, better known as Flip, climbed atop the rim, kicked away a 4-point attempt by the Generals and began to dance when Wilson instructed him to get down.One of the Globetrotters’ mascots, a bulbous figure named Big G, got involved by head-butting Wilson after the first quarter. Wilson took an enormous amount of abuse.Some of it may have been deserved. Late in the fourth quarter, after Wilson gave the Generals a series of favorable calls, including an inexplicable 9-point play that tied the score with seconds remaining in regulation, it was revealed that he had once played for the Generals — and was on the take.In sudden-death overtime, order was restored when the Globetrotters’ Tydran Beaty escaped for a game-winning dunk. The outcome was never in doubt.Articles in this series are chronicling Scott Cacciola’s sabbatical from covering the woeful Knicks. He will check out some of the good basketball around the country, recommended by readers of The New York Times.A version of this article appears in print on February 9, 2015, on Page D1 of the New York edition with the headline: Can’t Win ’Em All? Globetrotters Come Close.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »