By HUW RICHARDSFEB. 8, 2015
CARDIFF, Wales — Last season’s two top contenders will head into the second round of the 2015 Six Nations Championship in good shape after opening with victories on the road.The reigning champion Ireland beat Italy, 26-3, in Rome on Saturday, while England, which has finished second each of the last three seasons, defeated Wales, 21-16, in Cardiff on Friday night.Each, though, will be wary of France, which is coming off its worst three-year run since the 1920s, though it opened this year’s campaign with a 15-8 victory over Scotland in Paris on Saturday.A player was sent off from each of the losing teams for 10 minutes about an hour into the 80-minute matches. Ireland, though, was the only winner that fully capitalized on a one-man advantage.AdvertisementIreland, which is looking to repeat as champion for the first time since 1949, showed one trait of a champion: being able to win without playing well.Advertisement“If I had been offered a differential of 23 points before the match, I think I would have taken it,” said Ireland Coach Joe Schmidt, though he added that Ireland was “20 to 30 percent off” the performance delivered by England on Friday night.“I don’t think we would have lived with them,” Schmidt said.His team was drawn into a back-and-forth with a tough, combative Italian team, and while the Irish led, 12-3, after an hour, the game was far from decided.Then Italy hooker Leonardo Ghiraldini was sent to the sin bin. Ireland scored two tries in three minutes, and the contest was over.One try came from scrumhalf Conor Murray, who has played for the British and Irish Lions all-star team and who has scored two tries against New Zealand, the greatest team in world rugby. Yet he had not scored in 13 Six Nations matches before Saturday.The back-row forward Tommy O’Donnell was supposed to be warming the bench but he was called up after Sean O’Brien, back after 15 months of shoulder injuries, got hurt in pregame warm-ups and could not start.Ian Keatley played well for Ireland at flyhalf, kicking 14 points, but he will not play next week at home against France because Jonny Sexton, the usual starter, will return from injuries.France was more relieved than triumphant following its win. It failed to take advantage when Scotland back-row forward Johnny Beattie was sent off for 10 minutes and was unable to cross the Scottish line. All 15 points for France came from penalty kicks by Camille Lopez, its new flyhalf.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“We won so we need to accept that, but Scotland played very well,” said France Coach Philippe Saint-André. “We were not clinical enough, not enough patience close to the line. It’s a win, but we should do better than what we did tonight.”AdvertisementScotland did score a try, by the replacement wing Dougie Fife, and it showed more attacking edge, particularly by the rookie center Mark Bennett, than it has in years. It also defended heroically.Scotland should be optimistic when it meets Wales this Sunday. Wales was undone Friday night by the top performance of the opening weekend.Everything seemed against England: It was missing 12 injured players and was down, 10-0, after just a few minutes in a stadium where it lost, 30-3, two years ago. Yet it struck back to win,   21-16, and in truth was superior to what the final score showed.“Ten-nil down against a team of Wales’s quality is a big hole, but we held our nerve,” said England Coach Stuart Lancaster. “If two years ago here was the lowest point of my coaching career, today is definitely the highest point.”England will have both momentum and history on its side when it hosts Italy on Saturday. Not since 1895 has England finished a season in which it has won in Wales without some sort of title. It also received a valuable psychological edge as the teams prepare to meet again in the group stage at the Rugby World Cup in September in London.England was dominant all around. All of its points were scored by players from the Bath club who were making their Six Nations debuts and had previously played in the Junior World Cup. Flyhalf George Ford kicked 11 points; wing Anthony Watson scored the try that quickly pared back the Welsh lead; and center Jonathan Joseph’s brilliant finish, when he faked an overhead pass before breaking away from three would-be tacklers, set the tone for a dominant second half.Ford was named man of the match, but that honor could easily have been given to Joseph — by far the least experienced and most effective of the four centers on the field — or the back rower James Haskell.Wales, fielding its strongest team, was outplayed. Its inability to beat teams it cannot outmuscle was again exposed, along with the fallacy that Millennium Stadium — where Wales has lost 5 of its last 11 matches against Ireland, England or France — intimidates visitors.“I was happy at halftime, but we put ourselves under a lot of pressure in the second half,” said Wales Coach Warren Gatland. “You have to be more precise than we were.”A version of this article appears in print on February 9, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.