By ROB HUGHESFEB. 8, 2015
LONDON — No matter how global the sport becomes or how many foreigners are fielded by the top clubs, their derby matches still quicken the pulse in a special way.There were three such games Saturday. Tottenham Hotspur came from a goal down to beat Arsenal, 2-1, in the North London derby, thanks to two fine goals from the homegrown Harry Kane.Everton versus Liverpool finished without a goal by either side. The Merseyside derby started with great expectations because it was Steven Gerrard’s last league appearance at Goodison Park before he leaves to play for the Los Angeles Galaxy at the end of the Premier League season.Goalless was not quite guileless, though, because young Jordon Ibe — who was not even born when Gerrard began making his way through the Liverpool system — had a derby debut that outshone every other player on the field.AdvertisementThen came the match that surpassed both century-old English occasions, when Atlético gave Real a 4-0 whipping in Madrid. They say that form goes out the window when teams play their nearest neighbor, and Atlético ridiculed Real’s pride in being the best team in the world.AdvertisementGoals from Tiago, Saúl Ñíguez, Antoine Griezmann and Mario Mandzukic barely told the tale of Atlético’s superiority at its stadium, the Vicente Calderón.Atlético outplayed Real in the air, on the ground and in the heart and mind. “It is very simple to read this game,” Real Coach Carlo Ancelotti told reporters afterward in the press room. “They beat us in every respect — in fight, play, organization, second balls. Clearly we must change our attitude, our motivation.”His lineup had been led by Karim Benzema, Gareth Bale and Cristiano Ronaldo, a trio imported for more money than what the entire Atlético team cost. Reporters suggested to Ancelotti that maybe there was his problem, that the attacking trio known colloquially as the BBC overloaded the attack and left the midfield outnumbered and exposed.“With three attackers we have won the Champions League and the World Club Cup,” Ancelotti retorted. “So that question makes no sense. As long as they’re fit, they’ll play.“It was the worst game of Real Madrid with me on the bench. We all failed. We all arrived second, we lost all the tackles, all the aerial battles. We did not have one player who played a good game.”Ancelotti headed back to the locker room, back to the drawing board, without attempting to emphasize that Saturday’s team was a weakened Real, which was without four injured players: defenders Pepe and Sergio Ramos, playmaker Luka Modric and midfielder James Rodríguez. Another key defender, left back Marcelo, was suspended.It was the sixth time the Madrid teams had met this season. Real won none of them while Atlético won four and drew the other two, accomplishing a league double — beating Real both at home and away in Liga play — for the first time in 64 years.Advertisement“We have an impressive group,” said Atlético’s cajoling coach, Diego Simeone. “They don’t settle for anything. They demand every day. You watch the training sessions, and you don’t know who to call. This results in what happens on the field. They train as they play.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.They train to win. The opening goal on Saturday came from Tiago, a 33-year-old Portuguese midfield journeyman who tried his luck with a low shot that Iker Casillas fumbled across his goal line.The second was of the highest quality: a bicycle kick by Ñíguez who, just 20 years old, had entered the derby as a substitute when Koke was injured early in the contest. And with Arda Turan, the Turkish midfielder, pulling strings and plotting ways through Real’s meager defenses, Griezmann and then Mandzukic — both new players who replaced strikers that Atlético could not afford to keep — completed the rout of the high-standing neighbor.“People might think that we didn’t have the will to play,” Benzema said when he took his turn in front of the media. “But we are always motivated to play football, and more so with match like this.”He or any of the Real stars could have said that the better team won. Instead, they left saying that they would sleep atop the league standings this weekend and be ready to go again next week.The derby can be a law unto itself. In London, the Spurs have had to live with the fact that Arsenal, whose home is only a few miles away, has finished above it in the Premier League for the past 20 years.Inside Tottenham’s White Hart Lane arena, that trend seemed destined to continue when Arsenal’s Mesut Ozil volleyed the first goal. But Spurs, the sharper team and seemingly the hungrier one, worked relentlessly to overhaul the Gunners.That Kane — known inevitably as Citizen Kane — scored twice added to the euphoria of the home crowd. He is one of them, having stood on the terraces as a boy, rooting for Teddy Sheringham, Jurgen Klinsmann or Robbie Keane to score for Tottenham.On Saturday, Kane struck once on the ground and then with a towering header, scoring his 21st and 22nd goals over all in his first season in the Premier League.AdvertisementHe has a raw physical edge, fueled by what appears to be instinct to get into the right place at the right time.Up in Merseyside, the even younger Ibe learned Friday that he would play in his first derby. A Londoner by birth, Ibe turned 19 in December. He was recalled from a time spent on loan at Derby County and was pushed into Liverpool’s lineup at Everton.No player came closer than him to breaking the deadlock. Midway through the first half, Ibe tried a rising shot from 23 yards out, beating the goalie but smacking against the far post.Gerrard, a Merseyside legend, made the young man’s day by telling Ibe on national television that if he continued working, he had the talent to be a star for Liverpool.A version of this article appears in print on February 9, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.