By ANDREW KEHOCT. 11, 2015
PASADENA, Calif. —  For the men of the United States soccer team, a golden opportunity to quiet their critics and doubters came and went late in their game Saturday night, whisked away as fast as the lightning-bolt strike from Paul Aguilar that give Mexico a victory in the dying minutes of extra time.So, moments later, the questions came again — about whether the team was actually progressing, about the quality of Jurgen Klinsmann’s work as coach of the team and technical director of the United States Soccer Federation, about whether the naysayers deserved a response.“I don’t need to say anything to them,” Klinsmann said late Saturday, laughing softly. “As I’ve said before, everybody can express his opinion, and not everybody likes you, and that’s totally fine. I’m not here to be liked. I’m trying to do a good job, and I’m privileged to have that role and represent the U.S. soccer program.”For a weekend, at least, it felt as if the program had regressed. The 3-2 loss to Mexico occurred in a game that was held to determine which team would play in the 2017 edition of the Confederations Cup — a quadrennial eight-nation tournament — in Russia. But that was not the only disappointment for the United States.AdvertisementIn a game played a few hours earlier, the United States under-23 team lost to Honduras, 2-0, in the semifinal of the Olympic qualifying tournament. To qualify now for the Olympics — a competition globally regarded as beneficial for the development of rising players — the team must play a third-place match against Canada and then, if it wins, face Colombia in a playoff.Advertisement“It means that you have to work even harder than you ever did before in order to turn the results around and make things happen,” Klinsmann said when asked about the dual defeats.The Confederations Cup has been held since 2005 in the host country of the next World Cup. It has a small fraction of the cachet of other major tournaments worldwide. Yet Klinsmann, who often stresses the benefit of pressure situations for his players, had been emphasizing the importance of being there.“For the top 10 to 12 countries in the world, there’s no value to it,” said Taylor Twellman, a former player and an ESPN analyst, noting that those top teams generally fielded players who had an abundance of experience in big games and elite competition. “For the second-tier country, it matters 100 percent, and the United States and Mexico fit into that equation.”Twellman added: “You get used to the surroundings. You get used to the travel. At the World Cup, it’s the second trip there, not the first trip.”At the 2009 Confederations Cup in South Africa, the Americans managed to advance from the group stage despite having lost their first two games by a combined 6-1 score. But a surprise victory over Spain in the semifinal round and a robust showing in an eventual loss to Brazil in the final sent the United States back home feeling positive, and the next year, the team made an encouraging World Cup run.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Facing reporters after Saturday’s loss, Klinsmann rued the missed chance to visit Russia in 2017. He redirected the team’s focus to the World Cup qualification process, which will resume in November, and kept a defiantly positive stance, characterizing the string of poor results as a blip along a longer timeline of growth and progress.“We had 2012, great year; 2013, great year; 2014, get out of the Group of Death; and now we have a tough one this summer, and that’s part of it,” Klinsmann said, looking out at reporters. “But I’ll leave that up to you guys. You can get to your conclusions, no problem.”AdvertisementFloating amid questions about the long view and bigger picture were more urgent ones about Klinsmann’s tactics and game management. It was a familiar sight on Saturday, the United States team scrambling to bottle up a smoother opponent while looking reactive and disoriented.From the very start, the Americans were positioned deep in their own half of the field, absorbing pressure from the eddying Mexican attack, looking for an opportunistic moment to spring forward. But those moments, for the most part, failed to materialize.The Americans scored both their goals against the momentum of play, before Aguilar smashed in the winning goal in the 118th minute with a bit of exhilarating skill. Afterward, the United States players lamented the amount of time they were chasing the ball.“It’s difficult to play a team like that playing that way for 120 minutes,” striker Jozy Altidore said. “We knew it was going to be a tough game, but I thought we could have been better in terms of keeping the ball and trying to create a little more.”Michael Bradley, the team’s captain, went a step further, highlighting the chief issues in a dense, 80-second postgame rundown.Three Mexican forwards, he said, were making deceptive runs around the center of the field, forcing the American defenders to pinch inside. To compensate, the outside midfielders tracked back to defend on the unexpectedly spacious wing areas. Thus, even when the Americans gained possession, they were pinned too far back to threaten.It was not a good look for the Americans. Yet Bradley noted how close they had been to winning anyway.“We can talk about those things, but in the end, in the 118th minute, it was 2-2,” Bradley said. “We can talk about all those things. But all that stuff goes out the window. In the end, the difference is they scored an amazing goal and we didn’t.”So Mexico will travel to the 2017 Confederations Cup, and the United States, still reeling, will not.A version of this article appears in print on October 12, 2015, on Page D8 of the New York edition with the headline: U.S. Coach Sees Loss to Mexico as Minor Bump.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.