By ANDREW DASFEB. 9, 2015
STORRS, Conn. —  The showdown got away, as so many Connecticut women’s basketball games do, before the Huskies’ opponent realized what was happening.A 3-pointer. Two free throws. A layup. Another 3. Then another.The game, a highly anticipated battle between the top two teams in N.C.A.A. Division I, was over just like that.In two minutes midway through the first half Monday night, No. 2 UConn turned a tie score into an 8-point lead. South Carolina, ranked No. 1, missed a few shots, and suddenly the edge had doubled. Soon the Huskies were coasting to an 87-62 victory, on their way back to their accustomed spot atop the national polls.This is nothing new around here. UConn (23-1) improved to 17-3 in these No. 1-versus-No. 2 matchups, and 11-1 in its last dozen such games. It also extended its overall winning streak this season to 22 games.Advertisement“We’re UConn,” the junior forward Breanna Stewart said. “We want to be the No. 1 team in the country.”AdvertisementStewart, UConn’s rail-thin national player of the year candidate, drove the Huskies with 22 points, 8 rebounds and 5 blocks. Her fellow forwards Kaleena Mosqueda-Lewis (23 points) and Morgan Tuck (17) were nearly as dominant, and point guard Moriah Jefferson (16 points) set a blistering pace that the Gamecocks simply could not match.As the lead grew, South Carolina’s bigger players started to look winded. UConn’s, spurred on by an announced crowd of 10,167 that braved a New England snowstorm to watch the show, seemed to get fresher.Stewart called it a statement game, a chance to show the rest of the country that the Huskies — who play in the lightly regarded, and sometimes derided, American Athletic Conference — can contend with the best teams that power leagues like the Gamecocks’ Southeastern Conference have to offer. Mosqueda-Lewis said plainly, “We’re as good as people think we are.”South Carolina Coach Dawn Staley was even more frank. “They humbled us,” she said.Connecticut Coach Geno Auriemma may have planted the seeds for a big performance by his frontcourt players by benching them for most of Saturday’s 46-point victory at Memphis. Tuck (four minutes), Stewart (a career-low five) and the Huskies’ top rebounder, Kiah Stokes (eight), barely played against the Tigers. None took the court in the second half.It was an easy day for Auriemma to send the message, given the Huskies’ margin of victory, but it was unmistakable: Play hard, or you won’t play. Stewart and Tuck understood the lesson, which left them a bit chastened — and possibly a bit hungrier — for the game against the Gamecocks.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Stewart had what would have made for a solid night — 11 points, 6 rebounds and 2 blocks — in the first half alone. With Mosqueda-Lewis (5 for 6) and Tuck (2 for 3) hitting from the outside and Jefferson slashing through the lane, South Carolina saw nothing but the Huskies’ taillights.“You don’t go into any game expecting four of your best players to play their A game,” Auriemma said. “When we get that, that’s a tough task for anybody.”South Carolina fought back, scoring the first 6 points of the second half, but the outcome was never in doubt. Moments after Auriemma took off his sport coat with 10 minutes left, his team edged its lead past 20 points. With the Huskies ahead by 24 with two minutes left, the fans chanted, “We’re No. 1!”AdvertisementThat had been the Gamecocks’ position for the past 12 weeks. South Carolina has enjoyed a steady rise under Staley, a former W.N.B.A. star and an Olympic gold medalist who took over the program in 2008. The team, which last season held a campaign to draw 5,000 fans to its games to impress a recruit, now regularly attracts three times that many.The Gamecocks have back their entire starting lineup from last season, when they reached the N.C.A.A. tournament’s round of 16, and they bolstered their roster by persuading A’ja Wilson, now a star freshman, to turn down Auriemma and stay home to play in Columbia.South Carolina took over the No. 1 ranking after UConn lost to Stanford in its second game of the season and has barely been tested, beating opponents by an average of 28.1 points per game entering its matchup with the Huskies. But Auriemma’s team is winning by more than 40 a game, and he has other sly ways to reassert the Huskies’ dominance.Before the game, with both teams on the court and itching to begin, UConn took time to honor Auriemma for leading the United States women’s team to the world basketball championship last year and to confirm that he would return as coach of the Olympic team next summer. Moments later, he was called back onto the court to be honored for earning his 900th career win last week.The crowd at Gampel Pavilion roared its approval and chanted his name. The Gamecocks stood in a line in front of their bench and watched.Again, the message was clear: Auriemma and UConn have done a lot of winning. And they plan to do a lot more.A version of this article appears in print on February 10, 2015, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: UConn Sends Message With a Rout of No. 1 South Carolina.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.