AdvertisementSupported byBy Scott CacciolaAfter having an operation on his left knee in February, Carmelo Anthony went five months without shooting a basketball. The Knicks’ medical staff, he said, went to great lengths to prevent him from entering the gymnasium at the team’s training complex.“They had a ‘No Melo’ sign on the door — my picture with an ‘X’ on there or something,” Anthony said. “Honestly, I didn’t pick up a basketball until the end of July.”It was difficult to tell whether Anthony was being completely serious, but his point was valid: He was gone from the game for a good spell. In his absence, the Knicks put the finishing touches on the worst season in franchise history and then went about reshaping the roster through free agency. Anthony watched it all play out from a distance, his knee and his psyche taking advantage of a chance to mend.Last week, Anthony finally returned to the public stage, and the reviews were glowing. He shot a combined 18 of 25 in victories over Bauru Basket of Brazil and the Washington Wizards. His confidence seems to be soaring ahead of Monday’s game against the Philadelphia 76ers. Even if he harbored doubts after surgery (he is not a fan of surgery), Anthony has already proved something to himself.“It comes back to you,” Anthony said of his shooting touch. “It comes right back, believe it or not. You just worry about everything else coming back: getting that pop, having the power to do certain things, pushing off the leg. At first, it was like, ‘Man, it’s going to be hard to get it back this soon.’ But as the rehab went on, it started coming back to me.”Anything that involves the N.B.A. preseason comes with an important disclaimer: The games border on meaningless. They are glorified practices for the most part, as coaches experiment with lineups and players seek consistency (and roster spots). It would be premature to make any bold predictions.For Anthony, though, training camp signified the resumption of his career, at age 31. He is running out of seasons. His marriage with the Knicks may be fraught with uncertainty and competing timelines, but at least he appears committed — two games into the preseason — to doing what he can to help provide stability.“There was a lot of upside for us as a team,” Anthony said Friday night, after the Knicks had thoroughly outplayed the Wizards. “It’s nice to just get back out there. The most important thing is being healthy. When you’re healthy, everything kind of falls into place. Mentally, there’s a lot of clarity for me at this moment. I can just play ball and not have to worry about no tick-tack injuries.” That allows him to focus on helping the team, he added.Anthony said he had divided his rehab into phases. He initially focused on doing a lot of heavy lifting to improve his strength. Once he could resume cardiovascular activities, he worked to tone his body. By September, he said, he was playing five or six pickup games a day — and not shying away from contact.“That was a big test for me,” he said. “In practice, I try to be as physical as possible to kind of get back into that mode a little bit.”Anthony said he was still rehabbing. He will remain in what he described as the “power phase” through the end of the month. He was asked to elaborate.“I can’t explain that to you,” he said. “I’m not the trainer. I just go out there, and I trust my staff.”Against the Wizards, the Knicks sought to push the pace. Gone was the plodding tempo of the triangle offense from a year ago. Coach Derek Fisher has said that he wants his players to exercise more creative freedom, and Derrick Williams took advantage, scoring 21 points while basically doing improv.“We want our guys to be confident to trust themselves and go out and there and make plays,” Fisher said. “He was in the wrong places a lot of times when he did it, but it’s a results business, and he put the ball in the basket.”Anthony finished with 21 points, 4 rebounds and 4 assists. On one possession, he showcased a step-back, one-legged jumper that was Dirk Nowitzki-esque.Fisher said he was not surprised that Anthony had regained his shooting touch so quickly. Fisher has been more impressed, he said, with the other things that Anthony has been willing to do.“It’s more about the mind-set you see in his approach to the game,” Fisher said. “He’s staying aggressive. He’s making passes when he should make passes. He’s putting in effort on the defensive end. And he’s really leading our guys in the direction we want them to go.”Even if, after so much disappointment, the only direction is up.Advertisement