By KELLEY McMILLANFEB. 9, 2015
BEAVER CREEK, Colo. — Tina Maze kicked a cartwheel across the finish area. She had reason to celebrate: She had just won the combined event at the World Ski Championships for her third medal, and her second gold, in three events, firmly establishing herself as the most dominant woman in ski racing.“It’s special for me because I was always one of the favorites, but I never managed to win it,” Maze said Monday.The combined event, designed to determine the best all-around skier, features one downhill and one slalom run. Maze’s win came in an aggregate time of 2 minutes 33.37 seconds. Nicole Hosp of Austria took silver, 0.22 of a second behind Maze, and Hosp’s teammate Michaela Kirchgasser finished third. Laurenne Ross was the top-placing American, in 14th. Fifth after the downhill, the American Lindsey Vonn was disqualified from the slalom after skiing out in the top section.“I’m really disappointed,” Vonn said, visibly upset. “I tried as hard as I could, but I came up short.”AdvertisementIt has been an impressive couple of years for Maze, a 31-year-old Slovene. In 2013, she collected 2,414 World Cup points, breaking Hermann Maier’s record for the most in a season. That was followed by one of her worst seasons; she finished fourth in the 2014 World Cup overall standings, just over a month after winning two gold medals at the 2014 Olympic Games in Sochi, Russia. Then, two of her coaches, including her boyfriend, Andrea Massi, quit her team. At the end of the 2014 season, Maze’s skiing future was in question.By the beginning of the 2015 season, Maze had rebuilt her squad and recommitted to her career. She hired a new coach, Valerio Ghirardi, formerly of the Italian ski team, and Massi returned. She brought on a new female physical therapist because she missed female companionship during the long months of traveling on the World Cup circuit. But mostly, Maze found the desire to win again.Advertisement“My goal last year was Sochi, and I wasn’t doing World Cup races with the same passion as in the Olympics,” Maze said. “But doing so many mistakes didn’t feel good, so I said, If I go another season, I want to not do so many mistakes. I want to do 100 percent in each event.”Maze leads the World Cup overall standings by 184 points over Anna Fenninger of Austria, who won gold in the super-G and silver in the downhill at Beaver Creek. Maze has seven top-three finishes in the World Cup this season.What is perhaps most impressive about Maze’s skiing is that she wins in all five disciplines, one of only six women to have done so. This season alone, she has victories in slalom, downhill, giant slalom and now combined.“It’s always hard to go from one discipline to another — to get the right timing, to be fast in slalom, to be smart in downhill,” Maze said. “It takes a lot of training, a lot of work, a lot of experience.”Originally from the iron-mining town of Crna na Koroskem, Maze travels the World Cup circuit independently. She split from the Slovene national team in 2008, when officials objected to her relationship with Massi, who is 16 years older than she is and was a fitness coach for the national team. She met Massi when she was a promising 15-year-old on the Slovene national squad and he was a coach, but they did not start dating until she was 22.The decision to split from the national team yielded success. In their first year as a two-person squad traveling the World Cup circuit in a van, Maze won silver in the giant slalom at the 2009 World Championships in Val d’Isère, France, her first major championship medal. The next year, she won two silver medals at the Vancouver Olympics, and the duo continued to climb skiing’s ranks.AdvertisementDespite their success, the romantic and professional partnership does not come without some difficulty.“It’s hard with Andrea, because we work all the time together, so that’s a lot of work every day,” Maze said. “Then you need to be able to put that away and have a nice dinner and have a nice afternoon. Sometimes that’s not so easy.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.This season, the couple decided that Massi would take a step back from his primary coaching duties and let Ghirardi take control.“I still create the recipe and Ghirardi executes, but we are in synergy,” Massi said on Monday.With three medals already, Maze now has her eye on collecting five world championship medals at one event, a feat accomplished only by Lasse Kjus in 1999, when the world championships were last held on American soil.“I know I can be the one who does the same thing,” Maze said. “I’m looking forward to that.”Because of an editing error, an article on Tuesday about Tina Maze’s victory in the combined event at the Alpine skiing world championships misstated the given name of the top-placing American in the event. She is Laurenne Ross, not Laurence.A version of this article appears in print on February 10, 2015, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: After Winning the Alpine Combined, a Slovene Basks Atop the Skiing World.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.