By PETER KERASOTISFEB. 9, 2015
PORT ST. LUCIE, Fla. —  Beneath a benign blue sky that beckons frozen snowbirds to Florida was an even more tantalizing sight on the scoreboard at Tradition Field, where the Mets train each spring: a large picture of Matt Harvey in full windup.Sitting in the third base dugout after an hourlong morning workout of infield drills, Harvey cocked his head and squinted at the large image of himself.“Looks good,” he said, smiling.For the first time since late 2013, the image of Harvey on a pitcher’s mound no longer looks like a mirage. Monday was the unofficial first day of spring training for Harvey, the former and perhaps future Mets ace who on Aug. 26, 2013, learned he had a partial tear of the ulnar collateral ligament in his right elbow. Subsequent Tommy John surgery wiped out his 2014 season, casting an ominous shadow on his future.Though pitchers and catchers are not due to report until Feb. 19, Harvey was at the Mets’ training complex, getting early work in.Advertisement“Ten days away, but I couldn’t wait to get here,” he said. “It’s been 15 months since the surgery, but it hasn’t seemed that long ago. The whole process was pretty quick. Now it feels like a normal spring training. I’m 10 days early and extremely excited to be here.”AdvertisementHarvey expects to throw a bullpen session sometime this week. He has also been throwing regular bullpens in the off-season. Recently, at his agent Scott Boras’s training complex in Newport Beach, Calif., Harvey said that he cut loose a few times, just to see how he would feel.“It felt great; strong,” he said. “And I was letting it go pretty good. What’s been most surprising is the way the ball has been coming out of my hand. I’ve been on point with my accuracy. From everything I’ve heard, and from all the people I’ve talked to, accuracy is supposed to be the last thing that comes back. But that hasn’t been the case with me.”There is no exact science as to how pitchers rebound from Tommy John surgery. As Harvey noted, “No two arms are the same.”Whether his arm will be in that 70 percent to 80 percent success rate for the surgery, nobody knows. He has conferred with pitchers who have gone through this same surgery and rehabilitation — though not necessarily those who did not make it back.“I don’t want to look at this process in a negative way,” he said. “Whatever doubts there are, I’ve shoved them in the back.”The time off with steady rehab and workouts has left him “well rested, healthy and strong.” He added, “My shoulder is in better shape than it’s ever been, with the amount of arm conditioning I’ve done.”Missing a full season is the norm for Tommy John surgery. Chad Billingsley and Ryan Madson were pitchers who recently missed two full seasons after their operations. And there are those — like Jarrod Parker, Kris Medlen and Josh Johnson — who returned from Tommy John surgery only to need it again.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Harvey would rather focus on pitchers like Adam Wainwright, John Lackey, Jon Lieber, Jake Westbrook and Stephen Strasburg: They returned from the surgery without further complications, with some becoming top-of-the-rotation starters again.AdvertisementAs for Harvey, he expects to return to his former role as Mets ace.“My mind-set is the same,” he said. “I’m going to attack hitters the way I always do. You can talk to people, but what it comes down to is how I feel. I go off how I feel. And for me it felt like a normal off-season. Everything feels normal. I’m excited. I’m healthy. I’m right where I need to be, and I’m excited about getting started. The big test will be once hitters get in there, and facing them.”It is that type of confidence that can give the Mets a jolt both on the pitcher’s mound and in the clubhouse. Harvey’s dominance in the 2013 season — he was 9-5 with a 2.27 E.R.A. to go with 191 strikeouts in 1781/3 innings — came with a measure of swagger. In his 2013 All-Star Game start for the National League, he pitched two shutout innings, striking out three. It was one of many highlights in a season in which he projected an aura of invincibility.That same swagger, though, clashed at times with the Mets’ front office. Harvey initially delayed surgery to see if he could return via rehabilitation. And then, last August, he made overtures about wanting to pitch in a regular-season game, even while the Mets were nowhere near playoff contention. Eventually, though, he capitulated to the hierarchy and continued on a slower pace, with a full off-season of rehab.“That was tough, the toughest part — not getting in a game, not competing with my teammates,” he said. “That was the hardest part. But everybody made the right decision.”Similarly, Harvey said he was willing to agree to whatever inning restrictions the Mets might have in mind for him this year. Normally, he would be the squad’s opening day starter, but there is talk of saving him instead for the home opener a week later. The Mets could also give him extra days off around rainouts and off days.Harvey said that would be all right with him.“My goal,” he said, “is to be ready for opening day, to be ready for the start of the season, and to stay healthy, stay strong, and be available to go out there every five days. I couldn’t be happier with the way things are coming along.”A version of this article appears in print on February 10, 2015, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: Harvey, in Camp Early, Says His Arm Feels Strong.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.