AdvertisementSupported byN.F.L. RoundupBy Ken BelsonNagged by concerns that greater efforts are needed to safeguard players, the N.F.L. on Monday named its first chief health and medical adviser.Dr. Elizabeth G. Nabel will be the league’s “senior medical expert” while she continues in her work as the president of Brigham and Women’s Hospital in Boston and as a professor of medicine at Harvard Medical School.Nabel is a cardiologist and a biomedical researcher, not a specialist in brain disorders or neurological problems, two areas of concern for the league.Before the Super Bowl, Commissioner Roger Goodell trumpeted a decline in reported concussions during the past season and said the league would soon announce a chief medical officer who would “oversee our medical-related policies, ensure that we update them regularly, and work closely with our medical committees, our advisers and the Players Association.”Nabel said in email to her staff last week that she had “no intention of leaving our beloved Brigham” and that any advisory role she might play was subject to review and would not detract from her responsibilities to the hospital or Harvard Medical School.PANTHER’S CHARGES DISMISSED Prosecutors in Charlotte, N.C., dismissed domestic-violence charges against Panthers defensive end Greg Hardy on Monday, saying that the accuser in the case could not be found.The dismissal happened just as Hardy’s appeal in the case was set to begin. Andrew Murray, the Mecklenburg County district attorney, told the judge that officials had attempted many times to contact the woman but had failed. Murray said the woman had reached an agreement with Hardy in a lawsuit.Hardy, whose N.F.L. future is uncertain, left with his lawyer and did not answer questions. Moments before court convened, Hardy appeared calm, posting on Twitter that he would give away a pair of his game cleats to a fan who could name his favorite color, his favorite president and his favorite N.B.A. player.Hardy was convicted last summer of assault and communicating threats in a case involving a former girlfriend. Murray told Superior Court Judge Robert T. Sumner that law enforcement officials had taken “extraordinary” measures to find the accuser so she could testify during the appeal. He said they had monitored her new address, had tried to find her at work and had tried to contact relatives but could not locate her.The woman’s lawyer also would not share information about her location, Murray said.The accuser had testified on July 15 that she was frightened of Hardy and feared for her safety if she went to the police. She also testified that Hardy had thrown her in the bathroom and later onto a futon. She also said he had placed his hands on her throat and threatened her.“He told me he was going to kill me,” the woman testified on July 15. “I was so scared I wanted to die. When he loosened his grip slightly, I said just: ‘Do it. Kill me.’ ”In his testimony, Hardy took issue with that accusation. He said that he had never hit nor thrown the woman and that he had not threatened her. Hardy said she had become angry when he would not have sex with her. He said he had left the room to sleep in the living room.Panthers General Manager Dave Gettleman did not immediately return phone calls seeking comment on the dismissal. A team spokesman said the team might make a statement later.Hardy is set to become an unrestricted free agent in March. It is unclear whether the Panthers will try to re-sign him.  (AP)911 RECORDINGS OBTAINED Dalia Jacobs, the former girlfriend of Dallas Cowboys running back Joseph Randle, told a 911 dispatcher that Randle had threatened her with a gun near their son and had made another woman bleed.Jacobs placed two 911 calls early Tuesday after an altercation at a Kansas hotel in which Jacobs said Randle had broken a window of her car.The Wichita Eagle reported that Jacobs had gone to the hotel so Randle could see their baby. The newspaper obtained recordings of the 911 calls after filing an open records request.No charges related to domestic violence have been filed. (AP)Advertisement