By MARC TRACYFEB. 9, 2015
For decades, Coach Dean Smith would tell his players, both at halftime and after a game, how many points they had scored and had allowed per possession. In the 1960s, he began to assign managers to track the statistic.“That was always something we went over,” said Jeff Lebo, now East Carolina’s head coach, who played for Smith at North Carolina from 1985 to 1989. “ ‘We’re 1.2 per possession, the other team’s 0.6.’ We knew what that meant.”Today, employing statistics that are calculated per possession — or per 100 possessions — is as commonplace as sending five men out on the floor. Most coaches and analysts consider such figures more useful than raw numbers, which are not adjusted for teams that play quickly or slowly.But Smith — who majored in mathematics at Kansas, and who told his longtime collaborator John Kilgo that he would have been happy to be a high school math teacher — emphasized possession-based analysis as early as 1959.Advertisement“Forty years later,” said Dean Oliver, director of player personnel and analytics for the Sacramento Kings, “this was still below the radar.”Smith, who died Saturday at 83, is being remembered by his many fans, including President Obama, and his former players, including Michael Jordan, for his accomplishments on and off the court.To the list add this: Smith was one of the most innovative basketball coaches ever, and the most prominent early proponent of possession-based analysis, which is now standard operating procedure in college basketball and the N.B.A.“All signs point to him being the father of basketball analytics,” said Daryl Morey, the Houston Rockets’ general manager and one of the leading proponents of advanced statistics in the sport.Smith was so ahead of the curve on basketball analytics that, as Morey noted, “it didn’t have that name at the time.”AdvertisementIn an article on ESPN.com posted Sunday, the ESPN college basketball analyst Jay Bilas wrote that Smith’s 1981 book, “Basketball: Multiple Offense and Defense,” was “still the best book on basketball I have ever read, and it was the first time I ever heard of ‘points per possession’ long before the current age of analytics.”Lebo said that frequently changing rules and rosters drove Smith’s innovations.The four-corners tactic that Smith loved to use — a way to drain the clock to protect a lead — helped push the Atlantic Coast Conference and then the N.C.A.A. to introduce the 45-second shot clock in the 1985-86 season. Smith won one national title before the shot clock, and one after it.Similarly, Lebo said that North Carolina’s offense changed for the 1986-7 season, Lebo’s sophomore year, when the N.C.A.A. introduced a 3-point line. (The A.C.C. had experimented with one a few years earlier.) Smith used to demand that his players get the ball inside to big men for high-percentage shots, but after the introduction of the 3-point line, Smith designed plays to produce open looks for strong shooters like Lebo and Kenny Smith.“He was always really good at devising ways to play when the rules changed,” Lebo said.Even so, Smith’s favorite shot remained the free throw.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“He was a firm believer that the best way to play offense was to get to the foul line,” Kilgo said.This tactic has been endorsed by advanced statisticians who value players, like the Rockets’ James Harden, who are good at being fouled and then converting.Like his other advances, Smith’s emphasis on per-possession statistics was a logical response to circumstances.Specifically, the college game’s talent disparity and more variable paces (first, without a shot clock; then, with a 45-second clock) made per-possession analysis especially useful.“Teams — especially in college, where Coach Smith coached — played at very different rates, especially prior to the shot clock,” Morey said. “So if you’re trying to judge how good of a defense you were, you couldn’t just look at the raw number of points you gave up. That wouldn’t tell you a lot. You had to look at points and divide it by chances.”AdvertisementIn “Basketball: Multiple Offense and Defense,” Smith pointed to possession-based analysis as part of the “statistical basis” of his system.It seems likely, Kilgo said, that Smith also left an imprint on “The Importance of Possession Statistics,” a section of “Defensive Basketball,” a 1959 book by Frank McGuire, then North Carolina’s coach, for whom Smith was an assistant.The importance of possession statistics, then, was not a stray insight, but rather a key aspect of Smith’s worldview. In both books, its discussion appears in the opening pages.It was also seen as Smith’s distinctive innovation. According to another player Smith coached, Tony Shaver, now William & Mary’s head coach, per-possession statistics were known in the 1970s as Carolina efficiency ratings, in much the way that Bill Walsh’s 49ers schemes were called the West Coast offense.Although Smith was esteemed as brilliant and worldly, his innovations appeared to arise from no motive beyond competition.“He was pretty fearless in the causes that he stood for and also the things he did on the basketball court,” Kilgo said. “He never coached not to lose. He coached to win.”A version of this article appears in print on February 10, 2015, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: Smith Was Pioneer in Use of Analytics.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.