AdvertisementSupported byGlobal SoccerBy Rob HughesLONDON — Yaya Touré and Wilfried Bony are players on perhaps the impossible mission.Late Sunday, in the heat of Bata, Equatorial Guinea, they took part in the long night of a penalty shootout, which eventually ended with their Ivory Coast team’s winning the African Cup of Nations for the first time in 23 years.Their sport has yet to find a better way to decide a tournament than to ask exhausted and fearful men to take potshots at one another’s goals until one poor fellow misses the target. In this case, who got the gold medals came down to the goalkeepers. After each side scored on eight kicks and missed two, the Ivorian goalkeeper Boubacar Barry saved a weak shot from his Ghanian counterpart, Brimah Razak, to win the Cup, 9-8, following two hours of scoreless soccer.After celebrating, Touré and Bony were expected to fly to England and the icy grip of winter. Their club, Manchester City, has a vital league game at Stoke City on Wednesday.Modern players — aided by the wonders of medical science and the comforts of executive jets — have extraordinary powers of recovery. Yet not even Touré, voted Africa’s finest soccer player for the last four years, nor Bony, whose $38 million transfer from Swansea City to Manchester City was the highest ever for an African, can be expected to play Wednesday at Stoke.It may, in any case, be too late. Manchester City might have lost the Premier League title in their absence. Bony has yet to play in its attack, but the presence of Touré would appear to be decisive to his club’s fortunes.City has won the league twice in the past three season, with the big Ivorian acting as a colossus in its midfield. With a long, loping stride and a deft touch that is uncanny for someone so tall (6-foot-2), he has stridden out of midfield for City and scored goals that turned the tide in tight contests. He did the same for Ivory Coast in the semifinal with a shot so fierce and accurate that the ball zoomed over the opposing keeper’s head and hands before he could even react.No team should be overly dependent upon a single player, particularly City, which has world-class talents like Sergio Agüero and David Silva. However, the statistics are damning.With Touré playing, City had won 14 league matches, drawn two and lost two. But without him, it has failed to win in the league this season; its goals scored are down, the number conceded has almost doubled and the club’s ability to play a physical match has been gutted.There is no question that Africa deserves to see its players, just as South Americans deserve to see a glimpse of the Brazilian, Argentines, Chileans, Uruguayans and others who are purchased at a young age by Europe’s rich clubs. But this has been the third African Cup of Nations in four years, coming after Ghana and Ivory Coast — the best teams on the continent — also had to play at the World Cup in Brazil last year. There is no easy solution to the physical and emotional tug-of-war between a national team and the club that pays the salary. But if it is possible to feel sorry for a man earning $300,000 a week, it has to be because of his dubious privilege of being wanted in two places, thousands of miles apart, at the same time. Yaya Touré and his older brother, Kolo, the Liverpool defender, have lived with those dual demands throughout their adult lives. They and the rest of their “Golden Generation” had been classified as underachievers because Ivory Coast had never been able to live up to what was expected of it and win the African Cup. Didier Drogba had to retire without winning a continental title, but on Sunday, the Elephants delivered, with Yaya Touré as captain.It had been a final etched by fear of failure from both sides, one destined to go to the penalty shootout. Hervé Renard, the Frenchman who in 2012 coached Zambia to an emotional African Cup title — also won on penalty kicks — now guides Ivory Coast.As he stood and watched Sunday’s shootout, he at one point aimed a finger to the sky, suggesting that fate would decide it. Ghana had taken a two-goal lead after the Ivorians missed their first two kicks, first with Bony shooting against the bar, then with Tallo Gadji missing the target.After that, though, Ivory Coast scored with nine successive kicks. The sight of grown men crying over their nation’s failure — André Ayew was particularly emotional after Ghana’ loss — will outlive the scenes of joy as the Ivory Coast players danced over their good fortune.This was a tournament that pushed acts of ill temper, as well as fine performances, to the extreme. A referee from Mauritius referee was suspended for six months for his awful performance in the quarterfinals after he gave Equatorial Guinea, the host country, a penalty kick that knocked Tunisia out of the tournament.The event saw hooligans from Equatorial Guinea attempting to stop the semifinal as their team lost, 3-0, to Ghana. The event was in chaos before it even started, after Morocco was booted out of the tournament and fined for refusing to host it over Ebola fears. But ultimately, the tournament ended with the right result. Ivory Coast proved to be the finest team, as good as the sum of its parts. At last.Advertisement