AdvertisementSupported byBy Marc TracyThe second-year Southern California coach Steve Sarkisian was placed on an indefinite leave of absence because of an unspecified issue, Athletic Director Pat Haden announced Sunday. The offensive coordinator Clay Helton was named the interim head coach.Haden said that he called Sarkisian after Sarkisian did not attend practice Sunday afternoon and that “it was very clear” from the call that Sarkisian was “not healthy.” Briefly speaking to the news media after he and U.S.C. coaches addressed the team, Haden said: “It was clear the team had a great deal of concern about the health of Steve Sarkisian. So did the staff.”Haden declined to elaborate on Sarkisian’s absence, but in August, Sarkisian made lewd comments about U.S.C.’s opponents at a pep rally and later said his behavior arose from mixing alcohol and medication. At the time, Sarkisian said he would seek unspecified treatment, and the university announced that alcohol would be banned from the coaches’ locker room.A look at the top players in contention for college football’s highest honor.Ranked eighth in The Associated Press preseason poll, the Trojans have sputtered to a 3-2 record (1-2 Pacific-12). They lost at home Thursday night to Washington, 17-12, and are now unranked.Sarkisian, who previously coached at Washington, is 12-6 at U.S.C.MARYLAND FIRES COACH Midway through his fifth season as Maryland’s coach, Randy Edsall was fired Sunday, Athletic Director Randy Anderson announced. Lyndon Johnson, an assistant head coach and the outside linebackers coach, was also fired. The offensive coordinator Mike Locksley was named the interim head coach.“This was a difficult decision, but ultimately this is the best course of action,” Anderson said in a statement.Edsall’s contract was extended only a few months ago, reportedly providing for a $2.6 million buyout. He had two winning seasons at Maryland, including a 7-5 regular season last year in the Terrapins’ first campaign after moving from the Atlantic Coast Conference to the Big Ten and its competitive East Division. After a 49-28 loss Saturday at No. 1 Ohio State, Maryland is 2-4 and 0-2 in the Big Ten. Edsall’s record at Maryland was 22-34.Although not traditionally a football power, Maryland has high aspirations in the sport. It is backed  by the apparel company Under Armour, whose founder is an alumnus. Advertisement