By GRAHAM RUTHVENFEB. 10, 2015
MANCHESTER, England —  Coach Jason Kreis’s preparations for New York City F.C.’s first season might have been meticulous, but he lacked one vital resource. With his team’s Major League Soccer opener against Orlando City a little more than three weeks away, he had no game footage to pore over.That was at last provided by the club’s first official game, a preseason friendly against the Scottish club St. Mirren on Tuesday, and it included at least two highlights Kreis will enjoy seeing again: goals from David Villa and Tony Taylor that gave N.Y.C.F.C. a 2-0 victory on a frigid night at Manchester City’s academy stadium.As Kreis has built his team from the ground up since joining just over a year ago, it was apt that his team should play its first match at a stadium that was still a construction site when N.Y.C.F.C. signed its first player last July.Eventually, New York City F.C. will be whatever Kreis wants it to be, but on Tuesday — in his players’ actions and in his postgame comments — he once again made it clear that he intended to construct a team in the mold of Manchester City, which owns N.Y.C.F.C. in a partnership with the Yankees. That has generally meant a focus on strict care for the ball: players who pass crisply and are confident and secure in possession.AdvertisementAgainst St. Mirren, there was some tidy first-half exchange play, especially that between Mehdi Ballouchy and Sebastian Velasquez, who occupied the creative space behind the central striker, Patrick Mullins. Villa, who served as captain, took up a position on the left, drifting inside to link up with his teammates and generally enjoying the freedom of Kreis’s interchangeable front line.Advertisement“We want to have a purpose about our possession and not just knock it about aimlessly,” said Ned Grabavoy, who will most likely play in central midfield alongside Mix Diskerud, who arrived from United States national team duty in time to watch from the sideline Tuesday. Grabavoy is familiar with Kreis’s expectations from their days together at Real Salt Lake.“The coach wants us to play with high energy and get on the front foot,” he said.It was Villa who scored the game’s opening goal, making the most of a defensive error in the 33rd minute to slot a calm finish under the St. Mirren goalkeeper after a cross from Chris Wingert.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Only Velasquez and goalkeeper Josh Saunders kept their places for the second half, with Kreis making nine changes at halftime. Perhaps as a consequence, the flow of the game, which N.Y.C.F.C. had been dictating, was lost. Taylor’s goal in the 69th minute was a result of a 40-yard ball over the top from defender Kwame Watson-Siriboe. It might not have been the best example of the so-called City Way that Kreis often talks about, but it was effective.“That was pretty close to what I was looking for in terms of the playing style,” Kreis said of the overall performance. “We moved the ball pretty well, although there were some moments where it was pretty hectic and scary. The guys still need to spend some time together. This is not a completed picture, and won’t be until several months down the line.”There is still some way to go. The club said it had sold more than 13,000 season tickets for its inaugural campaign, although there was little sign of that support against St. Mirren, which sits third from the bottom in the Scottish Premier League.There was also no sign of Frank Lampard, who enjoyed a few beers with his future teammates at their hotel on Monday night before traveling to Stoke with Manchester City for a Premier League match scheduled for Wednesday. Lampard has delayed his arrival at N.Y.C.F.C. until after the Premier League season concludes in May. “It would have been great that he was here now,” Villa acknowledged.Still, he added: “It was a beautiful day for the club. It was good to win against a difficult, strong team, and it was nice to score the first goal in the club’s history. We had been waiting for this for a while.”A version of this article appears in print on February 11, 2015, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: New York City F.C. Offers Clearer Glimpse of Its Plan in an Opening Win.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.