By BRAD SPURGEONOCT. 11, 2015
Sochi, Russia — The idea behind building a Formula One track that runs through the former Winter Olympics park in Sochi was to make sure that the multibillion-dollar sporting village had some kind of life after the Games.But the architects of that plan may not have anticipated that the track would end up hosting the kind of gladiatorial competition that emerged on Sunday during the second annual Russian Grand Prix, full of spectacular and dangerous crashes.For the second year running, and again with President Vladimir V. Putin watching from the stands, Lewis Hamilton of the Mercedes team won the race, again at the expense of his teammate, Nico Rosberg, who had started on pole position but was out of contention quickly after losing his throttle.Rosberg fell further behind in his title challenge against Hamilton, and because Sebastian Vettel finished second for Ferrari, he displaced Rosberg for second in the drivers’ standings. Hamilton’s victory gave him enough points to be able to win the drivers’ title at the next race, in Austin, Texas, in two weeks.AdvertisementIt was Hamilton’s 42nd victory, passing his hero, Ayrton Senna, into a tie for third place for total victories with Vettel. Only Michael Schumacher, with 91, and Alain Prost, with 51, have more career victories. “It is a special moment for me to surpass Ayrton,” Hamilton said after Mr. Putin had given him a hug of congratulations and handed him the winner’s trophy. “I’m very proud and happy to be here in Russia,” Hamilton said. “Beautiful country. If you haven’t been here you have to come.”AdvertisementFor the second year running in Sochi, the Mercedes team also took the constructors’ title, but this time under strange circumstances.The race was more akin to a gladiatorial contest on track, with a horrific accident during the Saturday morning practice session and three brutal accidents during the race, including a collision between Kimi Raikkonen’s Ferrari and Valtteri Bottas’s Williams on the last lap as they fought for third position.The two had just passed Sergio Pérez, who had been in third place for much of the race. Bottas was speared out of the race, while Raikkonen nursed his damaged car across the finish line in a fireworks display of sparks, finishing fifth. The wreck handed third place back to Pérez, driving for Force India. It was the first podium finish for that team and driver since last season.“One lap before the end it seemed like everything went away from us,” Pérez said. “I was really unhappy with myself and many things come to your mind, but on my last lap I gave it all.”“In the last lap they had a contact, and it was very good to come back and give a second podium to the team,” he added.Two hours after the race, the race stewards announced that the accident was Raikkonen’s fault, and he was given a stop-go penalty after the fact, which meant adding 30 seconds to his race time, which dropped him from fifth to eighth place for the race.Raikkonen’s penalty also ended up giving the constructors’ title to Mercedes.The race began under the cloud of a horrendous accident by Carlos Sainz Jr. of the Toro Rosso team during the Saturday morning practice session. Sainz, 21, ran into the barriers at 93 miles per hour.AdvertisementHe missed the qualifying session Saturday afternoon, but after tests in the hospital, he was deemed fit to take part in the race, starting from the last position.He climbed as high as seventh, but then his rear wing fell off and he retired on Lap 47 of the 53-lap race.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Two laps later, a track marshal ran out onto the track to grab the wing, and narrowly escaped being struck by Vettel’s Ferrari.“O.K., it’s clear that we have a very brave Russian running across the track,” Vettel said by radio to his team.A first lap accident involving a collision that left two cars sitting in the middle of the track drew out the safety car to suspend the race while the mess was cleaned up.On lap 12, there was a massive accident by Romain Grosjean, in a Lotus, who ran into the barriers and spun around violently. There was very little left of his car. That brought out the safety car for the second time as Grosjean got out of the car, stunned, and track marshals cleaned up the debris and the wreck of what remained of his Lotus.“I lost the rear end in a very high speed corner going through turn 3 and couldn’t recover it,” said Grosjean. “I feel O.K. physically and I’ll certainly be a bit sore tomorrow morning, but I’ll be completely fine again after a couple of days.”Part of the reason the accidents were so spectacular had to do with the Tecpro safety barriers themselves.The barriers are made of three layers of interconnected blocks of shock-absorbing plastic-like material. But the cars can get caught up in them and then be tangled and torn apart, with wheels and suspension ripping off in the rapid deceleration.AdvertisementIn Sainz’s accident the Spanish driver first hit a concrete wall before barreling straight down the track into the Tecpro barriers, which engulfed the car as they absorbed the impact of the crash.“It was shocking to see that he was so deep in the barrier and that he was covered in the barrier,” Vettel said after Sainz’s crash.Unlike most Formula One tracks, the circuit in Sochi runs through a tight area of buildings with very little or no run-off area, and the whole track is lined by barriers, similar to the way the track is set up for the Monaco Grand Prix, run on the streets of the city.The race had been predicted to be another walkover for both Mercedes cars, which finished first and second last year, but after only six laps, Rosberg lost his throttle and handed the lead to his teammate.“It’s not nice when there is a problem with the throttle, I had to take my complete leg off the throttle, and then I couldn’t steer anymore,” Rosberg said.With just four races left, Hamilton leads the series with 302 points, over Vettel, who is in second with 236 and Rosberg now in third with 229. A victory awards 25 points.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.