AdvertisementSupported byBy David WaldsteinAlex Rodriguez met with Hal Steinbrenner and other top team executives at Yankee Stadium on Tuesday to clear the air after a two-year battle with the Yankees and Major League Baseball over his use of performance-enhancing drugs.Rodriguez requested the meeting to smooth over sore feelings and help pave the way for his return to the team this month at spring training. “Alex initiated the meeting and apologized to the organization for his actions over the past several years,” read a statement issued by the team and Rodriguez’s lawyer after the meeting. “There was an honest and frank discussion on all of the issues. As far as the Yankees are concerned, the next step is to play baseball in spring training.”The 90-minute meeting in Steinbrenner’s office was also attended by Randy Levine, the Yankees’ president; General Manager Brian Cashman; Jean Afterman, a senior vice president for the team; and Jim Sharp, Rodriguez’s lawyer. One of the people in the meeting described Rodriguez as sincere, and the team officials accepted his apology but told him that he had damaged the organization and that his actions would not be forgotten.The Yankees also told Rodriguez they did not feel that they owed him the $6 million in bonuses that his contract calls for should he reach a series of milestone home runs. Rodriguez has hit 654 home runs in his career. Rodriguez met last month with Commissioner Rob Manfred to prepare for his return to the game. Manfred has said Rodriguez would be welcome to return once he served his suspension. Rodriguez missed all of last season while serving a suspension for the use of performance-enhancing drugs, stemming from involvement with Biogenesis, a now-closed anti-aging clinic in South Florida. During the suspension proceedings, Rodriguez filed lawsuits against Major League Baseball, the players’ association and the Yankees’ team physician. When Rodriguez asked for a meeting with team officials several months ago, the Yankees declined until the lawsuits were withdrawn, which they were.The Yankees still owe Rodriguez, who turns 40 in July, $61 million over the next three years of his contract.Advertisement