
On College Basketball By                     
 HARVEY ARATON
 
FEB. 10, 2015
There was a day to savor in March 1997 when Dean Smith surpassed Adolph Rupp as the coach with the most wins in major college basketball, and Clarence Gaines, also known as Big House, watched with a smile.This slice of American sports history occurred during the second round of the N.C.A.A. tournament in Winston-Salem, N.C., which happened to be Big House Gaines’s town, but was close enough to Smith’s celebrated lair in Chapel Hill.Winston-Salem is about 75 miles from Chapel Hill along Tobacco Road, or Interstate 40, though Gaines and Smith worked for decades in separate but unequal basketball universes of black and white. Both men nonetheless were giants of the college coaching profession, Hall of Fame inductees while still in the game, each with his name on the university building housing his team.Gaines had retired from historically black Winston-Salem State University in 1993 with 828 career victories but believed that a great social justice had been served when Smith of North Carolina won his 877th game, toppling Rupp of Kentucky from his longtime perch.Advertisement“It was before integration, and I didn’t know him,” Gaines had said the day before, referring to Rupp. “But you always heard that he didn’t want anything to do with blacks.” Of his relationship with Smith, he put it this way, persuasively: “I wouldn’t say our relationship is like, ‘Guess who’s coming to dinner.’ Let’s just say there’s a whole lot of respect.”Gaines knew Smith was on the righteous side of the racial divide in a life of routine compassion. And that is what Gaines always told his son, Clarence Jr., who was also in the arena that Saturday afternoon when Carolina beat Colorado and its backcourt star Chauncey Billups.“My dad always knew what Coach Smith stood for and that he had a tremendous respect for him,” said Clarence Gaines Jr., who went on to his own career in the basketball business, as a scout for the Chicago Bulls during the Michael Jordan championship years and now with the Knicks in the new Phil Jackson regime.AdvertisementThe younger Gaines understood what Smith was about even without the endorsement from his father. Born in 1958, he grew up on the black side of Winston-Salem, attended all-black Catholic schools, his contact with white adults mostly limited to nuns.It was Smith who helped modify his childhood perception of the world, or at least of what it might become, when he brought Charlie Scott to North Carolina in 1967 as its first black scholarship athlete.Gaines Jr. was not exactly a Tar Heels fan, choosing Maryland as his first Atlantic Coast Conference love — no coincidence in that it was the first conference team to suit up a black player, Billy Jones, in December 1965. But he also came of age with his father’s teams, which in those years featured Earl Monroe, who may have persuaded as many people in the state to acknowledge the game as a vehicle for expression and inclusion as much as Smith, Scott and all the others in the big boy division.“By the time Earl was a senior, so many people wanted to see him play that my father moved home games from the little gymnasium to the Coliseum,” Gaines Jr. said. “You had blacks and whites sitting side by side at a time when the city’s schools were still segregated.”The South was changing, finally, and Gaines Jr. would be swept along by the tide of integration, attending William & Mary as an undergraduate before going to Chapel Hill for a master’s in business, where he needed last-minute housing and his father made a call to the basketball office to remedy the problem.Gaines Jr. was there during the Jordan era, though his first and only meeting with Smith would not come until he was working for the Bulls and one of the job requirements was to arrange neutral-site preseason games.“I went back to Chapel Hill and got to meet Coach Smith,” he said. “We talked about my father. You could tell the respect was mutual.”It was not just what Smith said, more of what he had done. Earlier in the decade, Smith had recommended Big House Gaines for board membership on the National Association of Basketball Coaches. By 1989, the senior Gaines was president of the group, a position Smith had already held.“It was something that my father treasured, being involved in that way after all those years,” Gaines Jr. said.AdvertisementBarriers had fallen, the basketball world was expanding and even Gaines Jr.’s career grew from the foundation built by his father. When the Knicks retired Monroe’s jersey in 1986, Gaines Jr. met Jerry Krause, the Bulls’ general manager, who 20 years earlier had scouted Monroe and successfully lobbied for the Baltimore Bullets to draft him. Having inherited Jordan, Krause was beginning the process of surrounding him with the core cast that would win six titles.“We spent time talking the game, and the next thing I knew he’d offered me a job,” said Gaines Jr., who was in Chicago when Jackson settled in as head coach, one association fostering another.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Though born in Kentucky, the state of Rupp, Big House Gaines most assuredly died a Carolina man, in 2005, though without the national fanfare of Smith’s sad demise. To that end, his son recalled a conversation with Matt Doherty, a Jordan teammate at Chapel Hill and briefly the Tar Heels’ coach from 2000 to 2003.Doherty asked Gaines Jr., “Did your father coach any other really good players besides Monroe?”Gaines Jr. mentioned Cleo Hill, a first-round draft pick in 1961 of the St. Louis Hawks, not the most ideal location for a gifted young black player. He might have dropped two dozen or so less familiar names from the years before the big Southern campuses opened to black talent, before men like Smith had their say.By 1997, the residual effect — however unintentional — of Smith’s off-court campaign was to virtually eliminate programs like Winston-Salem from the equation of nurturing potential N.B.A. talent. Big House Gaines viewed this as a necessary sacrifice, as progress.“As far as Dean Smith the man is concerned, he’s become a role model for what a coach should be,” he said on the day before Smith overtook Rupp. It took one to know one.A version of this article appears in print on February 11, 2015, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: The Gaines Family Always Knew What Dean Smith Stood For.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »