

 Karen Crouse
 

ON GOLF
FEB. 10, 2015
In 2007, Louise Suggs said she was glad to have lived long enough to see the Women’s British Open played for the first time on the St. Andrews Old Course. For the 91-year-old Suggs, the wonders never cease. On Tuesday she was one of seven women offered honorary membership in the Royal and Ancient Golf Club, which voted last September to end its all-male policy.The other women so honored were Annika Sorenstam, Laura Davies, Renee Powell, Lally Segard, Belle Robertson and Princess Anne.For Sorenstam, a 10-time major winner from Sweden, the membership closes a circle that rounded into shape when she competed in the 2007 Women’s British Open. At the time, Sorenstam described the decision to welcome the best female professionals to the Old Course as “a big step in women’s golf.”Tuesday’s news represents an equivocal leap forward. Suggs, a founding member of the Ladies Professional Golf Association, is an 11-time major winner. If any woman is worthy of belonging to the world’s most exclusive golf clubs, it is Suggs, who was friends with Bobby Jones, one of the most revered figures in the game and a founder of Augusta National. So far she has been overlooked by Augusta National’s membership, which over the past 30 months has added its first three women, all of whom are titans of business or politics.AdvertisementThe Royal and Ancient Golf Club deserves credit for matching Augusta National’s gender-inclusive membership and raising it a fair bit by offering honorary status to Suggs and handful of women whose golf credentials are incontrovertible.The pity is that Suggs is past the age of enjoying the privileges of her membership. So is Segard, 93, a native of France who became a top amateur golfer and has been a tireless administrator for the sport as part of what is now the International Golf Federation.AdvertisementDavies, 51, is a four-time major champion from Britain and a former No. 1 player who will be inducted into the World Golf Hall of Fame this year. Robertson, 78, was a top Scottish amateur player in the 1960s, ’70s and ’80s. Powell, 68, was the first African-American woman to be a Class A member of the P.G.A. of America and was the first female head professional at a golf course in Britain.Princess Anne, the 64-year-old daughter of Queen Elizabeth II, was a curious choice given that a quotation often attributed to her is critical of the game: “Golf seems an arduous way to go for a walk. I prefer to take the dogs out.”She is the only one of the Royal and Ancient Golf Club’s seven sisters not to come from a golfing background. Her father, Prince Philip, and her brother Prince Andrew belong to the club, so she had that going for her.The organization might have sent a stronger message of inclusivity while also injecting youth into its rolls by extending membership to Catherine, the Duchess of Cambridge, 33, who met Prince William while they were students at St. Andrews University.The presence of Princess Anne and two nonagenarians gives new meaning to Royal and Ancient Golf Club. At 44, Sorenstam is the youngest of the female members, who average 70 years of age.The organization missed an opportunity to right a couple of wrongs by offering memberships to Judy Bell, 78, a fine amateur player who in 1996 became the first woman to head the United States Golf Association, and Louise Richardson, who in 2009 became the first female principal at St. Andrews University. The men who preceded Bell and Richardson in their jobs were granted honorary club memberships.AdvertisementThe university released a statement, saying, “We wish the R&A every success and look forward to the resumption of the tradition by which previous principals of St. Andrews were invited to become honorary members.”The club’s membership roll matters because it is not just another private club. Like Augusta National, it is one of the most high-profile organizations in the sport. Before 2004, the Royal and Ancient Club was one of golf’s governing bodies, a responsibility since taken over by the R&A, which takes its name and many representatives from the club but is a separate entity. The R&A also organizes the British Open, which has three courses in its regular tournament rotation with an all-male membership, including Muirfield, site of the 2013 event.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.At a time when the sport is striving to appeal to a younger, more diverse, crowd, the Royal and Ancient Golf Club could have aided the cause by offering a membership to Se Ri Pak, the 37-year-old from South Korea whose success on the L.P.G.A. Tour is largely responsible for the golf boom in Asia. Before Pak lit up golf like a comet, the sport’s popularity in Asia was largely limited to Japan, whose best female golfer, Ayako Okamoto, a World Golf Hall of Fame member, would also have been a worthy pioneering member.In 1987, Okamoto became the first non-American to win the L.P.G.A. player of the year honors. In her heyday, she was the Tiger Woods of Japan, sating the country’s immense appetite for a golf superstar.In a statement, George Macgregor, the Royal and Ancient Golf Club’s captain, said, “This is an historic day for the club.” He added that the seven women “are extremely worthy additions to our roll of honorary members and will become ambassadors for the club as they have been for the sport of golf throughout their careers.”The pool of worthy women is deep, deep enough for more and frequent dips into the sea of equity by golf’s ruling clubs.A version of this article appears in print on February 11, 2015, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: Seven Women Enter a Male Golf Bastion.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »