By HUW RICHARDSOCT. 11, 2015
CARDIFF, WALES — Ireland, European champion for the past two years, underlined its status as the Northern Hemisphere’s leading World Cup contender when it beat France 24-9 at the Principality Stadium in Cardiff on Sunday night to top Pool D.The result secured it a quarterfinal on the same ground next Sunday against Argentina, sidestepping the World Cup holder and favorite New Zealand, which it has never beaten in 110 years of trying. Ireland was clearly superior, but the result may not have been welcome to the New Zealanders.Subdued so far, the All Blacks must now face the one team that truly spooks them, France, on the same ground at the same stage of the tournament as its famous World Cup loss to it in 2007.Ireland’s victory came at a cost. Its totemic lock forward and captain Paul O’Connell, second only to Brian O’Driscoll in the affections of his countrymen during a golden age for Irish rugby, was carried off the field in clear physical distress as the first half ended. O’Connell, veteran of 108 caps, will be 36 later this month, and the applause of the massed Irish fans as he left had a valedictory air.AdvertisementIt also had a second forward, blind-side flanker Peter O’Mahoney, who was carried off in the 55th minute and earlier had lost its midfield playmaker Jonny Sexton.AdvertisementFormer Ireland prop forward Reggie Corrigan proclaimed it “one of Ireland’s greatest victories.”There was little doubt of the team’s superiority, particularly in the second half. It was spearheaded by a formidable all-around back-rower’s display by its rampant open side, Sean O’Brien, whose efforts at the breakdown and as a ball carrier made sure France was kept on the back foot, rarely threatening the Irish line.After a series of almost satirically bad official Man of the Match selections, this was one that the voters got right.Two of O’Brien’s ferocious ball-in-hand charges played their part in denting the French defense in the relentless assault that created Ireland’s decisive second try in the 72nd minute for scrum-half Conor Murray. That took it out of sight, when Ian Madigan added his conversion, at 21-9. A further penalty from the replacement fly-half completed the scoring.Ireland’s earlier reward for its second-half dominance came nine minutes after the break from an attacking position set up by center Robbie Henshaw. Fullback Rob Kearney broke the tackle by French fly-half Frederic Michalak and bounced off wing Brice Dulin to score.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.This was a victory for Ireland’s recent history over longer-term weaknesses. France is still 34-8 against it over the past 40 years, but Ireland has won the last three.Its fans will be more than happy to return to the recently renamed Principality Stadium next week. It is not just an affinity between Celtic nations that means Ireland feels at home here. The Irish were clearly the majority of the 72,000 crowd, generating noise levels reminiscent of Wales’s matches here. Ireland is 6-3 against Wales in Cardiff since the ground opened in 1999, and it has also seen some of its provincial teams’ greatest triumphs — notably Munster’s two Heineken European Cup victories.Ireland led 9-6 at the end of a fiercely contested but untidy first half. It was 40 minutes of much heat, but little light as the two teams battered at each other’s defensive lines to limited effect. Not only was all the scoring from penalties, but the loudest cheers heard were on the occasions when Ireland won penalties in defense, relieving French pressure.AdvertisementIreland’s marginal edge was reflected not only in the scoreline, but the distance from which the points were secured. Both of France’s scores were kicked from near the halfway line by its South African-born fullback Scott Spedding, the second from a position gained by one of its few breaks, by veteran fly-half Michalak.Ireland’s scores, by contrast, came from around 40 meters out. Sexton landed the first two, in the 12th and 18th minutes, while one of the first tasks confronting Ian Madigan, his fellow Leinsterman, on joining the play after replacing Sexton in the 25th minute was landing the penalty which accounted for Ireland’s lead at the interval.It should, though, have been further ahead. The one clear try-scoring opportunity of the half came after 31 minutes. Tommy Bowe, much criticized for his form so far during the tournament, came in off the right wing to make a scything angled break through the French midfield.A score looked certain as he drew the final defender and passed to center Keith Earls, up in support. Earls, who became Ireland’s all-time record World Cup try-scorer when he crossed for his eighth try against Italy last week had only to catch the pass to make it number nine, but fumbled — and the opportunity was gone.Elsewhere on Sunday, Argentina further underlined that meeting it in the quarter-final is no soft option, scoring nine tries as it beat Namibia 64-19 at Leicester, while Italy sealed third place in pool, and with it automatic qualification for the 2019 World Cup by beating Romania 32-22 in Exeter. Liam Williams became the seventh Welsh back, and the sixth of its original squad of 31, to be ruled out of the tournament, after a foot injury received during Wales’s 15-6 loss to Australia at Twickenham on Saturday night.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.