By PETER KERASOTISFEB. 11, 2015
ORLANDO, Fla. —  In a season slipping further into nothingness, the only drama surrounding the Knicks as they played the almost equally abysmal Magic here on Wednesday night was whether Carmelo Anthony’s sore left knee would allow him to play.It did not.Not that it would have matter much, with the Knicks losing by 89-83 as two teams with a combined 27 victories — only 10 of those coming from the Knicks — played their last games before the lengthy All-Star break, which may have added to the evening’s air of apathy.Anthony last played Monday night against the Heat in Miami, scoring 26 points in a 14-point loss, and his knee hurt the morning after. Before Wednesday’s game, he was limping slightly. After the game, he said that his condition was day to day, although he would like to play in Sunday’s All-Star Game, especially because it is being held at Madison Square Garden.“Unless something happens over the course of rehabbing, I’m going to give it a try,” he said. “To have that game in New York City, that’s special to me. I feel better today than yesterday. I’ll keep doing my rehab and see how I feel Saturday at practice.”AdvertisementThe decision will be Anthony’s, not the organization’s, a point that was made by Knicks Coach Derek Fisher.Advertisement“Carmelo is an adult,” Fisher said. “The decision will always be his.”It remains uncertain what will happen after the All-Star break and whether Anthony will opt for surgery sooner rather than later. The Knicks are the first team in the N.B.A. guaranteed to have a losing record this season, and they are destined for the draft lottery. Letting Anthony mend for next season would seem to be the smart move, but in recent seasons the Knicks have not always done things wisely.“I don’t know” was all Anthony would say when peppered with questions about the second half of the season.Amar’e Stoudemire was more thoughtful about his future. He is in the last year of his contract, and he acknowledged that in the game’s final seconds, he contemplated that this could be his last time in a Knicks uniform. There have been talks of the team’s buying out his contract or trading him.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“It was definitely bittersweet,” Stoudemire said. “Sweet because of all the things we’ve accomplished and bitter because in the near future, there are decisions that have got to be made.”Before the game, the franchise learned that Anthony Mason was fighting for his life after a serious heart attack. Mason, a gritty player for five seasons with the Knicks, was part of the 1994 team that advanced to the N.B.A. finals. It was one more piece of bad news in a season that has been rife with it.In Wednesday’s game, when the Knicks were trading the lead with Orlando and their forward Jason Smith was on his way to a career night, Smith jammed a finger exchanging a high-five with Stoudemire. It happened with 2 minutes 58 seconds left in the first half, when Smith was 8 of 10 from the field, with 19 points and 5 rebounds. He finished with a team-high 25 points, shooting 2 of 6 the rest of the game and grabbing only two more rebounds.“It’s O.K., just a little jammed,” Smith said of the finger.Playing in Anthony’s stead, Tim Hardaway Jr. scored 10 points. Between the first and second quarters, he vomited into a cup and briefly left for the team’s locker room. After the game, he said he was fine.Like the Knicks, the Magic are looking at the draft lottery. But they are a franchise seeking upward mobility after two seasons of futility following the departure of Dwight Howard, their former star center, who asked for and was granted a trade after the 2011-12 season.With only 15 victories this season, the Magic fired Jacque Vaughn as their head coach and named the assistant James Borrego as interim coach. In four games coaching the Magic, Borrego has only eight fewer victories than Fisher does this season.A version of this article appears in print on February 12, 2015, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: No Anthony, No Hope as One Lowly Team Falls to Another.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.