AdvertisementSupported byBy Benjamin HoffmanAaron Rodgers’s incredible streak of 586 passes without an interception at home came to an end against the St. Louis Rams today thanks to a safety blitz by Mark Barron and a sensational dive for the ball by linebacker James Laurinaitis. It would not take long for him to throw another, as Trumaine Johnson picked him off in the second quarter.Rodgers also lost a fumble, but it did not seem to matter as the Green Bay Packers beat the Rams 24-10.The first pick came in the first quarter with the Packers up 7-0. Barron was blitzing on the play and caught a piece of the ball which sailed into the air. Laurinaitis quickly turned and got his hands out to make the play.It was his first interception at Lambeau Field since Dec. 2 of 2012. Including the playoffs, Rodgers had 49 touchdowns in-between the two interceptions. The second interception gave him his first two-interception game at home since 2010.On a day in which Rodgers was clearly not at his best, Green Bay remained undefeated thanks to relentless pressure by the defense forcing Nick Foles to throw four interceptions.“They’re playing great,” Rodgers said of his team’s defense at his post-game news conference. “It’s been fun to watch the last two weeks. They exploded with the turnovers today.”It had been so long since Rodgers threw an interception that when reporters asked him about it recently he did not remember the play. It came in a win over the Minnesota Vikings when the Packers tried a flea-flicker, with Rodgers having the ball pitched back to him by Randall Cobb before throwing deep to Greg Jennings. Harrison Smith was not fooled and got the interception.“That’s what it was?” Rodgers said “Shouldn’t have called that play.Rodgers finished the day having completed 19 of 30 passes for 241 yards and 2 touchdowns. James Jones proved vital once again with a 65-yard touchdown catch.Despite the win, Rodgers was unhappy with the turnovers.“We’ve had so many games where we take care of the football,” Rodgers said. “his was uncharacteristic of us. We’ve got some stuff to clean up.”The Packers will try to go 6-0 next week while hosting the San Diego Chargers in Green BayAdvertisement