
Sports of The Times By                     
 JULIET MACUR
 
FEB. 11, 2015
Here’s a tip on choosing the perfect seats for this summer’s Little League World Series.Forget the ones next to the dugouts or along the baselines. Get the cheapest ones you can find — the ones at the tippy-top of the old stadium in South Williamsport, Pa., or in the hinterlands of the outfield’s grassy hill. The farther away from home plate, the better.The players would be just a blur. But that’s the point.This is why: Jackie Robinson West — the hard-hitting team from the South Side of Chicago that last year became the first all-black team to reach the tournament final — was stripped of its United States championship Wednesday for knowingly including ringers from outside its district on its roster.The revelation was proof that even at the youth level, baseball these days is best viewed from a distance.From far away, you can pretend that the game is just the way you remember playing it, and just the way Little League International touts it to be. It’s America’s game, watched best with a slice of apple pie. Drive your Chevrolet to the game, grab a hot dog, and settle in for six innings of sportsmanship.AdvertisementIn a perfect world, we’d all watch the game with the attitude that Mike Roche had when he was playing it nearly 50 years ago. Roche was the winning pitcher for Windsor Locks, Conn., when it won the Little League World Series final in 1965. “We never for a second thought about anyone cheating because we were just kids out there, trying to win,” said Roche, a tax accountant who is 61 and who still lives in Windsor Locks, just north of Hartford.AdvertisementIt was only later, on a team trip to the World’s Fair in New York with several other World Series teams from that year, that Roche even considered that another team might have bent the rules.He and his teammates — who Roche said were 11 and 12, following Little League rules — were hanging out with the Venezuelan team when they noticed something that made them do a double take: Some of the Venezuelans, he said, could have used a shave.“It never made the papers because we didn’t cry foul,” Roche said. “But suddenly, we realized that, ‘Hey, look at that, some of these guys seem a lot older than they should have been.’ ”The lesson is this: Don’t look at baseball too closely because you might see exactly what’s in the sausage. Often, it’s not pretty.On Wednesday — the day after Alex Rodriguezapologized to the Yankees for being suspended for an entire season for using performance-enhancing drugs — Jackie Robinson West officials were identified as the game’s newest cheaters.The Chicago team’s manager, Darold Butler, was suspended from the league for his role in falsifying a map to include players who should not have been on the team. The league’s Illinois District 4 administrator, Michael Kelly, was booted from his position, too.Too bad Little League couldn’t punish itself for letting all of that happen. It should have triple-checked the team’s paperwork before the players took the field — and the ESPN stage — in South Williamsport last summer, and it certainly should have learned from its mistakes.AdvertisementIn 1992, a team from the Philippines had its world title taken away because of a residency issue. Then, in 2001, the Bronx pitcher Danny Almonte was found to be two years older than he should have been after his team finished third in the tournament. His size and performance had prompted grumbling and complaints among opponents for weeks; his team was subsequently disqualified.You’d think that Little League would have been so embarrassed by those mistakes that it would do anything and everything it could to keep a similar eligibility mistake from happening again.But that’s probably tough, especially when a good story gets in the way.Jackie Robinson West was a city team that went on to meet President Obama and be chosen as the Chicagoans of the year on the cover of Chicago magazine (an issue that Butler, through his Twitter account, encouraged people to buy by clicking on a link). Butler’s son was on the team.This all came in a year when the Little League World Series ruled the heat of the summer, thanks to the story lines of the (apparently greater) Chicago all-stars and to Mo’ne Davis, a Philadelphia girl with a rocket arm.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Adults climbed over each other to latch on to her story. Davis was on the cover of Sports Illustrated. She was on the late-night talk shows. During the major leagues’ World Series, she starred in a 16-minute documentary sponsored by Chevrolet and directed by Spike Lee.ESPN benefited from the boost in viewership. Little League International benefited from the elevated profile.Everyone seemed to benefit, but where does that leave the Jackie Robinson West players? They will be the ones marked by this cheating, even if it appears that it was the adults who ruined it for them. The adults who ran the team and the local league. The adults at Little League International. They have all marred the memories of boys who probably just wanted to play baseball.Wednesday’s announcement won’t easily be forgotten. Bob Rumbold knows that. He was an alternate second baseman on that winning Windsor Locks team in 1965 and has worked for decades as a sports anchor on television stations in Massachusetts and Connecticut.He told me that people still stop him on the street more often to talk about his Little League World Series victory 50 years ago than his television job.“You are always known for being on that World Series team, no matter what else you do,” Rumbold said. “Something like that follows you for the rest of your life.”Email: juliet@nytimes.com A version of this article appears in print on February 12, 2015, on Page B15 of the New York edition with the headline: Little League Shows Why It Shouldn’t Be Watched Too Closely.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »