
On College Basketball By                     
 JOHN BRANCH
 
FEB. 11, 2015

CreditIsaac Brekken/Associated Press        It was strange that Dean Smith and Jerry Tarkanian died within days of each other. They were coaching peers from opposite sides of the reputational spectrum, with Smith, the longtime coach at North Carolina, remembered as the gentlemanly throwback to a time when coaching was done right and Tarkanian cast as the misunderstood pioneer of an era — the same era — when it all went wrong.Smith’s legacy was painted in sepia tones, tinged in Carolina blue. Among his noted achievements was a player graduation rate close to 97 percent.Tarkanian will be recalled far more colorfully, as someone who turned tradition inside out, bringing a fast-paced style and pro-style glamour previously unseen in college sports. Tarkanian acknowledged, a decade after taking over Nevada-Las-Vegas, that only six of his players had graduated. Yet his bronze likeness sits, chomping a towel, outside the university’s on-campus arena.It can be hard to know what we want most from our college coaches. Tarkanian showed, as much as anyone, that the answers are, mostly, wins and entertainment.AdvertisementThere was no one in college basketball like Tarkanian, who died in Las Vegas on Wednesday at age 84. He was reviled or revered, a saint or a sinner, depending on perspective and allegiance. But age and time have a way of softening the burrs of bad reputations. They turn rebels into forward thinkers.AdvertisementThe N.C.A.A. helped turn Tarkanian into an anti-establishment hero. He was less a rebel than a symbol — a mascot, really, with his own name (Tark the Shark) and a comical hangdog expression — for the win-at-all-cost appetite of so many fans, their judgment clouded by an affinity to the colors of a particular university.Like most sports, college basketball can be a dirty game when examined too closely. Tarkanian understood that college basketball’s one shining moment, as glorified at the end of the N.C.A.A. tournament each spring, is actually composed of a million murky moments along the way.Tarkanian took three programs to the N.C.A.A. tournament — and all three on to N.C.A.A. probation. He won nearly 80 percent of his games, but more than 50 of them were later redacted from his record for various violations.He was harangued by the N.C.A.A. for decades, tarnished by everything from findings of academic fraud to a photo of players in a hot tub with a reputed gambler twice convicted of bribery.He apologized for nothing, and his droopy eyes, like those of a bloodhound, lent him a look of the eternal victim. Tarkanian countered every accusation with plausible deniability. His best alibi was that others were doing things just as bad, or worse, and he was probably right.He earned a $2.5 million out-of-court settlement with the N.C.A.A., which he said had spent decades harassing him with investigations. He used the N.C.A.A. as his foil, and as the N.C.A.A. became more bureaucratic and less popular, Tarkanian won the public-relations war. He came across as the lesser villain, if not the hero to the underclass.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I would talk every day to guys, and they would thank me sometimes,” Tarkanian, speaking of fellow coaches, told The New York Times in 2013. “I fought for things they wanted to fight for. Everyone knows the system is broken. But no one ever says anything about it because they don’t want to be connected to me. They know what people will think.”Tarkanian prided himself on building winning teams with players that other programs did not want or would not risk. He was among the first to recruit heavily from junior colleges. He was chastised constantly for handing out second chances but never saw it as an insult.AdvertisementHe defended his approach while criticizing those of some of college basketball’s revered programs, such as Kentucky and U.C.L.A. Nothing frustrated Tarkanian more than when he was cast as the sinner to John Wooden’s saint. He suggested that the two were more alike than anyone, especially the N.C.A.A., cared to know.Tarkanian’s successful five-year stint at Long Beach State ended in 1973, shortly before N.C.A.A. investigators found recruiting violations. The N.C.A.A. practically set up a satellite office in Las Vegas when Tarkanian went to U.N.L.V., where its 1990 national championship was sandwiched by a stream of allegations of misdeeds and fights with the N.C.A.A.For the colleges that hired him, and the fans who adored him, the probability of violations was no match for the prestige of victories. Tarkanian’s quick success at U.N.L.V. led to the building of the Thomas & Mack Center, where the front row, nicknamed Gucci Row, was filled with celebrities who cheered the fleet-footed teams that Tarkanian supplied. The Rebels still play in the arena, located off Tarkanian Way.Fresno State, Tarkanian’s alma mater, wanted some of that, too, so it lured Tarkanian out of retirement in 1995. Victories piled up over seven seasons, although 49 of them were eventually vacated because of rules violations. There were investigations by the N.C.A.A. and an exposé on “60 Minutes.” Among a string of incidents, there were accusations of point shaving and a series of player arrests, with one alleged assault involving a samurai sword.Tarkanian’s legacy at Fresno State included a $100 million arena and a stretch under N.C.A.A. probation stemming from academic fraud. When Tarkanian returned to Fresno to be celebrated last March, his name was lifted to the rafters, and he was given a standing ovation.Tarkanian’s family and supporters spent years campaigning to get him into the Basketball Hall of Fame, to join the likes of Dean Smith. But the call did not come until 2013, when his health was failing.In the end, the victories were too much too ignore. Tarkanian was no longer the rebel, if he ever was, but part of the establishment.A version of this article appears in print on February 12, 2015, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Part Villain, Part Victim, Tarkanian Simply Won.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »