By BILL PENNINGTONFEB. 11, 2015
The soap opera that has become Tiger Woods’s life took another shadowy turn Wednesday when Woods announced he was taking an indefinite leave of absence from competitive golf to work on his floundering game.The announcement, made on Woods’s website, was not unexpected. Woods has been playing the worst golf of his career, and he withdrew from last week’s tournament with a back injury.But the lack of details about how long he will be sidelined — and his comment that the leave is not related to last year’s back surgery — created yet another tempest for Woods, this time surrounding what is at the root of his temporary exit.This winter, Woods has been altering his swing yet again with another new coach, but his greatest failings lately have seemed to be mental. He has repeatedly flubbed routine shots near the green that were once the strength of his game.AdvertisementThe question raised throughout the golf community Wednesday was whether Woods — once the steeliest competitor in golf — was seeking help from a sports psychologist, a swing tutor, a back specialist, or all three.AdvertisementThere is a chance that Woods’s respite will be short, and there is also a remote possibility that it could be lengthy. Woods has been unpredictable and secretive about his schedule, training methods and psychological preparedness.He could resume competing in two weeks at the PGA Tour’s Honda Classic, near his home in Florida. But in the past, Woods has also taken more extended breaks because it is hard to reinvent or relearn a masterly golf game quickly.Still, anything longer than seven weeks would mean that Woods would miss the Masters, which begins April 9.The overarching goal of Woods’s golf career has been to exceed Jack Nicklaus’s record of 18 major championships. Woods has claimed 14, but he has not had a major victory in seven years. He has won the Masters four times.“Right now, I need a lot of work on my game and to still spend time with the people that are important to me,” Woods wrote on his website. “My play, and scores, are not acceptable for tournament golf. Like I’ve said, I enter a tournament to compete at the highest level, and when I think I’m ready, I’ll be back.”He added: “I am committed to getting back to the pinnacle of my game. I’d like to play the Honda Classic — it’s a tournament in my hometown, and it’s important to me — but I won’t be there unless my game is tournament-ready. That’s not fair to anyone. I do, however, expect to be playing again very soon.”Woods, 39, has had four operations on his left knee and had back surgery last March. He did not play in either the Masters or the United States Open because of his back issues. He played in a limited schedule of events and made it through four rounds of those tournaments less than half the time.This year, he has fared even worse.Although he said his back was fully recovered at the Phoenix Open two weeks ago, Woods botched multiple chips around the green, sometimes bungling the same shot two or three times. He shot an 82, the highest score of his PGA career. The next week, he could play only 11 holes before withdrawing from the Farmers Insurance Open — held at one of his favorite venues, Torrey Pines in San Diego. Woods was noticeably limping and moving gingerly on the golf course because of what he termed a stiff back.AdvertisementWoods has now withdrawn from three of his last nine tournaments. His best finish is 18th, in an 18-man field.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“The last two weeks have been very disappointing to me, especially Torrey, because I never want to withdraw,” Woods said on his website. “Unfortunately, lately, injuries have made that happen too often.“This latest injury is not related to my previous surgery. I am having daily physical therapy, and I am feeling better every day. I want to thank the fans in Phoenix and San Diego. They were amazing. I greatly appreciate everyone’s support.”Since winning the 2008 United States Open, Woods has had a grueling, debilitating series of physical obstacles, including reconstructive knee surgery, an Achilles’ tendon injury, a strained elbow, a pinched back nerve and recurring back spasms.Woods has come back before. After he took a leave of absence in 2009, following a marital scandal triggered by an auto accident and reports of serial adultery, Woods was no longer among the top 50 golfers ranked worldwide. He eventually reclaimed the No. 1 ranking.On Wednesday, Woods was ranked 62nd in the world. It is the lowest he has been ranked since he turned professional in 1996.A version of this article appears in print on February 12, 2015, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: His Game in Tatters, Woods Takes a Leave.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.