By JERÉ LONGMANFEB. 11, 2015
Rarely had the Little League World Series gained such widespread attention, especially for African-American players.Mo’ne Davis, a pitcher from Philadelphia, became the first girl to throw a shutout in the event and appeared on the cover of Sports Illustrated. Jackie Robinson West, an all-black team from Chicago’s South Side, reached the championship game.Both teams provided encouragement for urban baseball at a time when participation by African-Americans in America’s pastime was in decline.Jackie Robinson West lost, 8-4, to a team from South Korea in the championship game last August in South Williamsport, Pa., but was celebrated for its displays of sportsmanship and for galvanizing Chicago during a violent, despairing summer.AdvertisementThe city’s mayor, Rahm Emanuel, organized parties to watch the games. After returning home, the team was honored with a parade. Last fall, the players traveled to Washington and met President Obama, whose two terms in the White House have sprung from his political base in Chicago.AdvertisementBut the team’s soaring achievement ended in scandal Wednesday as Jackie Robinson West was stripped of its United States title for knowingly using ineligible players who lived outside the team’s prescribed residential boundaries.Team officials falsified documents and illicitly expanded the areas from which it was allowed to draw players, although the players apparently did not know they were doing anything wrong, Little League International said.Some experts viewed the case as yet another example of adult interference in the increasingly win-at-all-costs world of American youth sports and the growing tension between neighborhood-based recreational sports and a more professionalized approach that involves travel teams.“This is a heartbreaking decision,” Stephen D. Keener, the president and chief executive of Little League International, said in a statement, adding that fair play should be valued more than wins and losses. “What these players accomplished on the field and the memories and lessons they have learned during the Little League World Series tournament is something the kids can be proud of, but it is unfortunate that the actions of adults have led to this outcome.”The players were in effect victims, Mr. Keener told reporters, saying in an interview with ESPN, “No one should cast any blame, any aspersions, on the children who participated on this team.”Jackie Robinson West officials could not immediately be reached for comment. They previously denied any wrongdoing.Brandon Green, a pitcher for Jackie Robinson West, said at a news conference in Chicago that players were not involved “in anything that could have caused us to be stripped of our championship” and added, “We do know that we’re champions.”AdvertisementMr. Obama was proud of the way the Jackie Robinson West players had represented Chicago and the United States, the White House spokesman Josh Earnest told reporters Wednesday. He added, “The fact is, some dirty dealing by some adults doesn’t take anything away from the accomplishments of those young men.”The Jackie Robinson West league was founded in 1971 by Joseph Haley, now deceased, who had moved to Chicago from Louisiana with his wife, Anne, and son, William. Last summer, William Haley said in an interview that his father had been inspired by seeing Lloyd McClendon hitting one home run after another during the 1971 Little League World Series for a team from Gary, Ind. Mr. McClendon is now the manager of the Seattle Mariners.In 1983, a team representing Jackie Robinson West reached the Little League World Series for the first time. The league became a powerful symbol of what could be achieved as baseball sought to broaden its appeal in urban areas. In 2010, William Haley was named Little League’s urban initiative volunteer of the year.“There has never been a question of whether Little League would be available to anyone in the neighborhood each summer,” Mr. Haley said at the time. “That is probably what I am most proud of.”During last summer’s World Series, the players on Jackie Robinson West drew acclaim not only for their baseball skills but also for their sportsmanship. One player, Trey Hondras, apologized to the coach of a team from Rhode Island for celebrating excessively after hitting a home run. After the championship game, another player, Marquis Jackson, gave an elaborate handshake and hug to one of the South Korean players at home plate.“Those kids were admirable,” said Jim Thompson, the founder and chief executive of the Positive Coaching Alliance, a California-based nonprofit. “Not only were they good at baseball, but they honored the game.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.A month after the series, though, an official from a neighboring Little League district in Illinois expressed concern about the residences of some players on the Jackie Robinson West team, Little League International said.Further investigation began in late January. It revealed that the team had expanded its boundaries to include territories belonging to other Little League teams and had used a falsified boundary map for the 2014 tournament, Little League International said.The team’s manager, Darold Butler, has been suspended from Little League activity. Jackie Robinson West will remain ineligible to play in the World Series until two members of the league’s founding family are replaced: William Haley as league treasurer and his mother, Anne, as president.Advertisement“We feel it is a necessary decision to maintain the integrity of the Little League program,” Mr. Keener said in his statement.In 1992, a team from the Philippines was stripped of its Little League World Series title after the discovery that some players had not met age or residency requirements.The Rolando Paulino Little League team from the Bronx was stripped of its third-place finish in the 2001 tournament when it was revealed that pitcher Danny Almonte had been too old to participate.The United States title for the 2014 World Series will go to Mountain Ridge Little League, a team from Las Vegas. Anticipating Wednesday’s decision, Ashton Cave, the Las Vegas coach, told The Associated Press on Tuesday that Little League International could send a more powerful message by leaving the American championship vacant. “If you bend the rules, there is going to be a consequence,” he said.In penalizing Jackie Robinson West, Little League International bucked a recent trend by trying to preserve the neighborhood-based nature of Little League at a time when travel teams are often more valued, Mr. Thompson said.“We have a win-at-all-cost society,” Mr. Thompson said in a telephone interview. “There is nothing wrong with travel ball; it’s just that there needs to be a space for kids to play that’s not hyper-hypercompetitive. When adults try to game the system, Little League needs to step up and do what they did.”In Chicago, Mayor Emanuel said the Jackie Robinson West players would “always be champions.” In a statement, he called them “remarkable boys” who had brought the city together and “created memories that will last a lifetime and nothing will take away.”Jerry Manuel, a former major league player and a former manager of the Chicago White Sox and the Mets, called the Jackie Robinson West case “a black eye.” But he said it would be naïve to think other teams did not bend the rules in an era where travel ball had become so popular among the best players.Advertisement“What I’m finding is that most good teams are kind of travel ball teams,” Mr. Manuel said in a telephone interview.Mr. Manuel also runs the day-to-day operations for Major League Baseball’s diversity task force. He said he did not think that this episode would harm attempts to get more African-American players, like himself, playing the game.“I think once you witness what we witnessed with that group from Chicago, the way they played and even the sportsmanship and enthusiasm, that kind of stays with you more than the legalities of where they came from,” Mr. Manuel said. “I remain proud of them. It shows we still have a culture that can be connected to the game of baseball. We have been pretty much disconnected.”A version of this article appears in print on February 12, 2015, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Hearts Won, Title Lost.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.