AdvertisementSupported bySports of The TimesBy William C. RhodenBATON ROUGE, La. — Louisiana State fans began lining up at Pete Maravich Assembly Center nearly two hours before game time on Tuesday, fully expecting that their Tigers, so tough at home, would end Kentucky’s 23-game winning streak. “Every team they play thinks they’re going to be the one to beat Kentucky,” L.S.U. Coach Johnny Jones said.The Tigers almost did. In the loud, rip-roaring atmosphere that Kentucky’s young team has come to expect, L.S.U. overcame a 13-point second-half deficit, took a 6-point lead with 7 minutes 29 seconds left and had a shot to tie with five seconds remaining.But as it had done 23 times before, Kentucky found a way to win with blocked shots, clutch shooting and a suffocating defense. When the dust settled, Kentucky had escaped with a 71-69 victory and extended its streak to 24.After the game, Coach John Calipari explained his philosophy for winning streaks.“It’s really important that you get a 10-game winning streak at some point in the year, because at the end of the year, you’ve got to get six, and you’ve got to know you can get 10,” he said. “I’m always trying to drive us to go on winning streaks.” He added, “Ten is a good number; 24 is better.”When you’re 24-0, anything you say makes sense.This was the second Kentucky game I had attended this season. On Saturday, in an equally frenzied atmosphere in Gainesville, Fla., Kentucky held off the determined Gators, 68-61.“You keep taking everybody’s best,” Calipari said after the game. “We’re in a championship fight every time we walk into a building.”Florida Coach Billy Donovan said the Kentucky game had been the first time this season that he felt his team had played to win. I told Donovan about Calipari’s comments about taking everyone’s best shot, inside the Southeastern Conference and out, and wondered if merely the sight of top-ranked Kentucky had been enough to push Florida to a higher level.“Listen, Kentucky, to me, has been the flagship program of the SEC for a long, long time,” said Donovan, who was an assistant at Kentucky under Rick Pitino early in his career. “They’ve been that way. That’s been the case, even when I was an assistant at Kentucky. It was the same thing: When you’re playing against the No. 1 team in the country, guys get up.”Entering Tuesday’s game, Calipari’s young Wildcats had had only two close calls: an overtime win over Mississippi in early January, and a double-overtime triumph at Texas A&M four days later. The rest of the schedule was a series of lopsided victories. Willie Cauley-Stein, the 7-foot junior forward who has become a mentor to Kentucky’s young players, said the Wildcats embraced the challenge that would surely intensify with each successive game. There are no nights off.“That’s what you sign up for when you come here,” he said. “They tell you that when they’re in your in-home visit: It’s going to be like this every night — a ‘goldout’ or ‘blackout’ or ‘whiteout’ every night out. That’s what it is when you sign up to play here.”This is great. Frankly, I’m tired of parity. In an era when everyone is advocating an N.F.L.-style equality — “on any given Sunday” — I’d like to see an undefeated juggernaut. A real king of the hill.Seven Division I men’s teams have capped an undefeated season with an N.C.A.A. tournament championship, but the last to do it was Bob Knight’s 1976 Indiana team nearly 40 years ago. The current Kentucky squad looks as if it could be next.Not everyone would be happy to see that, of course. Knight, for one, has made critical remarks about Calipari, who continues to rack up victories despite the longstanding perception that he is more of a recruiter than a tactician.“They ask me that question every day: ‘How do you feel when somebody says you can’t coach?’ Well, we’re winning all these games; it must mean the players are pretty unbelievable,” Calipari said. “I’d rather them say that than say I’m a great coach and I get players who stink.”Calipari’s recruiting skill is beyond debate. Everyone talks about Dean Smith’s ability to attract talent to North Carolina and John Wooden’s capacity for luring players to U.C.L.A., but Calipari has drawn skilled athletes to destinations like Amherst, Mass., and Memphis. Now that he is at Kentucky, he operates a veritable assembly line of players. This team goes 10 deep without losing a beat. Calipari’s knack for recruiting has been a gift and, professionally speaking, a curse.The previous two college programs Calipari has led — UMass and Memphis — wound up punished by the N.C.A.A., stripped of many of their achievements. And while Calipari will tell you — and almost sell you — that there were extenuating circumstances in each case, the record is the record. The vacated wins and Final Four appearances will follow him into the Hall of Fame if he goes, where one day he might join a couple of other coaches — Jim Calhoun and Jim Boeheim — with N.C.A.A. punishments on their résumés. In fact, Calipari is probably best described as this generation’s Jerry Tarkanian, the longtime coach who gained notoriety for his epic battles with the N.C.A.A.’s enforcement division while at U.N.L.V. But Tarkanian, who died Wednesday, is also in the Hall of Fame. How Calipari will be remembered is yet to be determined. There certainly won’t be the sort of glowing tributes that we have seen this week for Dean Smith, though it should be noted that Smith, like Wooden, did his winning in a far different, pre-Internet era.Calipari’s record as a college coach is 621-177; his record at Kentucky is 176-37, including the 2012 national championship. He is also the only coach to have Final Four appearances vacated at more than one university. No amount of salesmanship will remove those blemishes. But an undefeated season on the way the way to another national championship could make them a lot less distracting.Email: wcr@nytimes.com Advertisement