AdvertisementSupported byOn SkiingBy Christopher ClareyBEAVER CREEK, Colo. — Vail Valley was the happiest valley for Lasse Kjus in 1999, and he returned this year perfectly prepared to share his place in the history books with Tina Maze.Instead, Kjus will remain the only Alpine skier to win five individual medals in the same world championships.It is one of winter sports’ most remarkable records, and Maze, the versatile Slovene talent, had a fine shot of matching it here after winning two gold medals and a silver in her first three events.She was poised for another spot on the podium Thursday in the giant slalom, which has long been her base discipline.She was skiing on two days’ rest after skipping the team event on Tuesday to try to be as fresh as possible. She was skiing on another blue-sky day in Beaver Creek, and after one run, she was in strong position in fourth place.But grand plans bring grand pressure, and Maze was suddenly the woman with the most to lose Thursday, though in other circumstances she might have been able to exhale and let her skis run freely with three medals already in hand.As she surrendered time to the leader in the second run, the stadium announcer did his best to get inside her head as she pushed past the gates.“She’s tapped out!” he bellowed. “She’s tired. Emotionally. Physically. She needs our help!”The fans in the packed grandstand obliged by cranking up the volume. There were bells. There were whistles. But when Maze crossed the line, she was in third with three racers to follow.There would be no cartwheel in the snow and the sunshine this time, only a fifth-place finish, and it is tempting to write that Kjus’s remarkable record will stand until his beard goes gray if not for the fact that his beard is already Hemingway white.At 44, Kjus looks like a mountain man who has endured more than his share of harsh winters, but then he already looked older than his years when he was climbing podium after podium in the 1990s and early 2000s.He and his boyhood friend Kjetil Andre Aamodt were Norway’s Dream Team. The nickname began as a joke: Kjus and Aaamodt liked to sleep (and sleep), and when they finally stirred, they were prone to forgetting their boots, skis or car keys.But between them, the dream teammates racked up 36 world championship and Olympic medals, managing along the way to thrust Alpine skiing into the spotlight in their country.They were a double act then and remain one now, and on Wednesday night they were on the stage in a hotel ballroom in Vail, trading off-color gibes as they were feted — together — as Legends of Honor by the Vail Valley Foundation and inducted into the International Ski Racing Hall of Fame.Marc Girardelli, the five-time overall World Cup winner who raced for Luxembourg, introduced them. Previous inductees like Annemarie Moser-Pröll, Franz Klammer and Phil and Steve Mahre applauded them and roared along as Aamodt told the story of how he and Kjus once discovered quite late in the game that they had been sharing the same toothbrush during one of their stints as roommates on the road.“We didn’t talk to each other for the rest of the championships,” Aamodt said.On balance, Aamodt was the slightly more prolific winner and was also more productive at the Olympics, winning eight medals, four of them gold, to Kjus’s five medals.But the Olympics, which might seem like the ultimate to Americans who tune into skiing every four years, are not the ultimate to most of the world’s greatest skiers.In that group, the big prize is the World Cup overall title, which is awarded to the skier who accumulates the most points during a season spent schlepping equipment across the Alps and the Rockies and finding a way to contend on everything from ice to slush.By that measure, Kjus has the edge, with two overall titles to Aamodt’s one. And for all Aamodt’s gifts and enduring ambition, he never had a stretch to match what Kjus put together for two weeks at Beaver Creek in February 1999.“One of the greatest feats in the modern era of skiing,” Aamodt said Wednesday. “Of course, you had Toni Sailer and Jean-Claude Killy who won three out of three earlier, but five out of five was something special.”Sailer swept the downhill, the giant slalom and the slalom in the Winter Olympics at Cortina d’Ampezzo, Italy, in 1956, when there were only three men’s events. Killy did the same in the 1968 Winter Olympics in Grenoble, France. But since 1987, the first year there were five individual events at the world championships, Kjus is the only skier to make a mark in each.“The funny thing is, I did not feel 100 percent on top of my game,” he said Wednesday, leaning on his poles after reaching the podium in Vail again by finishing second in a legends race. “I had struggled a bit the season before, so I had laid out a two-year plan with my physical coach to really come back strong. But the program kicked in right away, and frankly the performance came as a big surprise.” In 1999, Kjus won gold medals in the super-G and the giant slalom and silver medals in the downhill, combined and, most excruciatingly, the slalom, which was his weakest event and the last of the championships.“You need a lot of luck for something like five medals to happen, and I got it,” Kjus said. “The snow here was just perfect for me, especially in the slalom. It was quite icy, and at that time, I was really good in icy conditions.”Ask Kjus why no one else has run the table, and he quickly answers, “Because they’re lazy,” before giving the straight answer. All-around skiers, already rare in his era, are a vanishing breed.“There were a couple of skiers who had it in them,” Kjus said. “A guy like Bode Miller could have done it at one time, but he’s been struggling with some accidents and setbacks through the years. Right now, at the moment, there’s only one person performing in all the disciplines at that kind of level, and that’s Tina Maze.”But even Maze, in peak form, could not crack the top three on Thursday.Advertisement