

 Michael Powell
 

SPORTS OF THE TIMES
OCT. 11, 2015
LOS ANGELES — Ruben Tejada hopped gingerly to his feet in the Mets’ locker room. Tejada, a young Panamanian, had entered this warm evening as a playoff shortstop, fielding with aplomb and recording the finest at-bats of his not invariably stellar career.Now his throbbing and fractured right leg was encased in a black walking boot. As reporters watched, he put a silver-gray crutch under his arm and took half-hops out the door. A few seconds later, Mets Manager Terry Collins walked in and shoved two laundry carts to the side. He let loose a curse for good measure.The reporters all wanted to ask Collins about the slide by Chase Utley — a rolling tackle, really — that had upended Tejada and threatened to do the same to his team’s playoff chances.Was it a dirty move? Collins peered out from under his visor.“Broke my shortstop’s leg; that’s all I know,” he said.AdvertisementWas he surprised that Utley, whom Major League Baseball has suspended for Games 3 and 4 for what it called an illegal slide, stood at the center of this? The manager’s eyes narrowed; his jaw was piano-wire tight. “We know that he plays with great passion and great aggression,” Collins said.AdvertisementWhich was to say no: Collins was not surprised, nor was anyone else. For the last decade, Chase Utley had been a name that Mets-loving New Yorkers invoked to frighten little children into silence.That owed to Utley’s undeniable talent as an All-Star second baseman with the Philadelphia Phillies, his run-scoring singles and his soul-crushing home runs. It also owed to those instances when he seemed to play to the edge of violence. Five years ago, he upended Tejada for the first time, a rolling block so hard that the usually placid Carlos Beltran, then a Met, was moved to say that Utley had “crossed a line — not only on that play.”Beltran added, “Once you try to hurt somebody, that’s no fun.”Utley is on the back end of his career now, a bench player with the Los Angeles Dodgers. His once considerable skills have not entirely deserted him; at a pivotal moment on Saturday night, in Game 2 of this National League division series between the Mets and the Dodgers, he was inserted as a pinch-hitter, shortened his swing and singled against that rocket-thrower Noah Syndergaard. On the next play, Utley ran at Tejada like a safety taking aim at a receiver.Some commentators mumbled that Utley’s slide was just “good old-fashioned baseball”; we retreat into cliché to avoid thought.The facts are these: In the bottom of the seventh, with the Mets hanging on to a one-run lead, Utley’s single put Dodgers runners at first and third with one out. Mets second baseman Daniel Murphy then fielded a grounder and made an awkward flip to Tejada. When Tejada grabbed the baseball, he had his back to Utley and to first base. He had precisely no chance of turning a double play, which would have kept the Mets ahead. Utley began his slide late, unless he thought second base was sitting on the lip of the outfield grass. He appeared to have one goal: to take out Tejada any way he could.And that is against the rules of baseball.Any sport that features 98-mile-per-hour fastballs and large athletes hurtling around the field comes encoded with risk. But the sport’s ethos has never been to rattle brainpans and cause rib cages to collapse. It is not football, and thank God for that.Utley took a long shower after the game. Then he talked to the news media.“I feel terrible he was injured,” he said of Tejada, before adding, “Any time you have an opportunity to try to break up a double play, you should do your best to do that.”AdvertisementJoe Torre, Major League Baseball’s chief baseball officer and a former All-Star himself, seemed to wrinkle his nose at that old-school guff. “It certainly was late,” Torre said of Utley’s slide. “That concerns me.”He added, “I’m looking at it to see if anything should be done.”On Sunday, Torre decided the answer was yes, and he suspended Utley.Even Dodgers Manager Don Mattingly had a hard time making a full-throated defense of his player on Saturday night. Was the slide dirty? “I don’t think we can,” he started. Then he said, “I don’t really ... I just think we go play, be ready to play, and just deal with whatever.”
            Chase Utley’s takeout of Ruben Tejada in Game 2 of the Mets-Dodgers series prompted a lof of Twitter comments from current and former major leaguers.        OCT. 12, 2015
This is a baseball man giving a hummina-hummina filibuster.Mets third baseman David Wright stared hard at Utley after that play. “He has injured people,” Wright said later. “This isn’t something new.”Here’s the shame: This has been a taut playoff series. The second game began with another fine pitching matchup: Zack Greinke, a harder-throwing version of that pitching artist Tom Glavine, against Syndergaard, the blond wunderkind still in his rookie year.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Syndergaard had struck out 166 batters in the regular season and walked just 31. Sometimes, after big games, he confesses that his pulse races and his breathing quickens — his own silent Edvard Munch scream.On the mound, though, his affect is all about implacability. He holds his glove at stomach level and stares in for a sign. Then he rears back and hurls heavy, thudding fastballs.Corey Seager, a fine-looking rookie shortstop for the Dodgers, stepped into the box in the first inning. Syndergaard’s first pitch arrived at 99 m.p.h. The last clocked in at 100. How ya doing?In the second, the Mets’ Yoenis Cespedes hit an off-balance home run, and later in the inning, Michael Conforto yanked a rocket off the right-field foul pole, the ball exiting the field so quickly it did not have time to curl foul.The impossible seemed possible: The Mets might take two wins in Los Angeles and return east with their pockets filled to overflowing with house coin.AdvertisementThen Greinke righted himself, moving the ball around the strike zone with a surgeon’s precision. And Utley crashed into Tejada, and the Mets unraveled, with the umpires even ruling that Tejada had not touched second and that Utley was safe. By the end of the seventh, Adrian Gonzalez had doubled to put the Dodgers ahead by two runs, and Justin Turner, the red-bearded former Met, had followed with another double to make it 5-2, which held up as the final score.So this series careens back to New York City, a place that on a good day comes awfully close to outlawing serenity. As Collins said of New Yorkers, which is to say us, “they are pretty excitable.”Guilty as charged, Skipper.Collins also predicted that his players would return with a touch of attitude. “We’ll control it, but yeah, they’re angry,” he said. “You lose in a playoff series to that serious of an injury, yeah, they’re not very happy about it.”You hope that Matt Harvey, the next of the Mets’ strong young arms scheduled to step forward, realizes that he is of more use snapping Lord Charles curveballs and 98-m.p.h. fastballs in Game 3 on Monday than he is tossing at the cranium of some Dodger. You also hope an old Mets antagonist has not hijacked a series and taken it to a dark place.Email: powellm@nytimes.comA version of this article appears in print on October 12, 2015, on Page D2 of the New York edition with the headline: Run-In With a Longtime Nemesis Threatens to Derail a Series.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »