AdvertisementSupported byBy Richard SandomirFox and Telemundo have not shown a second of World Cup action, but on Thursday they added the 2026 Cup to their rights to broadcast the 2018 and 2022 soccer tournaments in the United States.The networks extended their contracts in direct talks with FIFA, soccer’s world governing body. There was no bidding with competing networks as there was when Fox and Telemundo, the Spanish-language network owned by NBCUniversal, agreed to pay about $400 million (Fox) and $600 million, which was enough to outbid ESPN and Univision for the 2018 and 2022 rights. An ESPN executive who was not authorized to speak publicly said the company had received no advance warning that the 2026 rights were being sold.FIFA’s brief and surprising announcement of the new contract offered no financial details. But by agreeing to add the 2026 rights, it is possible that the two networks received a financial break by agreeing to a potential move of the 2022 World Cup from the extreme heat of the Qatari summer to the winter. A shift in seasons has been under discussion within FIFA and is expected to be approved.A winter World Cup in early 2022, for instance, would mean facing stronger competition for sports advertisers and viewers in the United States than it would encounter in the summer.“They need Fox to agree to different economics in the winter,” said Neal Pilson, a sports industry consultant and a former president of CBS Sports. “I don’t think Fox’s agreement to cover the World Cup in the winter of 2022 would result in no increase in 2026, but a smaller one than it might have paid otherwise,” to make up for what might be a reduced profit in 2022.FIFA also extended its deal to 2026 in Canada with CTV and TSN.Niclas Ericson, FIFA’s TV director, did not address what, if any, financial adjustments were made to please the networks. But in a statement, he said, “FIFA is constantly reviewing the market for its media rights and has ongoing discussions with media companies around the world.” He added that the extension “underlines the continuously growing interest into football in these major territories.”It is not unusual for networks to make deals that preclude bidding from their competitors. NBC has specialized in that form of negotiations to preserve its place as the Olympic network. Most of its Summer and Winter Olympics rights — which now extend through 2032 — were acquired in one-on-one transactions with the International Olympic Committee, rather than in auctions. World Cup rights include a portfolio of international competitions, including the Women’s World Cup. The first Women’s World Cup in Fox’s and Telemundo’s contracts will be held in June, with others to follow in 2019 and in 2023.Television rights for soccer got a financial jolt this month when Sky Sports and BT agreed to pay $7.8 billion for three years of English Premier League rights starting in 2016, a 70 percent leap from the value of their current deals. To retain its Premier League rights in the United States, NBC will most likely have to pay “substantially more” than its current three-year, $250 million deal, Pilson said.Advertisement