By JAY SCHREIBERFEB. 12, 2015
Anthony Mason, a cornerstone of the tough-minded Knicks teams that came close to winning an N.B.A. championship in the 1990s, was in a New York-area hospital on Thursday, battling the effects of a serious heart attack that appeared to put his life in jeopardy.Don Cronson, who was Mason’s agent when he played in the N.B.A., expressed slight optimism during the day on Thursday after a member of Mason’s immediate family gave him an update on Mason’s condition. “Right now, it’s day to day, but that’s an improvement from moment to moment,” Cronson said.He said Mason, 48, who last played in the N.B.A. in the 2002-3 season, had gone to a hospital for a checkup for heart issues and had the heart attack there. Cronson said family members had been told that Mason might need a heart transplant if he survived.Mason played 13 seasons in the N.B.A., five of them for the Knicks, whose coach at the time, Pat Riley, helped Mason establish himself as a brawny, versatile 6-foot-7 player who could play both forward positions and even take on centers who were a good deal bigger than he was. A left-hander, he could also dribble the ball like a point guard, another example of his unlikely abilities.He was not, after all, a classic N.B.A. prospect. He was drafted by Portland out of Tennessee State in the 1988 draft — but only in the third round — and never played for the Trail Blazers. Instead, he played in Turkey and Venezuela and in what are essentially the minor leagues of American basketball.AdvertisementMason made it to the N.B.A. in the 1989-90 season, when he played briefly for the Nets, and he had an even shorter stint with the Denver Nuggets the next season.AdvertisementThe Knicks were alerted that Mason was a player worth signing, which they did in time for the 1991-92 season. He quickly became a critical member of a team that included Patrick Ewing, Charles Oakley and John Starks; that battled Michael Jordan and the Chicago Bulls in memorable playoff series; and that made it to Game 7 of the 1994 N.B.A. finals before losing to the Houston Rockets.Mason won the N.B.A.’s Sixth Man of the Year Award in 1994-95, his next-to-last season with the Knicks. In 1996, he was traded to the Charlotte Hornets in a deal that brought Larry Johnson to the Knicks. In 2000, Mason was dealt to the Miami Heat, where he was again coached by Riley.Mason signed with the Milwaukee Bucks for the 2001-2 season and played there for two seasons, concluding a career over which he averaged 10.9 points and 8.3 rebounds a game.Harvey Araton contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on February 13, 2015, on Page B16 of the New York edition with the headline: Ex-Knick Mason in Hospital After Serious Heart Attack.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.