By BILL PENNINGTONFEB. 12, 2015
BEAVER CREEK, Colo. —  Lindsey Vonn and Tiger Woods kissed in the finish area Thursday after Vonn struggled and finished 27th in the first run of the giant slalom at the Alpine world ski championships.A day earlier, Woods conceded that his golf game was in tatters and announced that he was taking an indefinite leave from competition to resurrect his game.After the kiss in the snow, Woods and Vonn patted each other on the back.At that moment, who was consoling whom?It turns out Woods is good at motivating his girlfriend.“He just said, ‘Let’s end on a positive note,’ ” said Vonn, who was competing in her last race of the championships. “It was like, ‘In the second run, show them what you can do.’ And I did.”AdvertisementWoods smiled broadly near the finish line after Vonn’s second run, in which she roared down the racecourse to briefly take the lead.AdvertisementWill Vonn now return the favor and raise Woods out of the morass his golf career has become?After Vonn was asked if she had discussed with Woods his decision to step away from competitive golf for a while, she smiled and replied, “Nope.”She laughed heartily. “I’m not talking about that,” she said as she walked away.On a sunny afternoon two days before Valentine’s Day, a dynamic duo of the sports world was arm in arm. But how much their union will be a mutual source of inspiration was not clear. Woods was not available to reporters.But Vonn, who finished 14th on Thursday in a race won by the ascendant, ever-dominant Anna Fenninger of Austria, was happily leaving the race arena feeling she had demonstrated progress after two years on the sideline with injuries.Viktoria Rebensburg of Germany won the silver medal and Sweden’s Jessica Lindell-Vikarby was third. The 19-year-old American Mikaela Shiffrin, who was a medal hopeful, skied tentatively during her first run but improved drastically on her second run and finished eighth.There was no escaping that Vonn’s performances at the world championships were uneven. Overall, the event was far from the coronation many expected. But as her final run Thursday showed — it was only the second giant slalom racecourse she has skied down competitively in nearly two years — she was able to leave Beaver Creek with the belief that she may be building toward something.About a week ago, Vonn won a bronze medal in the super-G, her sixth world championship medal, which is the most for an American. Three days later, she was fifth in the downhill, which was a surprisingly low finish after she won three World Cup downhill races this season.On Monday, she skied out of the super combined and was not particularly fast in the downhill portion of that competition. Thursday’s giant slalom also started poorly, in part because of one significant mistake that almost caused Vonn to veer off the course. But her second run was attacking, aggressive and the fifth fastest in the field.AdvertisementComing off two knee operations in less than two years, Vonn, 30, looked like a veteran racer easing her way back with unpredictable results. Having the world championships just a few miles from her hometown, Vail, was a bonus, but it also came with consequences.“I enjoyed having the support of the crowd, but I think maybe I wanted to do well too much,” Vonn said. “At the same time, I’m leaving here with a very special feeling even though I didn’t get as many medals as everyone expected me to get. I’m still happy with my performance.“I’m taking away a lot of positives.”Tina Maze, who took over Vonn’s spot as the top women’s skier shortly after Vonn’s first major knee injury in 2013, had a disappointing day — by her standards — on Thursday. Maze won medals in each of the first three races here and said she planned to win a medal in each of the five individual races of the championships.But Maze faltered in the first run of the giant slalom and was fourth. She finished in fifth, 1.74 seconds behind Fenninger.Fenninger had a commanding lead after the first run but nearly gave it all away when her skis split with about 20 seconds left in her second run. She lurched into a snowplow, the beginning skier’s stopgap for slow control.“I thought for sure she was going to do a face plant there,” Vonn said. “But she recovered, which was impressive.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Fenninger regained her balance and charged anew. The combined winning time of her two runs was 2 minutes 19.16 seconds, which was 1.4 seconds ahead of Rebensburg.Shiffrin, who on Saturday will defend her Olympic and world championship titles in her best event, the slalom, said she had hoped to win a medal in the giant slalom but was not overly discouraged.“I didn’t show it today, especially in the first run, but I feel like I’ve been skiing well in giant slalom in training,” Shiffrin said. “It would have been nice to get a medal today but that wasn’t the goal. I know I’m improving.”AdvertisementThursday’s race was the first time Vonn and Shiffrin had competed against each other. Shiffrin, often called “the next Lindsey Vonn,” figures to appear in several Olympic Games in the future. Vonn’s primary goal after her recent injuries is to compete at the 2018 Winter Olympics.“I certainly haven’t stopped fighting,” Vonn said late Thursday afternoon. “I fought the whole way down today.”Perhaps channeling the guidance she had received from Woods earlier in the finish area — advice that might be applicable in Woods’s predicament, too — Vonn added: “I’m not going to quit just because everything isn’t going perfectly.”Because of an editing error, an article on Friday about Lindsey Vonn’s performance in the giant slalom at the Alpine skiing world championships referred incorrectly in some copies to her boyfriend Tiger Woods’s availability to the news media at the event. Reporters were not given access to speak to him; it is not the case that he was available.A version of this article appears in print on February 13, 2015, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Vonn’s Finale Is Positive if Not Worthy of a Medal.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.