AdvertisementSupported byOn GolfBy Karen CrouseFebruary has taken a sad turn for golf fans, who mourned the deaths last week of two of the game’s most important figures, Charlie Sifford and Billy Casper. Wednesday brought the news that Tiger Woods was taking an indefinite leave of absence, leading many to lower the curtain on his legendary career. Any reports of the death of Woods’s game are greatly exaggerated. Yes, his chipping went from bad at the Hero Challenge in December to worse at the Phoenix Open two weeks ago, a contributing factor in his second-round 82, his career-worst score as a pro. And after Woods’s first-round withdrawal at last week’s Farmers Insurance Open, it was difficult to discern which was hurting him more, his back or his pride. Woods, 39, was wise to announce he was stepping away from competitive golf. All athletes at one time or another are faced with the challenge of regaining their confidence while playing before a crowd, whether an audience of their peers or, worse, millions watching on national television. To be one of the highest-profile athletes on the planet and be adrift in a roiling sea of scrutiny must feel like a public drowning. Everything that Woods needs to save his game — hitting fairways and shoring up his short game — is within his grasp. All he needs to do is commit to following through on the action he has set into motion. No bailing out this time. In February 2010, Woods announced he was stepping away from the game. At the time, it wasn’t his swing that was broken; it was his life. Woods resurfaced at the Masters in April that year, which was not sufficient time for him to deep-dive into his abyss. Five years later, Woods has awarded himself a mulligan. No shame. With one more precious shot at renewing his pursuit of Sam Snead’s 82 PGA Tour titles and Jack Nicklaus’s 18 major championships, Woods must get his mind and body right. His next competitive appearance should be as an assistant captain at the Presidents Cup in South Korea in October. Between now and then, Woods ought to focus his energy on rediscovering the joy of playing. The majors can wait. It won’t be a lost year if Woods finds his lost love for the game. The last thing he needs to do is repair to the range and pound golf balls. He doesn’t need the fresh eyes of the swing consultant Chris Como — not now or for the next couple of months. For the foreseeable future, Woods should play golf the way he did as a child. It is not remotely the same as suggesting he swing the way he did then. Every day he should play at least 18 holes, preferably with friends, and let his imagination run loose. He should throw balls into the woods and try to curve shots around trees. He should purposely hit from the fairway of one hole to the green of another — surely, no one at his home course, the Medalist, will mind — to infuse his routine with fun. Instead of looking at his swing on a video monitor, Woods needs to picture shots in his head and then playfully try to duplicate them. No pressure, all process. As soon as he deflects the focus from the results, he’ll experience success, and his confidence will return like long-lost paparazzi. Woods could do worse than making the drive from Jupiter, Fla., to Miami to play a few rounds with Lucy Li, who competed in last year’s United States Women’s Open at age 11. She talked about how her coach, Jim McLean, kept golf fun by having her hit while balancing on one leg or using one hand. What does Woods have to lose? He is No. 62 in the latest world rankings, a spot he hasn’t visited since before he won his first PGA Tour title in 1996. A year may seem like an eternity — especially to Woods’s sponsors, who are not paying him to disappear from view — but anybody who truly cares about Woods needs to step back and take the longer view. In 1949, Ben Hogan spent two months in the hospital with a broken body after the car he was driving was hit head-on by a bus. He was 36, and his career-threatening injuries kept him off the competitive circuit for 16 months. Hogan described his nervous system as being “shot” after the accident, which sounds much more dire than one’s glutes not activating. Many people wrote Hogan off, but he was not done. He returned to win six of his nine major titles, including the 1950 United States Open and the so-called Hogan Slam in 1953 — the Masters, the United States Open and the British Open. Woods, who is three tour victories from tying Snead and four major championships from equaling Nicklaus, described himself as “committed to getting back to the pinnacle of my game” in a statement on his website. He didn’t lose his footing overnight, and he can’t expect to regain it in a matter of weeks. If he knows what is best for him, and it sounds as if he does, he will take it slow. “Right now,” he said in the statement, “I need a lot of work on my game and to still spend time with the people that are important to me.” Advertisement