AdvertisementSupported byBy Huw RichardsPlayers and teams to watch at the Cricket World Cup, which starts this weekend in New Zealand and Australia.Eoin Morgan  At least there is no great burden of expectation on England’s captain because he was appointed only weeks ago, and the Dublin native won’t have to face his former colleagues on the Irish team unless both teams reach the playoffs. But England’s start could hardly be tougher, as it faces the two co-hosts, Australia and New Zealand, in its opening matches. Morgan will need runs from his own inventive bat and help from his teammates, or England will be struggling from the start.Shakib al Hasan  Few players carry a heavier burden than Shakib, rated the top all-rounder in all three formats of cricket. Hasan’s smart, accomplished spin is ranked 15 places higher than any other Bangladeshi bowler’s, and he is tied as the team’s top batter. If his teammates ever come close to matching him, Bangladesh will finally be able to break through and actually be competitive, instead of just periodically promising to be so.Trent Boult His ranking is nothing much, but he is at least moving in the right direction, and history says that good left-arm pace bowling is often the key to winning World Cups. That makes Boult a key man for New Zealand — he adds both variety and genuine hostility to the cast of deceptively unthreatening fast-medium men that the Black Caps habitually field. If he and Tim Southee fire, the Kiwis may be hard to stop.AB de Villiers  Perhaps the most terrifying batter in the tournament, de Villiers is fresh from making the fastest century in the 44-year history of one-day internationals. South Africa’s captain combines an unmatched range of strokes with a lightning-fast bat. He’s the top-rated batsman in the one-day form of cricket and, freed from wicket-keeping, he will be a predatory force in the field.South Africa  Is any team in any sport more overdue for a world title than the Proteas? It has formidable firepower — de Villiers and Hashim Amla are the top-ranked batsmen at the tournament, while Dale Steyn is the top-ranked bowler — but that is balanced by the fact that ever since its tournament debut in 1992, no team has found more ways to be weirdly and cruelly eliminated than South Africa.India  Not at home this time, and there’s no Sachin Tendulkar. The bowling, less than average for years, looks no better than before. Yet India added the last significant one-day title in cricket, the Champions Trophy in England in 2013, after it won the World Cup in 2011. If you can make a habit of topping 300 when you bat like India does, maybe it does not matter whether the bowling is any good.Afghanistan  Cricket’s favorite feel-good story acquires another chapter as the Afghans, after playing in the last two World Twenty20 tournaments, make it to their first World Cup. The longer the format, the tougher the odds are against cricket’s developing nations, but the Afghans are more than capable of putting a serious scare into at least some of the bigger teams.Ireland  Bent on building an unanswerable case for elevation to Test status, the Irish rarely leave a global tournament without taking down at least one of the elite teams. Seeded sixth in its group, Ireland has every reason of liking its chances of knocking out Zimbabwe and the troubled, depleted West Indies team and making it to the playoff stages — with a chance of a shot at England.Advertisement