By HUW RICHARDSFEB. 12, 2015
More than just a trophy could be at stake when the Cricket World Cup gets started Saturday in Christchurch with a match between the co-host New Zealand and Sri Lanka.Cricket has three separate formats, and while the one-day international version of the game is used for World Cups, that format is perhaps the one most in jeopardy.Five-day test cricket has heritage and status on its side and is still generally regarded as the supreme test of skill. Twenty20 has mass appeal and is a huge moneymaker, especially for the world’s top players with the Indian Premier League.The one-day international is like the once-cool kid who has grown staid in middle age. It has been overtaken in novelty, excitement and popular appeal by Twenty20 without acquiring anything like the cultural clout of the five-day Tests. With decreasing numbers of top cricketers playing all three formats, some are asking if three forms of the game is one too many.AdvertisementThe World Cup is the one-day international’s supreme showcase, a chance to show that it offers greater variety than the quick-fire Twenty20 with the guaranteed outcome at the end of each day, unlike Tests.AdvertisementIt needs high-quality matches with exciting finishes, and ideally this World Cup can offer just as emotional a conclusion as the last one in 2011, when Sachin Tendulkar, the greatest batsman of the modern era, was carried around on the shoulders of his Indian teammates after they won the title in Mumbai. As the young Indian batsman Virat Kohli said, “Sachin has carried India for 20 years. Now it is time that we carried him.”A decent performance by the home teams never did any tournament harm, and both Australia and New Zealand look equipped to make it to the later stages.Australia, which opens its campaign later Saturday against England in Melbourne, tops the world rankings and is the favorite to regain the trophy that it won three times in a row, in 1999, 2003 and 2007.Its captain, Michael Clarke, is one of just two holdovers from that 2007 team, assuming that he does not suffer a recurrence of the career-threatening back injury that kept him out of the recent Test series against India.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“If you look at Clarke’s one-day record, it’s exceptional,” the former Australia fast bowler Jason Gillespie told BBC Radio. “And I also put him and Brendon McCullum as the top two tactical captains out there who can make a difference with a field setting. They are very proactive and positive. Australia will be better for Michael Clarke being there.”McCullum is captain of New Zealand, which always overachieves but never has quite enough firepower to bring home the big trophies. Its six appearances in the final four of the World Cup are more than any other team, yet it has never reached the final.New Zealand has two batsmen (Kane Williamson and the former captain Ross Taylor) ranked among the top eight in the world and a smart and varied group of bowlers, including the veteran Daniel Vettori, probably playing his last big event at age 35.It will be an emotional opening match in Christchurch, a city that was unable to stage its scheduled matches for the 2011 Rugby World Cup because of damage from an earthquake earlier that year.Advertisement“The World Cup is a chance to get the country right in behind us. We saw what happened with the All Blacks in the 2011 Rugby World Cup,” New Zealand fast bowler Tim Southee said this week. “Hopefully we can do our part as cricketers over the next two months and enjoy and embrace what a special time it’s going to be.”The downside is the sheer length of the tournament, which will play 42 matches spread over a month to reduce 14 competitors down to eight quarterfinalists. It will take another two weeks of playoffs before a champion is crowned in Melbourne, Australia, on March 29.For all its limitations, the tournament still offers a chance to see the world’s greatest cricketers in action, and in some cases it will be for the last time. The one-day game will see the last appearance of the sublime Sri Lankan batting duo of Kumar Sangakkara and Mahela Jayawardene, while the magnificent Shahid Afridi of Pakistan has also said that he will quit the format after the tournament. If all three were to meet in the final, few would begrudge them.The Sri Lankan duo might just get there, since the country has consistently been competitive in shorter forms of the game over the last decade. If they do make it that far, don’t be surprised if the final is a repeat of the opening match — with New Zealand shedding its label as a dark horse and emerging as a thoroughbred champion.A version of this article appears in print on February 13, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.