AdvertisementSupported byBy Zach SchonbrunApproaching 10 p.m. on the eve of a recent blizzard, the Rockwood Music Hall, on the Lower East Side of Manhattan, was running low on breathing room, packed so tightly that each whoosh of cold air from the opening of the rear door brought sharp-eyed looks from those inside — no more, please. Even the stage was jammed: four musicians (drummer, keyboardist, two guitarists) and four singers, one of whom, stashed in the corner, slapping a tambourine against his hip, stood 6 feet 6 inches.He was an accessory to this band, but Brandon Sherrod could appreciate the kind of obscurity that singing backup in a throbbing New York City nightclub on a Sunday evening can provide. He leaned into the microphone as light reflected off the lenses of thick-rimmed glasses.“I don’t think many people recognize me here as a basketball player,” Sherrod said, standing offstage after the set had finished. He had wrapped a charcoal scarf around his neck. “Maybe they do. I have no idea.”Maybe it is because Sherrod does not generally bring much attention to himself or because people are not quick to recognize what he was doing there, at a place, literally and figuratively, such a long way from the John J. Lee Amphitheater, the home of the Yale basketball team. Maybe the story just seemed too far-fetched.Here was a Division I basketball player, lean and muscular, who averaged nearly 7 points and 4 rebounds a game last season as a starting forward for Yale. And here was a man who abdicated that role to fulfill a most unlikely aspiration: He wanted to sing.He wanted to perform in red velvety parlors like the Rockwood and write music on his keyboard at home. But mostly he wanted to join the Whiffenpoofs of Yale, an all-male a cappella group that is believed to be the oldest of its kind in the country. Its 14 new members each year take both semesters off from school to rehearse, perform and travel the world, a sacrifice that helps distinguish the 105-year-old group from other collegiate a cappella groups.For Sherrod, that meant yielding a season of basketball — forgoing playing as a senior with the class he arrived with and trying to end the Bulldogs’ 53-year N.C.A.A. tournament drought with an ascendant team. He can return to the team next season. But Yale’s 5-1 start in Ivy League play — the Bulldogs won their first five league games for the first time since 1957 — has strictly been viewed from afar: His deactivated student identification card will not even let him into practice.Yet, for Sherrod, there was something uncommonly refreshing about escaping the basketball-only label that can be hard for any Division I athlete to shake, even at Yale.“If you’re interested in something, you can’t let other people influence what your interests are,” Sherrod said. “And you can’t be afraid to branch out and do your thing.”If he is not going to use his gifts, he said, “what’s the point?”On a recent weekday afternoon, Sherrod and some of his new teammates gathered at a recording studio in Ridgefield, Conn., hoping to complete the final songs of the Whiffenpoofs’ spring album. The studio was in a soundproof room next to the garage of Ed Boyer’s split-level house, atop a steep and winding road not far from the Peterson Gorge. Boyer is a music engineer recognized for his work on “Glee,” the television series, and the film “Pitch Perfect,” which satirized and celebrated collegiate a cappella.Boyer fiddled with his soundboard and kept his back toward the quartet of Sherrod, Justin Young, Ehrik Aldana and D. J. Stanfill as they began to fill the background harmonies to the staccato rhythm of Selena Gomez’s “The Heart Wants What It Wants.”“I hear a lot of breathing in the ne-ne-ne-nahs,” Stanfill said, tugging down on his headphones with an urgent look. “Think Blink-182 guitar.”Sherrod, a tenor, nodded affirmatively. His voice, as described by Michael Blume, a former Whiffenpoofs member and now a recording artist in New York, has a distinct R & B expression with gospel influences. He can replicate the lush melody of “Sweetest Berry” by David Ryan Harris, and he listed neo-soul artists like Robert Glasper and Ryan Leslie as his musical inspirations. For his audition last winter, which took place in a back room at Mory’s in New Haven, he chose “Ordinary People” by John Legend, a doleful composition he said he learned to play on piano at a music camp when he was 14.It had been clear, from a young age, that Sherrod loved music. Pots and pans became de facto drum sets, his father, Ricky, said. His mother, Sandy, sang in the church choir at Jesus Saves Ministry, in Bridgeport, Conn., and Sherrod took piano lessons from the musical directors there. Basketball did not interest him until high school when, weighing more than 300 pounds and with a 6-foot-2 frame, he tried out for the freshman team “just because I was tall.”“I couldn’t make a layup, couldn’t touch the rim,” Sherrod said. But over the course of that year, he slimmed down, and that summer he dedicated himself to getting into shape.He returned the next fall at 215 pounds and capable of dunking on a drop step. The varsity coaches took notice and soon, too, did colleges — smaller ones like Stonehill and Massachusetts-Lowell at first, then bigger ones like Davidson, Drexel and UMass. Yale appealed to Sherrod because of its proximity to home and its reputation in political science, his major.In high school, Sherrod could successfully meld his two interests, maintaining a role in a school choir or a musical while still playing ball. But at Yale, he found the challenge of juggling both to be too difficult. As a freshman, he joined an a cappella group, Living Water. But by December, once the basketball season started in earnest, he had to quit.“I’d go from practice to start doing work and then I’d realize I had a cappella rehearsal,” Sherrod said. “It was almost impossible for me to do that and maintain decent grades.”So he wrote music in his dorm room, ducked into practice rooms to jam on pianos and occasionally stepped onstage at a coffeehouse.“I had heard through a friend that this sophomore basketball player sang at an open mike night and was really talented,” Blume said. “I YouTubed him and saw a video and said, Wow, he’s great.”Blume and Sherrod collaborated on a music project over the summer, and toward the middle of Sherrod’s junior year, an email announced that Whiffenpoofs auditions were open for rising senior male students. On a campus flush with singing groups, this was one that commanded attention. It offered free travel to five continents, along with the opportunity to perform in some of the nicest venues in the country. In the past, the group had sung at Lincoln Center, Carnegie Hall, the Rose Bowl and the White House.Blume encouraged him to try out, but Sherrod had reservations. Was it worth it? Would his coach allow it? And what would his teammates think?“Playing with his guys for so long and leaving them,” his father, Ricky, said, “that was the tough decision.”Sherrod told only a handful of people he was auditioning, and Yale Coach James Jones was not among them. Sherrod did not think there was any point in alarming his coach on the chance he was not selected.And then he was tapped.“I got a call from someone from The Yale Daily asking my thoughts about Brandon getting tapped to be a Whiffenpoof,” Jones said. “This was the first I’d heard of it.”In the article in The Yale Daily News, Jones read that Sherrod would need to take the year off from basketball. This prompted an office sit-down between coach and player.“I said, ‘Listen, Brandon, I don’t care what you do,’ ” Jones said. “ ‘But right now we’re in the middle of our season, and I don’t want to detract from that. So if anybody asks, just tell them you’re playing basketball and at the end of the season we’ll have a discussion.’ ”By season’s end, Sherrod’s mind was made up. He was going to step away from basketball. The summer world tour, more than anything else, made the Whiffenpoofs too enticing to pass up.“I’d never been outside the United States before,” he said.The decision has not always been a favorable one. Jones said some of Sherrod’s teammates were initially “taken aback,” though Sherrod said they have since come to support him. He heard from others not associated with the program who considered him a quitter on his team. Some said he should stick to what he was brought to Yale to do: play basketball.“The opportunities Yale affords every athlete and every student, in general, you really have to take a grasp of what’s in front of you,” Sherrod said. “It’s unique for everyone.”Ricky Sherrod said his son had always possessed a self-assurance that gave his parents confidence he would not regret his decision.“It’s something we admire about him,” Ricky Sherrod said. “He’s taken different risks and done different things. Being an African-American young man, he doesn’t allow people to say, ‘You’re just a basketball player and that’s it.’ ”Sherrod stays in shape by playing pickup games at Jackie Robinson Middle School in New Haven, where he can squeeze in weekly runs with players like Bobby Moore, who was once one of New Haven’s most highly touted recruits, and Keith Cochran, who played at Rhode Island. He watches Yale games on his computer as often as he can. When the Bulldogs upset Connecticut, 45-44, on Dec. 5, Sherrod was in one of the last rows of Gampel Pavilion, screaming his voice hoarse.“Everyone’s making sacrifices to be here,” said Young, a tenor-II in the group. “But it’s pretty crazy that we have a Division I athlete singing with us.”Jones said Sherrod would have an opportunity to compete for his starting spot again next season. For now, he is spending long hours with his new teammates. After about six hours at Boyer’s house, the group finished recording. Out the door, they made plans for who was driving on the next day’s trip to a performance in New Jersey.“No thanks; I’ll be sleeping,” Sherrod said, still humming Selena Gomez.Advertisement