By ZACH SCHONBRUNFEB. 14, 2015
Andrew Wiggins was named the most valuable player after scoring 22 points for the World team in a 121-112 win over the United States team in the Rising Stars Challenge at Barclays Center on Friday night.The game, which consisted of rookies and second-year players and had two 20-minute halves, was essentially a relentless dunk and layup drill, with sporadic rim protection and paltry defensive efforts. The teams combined for 51 turnovers and shot 53.6 percent from the field. That was mostly because 65 percent of the points in the game were scored from the lane. There were also 52 3-point attempts. This was not a game to show off midrange shooting.The sold-out crowd stayed mostly subdued. It was quiet enough at one point that a group of fans screamed, “Oh, Canada!” at Wiggins, a Toronto native, as he stood at the free-throw line. Wiggins cracked a smile and missed the free throw.“It was all fun,” Wiggins said. “Hopefully for all the people watching, we could give them some entertainment.”AdvertisementThe Minnesota Timberwolves were well represented, with four players (Wiggins, Zach LaVine, Gorgui Dieng and Shabazz Muhammad) combining to score 68 points. LaVine, a rookie guard, contributed a handful of acrobatic alley-oops and finished with 22 points off the bench to lead the United States. He appeared to be warming up for Saturday night, when he is scheduled to perform in the slam dunk contest.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Maybe next year Zach can get Canadian citizenship and join the Canadian side,” Wiggins said of his Minnesota teammate.Wiggins, the No. 1 pick in last year’s draft, also had several highlight-reel moments, including a 360-degree dunk early in the second half. He added six rebounds, four assists and a blocked shot.The Nets were represented by two players, Mason Plumlee and Bojan Bogdanovic, and each scored in double figures. But Plumlee, who is also scheduled to compete in the slam dunk contest, had an ignominious moment in the final minutes.He leapt for a dunk, only to be met at his apex by Rudy Gobert, the 7-foot-1-inch center for the Utah Jazz, who dispatched his attempt with one hand. It was one of three blocks in the game for Gobert, and the fans loved it. They had not seen much defense all night.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.