By SCOTT CACCIOLAFEB. 13, 2015
Robert Pera was among the first participants to arrive at Madison Square Garden on Friday night, and he wore the determined look of a welder.Pera, the owner of the Memphis Grizzlies, had important things to do, and if other players planned to frolic through the N.B.A. All-Star Celebrity Game — well, Pera had other plans.Pera, who works with a trainer, led the West Celebrities to a 59-51 win over the East in a game that generally resembled basketball.The evening ended with a dollop of controversy after Kevin Hart, an actor and comedian, was named the game’s most valuable player for the fourth time. Hart scored 15 points but played for the losing team.AdvertisementHe cried during the trophy presentation and announced his retirement.Pera, on the other hand, finished with 13 points while shooting 5 of 6 from the field. He nearly dunked on a breakaway. He was unavailable to the news media afterward.Advertisement“Unfortunately, they gave the M.V.P. to the wrong person,” said Anthony Anderson, an actor and one of Pera’s teammates. “I don’t know what’s going on with that.”The result must have felt familiar to Carmelo Anthony, an assistant coach for the East who lost another game at the Garden after spending part of the day talking about his sore knee and the Knicks’ dismal record.The event, which dates to 2003, was held in an N.B.A. arena for the first time after normally taking place in smaller venues. On Thursday, individual tickets were going for an average of $354.39, with the cheapest available for $114, according to TiqIQ, which tracks online ticket resellers. The game was a sellout, according to a league spokeswoman.That the game was able to graduate to the Garden was probably a testament to the pull of pop culture, or the marketing skills of the N.B.A., or something. Perhaps all the bad basketball in New York has made people less demanding. And in the end, Pera might have been more entertaining to watch than some of Anthony’s fellow Knicks have been.In lieu of a red carpet, the showy preamble to the game featured a yellow carpet — yellow being the preferred color of the game’s title sponsor, Sprint. And the carpet was where some of the fiercest competition of the night played out, largely between media organizations. It was inevitable when Young Hollywood, MTV News, Billboard magazine and Vogue were among the publications vying for square footage and for the attention of luminaries like Nick Cannon.Win Butler, the frontman for the band Arcade Fire, wore a long red jacket that could have been mistaken for a bathrobe. He was asked about his approach to the game.“I don’t like to lose,” said Butler, who went on to collect a game-high 12 rebounds.Other celebrities looked determined, too. The rapper Common, whose film oeuvre includes a starring role as a professional basketball player in the romantic comedy “Just Wright,” practically sprinted through the media zone. So did the comedian Sarah Silverman, who paused just long enough to explain that she was suffering from pregame gastrointestinal distress, although she used more colorful language.AdvertisementPopular questions from the microphone-toting gaggle, in no particular order: Working on any new projects? Who are you excited to see? Why is New York the ideal location for the All-Star Game? It was a question that presumed that everyone indeed considered New York the ideal location for the game.“It’s the mecca of basketball,” said Chris Mullin, who grew up in Brooklyn and was a ringer for the West team.And then there was Michael Rapaport, an actor, filmmaker and inveterate Knicks fan, who stopped to talk to pretty much everyone. Rapaport made a beeline to a crew from Playboy.com — “I’ve got to do Playboy,” he said — and reminisced about his first experience with the magazine. (“Summer camp,” he said.)Rapaport also accosted a reporter from New York magazine — “Why haven’t I ever been in the back-of-the-magazine thing you guys do? I’m a subscriber!” — and pledged to take the game seriously. No one from the opposition would be safe from his aggressive play, not even Mo’ne Davis, the young star of the Little League World Series.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I would take her out,” he said. “I don’t care if she’s 14.”Sure enough, Rapaport was whistled for a technical foul in the first quarter. Davis, meanwhile, was unaffected by the bright lights of the Garden, spinning her way past Hart for an early layup that brought fans to their feet. Spike Lee, one of her coaches on the West, looked resplendent in a blue-and-orange fedora.“I work on it, but I usually don’t do it,” Davis said of her move to the basket. “It was the right time to do it.”The West ran out to a 32-24 lead at halftime behind Pera, who appeared to be aiming for a 10-day contract.Anthony was helpless on the bench. His team did not run the triangle.The West won despite shooting 3 of 16 from 3-point range — and a quiet effort from Silverman, who explained that she had not played basketball in school.“Because that’s when the musical was,” she said.A version of this article appears in print on February 14, 2015, on Page D1 of the New York edition with the headline: Nothing New Here: Anthony Endures Meaningless Loss.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.