AdvertisementSupported byBy Allan KredaUNIONDALE, N.Y. — Missing Kyle Okposo on their top line and scuffling to manufacture goals, the Islanders continue to win with the grit and determination embodied by their fourth line of center Casey Cizikas and wings Matt Martin and Colin McDonald.Two years ago, Cizikas, Martin and McDonald were especially effective for the Islanders in the playoffs against Pittsburgh, driving Penguins goaltender Marc-Andre Fleury to distraction with their frenetic energy.All three players paid their dues at Bridgeport in the American Hockey League — McDonald again for most of this season — and their collective work ethic was on full display Tuesday against the Edmonton Oilers when Cizikas scored the winning goal after McDonald’s pass — while lying on the ice — to his linemate in front of the net.“He plays the Islander way, the team concept we talk about all the time, which is to bring energy and grind it,” Coach Jack Capuano said of McDonald, 30, a favorite among his teammates. “You do those things, and good things happen.”Positive outcomes have been emerging for the first-place Islanders throughout this renaissance year. Playing their final season at Nassau Coliseum before moving to Barclays Center in Brooklyn, the Islanders are orchestrating a memorable campaign with 36 victories in their first 55 games.Last season, they won only 34 times over all, finishing last in the Metropolitan Division.What is perhaps most impressive about the Islanders this season is their ability to rebound after several losses and turn the momentum in their favor.The Islanders lost four of their first six games without the injured Okposo, who has been sidelined since the All-Star break. They also faced new injuries to defenseman Calvin de Haan and forwards Michael Grabner and Cal Clutterbuck, a mainstay on the line with Cizikas and Martin before McDonald’s return. Clutterbuck returned against the Toronto Maple Leafs on Thursday but played on a line with Nikolay Kulemin and Brock Nelson.With McDonald finally reinserted into the lineup after his fourth emergency recall from Bridgeport within a week, the Islanders have won three in a row heading into Saturday’s home game against Columbus. Another showdown looms Monday against the Rangers, a rival the Islanders have beaten three straight times this season.“For us, we have to get pucks in deep, grind it out, take the body and create chaos,” said Cizikas, 23, a speedy center who scored again on Thursday as the Islanders beat Toronto, 3-2.Martin, 25, a hard-nosed left wing, perennially leads the team in hits. He has seven goals to go with 82 penalty minutes. His game plan is clear every night.“You have to keep working hard and contributing,” said Martin, who was drafted by the Islanders in the fifth round in 2008. “A lot of what we do doesn’t really get noticed, but all three of us know where we’ll be on the ice. And we’ve had success together before. That really helps a lot.”Capuano even chose the unit to start against Edmonton, a move Martin credits for an extra dose of self-assurance.“Cappy puts a lot of confidence in us, that we can go out there with energy and start games the right way,” Martin said. “As long as we’re winning, that’s all that matters.”McDonald, with two goals and two assists during the three-game winning streak, has been eager to resume his role alongside Martin and Cizikas. After he scored against the Buffalo Sabres on Sunday, he was mobbed by celebrating linemates. The enthusiastic group hug was repeated after McDonald scored early against Edmonton and again in grander fashion when Cizikas netted the winner late in the third.McDonald does not shy away from speaking about how he chose striving instead of sulking when the Islanders waived him, then sent him to the A.H.L. in late October because of a surplus of forwards. McDonald turned his disappointment into productivity.“When they needed a call-up, I wanted to be that guy,” said McDonald, who had 35 points including 14 goals in 40 games with Bridgeport. “I understand my role is to play physical and be smart. I have my mind in the right place, always have, because this is what I love to do at this level or any level.”Amid the unpredictable nature of shifting rosters, McDonald wants to make sure the reunion remains intact with the grind of the stretch run ahead.“I used to take it one day at a time; now I take it one hour at a time,” he said.Advertisement