By KAREN CROUSEFEB. 13, 2015
Michael Phelps is an outlier for reasons beyond his record haul of 22 Olympic medals. On the United States national team, he stands apart as one of the few swimmers not to use college as a stepladder to scale the world rankings. Of the 49 athletes who represented the United States in swimming at the London Olympics, only Phelps and the freestyler Chloe Sutton had pasts or futures, or both, not tied to N.C.A.A participation.College programs have helped athletes prepare for international competition while letting them work toward degrees that will propel them into their post-aquatics lives. The arrangement has given athletes access to coaches, facilities and support personnel, and has given universities high-achieving students who often become successful, and financially supportive, alumni.The arrangement is in danger of being upended by N.C.A.A. reforms aimed at giving full-scholarship athletes a stipend for incidental expenses. The movement, fueled by the belief that football and men’s and women’s basketball players deserve a bigger share of the profits created by blockbuster television contracts, has left non-revenue-producing sports like swimming feeling more vulnerable. Cost-saving measures cut short the collegiate career of a 2012 Olympian, Ariana Kukors, who was at the University of Washington before the men’s and women’s programs were disbanded.The concern that swimming programs, especially on the men’s side, could be jettisoned to cover the costs of the extra benefits prompted U.S.A. Swimming to unite with the organizations representing college and club coaches to create an advisory position, filled by the former college coach Joel Shinofield, to help coaches and athletic directors reinforce their swimming programs against any financial storms.Advertisement“The vast majority of America’s top swimmers came through the collegiate system,” said Chuck Wielgus, the executive director of U.S.A. Swimming, “and we believe it is N.C.A.A. swimming that really separates us from the rest of the world.”AdvertisementShinofield, the architect and leader of the initiative, is the executive director of the College Swimming Coaches Association of America. In his advisory position, financed by a grant from U.S.A. Swimming, he will counsel coaches on fund-raising, alumni engagement and university relations, and start discussions with key decision makers in scholarship swimming.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Shinofield, who coached at Washington & Lee University, said he would stress the successes of swimmers in the classrooms and in their post-collegiate careers. “At a time when employers are decrying the lack of resiliency shown by young people, we know that swimmers have and use this skill day in and day out,” Shinofield said.He noted that more than half of the participants at last year’s women’s N.C.A.A. Division I championships and half of the qualifiers at the men’s championships carried grade-point averages of at least 3.5.Ray Looze, the men’s and women’s coach at Indiana, is among those concerned that swimming will be rocked by the effects of paying stipends to football and basketball players. Looze said his collegiate experience at Southern California, where he trained daily with the top performers in the world in his events, “transformed my career.”The college system in America, he said, “is the only place where you can be a world-class swimmer and get a world-class education simultaneously.”An article last Saturday about an effort by USA Swimming and college and club swimming coaches to help university athletic directors reinforce swimming programs facing financial problems misstated the timing of the Olympian Ariana Kukors’s departure from the University of Washington swim team. She left the program several months before — not after — it was disbanded.A version of this article appears in print on February 14, 2015, on Page D5 of the New York edition with the headline: Sport Works to Maintain Its Position in N.C.A.A.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.