AdvertisementSupported byN.B.A. RoundupBy Zach Schonbrun and Andrew Keh“Come on, you can get it up there,” LeBron James said.Standing around him, 16 second graders from Success Academy Charter Schools were dressed in blue button-down shirts and red ties. One by one, underneath a rim that towered at least seven feet above their heads, they lobbed basketballs as high as they could.James rebounded.“There we go, there we go, there we go.”It was around 2:30 p.m. on Friday in a subterranean gym at the High School of Graphic Communication Arts on West 49th Street in Hell’s Kitchen, and James, a four-time N.B.A. most valuable player, was trying to host a basketball clinic for children. But it turned into a who’s-who event. And the place was mobbed.Six police vans and a satellite television truck were outside the school. Mayor Bill de Blasio came through. N.B.A. Commissioner Adam Silver was there, and so were Michele A. Roberts, the executive director of the National Basketball Players Association, and Arne Duncan, the secretary of education.Stephen Curry, the All-Star Game’s leading vote-getter and one of the league’s fastest-rising superstars, showed off his shooting technique at one end of the court, but the students seemed far more engaged by James, giggling at his goofiness and gasping at his ability to spin the basketball on his finger or grab the rim without much of a leap.The N.B.A. recently helped refurbish the gym, turning it into a bright and airy recreation center, with new rubber flooring and N.B.A. All-Star banners hanging from all the walls, and the fitness clinic with James and Curry was among dozens that the league conducted at schools across the city on Friday.“I didn’t play on a court like this when I was younger,” James said. “I had outdoor courts, makeshift courts, things of that nature.”Just before the ribbon-cutting ceremony, James, who wore a gray wool cap, black pants, and a strawberry-red pair of his latest sneakers, the LeBron 12s, spoke to the crowd.“Listen to your parents; listen to your teachers,” he said. “Hopefully, me and Steph can continue to be an inspiration as well.”It used to be easy for fans to fantasize about James being a fixture in New York, playing for the Knicks. Seeing him at this community service event only 15 blocks from Madison Square Garden in perhaps the only time he would be engaging in something like this with young fans in this city served as a reminder that the face of the N.B.A. was a visitor; his home is Cleveland.But even de Blasio paused to watch James on the court with children.“It’s great having you here,” the mayor told James as they crossed paths.“All right, all right,” James said with a smile.Curry spoke most admiringly about playing in New York. He has averaged 26.2 points and 5.2 assists per game at the Garden.“The history in that building,” Curry said. “I know I circle that game when you come to play at Madison Square Garden. It’s a special feeling — the vibe is different, the bus ride to the arena feels different, the lights in the arena just get you going. You want to play well there.”Curry, it should be noted, plays for the Golden State Warriors and cannot become a free agent until 2017.DOLAN DISCUSSES EMAIL James L. Dolan, the owner of the Knicks, said that he should not have responded to a vitriolic email from a Knicks fan with an angry one of his own, an exchange that was made public this week.“I get emails all the time, like I’m sure you understand, right?” Dolan told reporters at a City Harvest charity event in Chelsea. “And I generally don’t respond to the bad ones, right? This time, it just caught me at the wrong moment, and I responded, sort of a tit-for-tat.” In his email, Dolan encouraged Irving Bierman, 73, to root for the Nets and speculated that he was an alcoholic. Bierman had sent an irate email to Dolan that criticized his moves as the team’s owner. The interaction was published to the website Deadspin. “I know I should not have done that, and I did it anyway,” Dolan said, smiling, “because he made me angry.” Dolan added: “Basically, it’s over. We’ve got All-Star week, and I’d love it if we all just focused on that. How about that?” Dolan said that he had received positive emails, too, and that he enjoyed responding to those. “Even if you have written me a nice email that says, ‘I’m happy about losing,’ you are actually going to hear back from me, O.K?” he said. ANDREW KEHJAMES BECOMES A UNION LEADER LeBron James was unanimously elected first vice president of the National Basketball Players Association, giving the game’s top player a leadership role within a union set to square off with the league’s owners over revenue. James has been outspoken on several player-related issues, but he now has a formal seat at the bargaining table with Chris Paul, the union’s president. (AP)Advertisement