By BENJAMIN HOFFMANFEB. 13, 2015
The N.B.A. may be a tall man’s league, but in the slam dunk contest, the taller you are, the harder it is win.In 1984, Larry Nance, a 6-foot-10 forward for the Cleveland Cavaliers, beat out Julius Erving, Dominique Wilkins, Clyde Drexler and five other competitors to become the N.B.A.’s first slam dunk champion. In the years that followed, Michael Jordan and Wilkins turned the contest into a marquee event for the league, and it evolved to celebrate the ability to jump, above all else and all others. Because of that, it took more than 20 years for another player as tall as Nance to take home the title. To this day, the only players 6-10 or taller to have won the contest are Nance, Dwight Howard and Blake Griffin.On Saturday, there is a good chance another name will be added to that list as a field of four will vie for the title, and in a throwback to the contest’s first year, in which Nance and the 7-4 Ralph Sampson competed, two participants will be big men: Mason Plumlee of the Nets and Giannis Antetokounmpo of the Milwaukee Bucks.Plumlee is an unusual choice for the contest. While CBS Sports has the 6-10 center credited with 88 dunks this season, good for fifth in the N.B.A., most have been two-handed dunks with more power than creativity.AdvertisementEven more unusual than his height is that he went to Duke. Coach Mike Krzyzewski’s teams have produced only three players who have competed in the slam dunk contest: Johnny Dawkins, Corey Maggette and Plumlee.Antetokounmpo, at 6-11, is the tallest participant this season. But unlike Plumlee, he has shown artistry in some of his 67 dunks this season, including a one-handed jam against the Phoenix Suns in January that was immediately compared to Kareem Abdul-Jabbar’s famously unstoppable skyhook shot, with the difference being that Antetokounmpo slammed the ball home rather than releasing it in midflight.Virtually all of the All-Star players said Antetokounmpo was the participant they were most looking forward to seeing, because of the dunking ability he has shown.Advertisement“He had a nice dunk against us in Milwaukee,” said Damian Lillard, the All-Star point guard for the Portland Trail Blazers, who competed in the slam dunk contest last season. “I knew he could jump, but he did a one-leg windmill in transition against us.”As others around him recounted the explosive dunk, Lillard was quick to point out, “It was off my turnover, too.”The other two participants on Saturday are of more traditional size: Victor Oladipo (6-4) of the Orlando Magic and Zach LaVine (6-3) of the Minnesota Timberwolves. LaVine is the favorite at many gambling websites.Wilkins, who competed in a record five slam dunk contests, said that Nance had succeeded because of his creativity and that Plumlee and Antetokounmpo would have to do the same to overcome the bias against taller players.The average height in the N.B.A. is 6-7, but the 112 players who have competed in the annual competition have been slightly smaller, on average, at 6-6. The tallest winner was Howard, at 6-11, but the 5-9 Nate Robinson won three times and the 5-6 Spud Webb won once.The players gathered at the All-Star Game media day on Friday agreed that a tall player’s height would be held against him when it was time to judge his dunks.“A guy like Josh Smith can really jump, and it looks good, but when you have a smaller guy, it looks better,” Lillard said. “Everything looks more acrobatic and explosive from a smaller guy.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The 6-11 Miami Heat center Chris Bosh said that he thought his fellow big men could compete but that it would require something extra.“You’ve got to come with something nobody’s ever seen,” Bosh said. “I don’t know if that’s possible, but you can’t do the same dunks that the smaller guys do, because with the height discrepancy, it seems easier.”Wilkins drew the line, however, at the use of props. Griffin won the contest by leaping over a car, a trick Wilkins said he had done as a youngster, but Wilkins said the contest should be focused on the pure athleticism of the players.Advertisement“Get a pair of sneakers, a basketball, go out there and take a shot,” Wilkins said. “Forget about the props and all that stuff. That’s what we did.”A version of this article appears in print on February 14, 2015, on Page D2 of the New York edition with the headline: In Dunk Contest, Taller Competitors Seek to Overcome Height Advantage.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.