AdvertisementSupported byBy Tom PedullaPRINCETON, N.J. — Young people often talk about changing the world. Alex Wheatley, a starting forward for the 16th-ranked Princeton women’s basketball team, is intent on it.“I want to leave the world better than I found it, which is huge and broad and kind of strange to say,” she said. “But it’s true.”Wheatley, who has a 3.5 grade-point average, is majoring in ecology and evolutionary biology with a minor in global health and health policy. She served an eight-week internship in Kenya last summer and is one of five Princeton juniors accepted into the university’s Scholars in the Nation’s Service Initiative, a program designed to groom top students for careers in government.For now, she is content with making a difference as a 6-foot-2 inside force for Princeton, which is ranked No. 16 in the Associated Press poll and is 22-0 (6-0 Ivy League) after defeating Brown, 86-58, on Friday. Wheatley had 11 points and 3 rebounds to help Princeton remain the only undefeated Division I women’s team in the country.“She has many good guards around her, but if you don’t have that anchor at both ends, you are just O.K.,” Princeton Coach Courtney Banghart said before the win over Brown (9-12, 3-4). “She allows us to be a lot better than O.K.”No Ivy League women’s basketball team has held a higher ranking in the A.P. poll, and this Princeton team is the first one to crack the coaches’ poll (No. 18 this week). The Tigers’ start is the best by an Ivy League women’s team, and second over all only to the 1970-71 Penn men, who started 28-0.Wheatley is averaging 10.4 points and 5.0 rebounds, statistics that do not measure the tone she sets for a team that relies on balance and selflessness as much as talent.“She’s a coach’s dream,” Banghart said. “She has innate talent, innate athleticism, but she has the work ethic of a kid who doesn’t quite believe she’s made it.”Wheatley often establishes such a commanding position near the basket that it appears she can score almost at will. Her .591 field-goal percentage (78 of 132) all but screams that she is capable of far greater offensive production. Teammates implore her to assert herself more.“We’re always encouraging her to attack the basket and be more aggressive,” said guard Michelle Miller, one of four junior starters.Wheatley’s life has revolved around others for as long as she can remember. And her stated goals for this season — playing shutdown defense and commanding a double-team on offense — reflect that.“She exudes kindness and intelligence,” said Annie Tarakchian, a junior who plays guard and forward. “She wants what is best for everyone around her.”Wheatley, who is from Upper Holland, Pa., has such a gentle soul that it worked against her earlier in her career. She was often reluctant to use the muscle — and sometimes elbows — necessary to meet the demands of her position.“We tried to build a fire inside her to be great,” Banghart said, “but you had to do it by saying, ‘Your being great makes our team better.’ ”As much as Wheatley wants to be a part of the first women’s team at Princeton to win a game in the N.C.A.A. tournament, she does not permit that goal to come at the expense of academic or personal growth.“Basketball is what she does, but it really isn’t who she is,” her father, Jeff, said. “She’s very academically oriented and has been since she was a child. She likes learning, she likes academics, she likes to read.”The more Wheatley learns, the more questions she asks. She does not accept whatever is presented at face value.“I like to know why,” she said, adding, “You have to know how things work to make a difference.”She developed a concern about the environment at a young age. Jeff Wheatley, who works for a financial services firm, and his wife, Paula, who teaches piano, recalled that their daughter, as early as fifth or sixth grade, would follow them around the house, making certain lights were turned off and items were properly recycled.After she arrived at Princeton, she ingrained the same habits in her teammates, who call her Wheaties. According to Tarakchian, they will often text her to assure her that the light to the hotel room was turned off because they know how earnest she is about that issue.“She is going to save the world one day,” Tarakchian said. “I’ve been saying that since the day I met her.”Although that may be a leap, there is every sign Wheatley will make a greater mark than most. How many students at the end of their sophomore year inform their parents that they will be interning in Kenya, teaching herders of cattle and goats how to make the most of limited resources?As much as limited communication worried her parents, Wheatley said she grew immeasurably from instructing local youngsters who could not be given homework because they did not have electricity.“They taught me so much about animals and life there,” she said. “I think they helped me more than I probably helped them.”As a SINSI scholar, she will intern with the federal government next summer. After she graduates from Princeton, the program calls for her to enter Princeton’s Woodrow Wilson School of Public and International Affairs to pursue a master’s degree. She will also have a two-year fellowship in federal government.Wheatley said of her experience at Princeton, in the classroom and on the court: “It’s perfect in every way.”Advertisement