By BILL PENNINGTONFEB. 13, 2015
BEAVER CREEK, Colo. —  For most of the last five years, winning the giant slalom had come easily to Ted Ligety. Almost too easily.Pressure-filled moments did not matter. World championship races? Ligety roared to the finish line first in 2011 and 2013 at the Alpine event, which is held every two years.The 2014 Olympic Games? He dominated both runs of the giant slalom and routed the field.Each of those victories made American ski racing history. But few champions earn a permanent place of distinction without enduring periods of hardship and finding ways to win anyway.Perseverance is always the lasting quality.This winter, Ligety has been battered in his best event, with Marcel Hirscher of Austria beating him in every World Cup giant slalom but one.Advertisement“Getting my butt kicked hasn’t been super enjoyable,” Ligety said.Hirscher again led Ligety, the two-time defending champion, after one run on Friday at the Alpine world ski championships. Skiing before Hirscher in the second run, Ligety charged into the lead before entering an aptly named section of the course called the Abyss.Advertisement“My legs were killing me in the Abyss, but I knew if I backed off even a little I’d hate myself forever,” he said.He attacked anew, outracing Hirscher by a wide margin at the bottom of the run to win the gold medal and become the first skier to win three consecutive world titles in giant slalom.“This victory is more emotional because this year has been a struggle,” Ligety said. “You want to come back, but you feel the pressure working against you. You have to stand up to that, and it feels good to have done that today. That makes this more satisfying.”Ligety’s winning time for his two runs was 2 minutes 34.16 seconds, which was 0.45 of a second better than Hirscher’s time. Alexis Pinturault of France won the bronze.The victory gave Ligety seven world championship medals, breaking a tie with Lindsey Vonn for most among United States skiers. Ligety has won five world championship gold medals and two Olympic gold medals. No other American has won as many major championship ski races.It was also the first gold medal for the Americans at this year’s championships, and the first world title won on home soil by an American since 1989.“I’m not really someone who worries about the statistics while I’m still doing the racing,” Ligety said with a laugh. “It does make me feel like I’m skiing better. And I know being home helped a lot.”AdvertisementLigety has placed the blame for part of his slump on irregular training conditions this summer in South America and in Europe during the winter. He also broke his hand in November.“There have been a series of things and I just haven’t been skiing my best,” he said. “And Marcel has been racing so incredibly well. He’s on his way to being one of the all-time greats.”The world championships’ return to the United States for the first time since 1999 gave Ligety the opportunity this month to return to his usual training regimen and familiar hills.“It was nice to go and hit the reset button,” Ligety said. “I got the feeling back for what I was trying to do. I got back to a little bit of my old self.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Still, after the first run Friday, Hirscher was 0.24 of a second ahead of Ligety. A tight, technically demanding course set for the first run led to a bunched leaderboard.Ligety was in fifth place, but was just one hundredth of a second out of third place.“I felt like I was definitely right there — I could win it if I really charged and made no mistakes,” Ligety said.With the home crowd on its feet and cheering, Ligety pushed out of the start gate and immediately whittled away at the lead. Entering the Abyss, where Bode Miller had his horrific crash last week, Ligety held a slim lead — one that Hirscher was likely to overcome.But in the final 35 seconds of the race, Ligety was at his best. He extended his lead to three-quarters of a second and finally more than a second over the leader at the time, and ended up considerably faster than Hirscher in the final two timed intervals.Being on home soil helped again. Ligety has won six of the last seven giant slalom races he has entered at Beaver Creek.AdvertisementHirscher, skiing last as the first run leader, quickly regained the lead at the top of the racecourse but gave up time with each stage of his descent. Entering the last portion of the course, he still had a narrow lead of 0.08 of a second over Ligety, but faded turn by turn on the final pitch.“Ted was just too strong today,” Hirscher said. “He has been a great champion, and great champions have days like this.”After crossing the finish line at the end of his second run, Ligety repeatedly pumped his fists in front of a sold-out grandstand, then blew kisses at the crowd. When Hirscher completed his run and the scoreboard showed that Ligety’s time would stand up as the best of the day, Ligety ran across the snow and raised his arms before the home fans once again.“I love racing in the U.S.,” he said. “That’s one of the real anomalies for the American ski racer. We don’t get to do it very often. So when something like this happens, you have to enjoy it.”Ligety, 30, has 24 World Cup victories and is closing in on 50 World Cup podiums. But on a sunny afternoon in Colorado, with his parents and friends watching, he won more than just another ski race. And it hardly came easily.“When things aren’t always going your way, it’s important to rise up,” Ligety said late Friday, preparing to leave for the evening medal ceremony, a few miles away in Vail. “That’s what will always make this a memorable race for me. I came through. I rose up.”A version of this article appears in print on February 14, 2015, on Page D1 of the New York edition with the headline: Ligety Knifes His Way to a 3rd Straight Title.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.