By KEN BELSONFEB. 13, 2015
Ray Rice, the former Baltimore Ravens running back who punched his fiancée in a hotel elevator a year ago and has been at the center of a swirling controversy over domestic violence in the N.F.L., apologized Friday for his behavior.“To all the kids who looked up to me, I’m truly sorry for letting you down, but I hope it’s helped you learn that one bad decision can turn your dream into a nightmare,” Rice said in a statement published by The Baltimore Sun. “There is no excuse for domestic violence, and I apologize for the horrible mistake I made. I hope you can find it in your heart to forgive me, and I hope to make a positive difference in people’s lives by raising awareness of this issue.”The statement came almost a year to the day after he punched Janay Palmer, whom he has since married, in an elevator in an Atlantic City hotel. After the charges against Rice were dropped in favor of court-supervised counseling, the N.F.L. in July suspended Rice for two games, leading to criticism from some who considered the punishment too lenient.After graphic video from the Feb. 15 altercation inside the elevator was published in September, Roger Goodell, the league’s commissioner, suspended Rice indefinitely. This led to more embarrassment for the N.F.L. and questions about whether Goodell had seen the video before suspending Rice the first time.AdvertisementThe Ravens, who initially supported Rice, terminated his contract after the video became public. Rice has since received some of the money he felt he was owed. A league-appointed arbitrator reinstated him in November.Rice’s apology to the Ravens and their fans could be a prelude to his trying to return to the N.F.L. Rice, 28, has played six years in the league.AdvertisementRichie Incognito, an offensive lineman who was at the center of a bullying scandal on the Miami Dolphins in 2013, recently signed with the Buffalo Bills after sitting out last season.A version of this article appears in print on February 14, 2015, on Page D5 of the New York edition with the headline: Rice Apologizes for ‘Horrible Mistake’.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.