By ROB HUGHESOCT. 11, 2015
LONDON — Sports do not get more surreal than this. Wales is defeated on a soggy Saturday night in Bosnia, and its players are on their knees when news comes that Israel has lost to Cyprus in Jerusalem.Suddenly, despair turns to joy for the few. The stadium at Zenica has rapidly emptied, apart from 650 Wales fans who made the 3,000-mile round trip to watch their team — their country — qualify for a major tournament for the first time in 57 years.“Probably the best loss of my life, to be honest,” said Gareth Bale, the one superstar in a nation that aspires to rugby success more readily than it dares hope for any crumbs from soccer.Indeed, Saturday was a chastening, yet fulfilling night for both the round and the oval ball. Wales lost a thunderous game in London to Australia in the Rugby World Cup, yet reached the quarterfinals because of previous wins; and the soccer team was now also a qualifier, thanks to a late-winning goal by Cyprus in Israel.Advertisement“I was gutted coming off the pitch,” said Chris Coleman, the Wales soccer team manager following his side’s 2-0 loss to Bosnia and Herzegovina. “Then, suddenly, my assistant and the fans are telling us we’ve qualified. I can’t explain how it feels; we’ve all dreamed about this all of our life.”AdvertisementAnd then the manager was grabbed by his players and tossed into the air like a rag doll. His name, and the names of the players — some of whom do not regularly play in top leagues — will now resonate through the valleys of Wales along with John Charles, Ivor Allchurch and Cliff Jones, the legends of the team that reached the 1958 World Cup.Wales, with a population of three million, is not a minnow compared to Iceland, which also has qualified for the 2016 European Championship to be played in France. And some observers might say that expanding the tournament so that 24 of the 53 nations of Europe will now have a place in the tournament next year makes it so much more likely that the dream of lesser countries will be realized.Say that within earshot of Wales and your voice will be drowned in a lusty rendition of “Hen Wlad Fy Nhadau,” the anthem, “Land of My Fathers.” The rugby players have delivered in spite of endemic injuries striking out key players, and the soccer boys have built their own credo around the motto “together, stronger.”Coach Coleman instilled this creed, Ashley Williams, the captain of Swansea City, held the defense together, and Bale, at times almost single-handedly, scored the goals that carried his nation through nine qualifying games.“I grew up with the dream of playing in a major tournament with Wales,” Bale said, “and here we are. It’s like we are all brothers in this team.”Bale, the big brother for whom Real Madrid paid a world record fee of more than $100 million, is in a way the John Charles of his day. So many decades ago, Charles had played for Juventus, whose owner, Gianni Agnelli, called him the Gentle Giant.But Charles never forgot his roots, and neither can Bale, who on Saturday stayed on the field the whole 90 minutes, despite being short of fitness following a month out of the Madrid team because of injury.AdvertisementImagine, if you can, the pressures upon Bale to put his club before his country on this occasion. Think of the repercussions if Bale returns to Madrid having exacerbated the calf muscle injury that has kept him out of the Spanish league since Sept. 15.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.And hold that thought while Real contemplates the muscle injury that another of its star strikers, Karim Benzema, suffered while representing France in a friendly game against Armenia on Saturday.The pull between club and country has been with us for generations, but with ever more fixtures cramming the calendars, with bloated qualification processes all around the world, team managers can only watch and wait.They are like parents who send off their sons on military duties, counting the days and waiting for their safe return. The European Championship qualifiers continue through this coming week, while in Africa and South America qualifiers have already begun toward the 2018 World Cup.Bayern Munich has lost Mario Götze for upward of three months after he tore an adductor muscle early in Germany’s 1-0 loss to Ireland last week, but Manchester City’s loss is even greater.City’s manager, Manuel Pellegrini, facing tough matches against Sevilla in the Champions League and a derby against Manchester United in the Premier League, almost dares not pick up the phone while his players are away.Vincent Kompany, his captain, enlisted for duty with Belgium despite missing City’s last five games with a calf injury. David Silva, City’s playmaker, injured an ankle during Spain’s 4-0 rout of Luxembourg. And Sergio Agüero, whom Pellegrini had withdrawn because of injury after he scored five goals in his last City game, was carried out in Argentina’s shock 2-0 loss to Ecuador in World Cup qualification.“Agüero had a problem from his last game with City,” Argentina’s national team coach Gerardo Martino told reporters in Buenos Aires. “We looked after him this week; he was moving well, but unfortunately he felt the strain, and we are going to lose him.”Agüero managed just 22 minutes against Ecuador. According to the Argentine Football Association, it is a different injury, to a different muscle than the groin strain he suffered in Manchester.AdvertisementBut with the demands on players, who travel thousands of miles for two causes, it is a known risk that when one side of the body is hurting the other is vulnerable to extra strain.Agüero expects to be out for a month. He has zero prospects of playing for Argentina against Paraguay in Asunción, Paraguay, on Tuesday, and City can only wait for his return.The joy of nations like Wales is ameliorated by the despair of clubs like City, Munich and Madrid. Soccer is a two-way tear on its players.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.