AdvertisementSupported byBy Rob HughesLONDON — Simply by the way tough and dangerous physical sports are set up, it seems inconceivable that one man can beat every competitor in every one of the 20 years of his career.The Irish jockey A.P. McCoy is about to achieve that.He was still in the saddle, he and his mount were breathing heavily from the exertion of the race, when he chose to reveal on national television what he had not even told his parents. The English Channel 4 racing presenter Rishi Persad had reached up to him with a microphone as they entered the winners’ enclosure, and Persad congratulated McCoy on reaching his 200th race win in a season for the 10th time — another milestone no other rider has come close to. “I’ll tell you something else, Rishi,” McCoy answered. “It’s going to be the last time I’ll ride 200 winners. I’ll be retiring by the end of the season.”When the interviewer caught his own breath and asked a follow-up question, McCoy had plenty more to say. “I just want to go out at the top, and I want to go out as champion jockey,” he said. “My mum and dad don’t even know. They’ll hear about it on TV.”Within half an hour of that announcement, Anthony Peter McCoy was thrown where jump jockeys so often are — unceremoniously on the seat of his riding pants after his next mount crashed down over a fence. His parents were still watching in the village of Moneyglass in rural Northern Ireland.That is the thing about riding over fences and hurdles. It takes a good jockey and a bold, brave and sure-footed animal to land safely every time. Over the 20 years of his adult life, McCoy has piled up a hugely unprecedented 4,300 winners — but has also broken bones in most parts of his skeleton, punctured his lungs and crushed his vertebrae through errors not always caused by himself or his horse, but by others in distress.That is what makes this record so stunning. McCoy is a married man with two young children. He has given daily interviews throughout this past week while piling up yet more winners every day, on different tracks in England, Ireland, Wales and Scotland, and repeating that there are so many to thank: the horses, the stable lads, the driver who has driven him around this relentless journey often in cold, bleak, misty days like this past week.”And all the ambulance drivers and the doctors,” he continued, “that have picked me up so many times over the years.”The ambulance drivers and the doctors.You look into his dark eyes and see no hint of irony, no intended whimsy in that reference. The face is lined, the cheeks sunken, because this is a man who, since he grew to over 5-foot-10 — taller and heavier than a jockey should be — has lived in saunas and on leaf lettuce, squeezing surplus pounds out of himself without compromising the strength to stay the two, three or more miles per race, five times in an afternoon, often seven afternoons every week.He is now 40. That, after the self-denial of sweating out between two and four pounds in weight every day, makes for a gaunt, as well as a devil-may-care obsession that many a jockey become addicted to. McCoy is not only their champion, he long ago eclipsed the most wins in a season that any horse rider had ever achieved.McCoy’s record of 289 victories in a seven-month season from October 2001 through April 2002 actually surpassed the British record of 269 set in 1947 by Gordon Richards, but there was a significant difference between them. Richards rode over the flat, with no obstacles to bring horses and riders down with injuries or at the mercy of being trampled under the galloping hoofs of a one-ton horse coming from behind.Another side to this cavalry charge, one that not even the bravest of riders dare look in the eye, is the carnage it can reap. On Tuesday, in a race McCoy was riding in at Chepstow in Wales, a horse called Wicker Man broke its neck in a fall. That, according to animal welfare observers who keep a track of the grim statistics, was the seventh equine fatality on a British track this past week, and the 1,229th to die in action over the last eight years. Human fatalities are rare, though they do happen. And every rider knows the fear of being crippled or maimed doing what they compulsively have done on tracks since the Irish invented jump racing back in the 18th century.McCoy is almost through that danger now, but not quite. His wife, Chanelle, spoke a few days ago of wanting him to retire, but knowing that this was a decision, to stop doing something he’d worked for since he was 12 years of age, that he alone could make. “He’s battled with it,” she said. “Some days he’s at peace with it and some days he’s sad. It will be great for him to go out on a high, and hopefully we will get him out in one piece.”The race is not yet run. A.P. McCoy is 80 winners in front of the next guy, so the perfect 20 titles in 20 seasons as a pro is virtually assured. He can retire any day he feels like it, without waiting to the last day of the season, April 25.Two iconic races beckon — the Cheltenham Gold Cup and the Grand National at Aintree, Liverpool. McCoy has earned the right to have his pick of horses, and if he and they stay healthy, he is expected to ride Carlingford Lough in the Gold Cup on March 13, and Shutthefrontdoor in the world’s biggest and most vicarious race over fences and ditches, the Grand National on April 11.And after that? Like many champions, McCoy has little idea what life might bring. He talks of using up unspent energy riding in the amateur event alongside the Tour de France cycle race. He dreams of flying to Las Vegas if and when Manny Pacquiao and Floyd Mayweather step into the boxing ring together.And — a long shot — he would go anywhere to watch his soccer team, Arsenal, win a Champions League final.There are bets being laid that McCoy will receive a knighthood, as Gordon Richards did after retiring his saddle. The odds began at 14-1 and shortened during this past week to even.Advertisement