AdvertisementSupported byBy Christopher ClareyBEAVER CREEK, Colo. — Up on the slalom course on Saturday afternoon, Mikaela Shiffrin was staring down the moment on home snow and winning her latest gold medal.Down below in Beaver Creek Village, Shiffrin’s American teammate Resi Stiegler watched and admired the victory on television and then slipped into her bathing suit and the hotel pool.“Water heals a lot of things,” she said, conducting an interview while still immersed in the hot tub.At 19, Shiffrin is fast becoming synonymous with grace under pressure, but Stiegler has shown plenty of grace under duress herself through the years.She, too, was once a teenage ski prodigy. The daughter of the former Olympic champion Pepi Stiegler of Austria, she began racing at age 6 and made her big-stage debut at 17, finishing 11th in her first World Cup race and 10th in the combined in her first world championships in 2003.But Alpine skiing remains a passion and profession with a dark side, and injuries, sometimes brutal injuries, have knocked her back as they have knocked back so many luminous talents through the years. Stiegler has persevered, usually with a smile on her face, retaining much of the grit and un-self-conscious enthusiasm reflected in the tiger ears she long attached to her helmet during races.She soldiered on again this season: raising her own travel and training expenses at age 29 after losing her fully funded spot on the United States ski team. And after tearing the anterior cruciate ligament and the meniscus in her right knee in a training accident just a month ago, she somehow soldiered on in Beaver Creek, skiing the first run of Saturday’s slalom.“I think most people wanted me to just have surgery right away, but I was feeling the best I’ve ever felt after an injury,” she said. “I was walking and jogging almost and jumping and doing all these agility workouts, and I’m still kind of curious to get into surgery and see what they find to see if there’s anything different from the M.R.I.”Nonetheless, she said she felt surprisingly overcome with emotions before competing Saturday: shaky in training; shaky in the start house. But even without peace of mind or an intact A.C.L., she still managed to finish, placing 35th, which was 3.35 seconds off Shiffrin’s leading time and 0.38 of a second outside the cutoff for the top 30.Some of the top ski racers in the world describe the sounds of a World Cup downhill.That meant that she would have had to ski the second run in the second wave after the medals had been decided and the packed grandstand had largely emptied.She chose not to take any more risks, withdrawing after handing out candy to the fans in the finish area and then heading down the mountain feeling a potent blend of pride and disappointment.“The last couple years were pretty difficult for me,” she said. “This year, I think, I just had so much belief, and I never doubted myself, which does help. I think a lot of people don’t have that when they are coming back from injury or struggling, but I honestly don’t know why I’m so happy all the time.”She put her head down, fighting — successfully — for composure.“Behind closed doors, I’m not happy all the time,” she said. “I have a very difficult time being upset and being depressed around other people when there are so many hardships in the world to begin with. But I think behind closed doors, I struggle a lot with the fight within.“You question yourself. It’s not about loving the sport for me, because that will never change. It’s about, why is this happening to me again? Or about how can someone believe so much in something and keep going and have this keep happening?”What, she was asked, are her conclusions?“I just try to choose the idea ‘Let’s inspire others,’ ” she said. “Maybe I’ll never win, but I try to inspire somebody out there to challenge themselves or come back from something or try to be themselves and fight for what they believe in. Just have a passion for living because I think just living is a really difficult thing sometimes.”Shiffrin can make it look easy with her serial victories and precocious poise in the spotlight, on and off the course. But Stiegler, the second-best women’s slalom skier from the United States since Shiffrin’s emergence, has had a long look at greatness: traveling and training with Shiffrin, often sharing the same hotels.“She does not fail under pressure, ever, which is pretty impressive,” Stiegler said. “I’m sure she’s affected by it in some way, and it’s just interesting to see how she does it. I’ve been up close a lot, and I don’t see anything special and nothing that someone else couldn’t do, but she really nails it.”Stiegler does see a special maturity and focus in Shiffrin, an ability to structure her time and career to optimum effect, to visualize courses at great length without getting drained.“Just the way she can envision it and make it happen,” Stiegler said. “I’m sure she doesn’t have as much doubt as some people only because she’s had so much success from the beginning. And I think a lot of us are plagued by all the things that can go wrong.”But despite all that has not gone according to plan for Stiegler and despite her latest surgery looming in the next few days, she said she would still recommend Alpine skiing as a career path and a continuing life lesson.She plans to get healthy, return next season and push on to the 2018 Winter Olympics.“I haven’t had the success I want,” she said, still partly submerged in Beaver Creek’s healing waters. “But I am happy to be doing what I love.”Advertisement