AdvertisementSupported byBy Benjamin HoffmanShowing off an ability to seemingly jump out of the building, Zach LaVine of the Minnesota Timberwolves lapped the competition Saturday night on his way to winning the N.B.A. slam dunk contest at Barclays Center in Brooklyn.On a night when everything seemed to be going wrong for his competition, LaVine, 19, showcased his creativity and execution, entering the competition as the favorite and leaving as the winner.LaVine set the bar high by coming out for his first dunk of the night wearing a No. 23 Michael Jordan jersey. In a twist, it was not Jordan’s Chicago Bulls or Washington Wizards jersey, but instead the one he wore in the movie “Space Jam,” which LaVine said had inspired him to reach the N.B.A.LaVine was an instant crowd favorite, going under one leg on his first dunk before putting in a one-handed reverse as the All-Stars on the sidelines leapt to cheer for him. He earned a perfect 50 points from the judges and was at it again on his second attempt, going behind his back before putting the ball in with his right hand for another 50.“We’re entertainers,” LaVine said when asked how he had been able to live up to the expectations that had made him the favorite to win on most gambling websites. “We’re in New York. I wanted to get everybody off their feet and have a good time.”LaVine’s first-round score of 100 points was 11 points higher than that of his closest competitor, Victor Oladipo of the Orlando Magic.Oladipo drew big cheers early on, coming out for his first dunk in a tuxedo T-shirt and a fedora, singing “New York, New York.” He delivered one of the best dunks of the night, spinning at least 360 degrees before putting in a reverse. The TNT television crew, which was announcing the event live in the arena, loudly debated whether he should be credited with 540 degrees of rotation.His strong start did not carry through the contest, and things fell apart for Oladipo in the finals. A teammate, Elfrid Payton, sat on a folding chair under the basket holding the ball up as Oladipo approached from midcourt, grabbing the ball and going under one leg before trying to slam it home. The dunk looked as if it could have been impressive, but Oladipo missed on all three attempts.LaVine then came out for his first dunk of the finals and had a similar setup, with a teammate, Andrew Wiggins, holding the ball under the hoop with one hand.Zach LaVine’s slam dunk performance, which began with his “Space Jam” dunk, earned him the title. Here’s how he did it, frame by frame.The 6-foot-5 LaVine grabbed the ball with his right hand and passed it under one leg to his left before putting it in, with his face level with the rim.On Oladipo’s last dunk of the night, he showed a great deal of frustration, repeatedly missing a solo attempt before having Payton come out again to assist him, on a baseline alley-oop. LaVine again topped him, having another teammate, Shabazz Muhammad, throw the ball off the basket’s stanchion, with LaVine catching it, passing it under his right leg and putting it in with his right hand.For the night, LaVine scored 194 out of a possible 200 points from a star-studded group of judges that included Julius Erving, Nate Archibald, Chris Mullin, Walt Frazier and Bernard King.“I tried to get a 50 on every dunk,” LaVine said. “It didn’t happen, but I was close on all of them.”Mason Plumlee of the Nets, who is 6 feet 10 inches, and Giannis Antetokounmpo of the Milwaukee Bucks, who is 6-foot-11, were two of the tallest competitors in slam dunk contest history, but both failed to impress and were eliminated in the first round.Advertisement