By BENJAMIN HOFFMANFEB. 15, 2015
In an N.B.A. take on Aesop’s “The Tortoise and the Hare,” Patrick Beverley of the Houston Rockets proved that patience can triumph over speed as he lumbered his way to victory Saturday in the N.B.A.’s revamped skills competition.The contest’s 13th incarnation introduced a tournament format, with two players competing head-to-head in each round, dribbling through an obstacle course, passing a ball through a target, and shooting a layup and then a 3-pointer. In both the second round and the finals, Beverley found himself well behind his competitor, but was able to win by sinking the final shot first.In the competition’s most entertaining moment, Jeff Teague of the Atlanta Hawks raced out to a huge lead and stopped at midcourt to wave at, or possibly high-five, the trailing Beverley. But as Teague struggled to make a 3-pointer to seal the win, Beverley caught up with him and made his final shot.In the finals, there was no showboating, but the result was the same, with Brandon Knight of the Milwaukee Bucks letting a sizable lead crumble when he missed two 3-point attempts and Beverley easily made his first shot to claim the title.Beverley, a tenacious defender who generally shares the court with James Harden, the All-Star guard and contender for most valuable player, said the chance to be the center of attention was a welcome change.Advertisement“On our team, James has the ball a lot, which is fine,” Beverley said. “He is the best player in the N.B.A. right now. He’s our M.V.P. So on a setting like this, just by myself I was able to display my skills and some things that some people have never seen before.”AdvertisementThe format proved troublesome at times. More than once, players were shooting at the same basket, and their shots sometimes knocked both balls away from the rim.Beverley’s win came with a bit of an asterisk: Damian Lillard, the Portland Trail Blazers’ starting point guard, passed up a chance to be the first player to win the competition three years in a row by declining to participate. Lillard, who was partners with Trey Burke of the Utah Jazz for the win last season, was initially not named to the All-Star team, and that decision reportedly played into his decision not to participate. He was later added to the All-Star Game as an injury replacement for Blake Griffin.Burke tried to defend their shared title, but he was eliminated in the first round by Knight.A version of this article appears in print on February 15, 2015, on Page SP11 of the New York edition with the headline: Skill and Patience.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.