AdvertisementSupported byBy Benjamin HoffmanIn one of the best groupings of shooters to ever participate in the N.B.A.’s 3-point contest, Stephen Curry of the Golden State Warriors cruised to victory Saturday, at one point hitting 13 consecutive shots, much to the delight of a Brooklyn crowd that seemed to be rooting for him from the start.Considered by some a second-fiddle event to the slam dunk contest, the competition received added attention this year when it was announced that Curry would face off against Kyle Korver of the Atlanta Hawks, Wesley Matthews of the Portland Trail Blazers and Curry’s teammate Klay Thompson. The players in that group rank first through fourth in 3-pointers made this season, Curry and Korver leading the way with 161 each. Rounding out the field were Kyrie Irving, J. J. Redick, James Harden and last year’s champion, Marco Belinelli.“If you look at everyone individually, it’s pretty special to have all these guys out there shooting,” Curry said when asked about participating in the contest for the fourth time. “I wanted to be a part of that group.”In a change from previous years, the players were able to have a full rack of money balls, which are worth 2 points each, placed at their favorite position on the court. Five of the seven participants chose to put the money ball rack in a corner, and two players positioned it at the top of the arc, but only Matthews placed his in the fourth rack in the left wing.Curry and Thompson, who are known as the Splash Brothers because of their shooting skills, trailed Irving as they entered the final round, but Curry took over, hitting 13 consecutive shots before missing his final shot of the night. Curry’s performance that had many fans in the crowd standing and cheering. His winning total was 27 points.Korver, who has been a big part of the dream season for the Atlanta Hawks, did not live up to his hype, missing four of five shots on his money ball rack in the first round and failing to advance. The website Grantland recently made the argument that he was having the greatest shooting season on record, noting that he was on pace to be the first qualified shooter to make 50 percent of his shots from the field, 50 percent from 3-point range and 90 percent from the free-throw line. Advertisement