By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSFEB. 15, 2015
Josh Bailey scored two goals in the first period, John Tavares had two goals and two assists, and the host Islanders fought off two rallies by the Columbus Blue Jackets in a 6-3 victory on Saturday night.Tavares set up Bailey twice early and then gave the Islanders two- and three-goal leads in the third. The Islanders have won four straight and six of seven. Ryan Strome and Frans Nielsen also scored, and Jaroslav Halak made 34 saves.Brandon Dubinsky, Cam Atkinson and Nick Foligno had goals for Columbus, which beat Philadelphia at home on Friday. Anton Forsberg stopped 40 shots as Columbus began a five-game trip.Nielsen put the Islanders ahead for good when he converted Thomas Hickey’s slap pass 1 minute 54 seconds into the third for his first goal in 13 games.AdvertisementTavares made it 5-3 with 12:52 remaining and gave the Islanders a three-goal lead — off an assist from Bailey — with 8:45 left on his 26th goal.AdvertisementCANADIENS 2, MAPLE LEAFS 1 Alex Galchenyuk and David Desharnais scored in a shootout to lift host Montreal to a victory over Toronto.Brendan Gallagher scored in regulation and Carey Price made 28 saves for Montreal, which has points in five straight games.Daniel Winnik scored for Toronto, which is 0-11-2 in its last 13 road games. Jonathan Bernier stopped 31 of 32 shots through regulation and overtime.The Leafs took a first-period lead for the first time in seven games when Winnik was left alone in the right circle and beat Price at 11:19.Toronto’s advantage lasted only 41 seconds, though. The Canadiens tied it on a power play when Gallagher reached into the crease to put in Tomas Plekanec’s pass.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.JETS 5, RED WINGS 4 Drew Stafford scored the only shootout goal to lift visiting Winnipeg to a victory over Detroit.Stafford’s shot got past Detroit’s Jimmy Howard in the fourth round of the tiebreaker, and Michael Hutchinson stopped Stephen Weiss on the ensuing attempt to seal the win.Howard, who missed 11 games with a partly torn groin muscle, made 34 saves for Detroit in his first start since Jan. 6. The Jets’ Hutchinson stopped 25.AdvertisementLadd also had a regulation goal for Winnipeg, which improved to 14-6-4 against Eastern Conference teams this season. Pavel Datsyuk had two goals for Detroit.The loss ended Detroit’s six-game home winning streak.SENATORS 7, OILERS 2 Milan Michalek had two goals and an assist, leading host Ottawa over Edmonton.Kyle Turris, Cody Ceci, Alex Chiasson, Mike Hoffman and David Legwand also scored as the Senators matched their season high for goals.Robin Lehner, making his eighth straight start for Ottawa, stopped 25 shots.Derek Roy and Mark Fayne scored for Edmonton. Viktor Fasth allowed three goals on 15 shots before being replaced by Richard Bachman, who gave up four goals on 27 shots.With the game tied at 1-1 in the second period, Ottawa scored twice in 16 seconds. Ceci beat Fasth from the face-off circle, and Turris finished off a two-on-one with Michalek for his 12th goal of the season.That ended Fasth’s afternoon, and Bachman made his first appearance in an N.H.L. game since 2013.STARS’ SEGUIN OUT Tyler Seguin, the Dallas Stars’ scoring leader, will miss three to six weeks with a right knee injury he sustained Friday when he was checked below the waist on a hit that his teammate Vernon Fiddler called gutless.A version of this article appears in print on February 15, 2015, on Page SP4 of the New York edition with the headline: Tavares Collects 4 Points as Isles Win 4th Straight.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.