By ZACH SCHONBRUNFEB. 14, 2015
After recently labeling himself a “boring All-Star,” LaMarcus Aldridge can add “starter” to that moniker. He replaces the injured Anthony Davis, who just happens to be one of the most exciting young players in the N.B.A.Steve Kerr, the Western Conference coach, announced the switch after the two teams practiced Saturday at a packed Madison Square Garden.It came as a surprise to many who thought that last year’s league most valuable player, Kevin Durant, would step in for Davis, an early contender for this year’s M.V.P. with the New Orleans Pelicans.Instead, Kerr chose Portland’s Aldridge to start Sunday’s game. A four-time All-Star, Aldridge still does not quite have the name recognition of Durant or Davis, partly because of his style of play.Advertisement“I don’t jump high,” Aldridge said. “I don’t windmill. I don’t do anything flashy. It’s me being regular.”Averaging 23.6 points (tied for seventh in the N.B.A.), 10.3 rebounds (tied with Davis for 10th) and 1.1 blocks per game has earned him plenty of respect within the league.Advertisement“I think there’s excitement to his game,” his Portland teammate Damian Lillard said. “I think he’s not the most outspoken person, he doesn’t play the game where he’s trying to dunk on people, stuff like that. But I don’t think he’s boring at all.”Certainly no one would consider Davis in that light. Even though he will miss Sunday’s game with a shoulder sprain, he remained an attraction on Saturday. His numbers (24.5 points, 10.3 rebounds, 2.7 blocks, 1.5 steals per game) do not account for the highlight-reel plays he has been making in New Orleans this season.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.One in particular — a double-clutch 3-pointer over Durant to beat the buzzer on Feb. 6 — was still a talking point on Saturday.“I don’t know how I made it,” Davis said. “It was a unique moment. To do it on the road made it even better.”It was Davis’s first successful 3-pointer of the season, in nine attempts, but his college coach, John Calipari, has often said that the 6-foot-10 Davis, a former guard who now plays forward, is capable of making 3-pointers consistently. He has thought about extending his range as Durant did.A version of this article appears in print on February 15, 2015, on Page SP11 of the New York edition with the headline: Aldridge Replacing Davis.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.