By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSFEB. 14, 2015
Liverpool came from behind to beat Crystal Palace, 2-1, in the fifth round of the F.A. Cup on Saturday, preserving the chances of Steven Gerrard finishing his tenure at the club with a trip to Wembley Stadium for the final.Daniel Sturridge and Adam Lallana scored early in the second half as Liverpool fought back after conceding a 15th-minute goal to Fraizer Campbell at Selhurst Park.West Bromwich Albion thrashed West Ham, 4-0, in another all-Premier League matchup in the F.A. Cup, while Blackburn, of England’s second tier, rallied for a 4-1 win over Stoke, which lost the American Geoff Cameron to a red card just before halftime. Reading won, 2-1, at Derby.If Liverpool reaches the final on May 30, it will be Gerrard’s last game with the club before he moves to the Los Angeles Galaxy in M.L.S.AdvertisementThe Nigerian striker Brown Ideye maintained his resurgent form at West Brom by scoring in each half in the convincing win over West Ham.AdvertisementIdeye almost left West Brom in January, six months into a difficult first season, but stayed at the Hawthorns and has now scored in three straight games under the recently hired manager Tony Pulis.He put West Brom ahead in the 20th by turning in Craig Dawson’s center, and made it 3-0 with a 57th-minute header from Stephane Sessegnon’s cross.ASTON VILLA HIRES MANAGER Aston Villa hired Tim Sherwood as its manager three days after firing Paul Lambert. Sherwood, who was fired by Tottenham at the end of last season, signed a contract through the end of the 2017-18 season.INJURIES RAVAGE P.S.G. Paris St.-Germain is facing an injury crisis in advance of its Champions League match against Chelsea on Tuesday.Four of its players left with injuries in a 2-2 draw against visiting Caen as P.S.G. conceded two late goals, shifting control of the French league race to Lyon.Manager Laurent Blanc said midfielder Yohan Cabaye, defender Marquinhos, winger Lucas and defender Serge Aurier would miss the Chelsea game. Midfielder Blaise Matuidi has a sore knee and is doubtful for that game.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“We’ve lost four players but above all 2 points,” Blanc said. “We have to pull ourselves together and get ready for Tuesday.”P.S.G. had to play the final 10 minutes with a nine-man squad because two of its players were injured after Blanc had used all three of his substitutions.AdvertisementMADRID BOUNCES BACK Isco Alarcón and Karim Benzema scored to lead Real Madrid to a 2-0 home victory over Deportivo de La Coruña to maintain its position atop the Spanish league.Rebounding from its 4-0 loss at Atlético Madrid last week, Madrid’s Cristiano Ronaldo and Gareth Bale both hit the goal frame before Isco opened the scoring in the 23rd minute. Benzema secured the result with a goal in the 73rd. Madrid has a 4-point lead over Barcelona, which plays Levante on Sunday.BAYERN ROMPS Bayern Munich routed Hamburger S.V., 8-0, and Bas Dost’s winner in injury time gave Wolfsburg a 5-4 victory at Bayer Leverkusen.Thomas Müller, Arjen Robben and Mario Götze scored two each for Bayern.Dost scored four goals, the final one in the 93rd minute, to help keep Wolfsburg 8 points behind Bayern in second place.NAPOLI STUMBLES  Napoli missed the chance to close the gap with second-place Roma as it lost, 3-1, at Palermo in Serie A, ending a run of six successive victories.Napoli was hoping to cut Roma’s advantage to 1 point, provisionally at least. Instead, it will be looking over its shoulder at Fiorentina, which cruised to a 3-1 win at Sassuolo to move to within 4 points of the final Champions League qualifying spot.Achraf Lazaar, Franco Vazquez and Luca Rigoni gave Palermo a comfortable advantage before Manolo Gabbiadini scored a consolation eight minutes from time.Palermo moved into seventh.Napoli squandered a two-goal lead to pull to 3-3 in a thrilling match against Palermo earlier in the season, and it was looking to avoid further disappointment in Sicily.A version of this article appears in print on February 15, 2015, on Page SP11 of the New York edition with the headline: Liverpool Lifts Hopes of Gerrard With Rally.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.