AdvertisementSupported byOn Pro FootballBy Ken BelsonDuring his address last month on the state of the league, N.F.L. Commissioner Roger Goodell appeared eager to turn the page on 2014, a year when he was under siege for mishandling several domestic violence cases and for seemingly every other misstep that befell the league.“As an organization and as an individual, it’s been a tough year, but a year of progress,” Goodell said in answer to a question about whether he envisioned resigning or being fired. “I’m excited about the future.”Goodell has tried to turn the page, but the events of the last few weeks are a reminder of the stubborn problems that continue to plague the league: off-field violence by players, potential malfeasance by teams trying to gain an edge and an embarrassing legal battle for control of one of the league’s marquee teams.Some of them may force Goodell into the uncomfortable position of penalizing some of the owners who pay his robust salary — which was $35 million in 2013, according to the league’s tax filings, which were released Friday. Other episodes involving player misconduct could force the commissioner to apply the league’s revised personal conduct policy, which included stiffer penalties for domestic abuse. The league plans to appoint a special counselor to mete out suspensions, but because that person has not yet been chosen, Goodell may have to handle the job.Either way, it’s an uncomfortable reminder of the messy and growing contours of Goodell’s job, which seems to be more about handling increasingly public and politically charged matters and less about the actual business of the league, such as signing television deals and glad-handing fans.In fact, Goodell has become such a piñata of sorts that fans, television analysts, columnists and women’s advocates continue to call for him to be replaced. Even when he seems to have taken control of a situation, he is criticized for the way he handles it.That certainly has been the case with the inquiry into why almost all of the balls used by the New England Patriots in the A.F.C. championship game were not fully inflated. For days after the game, the league said only that it was looking into the matter. In the vacuum, Coach Bill Belichick and quarterback Tom Brady held awkward news conferences to defend the team. As the controversy started to overshadow the Super Bowl, the league finally appointed Ted Wells — the lawyer who looked into the biggest scandal of 2013: bullying in the Miami Dolphins locker room — to lead an investigation.Some critics said the league was trying to avoid announcing the findings before the Super Bowl. But in an unusual show of defiance, Robert K. Kraft, the Patriots’ owner and one of Goodell’s closest allies, told reporters that his team was innocent and deserved an apology from the league.Kraft said he “would expect and hope” that the N.F.L. would issue an apology, “in particular to Coach Belichick and Tom Brady for what they have had to endure this week,” Kraft said after the Patriots arrived in Phoenix for the Super Bowl.The Atlanta Falcons’ owner, Arthur Blank, is not waiting for the results of another N.F.L. investigation. After the Super Bowl, he admitted that his team had piped in artificial noise during home games to distract visiting teams.“It’s not really a fine line,” Blank told The Associated Press. “I think what we’ve done in 2013 and 2014 was wrong. Anything that affects the competitive balance and fairness on the field, we’re opposed to, as a league, as a club and as an owner. It’s obviously embarrassing, but beyond embarrassing it doesn’t represent our culture and what we’re about.”The Falcons could be fined or lose draft picks.Goodell may have to impose similar penalties on the Cleveland Browns, where General Manager Ray Farmer has been accused of texting coaches during games.For now, Goodell can only watch as a legal tug-of-war plays out between the New Orleans Saints’ owner, Tom Benson, and his daughter and grandchildren, who sued him to reverse his decision to give the Saints and the New Orleans Pelicans to his third wife, not to them, as had previously been promised.Because the cases involving alleged team malfeasance fall outside the revised personal conduct policy, decisions about any penalties will fall in Goodell’s lap. And because they involve teams, not players, it will raise anew the uncomfortable possibility of the commissioner having to penalize his employers.Handling instances of player misconduct may be no easier. Josh Gordon, the talented Browns wide receiver, violated the league’s substance abuse policy and was suspended for at least a year. Gordon, a repeat offender, sat out 10 games last season.More serious cases abound, even though Goodell said last month that he was eager to highlight all the good things players have done in their communities.This year, Colts linebacker Josh McNary was accused of rape and his teammate D’Qwell Jackson was accused of assault. Cowboys running back Joseph Randle is being investigated on suspicion of domestic abuse. Other players on the Packers, the Saints, the Jets and the Bears have either been charged with or accused of drug violations, assault, drunken driving and carrying weapons.Goodell will have to wrestle with the bêtes noires of 2014, too. Minnesota Vikings running back Adrian Peterson continues to fight his suspension even though his criminal case over charges he beat his son was resolved. And Ray Rice, the former Baltimore Ravens running back who knocked out his fiancée in an elevator a year ago, apologized for his behavior on Friday, a possible prelude to his trying to return to the N.F.L.“To all the kids who looked up to me, I’m truly sorry for letting you down, but I hope it’s helped you learn that one bad decision can turn your dream into a nightmare,” Rice said in a statement published by The Baltimore Sun. “There is no excuse for domestic violence, and I apologize for the horrible mistake I made. I hope you can find it in your heart to forgive me, and I hope to make a positive difference in people’s lives by raising awareness of this issue.”Advertisement