By ROBERT HARMSFEB. 14, 2015
CHAPEL HILL, N.C. —  Time is precious for Houston Summers, a 27-year-old junior at North Carolina, and not just because he is majoring in psychology, with two minors, in the hopes of attending medical school. Summers, a former professional baseball player, is now a walk-on javelin thrower on the track team, and he is also trying to become the student body president.To say Summers is busy is an understatement, said R. J. Alowonle, a junior hurdler and Summers’s roommate.“Every morning when we wake up, one of the first things I ask him is: ‘Hey, man, what do you have to do today? What are your meetings?’ ” Alowonle said. “It’d be hectic just to be running for student body president alone. And having track on top of that.”He added, “Sometimes I wonder how he does it.”The election will be decided Tuesday in a runoff between Summers and another candidate. His platform’s main themes are unity and athletic reform. And at a time when the university’s reputation has taken a blow — the Wainstein Report, published in 2014, outlined the severe scope of academic impropriety that occurred at North Carolina from 1993 to 2011, primarily among student-athletes — an athlete as the face of the student body would be, at the least, intriguing.Advertisement“How many kids can be as great as U.N.C. athletes are at their sport and excel in the classroom at a school like this?” Alowonle said. “There’s plenty of student-athletes that are incredibly, incredibly talented in both areas and excel in both areas, and I think that Houston, if he wins, would speak to that.”AdvertisementThe antidote to all the chaos, Summers said, is sports, and it always has been, even when he was sidelined as a teenager with a benign tumor the size of a softball.“That’s my comfort zone,” he said of sports while sitting barefoot in his dorm room, where track bibs lined the walls and books were neatly piled on his desk. “That’s where I feel like I can kind of flip the switch and I can be me. I can express that kid that’s in me.”Summers’s father, Harold, said his son was “100 percent boy” and had been that way since Day 1. Growing up in Summerfield, N.C., he climbed trees, swam in creeks and built tree houses. One day, Summers and his younger sister, Holly, carried their trampoline to the side of their house, crushing shrubbery along the way. Then, from a second-story window, they jumped onto the precarious mix of metal and canvas.“It was great,” Summers said, “till Mom came home.”The family lived less than a mile from a park with two baseball fields, which became Summers’s second home. He could soon distinguish a curveball from a changeup, his father said, and he still holds the record for most home runs at Northwest Guilford Middle School (seven).During games at Northwest Guilford High School, Summers often pitched the first five innings for the Vikings and caught the last two. He did whatever his coaches asked.When he was 13, Summers developed congestion and headaches; he thought it was a sinus infection. After two weeks of antibiotics, little had changed, and then blurry vision and muffled hearing set in. One day, he sneezed blood. He and his mother, Laurie, a nurse, headed straight to the doctor.A magnetic resonance imaging test revealed a mass in the right side of his head; the official diagnosis was juvenile nasopharyngeal angiofibroma, which predominantly affects adolescent males. The family decided on surgery. Just before the operation, a nurse handed Summers a paper that detailed the risks: loss of the ability to talk or smile, paralysis, death. This is not happening, he thought.Advertisement“Then you walk in, and you’re the one laying on the table,” he said, “and it’s real.”In the waiting room, his parents held hands and prayed. When the 18-hour operation was over, they entered the recovery room. Summers smiled, and they exhaled.Summers also set a goal: to be playing outside again within two days of returning home from the hospital. It was an ambitious but impractical plan — his head still throbbed, and his energy was so depleted that he lasted only two steps when he tried to walk up the stairs.“There was this drive in me that wanted to go, that wanted to play, that wanted to achieve, and then it was taken away,” Summers said.The doctors, he added, “really gave me a second chance to live out that dream again.”So he made a pact with himself that he would become a doctor to provide someone else with the same opportunity.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.First, though, Summers had another dream: to play professional baseball.At 17, he was selected by the Arizona Diamondbacks in the 47th round of the 2005 amateur draft. Summers, who was home at the time, yelled joyously and bolted outside to put a baseball on a tee, pretending he was Derek Jeter in the World Series, something he had often done as a youngster.But the reality of minor league baseball was far less glamorous. Summers, the youngest United States-born player drafted by the Diamondbacks, bounced around teams, including the Missoula Osprey, the Tucson Sidewinders and the Batavia Muckdogs, as an oft-injured pitcher, catcher and second baseman. He read anatomy textbooks and ate a lot of Cinnamon Toast Crunch cereal, said Andrew Fie, Summers’s teammate and roommate for several of their stops in the minors.After injuries and uncertainty ended Summers’s professional career, he decided to go to college. As part of his rookie contract, the Diamondbacks agreed to pay for his undergraduate education. He took the SAT with high school juniors, using a pink calculator borrowed from a neighbor’s daughter, and arrived in Chapel Hill in the fall of 2012 as a 25-year-old freshman.Sports were his safe place, his way to fit in when he stood out in so many ways, so one day, after several unanswered emails and phone calls, Summers visited the Tar Heels’ track and field coach, Harlis Meaders. Meaders and his assistant Josh Langley took one look at him and thought he was lost.Summers told them of his desire to be on the track team, even though he had never run track at any level. Tryouts were in two weeks, the coaches said.AdvertisementAt tryouts, which consisted of a series of conditioning drills, Summers willed his way onto the team. He led every drill, every day, and did not slow down as the workouts progressed.Alowonle, his roommate at U.N.C., said that Meaders screamed, “You guys are letting a baseball player crush you!”Langley remembered Meaders whispering to him during the tryout: “I don’t know if he’s any good, but man, he won’t quit. We’re going to find something for him.”Houston initially wanted to be a sprinter; Langley laughed.“It’s hilarious,” Alowonle said. “Whenever I see him running stuff, I’m just like, Man, you’re not a sprinter. It’s not for you.”Langley had success converting baseball players to javelin throwers, so Summers went in that direction. Buoyed by the same skills that helped him become a professional baseball player — arm and core strength and a relentless work ethic — he advanced to the finals at the N.C.A.A. East Regional as a freshman, with a best throw of 67.97 meters (about 223 feet) earlier in the season.This season, Langley’s goal for Summers is to qualify for the N.C.A.A. championships.Until then, Summers’s main focus is the race for student body president. Whether he wins or loses, his life goal remains the same: to grant someone else a second chance like the one he was given.After graduation he will follow whatever form that takes, be it as a doctor, a coach or a missionary.“Who knows where I’ll be?” he said, smiling.A version of this article appears in print on February 15, 2015, on Page SP4 of the New York edition with the headline: At North Carolina, Throwing Javelins and Running for Office.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.