AdvertisementSupported byBy Andrew KehAmong the striking sights of last year’s N.B.A. All-Star Game — the dunks, the no-look passes and the general tomfoolery — was the final score.The Eastern Conference beat the Western Conference, 163-155, in regulation at the Smoothie King Center in New Orleans. It was the highest combined score of the 63 All-Star Games. The East’s total was the highest by a single team, too.Retired professional athletes have long been known to consider their game superior to the one played today. Whether or not that is the case, former N.B.A. All-Stars said that at the very least, there was more defense.“Back when we were playing and even before me, the first three quarters were like the show and the last quarter it was like all serious,” said Penny Hardaway, 43, who made four consecutive All-Star teams from 1995 to 1998 with the Orlando Magic. “I think they never really got to that in the last couple of years.”Hardaway said, “I think that for three quarters it’s cool, but in the fourth quarter it needs to turn up a little bit.”All-Star weekend, which is taking place in New York for the first time since 1998, is a multiday bonanza. The game itself is only one of the entertainment options. Players seem to spend more time recuperating, attending parties, doing promotional events and conducting business meetings than thinking about or playing basketball. The game Sunday night, naturally, takes on an air of nonchalance.It was not always this way, former players say.The event had very modest beginnings, dating to when the league was still fighting for attention in the sports market. Shortly after joining the N.B.A. in 1951 as a publicist, Haskell Cohen suggested that the league create an event like Major League Baseball’s All-Star Game. One was scheduled for March 2 that year at Boston Garden.When Cohen suggested that the league provide gifts to the players, Maurice Podoloff, the league’s top executive, told him not to spend more than $2.25 per person. Eventually, Cohen struck a deal with a store and procured televisions for all of the participating players.The East defeated the West, 111-94, before 10,094 fans. Dolph Schayes, who played in that first game and the next 11 after that, recalled that his teammates considered it “a big deal” and “really wanted to win.”“We were in the locker room, and we said, ‘Let’s really show these guys Eastern-style basketball,’ ” Schayes said. “The Western team had a slowdown offense, and we were pretty quick. We won the game, and it was very exciting.”The All-Star Games were not particularly exciting at first, mostly because the N.B.A. games in general were not, either. Among the first few contests was a 79-75 win for the West in 1953. “It was not a crowd-pleasing game,” said John Hareas, a basketball historian.But things started to change when the league added the 24-second shot clock in 1954, which kept teams from stalling to protect a lead. The average score in the final season without a shot clock was 79.5; the next season, it was 93.1. “When I first started playing it, it was very competitive,” said Lenny Wilkens, who made the first of his nine All-Star appearances in 1963. “The guys wanted to win because the winning team got a few extra bucks.”And Wilkens said that the games were not quite as collegial as they are now: “We said hi to each other,” he said. “We didn’t hug or anything. We maybe shook hands.”The weekend eventually began to take on more social vibe and more fanfare. Around the late 1960s, the league began hosting a banquet dinner on the Saturday night before the game, Hareas said, which gave the weekend a more celebratory atmosphere.Incrementally, All-Star Game scores have come to look less and less like regular-season scores.Even so, players from the 1980s said the game then was still much more competitive than now.“Guys really played,” Wilkens said. “If you looked at some of the All-Star Games back when we played, guys took it personal because you’d have bragging rights for the summer, the East against the West.”The one constant seems to be that players find the amount of defense played in their All-Star games to be perfectly sufficient.“You have the top guys from most of the teams in the league, so they lead their teams and get guys going,” said LaMarcus Aldridge of the Portland Trail Blazers, who is making his fourth All-Star appearance. “You have a bunch of guys who are overly competitive.”Well, maybe not too competitive. When peppered with questions Friday about what he was looking forward to most during All-Star weekend, Russell Westbrook of the Oklahoma Thunder said, “I’m just trying to find a way to get some rest.”Advertisement