FEB. 14, 2015
Smith Shone On Court and OffTo the Sports Editor:I once played golf in a fivesome with Dean Smith at Quaker Ridge in Scarsdale, N.Y. Afterward, we repaired to the lounge. All of us, except Coach Smith. He remained outside talking to our caddies.He finally came inside, and I went outside. One of the caddies told me Smith was going to send them sneakers. “He took down all our sizes,” the caddie said.That action typified what made Smith great as a person at least as much as his .776 winning percentage as a coach at North Carolina. His winning percentage at Quaker Ridge that day was 1.000.DONALD KURTZStacked Teams vs. Fair PlayTo the Sports Editor:Re: “After Auriemma’s Reign, UConn Could Lose Clout,” Feb. 8: Jeré Longman zeros in on the sad reality of big-time college sports.AdvertisementAs Louisiana Tech’s coach, Tyler Summitt, put it, referring to the ability to sustain a winning program, “Money inevitably is the driver behind a lot of this.” Is sports really interesting when there isn’t a level playing field? Where is the satisfaction in winning if you can stack your team with all the best players?AdvertisementIt’s sad that the institutions that are supposed to be providing the basis for fair competition in life (an education) instead are promoting the doctrine of moneyed privilege.DICK SCHWARTZ, Bellevue, Wash. Of Jenner, and Gender BiasTo the Sports Editor:Re “The Transition of Bruce Jenner: A Shock to Some, Visible to All,” Feb. 6: As a transgender woman, I thought your article was fairly respectful and appropriate, while understandably foregrounding the circus of publicity and curiosity that surrounds Mr. (or is it Ms.?) Jenner’s changing appearance.However, I feel it included a needless expression of disrespect to several figures who have transitioned in the public eye. The article listed “Chastity (now Chaz) Bono“ and several others. I am extremely proud of these brave trans people, but not of The Times for choosing to refer to them by their pretransition names, with their actual names in parentheses.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.HELEN HOLLAND BRONSTON, Burlingame, Calif.Little League ChicaneryTo the Sports Editor:Re “Hearts Won, Title Lost,” Feb. 12: I was taken aback by the reversal of fortunes for Chicago’s Little League championship team named after Jackie Robinson — a pioneer of the game. Chicago is not without its chicanery over the years. But to deprive young boys of such a cherished victory and national acclaim, over a boundary advantage, is a true travesty.American sports has become tainted by deflated footballs, elevator fisticuffs, drugs and beatings, and now boundary violations have turned boys from Chicago’s mean streets from heroes into defeated children. Was it worth the cost?VINCENT KAMIN, ChicagoTo the Sports Editor:Shame on Darold Butler, the manager of the Jackie Robinson West Team of Chicago. You, sir, have ruined the hope and pride of this team’s accomplishment.And you, Stephen D. Keener, the Little League International president and chief executive, have misdirected your punishment by including the players. How can you in good conscience penalize these young boys? Punish the culprits, not the innocents.MARY MCCORMICK, East Northport, N.Y.A Yankees Double StandardTo the Sports Editor:Re “Alex Rodriguez Offers Apology in Meeting With Yankees,” Feb. 10: The Yankee view is that bonuses for milestone home runs should not be paid, because of steroid use. This would sit more comfortably if the team felt it should also return money to the fans who came to cheer on Alex Rodriguez, and enrich the Yankees, while unaware of Rodriguez’s steroid usage.JERRY LUTZER, Setauket, N.Y.A version of this letter appears in print on February 15, 2015, on Page SP6 of the New York edition.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.