AdvertisementSupported by30 SecondsBy Ken BelsonNearly two weeks after he caught a game-winning touchdown pass to help the New England Patriots defeat the Seattle Seahawks, 28-24, in Super Bowl XLIX, wide receiver Julian Edelman was still buzzing. In addition to celebrating the Patriots’ fourth Super Bowl title at a victory parade and elsewhere, Edelman has been promoting CoachUp, a private coaching service. Edelman, who grew up in California and was considered an undersize quarterback at Kent State, was drafted in the seventh round in 2009. Though he blossomed as a wide receiver in recent years, he credits his coaches for helping him overcome the hurdles to succeed in the N.F.L.In fact, in New England’s A.F.C. divisional playoff game against the Baltimore Ravens, Edelman put his quarterback skills to good use, changing the momentum of the game. With the Patriots trailing by a touchdown, Tom Brady took the snap and threw across the field to his left to Edelman. He lofted the ball more than 30 yards to Danny Amendola, who caught it for a game-tying 51-yard touchdown. KEN BELSONQ. What is CoachUp about?A. Fortunately, my father was my first coach. But I had to outsource because my father outgrew what I needed. This pairs coaches at the highest level with people who want to make it to the pros.Q. Do you think there is too much specialization in sports?A. It’s a crazy argument. I was one of the last guys who played three sports. It’s so competitive these days. You almost have to do it. [A good coach] is going to teach them the proper way to do it.Q. The N.F.L. says it is possible to tackle safely, but football is naturally a dangerous game. Is it possible?A. It’s possible to tackle safely. I was taught to keep your head up. The N.F.L. is trying to crack down on it. Q. Do you think Kam Chancellor should have been penalized for the vicious hit on you during the fourth quarter of the Super Bowl?A. I don’t have an opinion on that. Kam Chancellor’s doing his job. Whether it was or wasn’t [a penalty], that’s for the refs to decide. Q. Did you get a concussion on that play?A. Due to our team policy, I can’t discuss that.Q. You stumbled after that play, but you stayed in the game. Does that mean you were not injured?A. Next question.Q. Were you tested for a concussion?A. I went through all the protocols.Q. You played quarterback in college. Where are you on the Patriots’ depth chart to replace Brady?A. Tom Brady‘s our quarterback. The quarterback is the C.E.O. of the football team. He knows his system well, works on it well, and has that poise and gut factor.Q. After winning the championship, what are you doing for your next act?A. I’m truthfully just trying to get off the high of the Super Bowl and getting back to work.Advertisement