By VIV BERNSTEINFEB. 14, 2015
Eighteen months after badly breaking his right leg in a crash, Tony Stewart is still not fully healed. He has had four operations so far — the latest on Dec. 1 to replace a rod in the leg — and another is planned after this season. It will be the third straight Sprint Cup season in which Stewart is not physically 100 percent.His mental health is not as easy to gauge. Whatever emotions linger from an accident in August in which Stewart struck and killed a 20-year-old driver at a dirt-track race in Canandaigua, N.Y., remain hidden from public view.Those who know Stewart say he is finally getting back to his old, playful self. But can he be the driver of old, too? At 43, and after two seasons of injury, anguish and middling success, can Stewart once again be the competitor who established himself as one of Nascar’s top drivers and fan favorites for more than a decade?These are some of the larger questions facing Stewart and Nascar as drivers return to the track on Feb. 22 for the Sprint Cup season opener, the Daytona 500.AdvertisementAsk Stewart and he demonstrates an outward, steely resolve.“I’ve never questioned who I am and what I do,” he said last month in Charlotte, N.C. “We’ve had two rough years back to back, which I don’t think I’d wish that on anybody. But deep down inside, I know who I am as a person and I know who I am as a driver, and that’s what I want to get back to. That’s what makes the start of 2015 so exciting for me, is flipping the page and getting ready to get focused again on what we love doing.”AdvertisementIt was not long ago that Stewart was at his best, outracing Carl Edwards in a riveting playoff that culminated in a victory at Homestead-Miami Speedway in November 2011 for his third Cup championship. That title cemented Stewart’s place among the best drivers in Nascar history. Only four drivers have won more than his three titles: Richard Petty, Dale Earnhardt, Jimmie Johnson and Jeff Gordon.Stewart fell back to ninth place in 2012, but he won three races and made the playoff for the eighth time in nine years. Then came 2013. Stewart, who has maintained a passion for his dirt-track racing roots and continued to compete on the side, sustained a broken tibia and fibula in a gruesome crash during a sprint-car race in Iowa in August 2013. He missed the final 15 races of the Cup schedule and finished 29th in the standings.Although he returned to Cup racing in 2014, Stewart was not as competitive week to week and was in 19th place by August. Still, he returned to racing those small, powerful open-wheel sprint cars last summer. But on Aug. 9, he struck and killed Kevin Ward Jr. during a dirt-track race at Canandaigua Motorsports Park after Ward had stepped out of his racecar to confront Stewart on the track after a crash.Stewart missed three races amid an investigation, and a grand jury declined to indict him. He finished 25th in the standings, capped by a 43rd-place finish at Homestead.The 2014 season was the first in Stewart’s 16-year Cup career in which he had failed to win a race.“I think the last two years have been tough on everybody, but they’ve been extremely tough on him,” said Greg Zipadelli, vice president for competition at Stewart-Haas Racing and a former crew chief who won two Cup titles with Stewart at Joe Gibbs Racing.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I know for a fact he’s ready to go out and go racing,” Zipadelli said. “It’s all that man has. It’s all that he lives for. So if anybody can do it, anybody can find that inner drive to do it, it’s going to be Tony.”Stewart appears determined not to dwell on what has happened, at least not publicly. He brushed aside questions about his health and the recent past when he met with reporters Thursday at Daytona International Speedway.Advertisement“We’re talking about 2015 now,” he said. “You’re talking about something that we talked about in 2014 that we already covered. I mean, it’s not an issue. It’s not something I’m thinking about. It’s just kind of in the past. I’m ready to go.”That seems like the ornery Stewart of old. But those who know him say he is not the same person.“How could it not change him?” said Kevin Harvick, who won the Sprint Cup championship for Stewart-Haas Racing last season.But like others, Harvick said he had seen a different Stewart of late, one who is eager to race again.“He’s upbeat, he’s happy, he’s smiling, he’s enthused,” Harvick said. “He’s involved and he’s out doing the things that he likes to do. And as his friend, that’s what you want to see.”Still, others do not know what to expect when Stewart returns.“Will we see the same old Tony Stewart? My knee-jerk reaction is no, he’s a different Tony Stewart,” the veteran driver and broadcaster Kyle Petty said, pointing not only to Stewart’s accidents but to his increased focus off the track, including the recent purchase of a racing series.No one knows if Stewart will ever compete for another title. But maybe that should not be the goal right now, anyway.“I don’t know if he can get that fire back,” said Darrell Waltrip, the motor-sports broadcaster, who won three Cup titles in his racing career. “I think for him, just being content and happy would be a big accomplishment in this year coming up. A content and happy Tony Stewart can win a few races.”A version of this article appears in print on February 15, 2015, on Page SP12 of the New York edition with the headline: His Eyes Fixed Straight Ahead, Stewart Plans Resurgence After Two Trying Years.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.