
Extra Bases By                     
 TYLER KEPNER
 
FEB. 14, 2015
Spring training camps open this week in Florida and Arizona, heralding the start of a baseball season sure to be full of surprises. We’ll have plenty of time for serious predictions — Could the Mets have more wins than the Yankees? Could the Giants win the title in an odd-numbered year? — but here’s a look at a calendar of the absurd:Feb. 20 — The PITTSBURGH PIRATES, having already used the former Yankees Russell Martin, Chris Stewart and now Francisco Cervelli as their catcher, decide to go all in. They extend spring training invitations to Jake Gibbs, Rick Cerone, Butch Wynegar, Matt Nokes, Mike Stanley, Jorge Posada, Chris Widger, Sal Fasano and Yogi Berra.March 18 — Buck Showalter, the manager of the BALTIMORE ORIOLES, asks the team’s owner, Peter Angelos, for permission to interview with the Republican National Committee to be a candidate for president of the United States. Showalter argues that the move would be a promotion, but when Angelos demands the Lincoln Memorial and the deed to the Reagan Ranch as compensation, Showalter stays put.April 6 — On opening day, the MIAMI MARLINS and their art-dealer owner, Jeffrey Loria, unveil a hulking statue of Giancarlo Stanton to commemorate his record 13-year, $325 million contract. The monument, which rises above right-center field to match the funky home run sculpture in left-center, embarrasses Stanton until he realizes he can opt out of the tribute after six innings.April 10 — The TEXAS RANGERS, whose players lost a ludicrous 2,281 days to the disabled list last season, open their home schedule by becoming the first team in major league history to wear uniforms made of Bubble Wrap. Inexplicably, the home white jerseys still say “Texas” instead of “Rangers.”AdvertisementApril 24 — Dismayed by his latest crotch-grabbing antics, the PHILADELPHIA PHILLIES devise a crowd-pleasing punishment for their tough-guy closer, Jonathan Papelbon: a role as the villain in the newest Rocky sequel, “Creed,” now filming in Philadelphia.AdvertisementMay 6 — Deeply missing the game he loves, the former commissioner Bud Selig becomes a regular at Miller Park, home of the MILWAUKEE BREWERS. But things take a dark turn when Selig hires a childhood pal, the former United States senator Herb Kohl, to conduct an investigation into preservatives and additives in the sausage race after Chorizo’s suspicious winning streak.May 11 — Matt Harvey, recently given the title of New York City bureau chief by Derek Jeter’s website, is slapped with a six-month suspension by the METS’ media relations department. Harvey had falsely claimed to his New York Rangers buddies that he was hit by a barrage of Tastykakes thrown by enemy Phillies fans while warming up in the bullpen the previous day.May 12 — Concerned that his 2014 World Series Most Valuable Player Award has outshined his 2014 Silver Slugger Award, the SAN FRANCISCO GIANTs ace Madison Bumgarner serves as the designated hitter on a trip to Houston. He belts two more grand slams.May 21 — A day after David Letterman ends his run as the “Late Show” host on CBS, the YANKEES’ Mark Teixeira surprises club officials by retiring to become Letterman’s replacement. Teixeira, buoyed by the success of his “Foul Territory” comedy shorts on the YES Network’s website, appoints Bernie Williams as band leader.May 29 — The TORONTO BLUE JAYS, who have baseball’s longest postseason drought, hire Kelly Gruber from their 1992 championship team to inspire the struggling Josh Donaldson. Encouraged by the presence of another Blue Jays third baseman with a blond mullet, Donaldson goes 5 for 5.June 8 — On the first day of the amateur draft, the KANSAS CITY ROYALS — encouraged by the example of pitcher Brandon Finnegan, who played in the College World Series and the major league World Series in 2014 — select players from the Little League World Series, the World Series of Poker, the World Series of Fighting, the World Series of Golf and the World Series of Gin Rummy.June 14 — Desperate for relievers at the end of a tough three-game series in Detroit, CLEVELAND INDIANS Manager Terry Francona, the maestro of the matchup, activates a long-ago lefty, Atlee Hammaker, for a crucial at-bat. Hammaker and Tribe catcher Yan Gomes become the first father-in-law/son-in-law battery in major league history.AdvertisementJune 22 — Hoping to reverse lackluster civic support for the town’s 2024 Olympic bid, the BOSTON RED SOX use a day off to demonstrate various events in the Summer Games. While Dustin Pedroia and Xander Bogaerts make a nifty pair in synchronized swimming, and Shane Victorino nails his ribbon routine in rhythmic gymnastics, Pablo Sandoval sustains a season-ending injury in an unfortunate pommel horse accident.June 28 — Zack Greinke, a deep-thinking ace of the LOS ANGELES DODGERS, waives his pending opt-out clause when the team offers a contract extension with a twist: Greinke can be co-general manager. Catcher A. J. Ellis, who was once told by Greinke that a good way to improve the team would be to trade him for a prospect, decides not to put down his deposit on that beachfront condo.July 1 — In an effort to speed up the pace of games, baseball makes good on its wish to install a pitch clock. The league chooses Tropicana Field, home of the TAMPA BAY RAYS, whose average game time last season (3 hours 19 minutes) was the longest in baseball. Concerns about overflowing crowds of rowdy fans counting down with the clock do not apply as Rays attendance continues to dwindle.July 14 — With the CINCINNATI REDS hosting the All-Star Game, Pete Rose is allowed to make a motivational speech to the National League team. The American League’s catchers, Russell Martin, Sal Perez and Matt Wieters, all sustain separated shoulders in home-plate collisions, but Commissioner Rob Manfred forgives Rose by pointing out that players really do take the All-Star Game seriously.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.July 23 — The CHICAGO CUBS’ manager, Joe Maddon, parks his beloved R.V., “Cousin Eddie,” at a shady downtown garage. While the attendant takes it on a joy ride around Chicagoland, Maddon enjoys a madcap day off in which he visits the sky deck of the Willis Tower, studies Seurat at the Art Institute of Chicago, impersonates Abe Froman at a snooty French restaurant and leads a band in “Twist and Shout” at a parade down Dearborn Street.July 31 — After a series of deals in which he discards his entire 25-man roster for a new one, the OAKLAND ATHLETICS’ Billy Beane trades himself to Apple for the iGeneralManager, a hand-held device that sends players frequent push notifications to tell them where they have been traded.Aug. 3 — John Schuerholz, the president of the ATLANTA BRAVES and a top adviser to the commissioner’s office on rule changes, decrees that the “K” symbol for strikeout now officially stands for “Kimbrel.” Braves closer Craig Kimbrel, who struck out half his opposing hitters in 2012, has raised his percentage to 100 as leaguewide whiff trends continue.Aug. 9 — The SAN DIEGO PADRES, established in 1969, finally get their first no-hitter, but it’s not by James Shields, Tyson Ross, Ian Kennedy or Andrew Cashner. The magic moment belongs to Odrisamer Despaigne, who had a 3.36 earned run average in 16 starts last season. A wave of Odrisamania erupts from San Ysidro to Solana Beach.Aug. 23 — General Motors tries to capitalize on the success of the new DETROIT TIGERS slugger Yoenis Cespedes, who owns an Avorza Lamborghini Aventador with tailpipes that shoot fire. Inspired by an episode of “The Simpsons,” the company introduces “The Yoenis — The Car Built For Yoenis,” with tail fins, two bubble domes and a musical horn. G.M. promptly goes out of business.AdvertisementSept. 1 — Rosters expand, and the ARIZONA DIAMONDBACKS call up the outfield prospect Socrates Brito. Asked why the Diamondbacks are 40 games out of first place, Brito replies, “As for me, all I know is that I know nothing.”Sept. 13 — Cruising to another A.L. Most Valuable Player Award, the LOS ANGELES ANGELS’ Mike Trout misses his team’s game against the Astros to suit up as the starting running back for his beloved Philadelphia Eagles. Trout plans to take after another former Angel and All-Star Game M.V.P., Bo Jackson, by playing two sports — without the catastrophic hip injury.Sept. 17 — The MINNESOTA TWINS’ Ervin Santana, who signs many tweets with #SmellBaseball, introduces an app that somehow emanates the scent of broiled hot dogs, freshly cut grass and old-time Topps chewing gum through a cellphone. Santana wisely takes the equipment manager’s advice to leave it at that.Sept. 27 — With a week left in the regular season, the HOUSTON ASTROS break their 2013 major league record for strikeouts with their 1,531st whiff. Chris Carter, Jason Castro, Evan Gattis, Colby Rasmus, Jonathan Singleton and George Springer have each topped 200 strikeouts, yet contact-hitting machine Jose Altuve has zero.Oct. 2 — No player hit more than 40 home runs last season, but the WASHINGTON NATIONALS’ Bryce Harper blasts No. 50 against the Mets at Citi Field. The ball disappears into the tangle of auto-glass shops far beyond right field, but Harper is unimpressed: His off-season 340-yard destruction of a golf ball, he says, was much more majestic.Oct. 3 — After helping his team clinch the A.L. Central title the night before, CHICAGO WHITE SOX closer David Robertson throws an inning left-handed, becoming the first righty to pitch lefty in a major league game since Greg A. Harris in 1995. Robertson, who owns a left-hander’s glove and throws with his left hand during batting practice, records his major-league-record 63rd save.Oct. 4 — After spending his entire career as a utility man in St. Louis, the COLORADO ROCKIES’ Daniel Descalso finishes the season with a .397 average and the batting title. Descalso becomes the fifth different Rockie in the last nine years to win a batting crown. Strangely, he hits just .086 on the road.Oct. 7 — The ST. LOUIS CARDINALS, who have reached the N.L. Championship Series nine times since 2000, successfully petition the league to cancel the formality of their division series and allow them more time to prepare for the inevitable.Nov. 4 — The SEATTLE MARINERS’ coaching staff opens itself to worldwide ridicule by calling for the plodding slugger Nelson Cruz to steal home with two outs in the bottom of the ninth inning of Game 7 of the World Series. While Cruz is caught easily to end the season, the coaches of the local N.F.L. team insist it was the smart move.The Extra Bases notebook article last Sunday about absurd events in the coming Major League Baseball season misstated the year Atlanta Braves closer Craig Kimbrel struck out half his opposing hitters. It was 2012, not 2013.A version of this article appears in print on February 15, 2015, on Page SP8 of the New York edition with the headline: The Coming Silly Season.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »