AdvertisementSupported byBy Benjamin HoffmanRussell Westbrook was one of the least enthusiastic players at the N.B.A.’s media day on Friday. Sitting on a podium and continually checking his phone, he gave one-word answers and seemed as if he would rather have been anywhere else. That sullen player was nowhere to be seen on the court Sunday night at Madison Square Garden as Westbrook, an Oklahoma City Thunder guard, caught fire in his fourth All-Star Game, throwing down dunks and easily hitting long 3-pointers on his way to a record 27 points in the first half and a total of 41 points, just missing Wilt Chamberlain’s record of 42, set in the 1962 All-Star Game.Stephen Curry said he and the rest of the West squad had not realized that Westbrook was just a few points short of the record until the game was nearly over. But he added that the game had been close enough that the idea of feeding him the ball to break the record was not considered — a decision Westbrook said he was fine with. Westbrook also pointed out that he had plenty of opportunities to get there himself.“Somebody told me, but by that time we were just trying to find a way to win the game,” Westbrook said. “I missed about six or seven layups, though, so I definitely could have had it.”Westbrook became the third player to score 40 or more points in an All-Star Game. Michael Jordan scored 40 in 1988.“It’s definitely an honor to be grouped with those two guys,” Westbrook said of Chamberlain and Jordan. “Especially in an All-Star Game.”In an event often ridiculed for a lack of effort by its participants, Westbrook had the crowd gasping on multiple plays in the first half and overshadowed LeBron James of the Cleveland Cavaliers, who had 22 in the half — 2 short of the previous record of 24, which was shared by Glen Rice (1997) and Kyrie Irving (2014).James, who finished the game with 30 points, called Westbrook one of the N.B.A.’s greatest talents and gave him credit for coming out with a clear goal of making a statement.“Westbrook came forward from the start,” James said. “He’s unbelievable.”After Westbrook’s record-setting half, he did not re-emerge until there were less than five minutes left in the third quarter, but he was back at it, attacking the rim and seemingly caring far more about the game than any other player. In one sequence, he threw down a monster dunk, stole the ball from Jeff Teague and dunked it again, with the two baskets giving the West back a lead it had squandered.Westbrook, often known for volatility as well as talent, can be a lightning rod, but when James was asked what Westbrook needed to do to reach the top level of players, the answer was simple.“Be Russell Westbrook and stop caring about what everyone else thinks,” James said. “Just be yourself.”Westbrook was named the game’s most valuable player, and for once, he appeared relaxed while talking with the news media. He was reminded after the game that he had said that the thing he was looking most forward to over All-Star weekend was “getting some rest.” Asked whether he had found some time to get that rest, Westbrook cracked a broad smile. “I definitely did,” he said. “I found some time to get some rest during timeouts, during halftime and when I was on the bench.”Advertisement