AdvertisementSupported byWinter Sports RoundupBy The Associated PressThe American figure skater Polina Edmunds, who entered the free skate in fourth place, rallied to win at the Four Continents championships Sunday in Seoul, South Korea.Edmunds, 16, hit the wrong edge on an early combination, but she landed most of her other big jumps to become the second-youngest woman to win the event.The Four Continents event provides a gauge for skaters headed to the world championships, set for next month in Shanghai, but it does not include the powerful European skaters.Satoko Miyahara of Japan, who was in first after the short program, had an uneven free skate, including a fall on a triple lutz. She took the silver. Rika Hongo of Japan earned the bronze medal.A SECOND SKATING GOLD MEDAL Brittany Bowe won her second title of the speedskating single-distance world championships, taking gold in the 1,500 meters in Heerenveen, the Netherlands, to add to her victory Friday in the 1,000.Ireen Wust of the Netherlands, the defending champion, finished in second, and Bowe’s American teammate Heather Richardson was third.Pavel Kulizhnikov of Russia won the men’s 500. In the first mass-start races to be included in a world championships, Arjan Stroetinga of the Netherlands prevailed on the men’s side, and his countrywoman Irene Schouten triumphed on the women’s.CROSS-COUNTRY TITLE DECIDED Marit Bjorgen of Norway secured the overall cross-country World Cup title with four races to go as she finished in second in a women’s 10-kilometer race in Ostersund, Sweden. Her compatriot Finn Hagen Krogh won the men’s 15-kilometer event.Charlotte Kalla of Sweden beat Bjorgen, a six-time Olympic champion, by 36.4 seconds.LATVIAN WINS BOBSLED CROWN Oskars Melbardis of Latvia finished his title-winning campaign in the four-man bobsled with a win in Sochi, Russia, in the last race of the World Cup season.Also in Sochi, Alexander Tretiakov of Russia captured a skeleton World Cup victory on the same track where he won an Olympic gold a year earlier. A FIRST IN FREESTYLE Jean-Frédéric Chapuis of France earned his first freestyle World Cup victory of the season by winning a ski-cross race in Are, Sweden. Anna Holmlund of Sweden won the women’s race, climbing atop the podium for the first time since 2011.GERMAN WINS IN SKI FLYING Severin Freund of Germany won a World Cup ski flying event in Vikersund, Norway. Anders Fannemel of Norway set a world record by soaring 251.5 meters in the first round but managed to jump only 202 meters in the second round, finishing second. It was the second day in a row that a world record was set on the hill, after Peter Prevc soared 250 meters on Saturday. A TIE IN SKI JUMP Sara Takanashi of Japan and Daniela Iraschko-Stolz of Austria shared first in the weekend’s second World Cup ski jump event in Ljubno, Slovenia. (AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE)Advertisement