AdvertisementSupported byN.B.A. NotebookBy Andrew Keh, Benjamin Hoffman and Zach SchonbrunThe Knicks have agreed to buy out the remainder of forward Amar’e Stoudemire’s contract, freeing him to join another club before the N.B.A. resumes its schedule this week, according to a person with knowledge of the situation.Stoudemire and the Knicks will make a formal announcement about the agreement on Monday, the person said. The Daily News first reported the deal on Sunday night during the All-Star Game at Madison Square Garden.Stoudemire is in the final season of the five-year, $100 million contract he signed with the Knicks in 2010, when he joined the team as a free agent. He was due to make $23.4 million salary this season.Stoudemire had an excellent first season with the Knicks, averaging 25.3 points and 8.2 rebounds in 78 games. But injuries reduced his effectiveness in the following seasons.This season, Stoudemire missed 17 games with the struggling Knicks before the All-Star Game while battling a variety of ailments, including a sore right knee. He was averaging 12.0 points and 6.8 rebounds.News about the deal was filtering around the Garden after the All-Star Game, including to Carmelo Anthony, who said Stoudemire’s presence on the Knicks was one of the main reasons Anthony was comfortable joining the team in a trade in 2011.“I couldn’t believe it,” said Anthony, who was informed of the move after playing in the game. “I thought they were lying.”Anthony added, “Amar’e brought something back to New York that New York had been missing for a long time.”Anthony said he would not call Stoudemire on Sunday night but wished him well.“He wants to play for a contender, so I don’t think anyone should hold that back from him,” Anthony said.SILVER HAS GOAL FOR LOTTERY  Fans of the Knicks may be tallying all the losses this season as they dream of landing Duke’s Jahlil Okafor, the prize of this year’s draft, but the draft lottery, in its 31st season, will make that more difficult than most realize. And in the coming months, N.B.A. Commissioner Adam Silver has promised to make losing even less attractive to teams.Speaking before the All-Star weekend’s Saturday night events in Brooklyn, Silver insisted that the system worked as is, but he acknowledged a widespread perception that it did not. In an interesting concession, he said one of the goals of his second year as commissioner would be to reassure fans by adjusting the system to more clearly show that there was little incentive to lose games.“I don’t think the system is as broken as some may suggest,” Silver said. “But it’s going to require a tweak.”Okafor, a 6-foot-11 freshman center, is the type of player who can turn a struggling team around in a hurry, but there is no guarantee that the Knicks will get the chance to draft him. Unlike the N.F.L., which automatically gives the worst team the top pick, the N.B.A. has a system that gives the team with the worst record just a 25 percent chance at getting the pick. In practice, the odds of getting the top pick have proved even harder than that, with just four teams in 30 seasons receiving the top pick after having the league’s worst record.Because of the disincentive to lose, Silver said, he believes that all teams are working toward success in their own ways and that any tweak would simply be to convince the public of that.“We want to ensure our fans that our teams are always undergoing a process to try to field the best possible team on the floor,” he said.At its last meeting, the league’s Board of Governors considered a proposal to discourage teams from tanking, and while a majority of the teams supported the idea, it did not reach the 75 percent threshold needed to pass.Silver may believe that no team is losing on purpose, but as the season winds down, and the Knicks consider shutting down Carmelo Anthony so he can recover from his various injuries, that belief may be tested. BENJAMIN HOFFMANTICKETS STAY HOT ITEMS  Despite subfreezing temperatures and an arctic wind whipping across New York, the secondhand market for All-Star Game tickets stayed hot until the tipoff.As of late Sunday afternoon, average ticket prices for the game were up 105.1 percent over last year’s contest, at $2,091.68, compared with $1,019.89 in New Orleans in 2014, according to data compiled by TiqIQ.Average ticket prices had spiked in the last couple of days, after dipping to $1,760 on Feb. 8 following a high of $3,770 on Jan. 24. The cheapest tickets were being sold for $964, while the most expensive ticket was in Section 107 (center court), eight rows up. That was listed recently for $10,200.Ticket prices for the All-Star contests on Saturday night at Barclays Center, on the other hand, dropped considerably as the event approached, and the average price ($955.81) ultimately fell short of last season’s number ($992.80).For a fifth straight year, the N.B.A. refrained from offering a public sale of tickets to Sunday’s All-Star Game or Saturday night’s event.The lack of available tickets and the high cost of attendance might have contributed to strong television ratings. Turner Sports said Saturday night’s broadcast on TNT earned a 4.4 overnight rating, the second highest in the event’s history and up 19 percent from 2014. TNT had 6.1 million total viewers, including a 7.2 household rating in New York City. ZACH SCHONBRUNAdvertisement