By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSFEB. 15, 2015
Patrick Sharp scored the winner in a shootout to give the Chicago Blackhawks a 2-1 victory over the visiting Pittsburgh Penguins on Sunday.Jonathan Toews and Patrick Kane also scored in the shootout as the Blackhawks earned their second straight win. Halfway through an eight-game homestand, the Blackhawks have earned 6 of a possible 8 points.Nick Spaling scored in the third period for Pittsburgh, which had won four of five. Marc-Andre Fleury made 31 saves through overtime but was unable to stop any of Chicago’s shootout attempts.David Perron and Sidney Crosby scored in the shootout, preserving the Penguins’ chance for a big road win. But Blackhawks goaltender Corey Crawford stopped Kris Letang’s shot, and then Sharp beat Fleury on the right side.  BLUES 2, PANTHERS 1 Jori Lehtera scored the winning goal in the fifth round of a shootout, and St. Louis won at Florida. Jaden Schwartz scored in regulation for the Blues, who are 15-3 in their last 18 games. They earned their third consecutive win and sixth in a row over the Panthers.Advertisement CAPITALS 5, DUCKS 3 Alex Ovechkin scored twice in the first period to take over the N.H.L. lead in goals, helping Washington to a win at Anaheim.AdvertisementOvechkin also set up two goals by Andre Burakovsky, and Marcus Johansson scored the go-ahead goal at 3 minutes 27 seconds of the second period.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Ovechkin’s second goal was his 36th, one more than the Rangers’ Rick Nash has.FLYERS 2, SABRES 1 Michael Raffl and Matt Read scored for visiting Philadelphia in a win over Buffalo.Ray Emery made 21 saves as the Flyers ended a two-game losing streak.LIGHTNING 5, SHARKS 2 Steven Stamkos scored his 30th goal of the season, and Tampa Bay beat host San Jose.Alex Killorn, Ondrej Palat, Cedric Paquette and Ryan Callahan also scored for the Lightning. Logan Couture and Brent Burns scored for the Sharks, who lost their fifth straight at home and four of five over all.PREDATORS TRADE FOR TWO PLAYERS Nashville, the N.H.L.’s top team, made a big move well before the trade deadline to boost its roster for the playoffs.The Predators announced a trade with Toronto that brought back defenseman Cody Franson and forward Mike Santorelli. In return, the struggling Maple Leafs received Nashville’s first-round pick in June’s draft, along with forwards Brendan Leipsic and Olli Jokinen, who had been a healthy scratch in recent games for the Predators.A version of this article appears in print on February 16, 2015, on Page D4 of the New York edition with the headline: Blackhawks Hold Off Penguins in a Shootout.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.