By JOE LEMIREFEB. 15, 2015
Cam Talbot, thrust into the role of the Rangers’ starting goaltender after an injury to Henrik Lundqvist, was passed over by a premier junior hockey league, was overlooked by the biggest N.C.A.A. Division I programs and was not drafted by any N.H.L. team.Despite the long odds of his journey to the top of his profession, one need not look far from his native Caledonia, Ontario, to find the next Cam Talbot. It says so right on two players’ hockey sweaters.The back of the uniforms for the Junior C team in nearby Glanbrook — fittingly named the Rangers — is the domain of sponsors like O’Neil’s Farm Equipment and Mitchell Abbott Insurance. But Talbot is personally defraying the expenses of the two teenage goaltenders playing for his old coaching staff, so their jerseys bear his name on the back, while other players’ show the team sponsors.It is a token of appreciation from a growing star to his hometown.“Talbot gave a lot of young players something to look up to,” said Michigan Tech goaltender Jamie Phillips, who is also from Caledonia, a town of about 10,000 outside Hamilton.Advertisement“It’s nice to see when you turn on the TV and hear the name ‘Caledonia, Ontario,’ ” Phillips added. “You feel proud that it’s where you’re from.”AdvertisementLundqvist is expected to miss at least two more weeks as he convalesces after a vascular injury to his neck.As a rookie last season, Talbot had a .941 save percentage, leading all N.H.L. goaltenders who appeared in at least 20 games. This season he has a .918 save percentage. He has started the last six games, with the Rangers going 4-1-1, and the team is set to visit the Metropolitan Division-leading Islanders on Monday night.“The organization is very confident in him,” said Jeff Gorton, assistant general manager for the Rangers.He added: “There’s no way to do it until he does it, right? It’s just a matter of gaining the experience and getting the opportunity and seeing what he does with it.”Talbot, 27, started playing hockey around age 8, late by Canadian standards, and played goalie because no one else wanted to try. He broke his elbow and his foot and sustained a bad high-ankle sprain that slowed his development.None of the Ontario Hockey League teams drafted Talbot, so when he was 16, he tried out for the Hamilton Junior Red Wings, a Junior A team, and was cut.A year later, in 2004, Talbot again went to training camp, planning to audition for the new coach, John McDonald. But the club had already added two new goalies, and Talbot was shown the door again. A short while later, though, a residency issue arose for one of the goalies who had made the team.Advertisement“So I actually had released him, and then I had to call him and eat crow,” McDonald said. “Thank God I did.”By midseason, Talbot had established himself, and his team traded away his counterpart and installed Talbot full time. Around that time, in 2005, Gorton said, Rangers scouts in Ontario began recognizing Talbot’s long-term potential. They filed reports recommending that the team keep track of his development but not draft him.“There was no interest, no matter what level he played at, or didn’t appear to be,” his father, Mark, said.By Talbot’s third season with the Junior Red Wings, colleges started taking an interest. But only one, Alabama-Huntsville, was a Division I team, so that was where he went. A few other Division I programs contacted Talbot late in the process, after he started for the silver-medal-winning Canada East team in the World Junior A Championships and was later named the most valuable player of the Ontario Provincial Junior Hockey League’s Western Conference.“He stuck with his commitment because he thought that was the right thing to do,” Mark Talbot said. “In hindsight, it paid off in spades for him.”One can hardly start a conversation with one of Cam Talbot’s former coaches without the adjectives “big” and “athletic” bandied about regularly to describe the 6-foot-3-inch, 195-pound Talbot.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“It just looked like there was a goalie there somewhere,” the former Alabama-Huntsville coach Danton Cole said.While all goalies in their late teens are unfinished products, Talbot was further from a professional track than most.Although Talbot had always been quick with lateral movements, Cole said he needed to improve his off-ice work and trim down, which he did in short order.AdvertisementDetermination was never an issue. McDonald said Talbot had a “steadfast” work ethic and was the rare teenager to watch game film. Talbot delayed his entry to Alabama-Huntsville to finish some business administration classes he had started at nearby Mohawk College.Even during blizzards, he would drag his goaltending coach, Pat Dipronio, to the rink. He would spend hours on the ice after practice facing shots from the team’s top scorer, Spencer Abbott, a future Hockey East player of the year at Maine who now plays for the Maple Leafs’ A.H.L. affiliate.McDonald said that if Talbot gave up a goal in practice, he wanted the scorer to go back to his starting position and take the same route to the net “so he could analyze how he beat him the first time so he would never beat him again on that.”Not much has changed. Phillips works out with Talbot at Hamilton’s On Ice Goaltending School in the off-season and said he often heard Talbot tell shooters, “Do it again, do it again.”As a junior in the 2009-10 season, Talbot led Alabama-Huntsville to an overtime victory over Niagara for the College Hockey America conference title, leading to the program’s second N.C.A.A. tournament appearance, where the Chargers played the nation’s No. 1 team, Miami of Ohio, in the first round. Talbot made 36 saves, but U.A.H. lost, 2-1, after Miami scored two power-play goals.“They gave them a really good run, and it was all Cam,” Gorton said. “They were on his back.”After that playoff run, the Rangers’ scouting staff gave the team’s goaltending coach, Benoit Allaire, tapes of Talbot. Allaire saw a player he could work with, which persuaded the Rangers to give Talbot a free-agent contract.Talbot played three full seasons with the Rangers’ A.H.L. affiliate in Hartford and improved each season, ascending from backup goalie to a shared role and then the clear starter.“When he was with us, he earned his position,” Hartford Coach Ken Gernander said. “Every opportunity he was given, he rose to the challenge.”AdvertisementIn Lundqvist’s absence, Talbot is again showing he belongs.“He took the long way around, right?” Mark Talbot said by telephone from Pepsi Center in Denver, where he watched from a luxury suite as his son made 26 saves in a 6-3 Rangers win on Thursday. “I’m still kind of pinching myself. And now here I am, right?”A version of this article appears in print on February 16, 2015, on Page D4 of the New York edition with the headline: Proving Himself, Over and Over.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.