By JONAH BROMWICHFEB. 15, 2015
Every week, The New York Times will choose one essential game to watch, highlighting hot teams, winning and losing streaks and statistical intrigue in the N.B.A.Dallas at Oklahoma City, Thursday, 8 p.m. Eastern, TNTA plague of injuries has swept through the N.B.A.’s Western Conference. The Rockets lost Dwight Howard. The Clippers are playing without Blake Griffin. The Pelicans are missing Anthony Davis.The fate of the West was already up in the air this season, one of the more chaotic and exciting in recent memory. Now, with so many stars on the bench as the second half of the season is set to begin, the standings are primed for some reorganization.The Thunder’s Russell Westbrook and Kevin Durant were sidelined early this season, which left Oklahoma City adrift behind two other teams expected to contend for a championship, the Clippers and the Spurs. But now, with the Clippers likely to drop some games in Griffin’s absence and the Spurs holding steady in seventh place, the Thunder, who were playing well going into the All-Star break and sit only a half-game behind the Suns for eighth place, have a chance to finish the season ahead of both squads — a possibility their fans might see as karmic justice after Oklahoma City’s considerable setbacks.AdvertisementSince Durant made his season debut on Dec. 2, the Thunder have re-established themselves as one of the best teams in the league in both offensive and defensive efficiency while going 23-13, a record tied for third-best in the West in that stretch.AdvertisementThe team remains an unusual contender in an era of intricate offensive systems and rosters filled with scoring threats; the Thunder merely hand the ball off to their two superstars.With opposing teams focused on Durant and Westbrook, the Thunder’s other players are freed up to collect easy rebounds. That approach to offense makes Oklahoma City difficult to beat when Durant and Westbrook are around and vulnerable when they are not (or when one is having an off night).The Thunder might find more consistency with more reliable scoring to complement their stars. They have tried to find such a source of baskets, but so far, the mission has been a bust. Dion Waiters, whom the team acquired from Cleveland last month, has shot 37 percent from the field in his last 10 games, and Oklahoma City has few other candidates who seem to have the potential to blossom into consistent scoring threats off the bench.The Dallas Mavericks have myriad scoring options, but the injury bug has hit them, too, with Rajon Rondo sitting out for a couple of weeks because of facial fractures and leaving his team short-handed at point guard. Without Rondo, Dallas has been relatively unpredictable from night to night, although the Mavericks have played well enough to maintain a spot in the middle of the West standings.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Rondo’s absence may benefit Dallas in the long run. Although he has occasionally been stunning — he racked up nine assists on Dec. 20, for instance, his Mavericks debut — he has yet to click with the team’s offense, which was the most efficient unit in the league at the time of the trade. Some time apart may give Dallas a chance to evaluate why its offense has dropped nine spots in the rankings since then.One reason is that Rondo’s reluctance to shoot has grown even stronger. Rondo has it in him to be an effective scorer, but until Coach Rick Carlisle can coax him into being a more willing cog in the Mavericks’ machine, the team will suffer on offense.On the other hand, there is a strong correlation between Rondo’s presence and the team’s effectiveness on defense, the Mavericks’ biggest weakness over the past few seasons. That should have the team’s fans hoping to see Rondo return soon.Offensive chemistry can be improved, particularly when the problem is a new addition and when a savvy coach like Carlisle is at the helm. But the more time Rondo sits out, the less likely it is that he will jell with his teammates by the time it truly matters.A version of this article appears in print on February 16, 2015, on Page D3 of the New York edition with the headline: N.B.A. Game of the Week: Mavericks at Thunder.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.