AdvertisementSupported byGlobal SoccerBy Rob HughesLONDON — The Champions League appears to have an effect similar to smelling salts in rousing the consciousness of Germany’s top clubs.Bayern Munich somnolently came out of the midwinter break at the end of January, losing heavily and uncharacteristically in the league. But on Saturday, sensing that such lethargy would be exposed in European competition, it went flat-out against Hamburg.Arjen Robben danced down his wing and cut in to score, once with his left foot and once with the right. Thomas Müller, looking at his sharpest since the World Cup final last summer, also scored twice, as did the substitute Franck Ribéry. Oh, and Mario Götze and Robert Lewandowski got in on the act, too.The final score — 8-0 — was Munich’s biggest win in the Bundesliga in 30 years and Hamburg’s heaviest loss ever, although when the same teams lined up in the same Allianz Arena two years ago, the pummeling was only marginally less demoralizing, 9-2 in favor of Bayern. Both managers knew exactly what spurred the ruthlessness in Munich.“I’m happy because we are back in the groove,” said Bayern Coach Pep Guardiola. “We’ll turn our focus to the Champions League now.”Pep and his team have found their focus in the nick of time. On Tuesday evening, they will be in Ukraine to face Shakhtar Donetsk. The game will take place in Lviv, about 730 miles from Donetsk, because of the fighting in the eastern part of the country, and while Shakhtar will be separated from many of its supporters, there is ample evidence that the dedicated Brazilians who enhance the team of the beleaguered Ukrainian champion will be up for the task.It should, in short, be a stimulating contest between the “home” players such as Luiz Adriano, Douglas Costa, Alex Teixeira and their Croatian captain Darijo Srna and the high-powered and fully awakened Bayern Munich.“I’ll never forget this day for the rest of my life,” Hamburg’s humiliated coach, Joe Zinnbauer, said on the platform he shared with Guardiola. “We have to apologize to our fans because 8-0 is unbelievable, though we did meet incredibly strong opponents today.“The margin of victory,” Zinnbauer concluded, “is the right one.”It may have been, but it was only the second-highest scoring game in Germany on Saturday.Wolfsburg, the team in second place and eight points behind Munich, scored with the last kick of the game to win, 5-4, in the stadium of Bayer Leverkusen. Munich should not have been surprised by the form of the Wolves, because it had been Wolfsburg that struck four goals past Bayern on the first day after the winter break a few weeks ago.Bas Dost, who like Robben is Dutch, had scored twice against Bayern, and he doubled that on Saturday, including the game winner in the fourth minute of added time.If Dost was hot, then Leverkusen’s Son Heung-min was hardly less so. Son got going in the second half when his team, having made the maximum three changes at halftime, came from 3-0 down to pull even after the stealthy South Korean notched a hat trick between the 57th and 67th minutes.It wasn’t over, because Wolfsburg would not settle for an honorable tie away from home. The referee’s whistle was about to blow for the final time when Dost scored. The Dutchman was unsympathetic toward an opponent that was down to 10 men after defender Emir Spahic was sent off in the 82nd minute for a second yellow card offense.Wolfsburg’s appetite for goals, and Leverkusen’s response, made for a thrilling shootout between a home side that attempted 15 shots, with seven on target, and a visiting team that tried 13 attempts, with an impressive nine on target.Leverkusen has another week to redress the balance of attack and defense before it takes on Atlético Madrid, recently a 4-0 victor over Real Madrid, in the Champions League, in Germany on Feb. 25. A day before that, Borussia Dortmund has a trip to Juventus.Dortmund’s first half of this season has been quite baffling. In the Champions League, it blew away some exacting opponents to qualify with ease from its group. In the Bundesliga, Dortmund lost players to injury, lost confidence and seemed hounded by the fear of being relegated.Even the winter break did not immediately revive Jürgen Klopp’s team. The Bees, as they’re sometimes known because of the team’s black-and-yellow colors, seemed traumatized, and as admired a tactician and motivator as Coach Klopp is, even he appeared forlorn and somewhat afraid when league play resumed in January with another depressing defeat for Dortmund. Dortmund hit rock bottom — last in the standings — before its luck turned. Three things happened in its favor. The Borussia fans, arguably among the most committed anywhere soccer is played, traveled by the thousands to Freiburg, another struggling club in the Bundesliga, and sang their team to a 3-0 victory on Feb. 7.In the week that followed, Marco Reus, the one outstanding player not to have been bought by Bayern Munich, pledged his future to Dortmund until 2019. When the team took the field for Friday’s home game against Mainz, choruses of “Reus! Reus!” rang out among the 80,000 fans.Silence followed when Elkin Soto shot Mainz ahead just 53 seconds after kickoff.Borussia had not won any games this season after falling behind. But somebody must have waved those smelling salts under their noses because Neven Subotic tied the score, and then Reus (inevitably) put Dortmund ahead.However, frailty returned when Yunus Malli struck a second goal for Mainz, tying it at 2-2.It was the 70th minute before an immaculate pass from Reus set up Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang, who put Dortmund back in front. Then, rather than concede again, Nuri Sahin sealed the team’s second win on the bounce, at 4-2.Goals galore define the new Germany; nobody should underestimate its teams in the Champions League.Advertisement