AdvertisementSupported byRugbyBy Huw RichardsTWICKENHAM, England — With their victories in Week 2 of the Six Nations, Ireland and England have lined themselves up for a season-defining showdown in Dublin on March 1.The two nations finished first and second last year, with Ireland taking the title on point differential, and they will meet in the third round this year as the last two undefeated teams.Ireland knocked off France, the other winner in Week 1, by a score of 18-11 in Dublin on Saturday, while England beat Italy, 47- 17.Ireland’s midfield playmaker Jonny Sexton returned from three months out with concussion to kick his team to victory in spite of two head-to-head clashes with France’s massive center Mathieu Bastareaud.Sexton certainly kept a clear head in his role as goal-kicker. He landed five of Ireland’s six penalty goals and was named Man of the Match. France, which won its first game against Scotland despite conceding the only try of the match last week, this time scored the only try but lost.Ireland was able to hang on for victory, even after second-half substitutions tipped the balance France’s way. Prop forwards Vincent Debaty and Uini Atonio — a 340-pound New Zealand-born giant — and lock Romain Taofifénua, who scored France’s 70th-minute try, were able to dominate physically, while the scrumhalf Morgan Parra, whose exclusion from the starting lineup baffled many, excelled with his tactics in calling the shots.France failed because it had given itself too much to do by falling behind 18-6, though Ireland was superbly disciplined in its defense.Most teams would have given away penalties under the sort of pressure France imposed in the last 20 minutes, but Ireland did not.“They’re a good side — a big side — and we are very relieved to get that win. The pressure told when they scored that try, but we defended brilliantly,” Ireland’s captain, Paul O’Connell, told the BBC. “England in a couple of weeks is going to be the kind of challenge many of us have never faced before, and we can’t wait.”England cemented its reputation, in more ways than one as this year’s comeback specialist in its victory over Italy. For the second straight match, it won after starting poorly and conceding the first try, when the Italy captain Sergio Parisse scored in the seventh minute.But in a 14-minute deluge, England scored four tries to turn a close contest into a rout, with two of the tries coming from players recalled after long absences. Nick Easter, a 36-year-old forward whose last appearance before this month was at the 2011 World Cup, became the oldest player ever to score a try for England, and the oldest in the 132-year history of the championship. Danny Cipriani, playing his first championship match since 2008, scored 44 seconds after replacing George Ford at flyhalf.Yet England’s biggest star was Jonathan Joseph, who followed his try against Wales with two more brilliant solo efforts, one scored in each half against Italy.“His confidence is exceptional at the moment,” said England’s backs coach, Mike Catt. “He has taken his chance and taken it well.”England’s strength is its depth. Neither Joseph, the No. 8 Billy Vunipola nor the back-row forward James Haskell would have been picked except for injuries, and all were outstanding.“We want to get out of the habit of giving away soft tries at the start of games,” England Coach Stuart Lancaster said after the match. “We’ll need to step up our game against Ireland, but we’re all delighted with the result.”A 12th minute head injury to England full-back Mike Brown cost it a fine player, but the six-minute stoppage that followed the incident cost Italy its early momentum. Already up 5-0, it was looking capable of extending its lead.England’s first try, which gave it an 8-5 lead, was awarded to Vunipola after a video review that left few convinced.Italy showed real flair in attack, rewarded by Parisse’s early score and two second half-tries by center Luca Morisi. Yet it has lost its opening two matches by a combined margin of 53 points.“We can do better. We want to do better,” said Parisse, who played magnificently in a losing cause. “But we have to be realistic and say that we have played against two great teams.”Next up for Italy is the other winless team, Scotland. The Scots fell just short against Wales at Murrayfield, losing 26-23. Scotland played the more exciting rugby and took an early lead with a try from full-back Stuart Hogg. But the streetwise Welsh took ruthless advantage when Scotland outside-half Finn Russell was sent off for 10 minutes for a dangerous tackle, scoring 10 points to take a lead it never lost.Wales’s defense, as so often, was its strength, withstanding several extended periods of Scottish pressure.A 64th-minute try from center Jonathan Davies gave it a decisive lead. Jon Walsh’s short range try in the dying seconds made the final score fairer to the Scots, but came so late that there was no time even to restart.Advertisement