AdvertisementSupported byVillanova 80, Seton Hall 54By Brendan PruntyVILLANOVA, Pa. — After Monday night’s game at the Pavilion, Villanova Coach Jay Wright and Seton Hall Coach Kevin Willard exchanged back slaps and compliments. Willard laughed at a joke by Wright but then turned serious. “Keep it rolling,” Willard told him. “You’ve got a Final Four team here.” Willard’s team was dismantled by No. 6 Villanova, 80-54, as the Wildcats gained some revenge for a loss to the Pirates on Jan. 3. Five Villanova players scored in double figures on Monday, led by the senior Darrun Hilliard, who had 18 points. Not many teams in N.C.A.A. Division I have more victories than Villanova (24-2, 11-2 Big East). Yet the Wildcats, one of the top-ranked teams for the entire season, have attracted little national attention. As the N.C.A.A. tournament approaches, Villanova is expected to do what it did last season — win nearly 30 games and earn a top-three seed.Sometimes, even when a team is winning as much as Villanova is these days, a compliment like the one from Willard is just nice to hear. “Our staff works very hard to make sure that we all don’t take that for granted,” Wright said later. “Now fans do sometimes. Fans get to experience it over a long period of time. I want to make sure that the players here don’t ever get burdened with the past. That they get to enjoy their experiences here.” While Villanova has built a successful national program, it remains at a level below that of universities like Kentucky and Duke. It has a reputation as a very good college basketball team, not an elite one. “That’s all right,” Wright said. “We just know, because we have a group of older guys, that we have to prove ourselves at the end anyway.” Wright is in his 14th season on the Main Line. In 10 of those seasons, he has won 20 or more games. He has had nine N.C.A.A. appearances, making the Final Four in 2009. He does not doubt the success at Villanova, nor do his players. But because there has not been a national championship to go along with all those wins, the Wildcats have been kept a step below. The Wildcats, though, appreciate where they are. “I think you can ask a lot of other teams and players, ‘Would you rather be 24-2 and 11-2 in the Big East — or would you rather be what your record is?’ ” said Randy Foye, a former Villanova all-American who is now in the N.B.A. Foye’s point was proved down the hall from Villanova’s locker room, where a Seton Hall team reeling from its fifth straight loss continued to wonder how its season had unraveled. A month ago, after the victory over Villanova, the Pirates surged into the Associated Press Top 25, at No. 19. But internal strife — some players had a verbal altercation during a timeout in last week’s loss to Georgetown, and the sophomore guard Jaren Sina left the program — has compounded the losing. On Monday, Seton Hall fell to 15-11, 5-9 in the conference. Wright knows that part of the winning equation is that he has a veteran team; Willard’s is made up mainly of freshmen and sophomores. Seton Hall’s leading upperclassman, Sterling Gibbs, scored only 12 points and was ejected in the second half for striking Villanova’s Ryan Arcidiacono in the head. It mattered little. At the end of the night, it was one more Villanova win — not flashy, but efficient.“They are just a really good basketball team, top to bottom,” Willard said of the Wildcats. “They play great; they play together; they play hard. I think you think of them as a team. Like you think of the San Antonio Spurs. The Spurs have great players, but they’re a team.”Advertisement