AdvertisementSupported byRangers 6, Islanders 5By Allan KredaUNIONDALE, N.Y. — Solving the Islanders has been a conundrum for the Rangers. Three straight decisive losses would drive any team into frustration mode.For the Islanders to be the source of Ranger angst only added drama to a caldron of emotion on Monday at Nassau Coliseum.Just 11 seconds into this latest showdown, John Tavares intercepted a lazy clearing attempt by the goaltender Cam Talbot and scored his team-best 27th goal of the season.The Coliseum faithful erupted with their standard, thundering chants, “Yes! Yes! Yes!” when Frans Nielsen made the score 2-0 at 11 minutes 46 seconds of the period with his 11th goal of the season.But heading into the third trailing by 4-3 and after spotting the Islanders yet another goal, the Rangers erupted for three goals to shock the Metropolitan Division-leading Islanders, 6-5, and pull 2 points behind in the standings with two games in hand.It was the brand of comeback hockey befitting a squad that reached the Stanley Cup finals last spring, and the Rangers hero again was defenseman Kevin Klein, who scored the winner at 15:28 of the third. It was also the first time since Oct. 26, 1980, in a 7-6 home win over Detroit that the Rangers rallied from at least two multigoal deficits to win in regulation. “There is no explanation at all,” said Klein, who has a career-high nine goals, including four game winners this season. “You just try to pitch in when you can.” Down by 5-3 after Ryan Strome scored his 12th of the season and second of the game for the Islanders at 3:43, Derek Stepan answered at 6:25 with his 10th of the season before Martin St. Louis, mired in a long slump, tied the match at 8:02 with his 15th goal.“I’m new to this rivalry, but this is fun,” said St. Louis, who scored for the first time in 16 games. “We answered quick after they made it 5-3 and didn’t give them momentum or a chance for us to deflate. We’ve been resilient all season. That’s how you win in this league.”The Rangers (34-16-5) entered the game with an excellent run of their own: three straight road wins and only one regulation loss in their last eight games over all.Yet after Nielsen scored, catcalls usually reserved for Henrik Lundqvist rained down on Talbot, playing his seventh straight game in place of the injured Lundqvist, who is sidelined with a vascular injury after being struck in the throat with a puck on Jan. 31 during a game against Carolina.The Islanders (37-19-1), who have won with regularity against division opponents in front of their exceptionally loud fans, ultimately fell in crushing fashion.“It’s just the way it happens sometimes,” said Islanders defenseman Johnny Boychuk, who appeared to be tripped by Chris Kreider without a penalty call before St. Louis scored. “It’s part of the game. We just have to get it back tomorrow.”The Islanders outshot the Rangers, 22-11, in the first, in which Talbot struggled to keep the visitors afloat while wave after wave of forwards skated his way and pressured his defense.His key save of the night turned out to be his denial of Casey Cizikas on a breakaway with just over six minutes left in the first.“We just kept fighting and fighting tonight,” said Talbot, who made a career-high 38 saves. “My mind-set is always to just stop the next one.”But Rangers defenseman Ryan McDonagh managed to score his sixth of the season, against Jaroslav Halak (36 saves), at 14:35 of the first to narrow the deficit to 2-1 before intermission.At 1:20 of the second period Boychuk sent a booming slap shot past Talbot to restore the two-goal lead for the Islanders, but Kreider and McDonagh scored 23 seconds apart two minutes later to tie the game at 3. It was Kreider’s 14th goal of the season.Strome managed to shove a rebound past Talbot at 7:41 of the period to put the Islanders back ahead by 4-3, then scored again in the third period after taking the puck from defenseman Dan Boyle and completing a pretty passing play with Nielsen.“The guys just battled back,” said Klein, who scored in overtime to beat the Devils on Oct. 21 and Pittsburgh on Dec. 8. “It was a wild one.”Before the game, the Rangers spoke of countering the speedy Islanders, who have been successfully rolling four lines and forging wins even without their top-line right wing Kyle Okposo, who has missed the last 11 games with an upper body injury.Rangers center Derick Brassard said the key would be blocking out their three previous meetings, all losses by three-goal margins. The Islanders won twice at Madison Square Garden, by 6-3 on Oct. 14 and by 3-0 on Jan. 13, and then earned a 4-1 decision at the Coliseum on Jan. 27.“They have a really good team, a really fast team that tries to open up the game a lot,” Brassard said. “We fell asleep for five minutes, and they scored three goals the last time. We really need to put together a 60-minute effort.”It was more like 40 minutes for the Rangers, who were returning from Arizona, where they beat the Coyotes on Saturday while the Islanders have been home the past week.But it was 40 minutes they made count.SLAP SHOTSCam Talbot (5-1-1) won for the fifth time in seven games since replacing Lundqvist on Feb. 4 against Boston. ... Defenseman John Moore was a healthy scratch for the Rangers while the Islanders scratched defensemen Calvin de Haan and Matt Donovan.Advertisement