AdvertisementSupported bySports of The TimesBy William C. RhodenBy late Sunday night, the energized atmosphere that had engulfed Madison Square Garden for the All-Star Game weekend had been replaced by the furious activity of workers preparing for the Westminster Dog Show.And when Carmelo Anthony finally sat down to face reporters, and confront his immediate future, he was quickly pulled back into the dismal reality of the Knicks. “What’s your reaction to Amar’e getting a buyout?” he was asked about his longtime teammate, Amar’e Stoudemire, who is now free to join an N.B.A. team that actually has a winning record and a chance at the postseason.“Man, that’s the first question?” Anthony joked. “Ain’t you going to ask me about the weekend?”Sadly, no.For New York City, the All-Star festivities were an illusion. The aftermath is real.Stoudemire’s injury-riddled tenure in New York has come to an end. Five years ago, when the Knicks’ hopes of getting LeBron James were dashed, Stoudemire’s signing allowed the franchise to save some face and gave its fans something to embrace.On Sunday night, Anthony spoke eloquently of what Stoudemire had meant to him on a personal and professional level. Although it’s easy to conclude that Stoudemire failed to deliver in New York — he had just one solid season here, his first — Anthony maintained, perhaps out of loyalty, that Stoudemire had done exactly what he was supposed to do.“When he came, he brought back some excitement for the game of basketball here in New York,” Anthony said. “There was hope when he came back. People started believing in the New York Knicks once again. He was the main reason for that belief and for that hope when he first got here in New York.”What Anthony left unsaid was that he had forced his way onto the Knicks deep into Stoudemire’s first season with the team, and that he had quickly overshadowed him, but that nothing potent had emerged from their partnership. And that as Stoudemire departs, Anthony can only hope that things start improving soon for a Knicks team that now has the worst record in the N.B.A. What, I wondered, did Kenny Smith, the TNT basketball analyst, think of the current mess? Smith is paid to stay above the fray, to not let emotions get in the way. But the Knicks fiasco, their ridiculous record of 10-43, has to be embarrassing for someone like him, who comes from a long line of great New York high school players. Smith was a standout at Archbishop Molloy in Queens and then became a star at the University of North Carolina. He won back-to-back N.B.A. titles with the Houston Rockets, one of them against the Knicks, in 1994. Smith, who is 49, became a young Knicks fan in the early 1970s, just around the time the team was winning the second of its two N.B.A. titles. “I used to cry when the Knicks lost,” he recalled Sunday night. “My mom and dad stopped me from listening to the games. On a school night, she wouldn’t let me listen to the games because I would cry and be upset all night when they lost. I was a Knick fan from Day 1.”In two years, of course, we may all be celebrating a remarkable Knicks turnaround and wondering how we could ever have doubted that Phil Jackson would find a way to make New York basketball formidable again. We’ll see. For now, as Jackson and the Knicks try to put the pieces together, I hope they do it the old-school way — by not over-relying on analytics as a basis for selecting players. Smith agreed. More than just numbers is at stake, he maintained.“You’ve got to get out of the mind-set of trading salary for salary,” Smith said. “When I go to the park, I don’t go, ‘Well, this guy is going to bring his ball tomorrow, so I’m going to pick him,’ ” Smith said. “I say, ‘He’s going to help me win today,’ and that’s what you have to get back to. You say: ‘That dude can help me win. Now, how do I get him?’ That is a true essence of what New York City basketball is.”What’s problematic about the Knicks at the moment is that the team has no signature, no personality. There is no theme, except “next season.” “It seems like this year, it’s about, ‘We still have Carmelo, and we’re going to have 11 guys around him who weren’t here last year,’ ” Smith said. “That’s a difficult situation to sell, because you’re not creating a style of play that will make it attractive to come here.”And what’s extraordinary about the Knicks’ continuing free-fall is how otherwise sophisticated New Yorkers can accept the product. But that’s passion, which is hard to discard. Even Smith, after all these years as a player and broadcaster, admits that he is always “in a New York state of mind” when it comes to the N.B.A.“All the time,” he said. “I watch it as a New Yorker.” Amar’e Stoudemire is gone, Carmelo Anthony may be done for the season by the end of the week as he deals with an injured knee. Hope for a successful Knicks campaign, even an interesting one, has long vanished, though Anthony played along on Sunday night when someone suggested that, with 29 games left in the season, the Knicks could make a run.“Wouldn’t that be nice?” he said.More like make-believe. But if nothing else, All-Star weekend reminded Knicks fans of how great the Garden feels when electricity is in the air.Email: wcr@nytimes.com Advertisement