By VIV BERNSTEINFEB. 16, 2015
A protective order requiring the Nascar driver Kurt Busch to stay away from his former girlfriend was granted Monday by a Delaware Family Court commissioner.Busch is also awaiting a decision from the Delaware district attorney’s office on whether he will be charged with domestic assault. Both issues stem from a claim by the former girlfriend, Patricia Driscoll, who said she was assaulted during a confrontation at Dover International Speedway last September.Busch, the 2004 Sprint Cup champion, has denied the charge. Nascar, which has allowed him to continue racing, could discipline Busch if he is charged with domestic assault.Busch’s lawyer, Rusty Hardin, said he would appeal the decision.The order, which was posted by USA Today, said that Busch “committed an act or repeated acts of domestic violence” and required him to be evaluated for mental health issues, including anger management. Also under the order, he will not be allowed to possess firearms, and he must stay 100 yards away from Driscoll except at the racetrack, where she attends Nascar events as part of her work as president of the Armed Forces Foundation in Washington.AdvertisementBusch is preparing to compete Thursday in the qualifying race that sets the field for the season-opening Daytona 500 Sprint Cup race on Sunday.Advertisement“I feel like it’s full throttle, full steam ahead,” Busch said last week when asked if he thought he would be able to race.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Nascar’s chairman, Brian France, had said that the racing series would await any actions by the district attorney before making a decision on Busch, who drives the No. 41 Chevrolet for Stewart-Haas Racing.Tony Stewart, an owner of Stewart-Haas Racing, confirmed last week that the team had already made contingency plans should Busch be suspended.Hardin has said that Driscoll committed perjury and that he would appeal the ruling by David W. Jones, the Kent County, Del., Family Court commissioner.“Though we are not surprised by the Commissioner’s ruling, in light of the restrictions on the evidence he considered, we are deeply disappointed because we believe the evidence of Ms. Driscoll’s total lack of believability was overwhelming,” Hardin wrote in a statement. “Regardless of the commissioner’s finding, we know that Kurt never committed an act of family violence.”A version of this article appears in print on February 17, 2015, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: Woes Mount for Driver in Abuse Case.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.