AdvertisementSupported byBy Tim RohanPORT ST. LUCIE, Fla. — Dillon Gee spent his off-season at home in Texas, hunting and spending time with his family. It was relaxing for the most part. But whenever he saw his agent calling, he would become anxious. The Mets had been shopping him in trades, and on more than one occasion, he thought a deal might be close.Either way, Gee wanted a resolution. But it never came.A year ago, Gee was the Mets’ opening-day starter. Now he has arrived for spring training with his status very much in flux. The Mets have six established starters, and Gee has emerged as the one most likely to be traded. So far, though, the Mets have not found a deal they like. In the meantime, they appear content holding on to Gee in case a starter is injured or a better deal presents itself.“I guess there’s uncertainty,” Gee said Monday. “You look at the numbers and something’s got to happen. I try not to focus on that stuff.”That Gee found himself in this situation was not entirely his own fault. He is perhaps not the Mets’ least valuable pitcher. He just might be the most tradable.The Mets have made it clear that they plan to build around their young arms — Matt Harvey, Zack Wheeler, Jacob deGrom and minor leaguers like Noah Syndergaard, Steven Matz and Rafael Montero.Until those minor leaguers are ready, the last two spots in the rotation will be filled by veterans, probably Jon Niese and Bartolo Colon. Niese offers value as a left-handed pitcher, and Colon, at 41 years old, has not drawn much interest from other teams.That leaves Gee, the steady right-hander who will make about $5.3 million this year. He also is not eligible to become a free agent until after the 2016 season.If Gee had not injured a latissimus dorsi muscle last season, he might not have been on the trading block. During his first eight starts, he compiled a 2.73 E.R.A. He has acknowledged that when he returned after the injury, he lost his focus. He tried too hard. He said Monday that he had tinkered with his mechanics, thinking they were to blame for the injury.Over his final 14 starts, Gee had a 4.78 E.R.A. DeGrom, his replacement, was named the National League rookie of the year.The Mets might benefit from resolving Gee’s situation and moving forward with everyone’s role defined. In spring training last year, Ike Davis and Lucas Duda often fielded questions about their competition at first base. The Mets ultimately traded Davis in mid-April, and Duda emerged as the legitimate starter.Maybe the Mets will keep Gee after all. He indicated that he would move to the bullpen, if necessary. But he emphasized that his preference was to remain a starter.“Whatever is going to happen is going to happen,” he said, shrugging.Advertisement