By ANDREW KEHFEB. 16, 2015
Amar’e Stoudemire’s tenure with the Knicks came to a bittersweet conclusion on Monday when the team announced that it had bought out the remainder of the 33-year-old forward’s contract.Stoudemire should clear waivers on Wednesday afternoon, at which point he will be a free agent and able to negotiate a deal with a new team, most likely a playoff contender.“Amar’e’s period as a Knickerbocker has come to pass, at his request,” the team’s president, Phil Jackson, said in a statement. “His time here should be marked by recognizing his effort — it was 100 percent.”Stoudemire said in a statement that he was leaving the Knicks “with a heavy heart.” He uploaded a photograph on Monday to his Instagram account with the text, “New York will always be my home whether I am here playing for the Knicks or not.” The caption was a 10-line poem he had composed about the city.AdvertisementEvaluations of Stoudemire’s Knicks career will be mixed.In 2010, he signed a five-year deal worth $99.7 million. That summer, he was seen as something of a secondary prize to LeBron James, also a free agent, who signed with the Miami Heat.AdvertisementBut Stoudemire — who said in his introductory news conference, “The Knicks are back” — thrived in his first season. He played 78 games and averaged 25.3 points, 9.1 rebounds, 2 blocks and 2.6 assists. He was selected as an All-Star Game starter and scored 29 points. The Knicks made the playoffs for the first time since 2004 — but were swept in the first round by the Boston Celtics.He would not reach such peaks again. The Knicks acquired Carmelo Anthony in a trade in 2011, pushing Stoudemire to more of a sidekick role, and the two never formed a formidable partnership. Stoudemire succumbed to various injuries, including recurring knee problems, playing only 94 of the 164 regular-season games in the 2012-13 and 2013-14 seasons.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.This season, he played only 36 of the Knicks’ 53 games, averaging 12 points and 6.8 rebounds.“I feel truly blessed to have been able to play for the incredible New York fans, Mr. Dolan, my coaches, teammates and the entire Knicks organization for the past five years,” Stoudemire said in the statement, referring to James L. Dolan, the team’s owner. “I will be forever grateful for the opportunity to contribute positively on the court and in the community.”Stoudemire, at his best, was an explosive scorer and a colorful character. He dressed fashionably and often provided quotable material. He made cameos in recent years in several television shows and movies. He also revealed that he believed he had Hebrew roots and began to actively explore Judaism. (“Feeling good like a Hebrew should,” he said earlier this season, when asked about his health.) In October, he uploaded a selfie to Instagram that showed him taking a bath in a tub of red wine; he later explained that it was something he did to aid muscle recovery.Through his previous three injury-plagued seasons, he had shown brief flashes of his old form — the player who was so dynamic for eight seasons with the Phoenix Suns, who influenced games with sheer athleticism. That might give potential suitors hope that he could provide scoring in carefully measured playing time.The Knicks (10-43) have been systematically disassembling their roster, trading the rotation players Iman Shumpert and J. R. Smith to the Cleveland Cavaliers, and nearly everyone else appears to be on the trading block.While looking ahead to the rebuilding project, Jackson delivered a final compliment to Stoudemire.“As we move forward in structuring this team, we will look for players that exhibit his desire to win,” Jackson said.Because of an editing error, an article on Tuesday about the Knicks’ buying out the remainder of Amar’e Stoudemire’s contract misidentified the team the Knicks were swept by in the first round of the 2011 playoffs, at the end of Stoudemire’s first season in New York. It was the Boston Celtics, not the Nets. (The Knicks were swept by the Nets in the first round of the 2004 playoffs.)A version of this article appears in print on February 17, 2015, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: Leaving New York ‘With a Heavy Heart,’ Stoudemire Ponders the Possibilities.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.