By PAT BORZIFEB. 16, 2015
For as long as Bob Feller, the Hall of Fame pitcher for the Cleveland Indians, remained alive, the business model for the Bob Feller Museum in Van Meter, Iowa, his hometown, worked perfectly.Every year, Feller invited famous retired ballplayers to the museum for fund-raising events. Guests included fellow Hall of Famers like Stan Musial and Yogi Berra and former Mets like Ron Swoboda and Ed Kranepool. Most waived or discounted their appearance fee as a courtesy to Feller. In return, Feller appeared for no charge at an event of their choosing.“We would have a big autograph day, and people would come from as far away as Chicago,” said Bob DiBiasio, a Cleveland Indians executive who served on the museum’s board of directors. “We made good enough money to keep the museum afloat for a year.”But when Feller died in 2010 at age 92, the business model collapsed. Without reciprocity, DiBiasio said, players declined to appear for free. And Van Meter, a town of about 1,100 people just west of Des Moines with no other tourist attractions, could not support it. Museum memberships dropped to fewer than 100 by last April from about 450.Advertisement“Some people would show up, but not that many, not enough to run the museum,” said a board vice president, Steve Feller, the oldest of Bob’s three sons and an architect who designed the museum. “We tried to get football players, baseball players, guys we thought would draw people from Iowa, Nebraska and Minnesota. It just didn’t work.”AdvertisementSo last fall, the museum’s members — including Feller’s widow, Anne — unanimously approved a plan by the board to close the museum and sell the building to the city of Van Meter, Brandon L. Sawalich, the board president, said. Van Meter is converting it into its city hall. City officials hope to move in by mid-March.Feller’s memory will live on at the new city hall, where some artifacts from his time in Van Meter will remain on permanent exhibit without charge, said the city administrator, Jake Anderson. Much of the museum collection will be displayed at Progressive Field, the home of the Cleveland Indians, in accordance with Feller’s wishes. A few items are bound for the U.S.S. Alabama, the battleship Feller served on in World War II, which is in Mobile, Ala.“I know Bob’s legacy was important to some in Van Meter,” Sawalich said. “I’m proud of what we did, because the easiest thing would have been to close it up.”DiBiasio and another Indians employee, with the help of volunteer firefighters, filled a rented truck with memorabilia in December and drove it to Cleveland. The items will be housed at the stadium’s Terrace Club. With ballpark renovations continuing, DiBiasio hopes the exhibit will be ready for the April 10 home opener against Detroit.“That’s the goal,” he said. “We think we’ll have something up. It may not be in its entirety.”The museum’s closing ended an era in more ways than one. Research by Steve Feller indicated it was one of the last free-standing museums in the country devoted to a single major league baseball player.Only two remain: the Babe Ruth Birthplace and Museum, two and a half blocks from Oriole Park at Camden Yards in Baltimore, and the Shoeless Joe Jackson Museum and Baseball Library in Greenville, S.C. Six others, including the Yogi Berra Museum and Learning Center at Montclair State University in New Jersey, are either housed at or supported by larger entities.AdvertisementThe Feller Museum endured a fate similar to that of the Ted Williams Museum and Hitters Hall of Fame, which opened in 1994 in Hernando, Fla. The primary attraction was Williams himself, who lived nearby. Attendance dropped off after Williams died in 2002, and by 2006 the museum was closed. The baseball exhibits moved to Tropicana Field, home of the Tampa Bay Rays.Though Van Meter remains largely rural, it is not remote. A one-mile stretch of county road connects its modest downtown with Interstate 80, which runs the width of the state. Some residents commute to Des Moines, about 20 miles to the east. But other than the museum, Van Meter lacks a tourist attraction. Visitors often passed through or circumvented Van Meter on their way south to Madison County and its famous covered bridges, or to the small museum in Winterset that marks the home where the actor John Wayne was born.Feller’s ties to Van Meter are deep. His father, Bill, taught him to pitch on the family farm just outside town. Feller sold the farm in 1955, but the red barn is still standing, along with a three-bedroom house he had built for his parents; the farmstead was added to the National Register of Historic Places in 1999. Playing catch with his father as an 8-year-old, Feller reportedly fired a ball so hard it broke three of Bill Feller’s ribs.In July 1936, at age 17, Feller made his debut with the Indians while still enrolled at Van Meter High School. He struck out 15 in his first start, and 17 three weeks later. Feller graduated from Van Meter High School the next May. Known as Rapid Robert for his sizzling fastball, Feller won 266 games, pitched three no-hitters, struck out 348 in a single season (1946) and set a record in 1938 for strikeouts in a single game (18), which stood until 1969. He retired in 1956.In Van Meter, Feller is equally revered for his military service. He enlisted in the Navy two days after Pearl Harbor, the first United States professional athlete to volunteer, costing him three full baseball seasons and most of a fourth. He saw combat in the Pacific theater as a gun captain aboard the Alabama. Feller proudly called himself the only Navy chief petty officer in the Baseball Hall of Fame.Though Feller lived in Ohio most of his adult life, people in Van Meter never forgot him. “To the whole world, Bob Feller and Van Meter are intertwined,” Anderson, the city administrator, said. “That’s the importance of Bob Feller’s legacy to us.”The red brick museum at 310 Mill Street opened in 1995, down the road and around a bend from the high school, on land donated by a local bank. Ted Williams, who called Feller the toughest pitcher he faced, traveled to Des Moines in 1993 to headline a banquet that raised money for construction. He later visited after the museum opened.Artifacts like the Feller bat a cancer-ridden Ruth used as a cane during Babe Ruth day at Yankee Stadium, on June 13, 1948, will be displayed in Cleveland. Many items pertaining to Feller’s military service will remain in Van Meter. DiBiasio said he found Feller’s Navy jacket and other lost artifacts in the museum’s basement that will bolster collections at both sites.“The family is fine with it,” Steve Feller said in a telephone interview from Central Florida, where he lives. “As kids, we were never collectors. We have hardly any memorabilia from my dad. And that’s fine. It should be in Cleveland. It belongs to the fans, not the kids. It’s where it should be for the fans to see, fans of all ages.”A version of this article appears in print on February 17, 2015, on Page B8 of the New York edition with the headline: In Town Where Feller’s 266 Wins Are Part of Fabric, One Big Loss.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.