By PETER MAYFEB. 17, 2015
The N.B.A. trading deadline is Thursday at 3 p.m. Eastern time. Until then, there will be stories on the Phoenix Suns’ potential trade of Goran Dragic, the overhaul of the Denver Nuggets and the Houston Rockets’ ongoing analytic search for better players.There also will be stories on the one team whose general manager relishes the third Thursday in February. The Celtics’ Danny Ainge is ready, willing and more than able to deal.Ainge’s problem is his team, which is 20-31 in a pathetic Eastern Conference. It also is only one and a half games out of the No. 8 playoff spot. His possibilities are endless. He has what could be six first-round picks over the next two years. He has three players on the roster with expiring contracts who might help a contender: Brandon Bass, Tayshaun Prince and Marcus Thornton. He has some hefty trade exceptions and a space on his roster.He will take your phone call.“We’re ready,” Ainge said recently on a Boston radio station. “We have a lot of bullets in our arsenal right now. We have a lot of assets that we can move for a lot of different things, and we can go in a lot of different directions at this point. This is one of those turning points.”AdvertisementAinge has been in asset-accumulation mode for some time, making nine trades since July 10. In one dizzying stretch, he made five deals in less than one month, triggered by the decision to send Rajon Rondo to Dallas on Dec. 18. He subsequently unloaded Jeff Green to Memphis.AdvertisementIn those five deals, which included trading two of the three players he received for Rondo, Ainge acquired eight players, three first-round picks and a pair of second-round picks. Only three of the eight players are still on the roster. Three never appeared in a game for the team (including Doc Rivers’s son Austin, who now plays for his father with the Los Angeles Clippers) and a fourth, Shavlik Randolph, has yet to make his debut for the team.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The first-round picks were from Dallas, which most likely will not be utilized until 2016; Phoenix (for Brandan Wright, who came to Boston in the Rondo trade); and Memphis (a pick for Green). The Suns surrendered a pick they had from Minnesota that, in all likelihood, will change to a second-rounder in 2016 (it is protected 1-12 in 2015 and 2016). The Celtics have their own No. 1 this season as well as a No. 1 from the Clippers (for allowing Doc Rivers to leave Boston). Next season, they will have their own; the Nets’ No. 1 (the second of three No. 1 picks they received in the Paul Pierce-Kevin Garnett deal); the Cavaliers’ No. 1 (which they received for helping Cleveland clear cap space to sign LeBron James); and the Mavericks’ No. 1.They also could have as many eight second-round picks in the next two drafts, including those belonging to Philadelphia, Minnesota and Miami.“We’re opportunistic,” Ainge said. “There are a lot of different things that can happen.”Ainge has shown no reluctance in shaking up his roster at this time of the season, no more so than in 2011, when he dealt Kendrick Perkins and Nate Robinson to the Oklahoma City Thunder for Green and Nenad Krstic. The deal, which no one saw coming, was made in part with the expectation that Shaquille O’Neal would be ready for the playoffs. O’Neal was not, and the Celtics were eliminated in the second round.This will be Ainge’s 12th trading deadline. He has made some kind of deal on or around the deadline in seven of the previous 11 years. In his first year, 2004, he helped broker the deal that enabled the Pistons to acquire Rasheed Wallace. Detroit went on to win the N.B.A. championship. A year later, he reacquired Antoine Walker, whom he had traded to Dallas 16 months earlier.This year’s target for the size-challenged Celtics could be Utah center Enes Kanter, who has lost playing time to Rudy Gobert and has asked for a trade.A version of this article appears in print on February 18, 2015, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: As Trade Deadline Nears, Celtics’ Ainge Has Lots of Picks and Possibilities.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.