AdvertisementSupported byBy Karen CrouseLOS ANGELES — The golf calendar is stuffed fuller than a pro-am goody bag, with 43 PGA Tour events, including the four majors, plus the FedEx Cup playoffs.  But in South Korea, there is no bigger event in golf than the Presidents Cup.“How many days are we out, T-minus 220 or something?” Mike Kim, one of the tournament directors, asked Tuesday. In 233 days, Incheon will host the biennial competition, which is taking place for the first time in Asia, from Oct. 8 to 11.Two days before the start of the Northern Trust Open, Kim appeared at Riviera Country Club with the South Korean-born K. J. Choi, an eight-time winner on the PGA Tour who will serve as an assistant captain for the International team, and Kevin Na, the Korean-born American who aspires to play for the United States team, to talk about the competition. They were joined by Kyung-Mi Kim, a member of the Incheon task force entrusted with organizing the event. The task force’s Kim described the Presidents Cup as “equivalent to the Olympics” and said that to have an event of such a magnitude in their backyard is “an opportunity to ignite the interest level” in the sport among young South Koreans. “It makes it come much closer to your heart,” she said through a translator. The teams will not be completed for seven months. Based on this week’s rankings, no South Koreans would earn one of the 10 automatic spots, which raises the question: Does the success of the event in its Asian debut depend on a native son playing in it? Choi said it did not matter. Speaking through a translator, he explained, “The fact that the Presidents Cup is going to Korea is giving an opportunity and motivation to those junior golfers that are up-and-coming.” Na, who is No. 28 in the world and the 16th-best American, said that if a Korean player made the team either on merit or through a captain’s pick, “It will create more of a buzz.” He added: “If they have a Korean player represent the team, I think a lot of kids will come and watch, and they will dream about playing the Presidents Cup and they will watch and they will find out about what the PGA Tour is like. They will look at it more like, if you become a good golfer, you can play on this world stage.” Na has his work cut out if he is to secure a spot on the United States team. But his older brother, Austin, an academic in South Korea, has already secured his place. He has been hired to provide commentary on the Korean network that is airing the four-day competition. Seung-Yul Noh, one of the best young South Korean players, was asked to be part of Tuesday’s discussion but demurred. Noh, 23, the reigning champion of the Zurich Classic of New Orleans, said he preferred to spend his time on the Riviera range grooving his swing.  With one top-25 finish in six starts this season, Noh must significantly improve his standing if he is to automatically qualify for the International squad, which will be chosen based on the world rankings. At No. 103, Noh is behind 17 players, including his countryman Sang-Moon Bae, who is No. 79. The International team captain, Nick Price, has two discretionary picks, but Noh does not want to depend on the beneficence of Price. He is intent on earning his berth. “That’s why I’m working hard,” Noh said during a five-minute break from hitting balls on the practice range. “I’m just trying to improve my position.” Noh said potentially playing a Presidents Cup in front of home fans gave him extra motivation. “It just feels different,” he said. Advertisement