By SETH BERKMANOCT. 13, 2015
Before his first at-bat Monday night, Mets catcher Travis d’Arnaud looked like a golfer approaching the first tee trying to cure a case of the yips.D’Arnaud took a measurement by laying his bat down behind home plate. He then walked out of the batter’s box, tapped his cleats, jerked his arm and adjusted his gloves. As Los Angeles Dodgers starter Brett Anderson prepared to offer his first pitch of the bottom of the second inning, d’Arnaud settled in, his legs spread wide and his right foot resting on the back chalk of the box.Seconds later, d’Arnaud lined a 90-mile-per-hour fastball into center field, sending home Yoenis Cespedes for the Mets’ first run in Game 3 of their National League division series. He went on to score on a three-run double by Curtis Granderson, having ignited a four-run inning as the Mets erased an early 3-0 deficit.In the next inning, Anderson approached d’Arnaud differently. He led off by pulling an 83-m.p.h. changeup out of his bag, and d’Arnaud golfed it over the left-field wall at Citi Field for the first postseason home run in the ballpark’s history, putting the Mets ahead by 6-3 en route to a 13-7 win and a 2-1 edge in the best-of-five series.AdvertisementIf one Mets regular needed an offensive awakening, it was d’Arnaud, who finished 3 for 5 with three runs scored. Before his single in the second, d’Arnaud had been 0 for 7 with four strikeouts in the playoffs. He drove in a run in the eighth inning of a 9-3 loss to the Miami Marlins on Sept. 15, and that was his last R.B.I. until Monday.Advertisement“Today I was just trying to keep things simple,” d’Arnaud said. “I feel like, the last few weeks, I’ve been overthinking and trying to do too much instead of just seeing the ball and hitting the ball.”Earlier in the series, d’Arnaud often swung early in the count, only to bounce balls into easy outs for the Dodgers. Manager Terry Collins said before the game that d’Arnaud’s aggressiveness was not necessarily a fault.“One of the things as you go back, you can even tell, when he was swinging good, he jumped the count,” Collins said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.To correct his timing, d’Arnaud spent Monday afternoon working with the hitting coach Kevin Long, making minor adjustments to his approach. The results of the session now have the Mets one win from a berth in the National League Championship Series.D’Arnaud was not the only catcher to break out of a prolonged slump Monday. Yasmani Grandal spotted the Dodgers their three-run lead with a bases-clearing single in the top of the second. Two of the runs were earned; Carl Crawford came home on a throwing error by Granderson on the play.Grandal’s decline had been even more precipitous. Since Aug. 16, Grandal had had three hits in 76 at-bats, including the postseason.Grandal was named an All-Star, slugging .526, hitting 14 home runs and driving in 36 runs before the break. With a sore shoulder, he hit .218, with two homers and 11 R.B.I., in the second half of the season.For Game 4, the Dodgers may return to catcher A. J. Ellis, who has hit safely in 14 of 15 career postseason games and also caught Clayton Kershaw during Game 1.D’Arnaud, however, will almost surely be penciled in to start Game 4, as well as however many more contests the Mets play this October. D’Arnaud, who has dealt with a number of injuries this season, has often come through in the clutch when healthy. Seven of his 12 home runs during the regular season gave the Mets a lead or tied a game.AdvertisementD’Arnaud’s home run on Monday only extended a lead, but it effectively ended the Dodgers’ chance of a comeback: They never brought the tying run to the plate after the hit.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.