By SAM BORDENFEB. 17, 2015
PARIS —  On the first night of the Champions League knockout round, a night soccer fans had anxiously awaited through two months of winter, much of the conversation was, naturally, about buses.First, there was Chelsea’s damaged vehicle, the result, it seemed, of a driver’s failing to pay heed to France’s notoriously narrow parking lot tunnels as he drove the English team into the stadium before the game against Paris St.-Germain here on Tuesday night. No one was hurt in the scrape — most Parisian drivers would probably not even consider it an accident — and the Blues arrived safely about 90 minutes before kickoff.Once the game began, there was the “parked bus,” the not especially complimentary term used by critics of Chelsea who do not appreciate Manager José Mourinho’s long history of layering his team behind the ball and playing an energy-sucking defensive game. Mourinho, of course, makes no apologies for his strategies (which are often effective), and they worked again Tuesday as Chelsea scored a critical goal and left with a 1-1 draw in the first game of the two-leg aggregate matchup in the round of 16.“The result is not in our favor,” P.S.G.’s manager, Laurent Blanc, said. “It was the almost perfect game that we wanted to do, and I say almost perfect because we conceded a goal. In the end, it is the result that counts, and we conceded a goal.”It was easy to understand Blanc’s focus on Chelsea’s goal. After all, when these teams met in the Champions League quarterfinals last year, P.S.G. did far better in the first leg, beating Chelsea, 3-1, but was eliminated on the away-goals rule after losing in London, 2-0.AdvertisementLate Tuesday night, one admittedly optimistic journalist asked Blanc if he thought this could perhaps be a better situation because his players would be more “engaged” with a tighter margin. Blanc laughed.Advertisement“To be honest, I would have rather won 3-1 again,” he said.Indeed, the task for P.S.G. will certainly be more difficult, not least because the team, two-time defending French champions, has looked vulnerable lately. It is a reality that more paranoid fans might attribute to yet another bus: a karmic one.Last Saturday, three days before facing Chelsea, P.S.G. was leading Caen by two goals late in a French league match. With only a few minutes remaining, the team’s English-language Twitter account sent out a cynical message noting that P.S.G. now had to “park the bus” and added, “shout out to Jose Mourinho!” Within seconds, as if felled by a heavy belch of exhaust, P.S.G. conceded two late goals and blew a near-certain victory in embarrassing fashion.Making matters worse, several key players were injured in the win-turned-draw, leaving Blanc to explain why he had chosen to use his top team in a French league match just days ahead of a European showdown. Blanc offered only a terse, “It’s hard to accept,” when questioned Monday about his team selection.Chelsea rested over the weekend; the Blues, who wore fluorescent yellow jerseys Tuesday, have already been eliminated from the F.A. Cup. They arrived in Paris late Monday, went through a leisurely stretching session at their hotel early Tuesday (chronicled in real time by at least one French news outlet) and played, as expected, a counterpuncher’s game.“If you go to chances created, and the goalkeepers’ performances, we have to be honest and say they had more than us,” Mourinho said. “If someone was closer to winning the game, it was Paris, not Chelsea.”That was clear from the start. P.S.G. had the strongest chances early on, with Chelsea goalkeeper Thibaut Courtois making quality saves from Blaise Matuidi and Zlatan Ibrahimovic during one frenzied 30-second patch. Courtois also denied Edinson Cavani off a corner kick just after the half-hour mark, palming the sharp header behind the goal. Chelsea’s captain, John Terry, said afterward that Courtois was “a different class,” while P.S.G.’s David Luiz, who used to play for Chelsea, said that “without their goalkeeper, we would have won this game.”With Chelsea’s defenders working so hard, it was fitting that the Blues’ back line ultimately created the team’s goal. About 10 minutes before halftime, Terry curled a cross into the middle that another defender, Gary Cahill, flicked beautifully into the path of a third, Branislav Ivanovic, who headed it into the net.AdvertisementIt was, by any measure, an unlikely goal, and — just as the best counterpunchers strive to do — it came on Chelsea’s first shot on target, and was one of only two shots the Blues took all game.Given a lead, Chelsea retreated even further in the second half, allowing P.S.G. to press with more urgency. The Parisians finally broke through in the 54th minute, when Matuidi’s cross found Cavani, left with ample space because of poor marking, and Cavani’s header got past Courtois this time, rippling into the side netting.P.S.G. had its chances after that. Cavani nearly scored a second time with about 10 minutes left, but his shot from a sharp angle slid just past the post, while Ibrahimovic had another header saved from close range in stoppage time. P.S.G.’s captain, Thiago Silva, kicked the ball away in frustration at the final whistle.For Chelsea, it was, as Terry said, a “happy draw.” For P.S.G. though, the missed chances will linger, particularly as the French team prepares for a return leg that will almost surely involve another bus, in London next month.A version of this article appears in print on February 18, 2015, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: Chelsea and Paris St.-Germain Tie in Champions League Round of 16.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.