AdvertisementSupported byOn BaseballBy Tyler KepnerTents are perfect for the circus. If Alex Rodriguez had used one for his latest apology, he might as well have shown up in grease paint, floppy shoes and a rainbow wig. Rodriguez, the clown prince of baseball, would be setting himself up for laughs.Nobody does slapstick like Rodriguez, who squandered his legacy in a syringe and apologized for it under the big top at the Yankees’ training camp in 2009. He appealed then to our better angels and said, “The only thing I ask from this group today, and the American people, is to judge me from this day forward.”Rodriguez then led the Yankees to a World Series title. He won a ring but never did find a moral compass. He soon met Anthony Bosch and went right back to cheating. When he was caught, Rodriguez sued everybody and lied to all who would listen. He served a yearlong suspension, and here we are again.No news conference this time. Hooray. Rodriguez asked to be judged, and Major League Baseball did so. He is free to play again, but his words have no meaning anymore. His handwritten statement, issued through a publicist Tuesday, ought to be enough.From when Alex Rodriguez broke into the majors in 1996 to his retirement in 2016, he has been unable to escape the bizarre and controversial stories that seem to follow him on and off the field.Rodriguez long ago abandoned any sense of identity. His actions are scripted by his adviser of the moment. One lawyer tells him to attack, attack, attack. Another tells him to calm down and play nice. Who knows what he really thinks, and who really cares?This time, at least, Rodriguez’s handlers seem to understand their client’s image is beyond repair.“I accept the fact that many of you will not believe my apology or anything that I say at this point,” Rodriguez said Tuesday, in a statement addressed to the fans. “I understand why, and that’s on me.”Rodriguez’s choices have always shown more than his public playacting. His decision to use banned drugs again, to trust his career to a scammer like Bosch, revealed how little he trusted his own ability. Rodriguez believed he needed those testosterone gummies to succeed.And that was from 2010 to 2012. What about now? Let us assume, cautiously, that Rodriguez is finally trying to play clean. He turns 40 in July. Because of injury and suspension, he has missed 280 of the Yankees’ last 324 games. What could he possibly have left?Alex Rodriguez issued a hand-written statement Tuesday apologizing for his behavior that led to a season-long suspension for performance-enhancing drugs.The Yankees will go through the charade of spring training, partly to see if Rodriguez’s hips break down and force him to retire. In that case, the team would fulfill its fantasy of collecting, through insurance, most of the $61 million still owed Rodriguez.Yet Rodriguez has never seemed the type to give in. In 2007, the year he won his last Most Valuable Player Award — which persuaded the Yankees to sign him through age 42 — his favorite workout anthem was “Hit Me With Your Best Shot,” by Pat Benatar. Maybe now it’s “I Won’t Back Down,” by Tom Petty.There ain’t no easy way out for the Yankees, unless they release Rodriguez. Until then, he is like that stench in the carpet that will not go away. No matter how much you spray and scrub, sometimes you have to just give up and throw the thing out.If the Yankees released Rodriguez, would another team really sign him, even with the Yankees paying his salary? In 2007, Barry Bonds hit 28 homers with a .480 on-base percentage; he could not find a job the next season. And Bonds, surly scoundrel that he was, had never sued his team and the players’ union.The sad fact is that the Yankees might really need Rodriguez to help their sickly offense. What if he is capable of repeating his 2013 performance, when he had a .771 on-base plus slugging percentage over 44 games? A modest figure, perhaps, but not for this team. Last season, nobody who came to bat at least 200 times for the Yankees posted an O.P.S. percentage that high.Only two American League teams scored fewer runs than the Yankees last season: the Houston Astros and the Tampa Bay Rays. If Rodriguez can produce, even a little, the Yankees can hold their noses and play him, and fight the odious $6 million home run bonuses in arbitration.Forget the idea of Rodriguez as a distraction. He lives in a different orbit than anyone else, a storm cloud of his own making. The Yankees prepare their players well for dealing with reporters, and the team has handled sideshows before. The buzz around Rodriguez will probably amuse, more than annoy, the other players.The more important issues at Yankees camp, which opens in Tampa, Fla., on Friday, are elsewhere. Can Masahiro Tanaka, C. C. Sabathia and Carlos Beltran stay healthy? Can the Yankees integrate young players like Didi Gregorius and Nathan Eovaldi into an older roster? Can improved infield defense and a stronger bullpen make up for an offense in decline? Can Brian McCann and Mark Teixeira hit the other way?As for Rodriguez, he has said his apologies. Judgment Day has come and gone. He is here because the Yankees signed him to that endless contract, and they refuse to let him walk away with all that money. Just as Rodriguez must live with his decisions, the Yankees must live with theirs. Play ball.Advertisement