By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSOCT. 2, 2015
Justin Tucker, the Baltimore Ravens’ strong-legged kicker, made a 42-yard field goal to tie the Pittsburgh Steelers in the final seconds of regulation and hit a 52-yarder with 5 minutes 8 seconds left in overtime to give the Ravens a 23-20 road victory Thursday night.Pittsburgh kicker Josh Scobee had two chances to give the Steelers some cushion late in the fourth quarter but pulled both kicks wide left. The second miss gave the Ravens (1-3) enough time to put Scobee well within range to send the game to an extra period.Pittsburgh (2-2) then twice went for it on fourth down in Baltimore territory in overtime rather than send Scobee out for a long attempt into the wind at the open end of Heinz Field. Michael Vick, starting in place of the injured Ben Roethlisberger, was stopped on fourth-and-2 at the 39 and later overthrew Antonio Brown on fourth-and-1 from the 33.Neither Vick nor Scobee would get a third shot. Joe Flacco led the Ravens to the 35, and Tucker’s winner was never in doubt.AdvertisementJustin Forsett ran for 150 yards for the Ravens. Flacco threw a touchdown pass and did just enough late to help Baltimore end the worst start in franchise history.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Vick threw for 124 yards and a score, and Le’Veon Bell ran for 129 yards and a touchdown for the Steelers.AdvertisementJETS LEAVE TWO HOME Guard Willie Colon, who has a sprained knee, and tight end Jeff Cumberland, who is following the N.F.L. protocol for a concussion, did not accompany the Jets on Thursday when the team flew to London for Sunday’s game against the Miami Dolphins.Receiver Eric Decker’s status is uncertain after he missed last Sunday’s loss to the Philadelphia Eagles with a knee injury. He practiced on limited basis.TOM PEDULLAA version of this article appears in print on October 2, 2015, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: Ravens Win a Battle of Kickers and Edge the Steelers in Overtime .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.