By TIM ROHANOCT. 13, 2015
Yoenis Cespedes stood near the batter’s box for a moment, holding his bat, watching the fastball he had crushed into the second deck of the left-field stands. He took a few steps, flipped his bat high into the air and rounded the bases. The theme song from “The Natural” pumped through Citi Field, fireworks exploded, and Mets fans hugged one another, screaming.The three-run homer essentially ended Game 3 of this National League division series in the fourth inning on Monday night. From there, the Mets cruised to a 13-7 win over the Los Angeles Dodgers to take a two-games-to-one lead in the best-of-five series. Cespedes’s home run was estimated to have traveled 431 feet.Mets fans could not help rubbing it in. Not long after Cespedes crossed home plate, they chanted: “We want Ut-ley! We want Ut-ley!”It was the baseball equivalent of a crowd cheering for a bull to gore a matador. In Game 2 on Saturday, the Dodgers’ Chase Utley had broken Ruben Tejada’s right leg on a violent slide into second base, a play that proved critical in the Mets’ losing the game. Utley apologized, but it was clear that neither the Mets nor their fans would forget the play for the rest of the series.AdvertisementThis win was, for one game, the Mets’ way of exacting revenge.“I don’t know if we could be any more satisfied,” Daniel Murphy said, grinning mischievously.AdvertisementWhen Game 3 started, the Mets and their fans were seething. As Utley stretched in pregame warm-ups, a horde of cameras followed his every move. During the player introductions, the fans booed Utley louder than anyone else, yelled profanity and made obscene gestures in his direction.Major League Baseball had suspended Utley for two games, but he was allowed to play while he was appealing the decision, and the Dodgers had the right to use him off the bench.That added intrigue to what already promised to be an exciting night, the first playoff game at Citi Field. The Mets owner Fred Wilpon made a rare appearance during batting practice. Rusty Staub threw out the ceremonial first pitch. The largest Mets crowd in the park’s history, an announced 44,276, settled in, many fans waving orange towels.Everyone was curious: Would Matt Harvey plunk a Dodger as retribution? He had created a persona for himself as the Mets’ stopper, their ace. Even his superhero nickname, the Dark Knight, suggested that he would come to Tejada’s defense.But Manager Terry Collins had specifically instructed Harvey not to throw at anyone because, with the series tied at one game apiece, the Mets could not risk his being ejected. Commissioner Rob Manfred also met with both teams’ managers and general managers before the game, Collins said, to make sure nobody got “too carried away.”“Ruben knows we miss him,” Collins said. “He knows we’re irate about what happened. But there’s a lot at stake here, and we cannot just give a game away to assure Ruben we’re going to back him up. He knows what we would do. We’ve done it several times this year, for everybody. But right now, this is a little different circumstance. When Matt Harvey gets ejected in the second inning tonight, we’re in trouble.”Harvey had a hard time getting the Dodgers out, anyway. In the second, he allowed four consecutive singles, three off his fastball. When Yasmani Grandal, the Dodgers’ slumping catcher, ripped the fourth single, two runs scored, and a third run scored as Curtis Granderson made a wild throw to third base. A fourth run would have scored that inning, too, if David Wright had not made a spectacular leaping catch for the third out.AdvertisementEntering the game, Harvey had thrown 1891/3 innings, the most of his major league career, all while coming back from Tommy John surgery. At times this season, the Mets had noticed that his fastball lacked the same bite and that his command looked off. They attributed it to fatigue, and Harvey seemed to have the same symptoms Monday: He allowed three runs and seven hits, issued two walks and lasted only five innings, on 97 pitches.The park sounded as quiet as a library after the Dodgers took a 3-0 lead.It was fair to wonder if Utley’s slide had rattled the Mets. Immediately after Game 2, they called Utley’s slide a tackle and made pleas for safer rules. Even the veterans looked shaken.But on Monday, the Mets declared they would use Tejada’s injury as a rallying point. During pregame introductions, he walked out in uniform, wearing a walking boot and using a crutch, and received one of the louder ovations, a hero’s welcome. He tipped his cap, took his place in line and raised a closed fist as the crowd kept cheering wildly.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“That was really special,” shortstop Wilmer Flores said. “Kind of got me going a little bit, the ovation. It got me emotional. I didn’t cry, but it got me emotional.”Once the Mets fell behind, their offense erupted, for 10 runs over the next three innings. Cespedes started the rally, legging out an infield single. Then Granderson smacked a three-run double, Travis d’Arnaud clubbed a two-run homer, and Cespedes capped the fun with that emphatic three-run homer.With the game all but decided, no one was beaned, and no fight broke out. Mets fans did not seem to care that their team still had to beat Clayton Kershaw in Game 4, or possibly Zack Greinke in a Game 5, to win the series. As the game wore on, every so often, the crowd continued its chant, calling for Utley. But still, he remained on the Dodgers’ bench.“We want Ut-ley!” the crowd sang anyway. “We want Ut-ley!”Andrew Keh contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on October 13, 2015, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: Mets Get Revenge, and Then Some.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.