By ROB HUGHESFEB. 17, 2015
LONDON —  A club is not a living thing, but who says that it may not possess a spirit handed down from its past?While players often just pass through, supporters will follow the same club for generation after generation. And while it has taken a long time to come about, something remarkable is happening this season for Bradford City and its fans.The club has a notable history. In 1911, the team won the F.A. Cup. In 1985, a fire in its wooden grandstand killed 56 and injured 265.The disaster could have finished off Bradford City. But with some clubs, the spirit refuses to perish in the face of tragedy — and if anything, it serves as something to strengthen the resolve of those remaining. A similar purpose has been engrained at Liverpool and Juventus after they suffered disasters.AdvertisementTwo years ago, Bradford, then in the fourth tier of English soccer, made it all the way to the final of the League Cup, knocking out three Premiership teams along the way: Wigan Athletic, Arsenal and Aston Villa.AdvertisementDespite losing the final to Swansea City, Bradford Manager Phil Parkinson suggested then that since the club honors the 1911 team with a lounge in its name, it should dedicate another room to the class of 2013.Some people might say that the League Cup is a level beneath the F.A. Cup in terms of prestige and international standing. This season, Parkinson’s team is repeating the process in the bigger cup.Last month, Bradford came from two goals down to overpower Chelsea, 4-2, on Chelsea’s own turf.Then on Sunday, Bradford outplayed, outran and outfought Sunderland, knocking yet another Premier League opponent out, this time by a score of 2-0.The fascinating aspect to this, and at the same time the one that prompts the suggestion that there might indeed be a soul running through a club’s history, is that very few of the players who went on the 2013 cup run remain to fight again in 2015.Bradford’s nickname is The Bantams. And they are punching above their weight again, even though the defenders Stephen Darby and Rory McArdle and the locally born striker James Hanson are the sole remaining starters from the team that played the final two seasons ago.The manager has no doubt that something is in the air at Valley Parade Stadium, something transmitted from the fans to the team when the odds are against Bradford. “The atmosphere around the ground was amazing,” Parkinson said Sunday evening. “The boys were really reveling in it.”He said similar things to different faces in the locker room during both cup runs. He urged the team, and the fans, to believe that anything is possible on the day.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“We started really quickly and we were physical in terms of closing down and challenging,” Parkinson told reporters after the win over Sunderland. “We set out to make it uncomfortable, as you have to do. If we get our approach right, we have a chance against anyone.”AdvertisementHe believed his chairman was praying to draw Manchester United in the next round — and for the game to be played at United’s Old Trafford stadium, because their share of the proceeds would be worth about a million pounds ($1.5 million) to cash-strapped Bradford.“But what I want,” said manager Parkinson, “is to be at home. We can beat anyone here.”He looked out toward the muddied Valley Parade field, a field somewhat removed from the manicured lawns that the top teams play on.It was, however, more than mud in the eyes that brought down Chelsea, the Premier League leader. And more than just the heavy turf that accounted for Sunderland’s loss on Sunday.“Winning as underdogs,” said Parkinson, “is about us keeping the honesty and doing the right things. It’s about individuals being a team unit, without egos.”When the draw came on Monday night, it paired Bradford with Reading, a decent, solid team from only one division above it. But the Bradford coach got what he wished for, a home game.Someone once said that you can smell the fire when you enter Valley Parade. What you certainly sense inside the rebuilt stadium is a crowd rooting for their home team. The tragedy can never be undone, but rather than perpetuate bitterness or blame, the supporters look for reason to go forward.That May day 30 years ago began in celebration. It was the final game of a season in which Bradford won promotion from the third division, so the grandstand, the antiquated wooden stand, was packed to capacity. The audience was not simply local supporters, but visiting dignitaries from Verviers in Belgium and Mönchengladbach and Hamm in Germany, towns with community ties to Bradford.An investigation found that the fire might have started from a discarded cigarette butt or a match being dropped into waste paper underneath the stands just before halftime. The flames swept so quickly through the entire stands that some older fans died in their seats. The toll might have been even worse, had it not been for the actions of police officers, fans and players who rushed in to pull victims away.Out of horror came overdue laws to outlaw wooden stands and to ban cigarette smoking at stadiums. The England and West Germany teams who played the 1966 World Cup final got together to raise funds, and last month Chelsea made a donation to the Plastic Surgery and Burns Research Unit at Bradford University which pioneered new techniques by treating hundreds of those badly burned in the fire.AdvertisementMatthew Wildman was a 17-year-old spectator who was helped out of that inferno. The words he said long after the fact still resonate: “I still have terrible memories,” he said years ago, “but it is the humanity of those that helped us that I reflect upon.”A version of this article appears in print on February 18, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.