By PAT PICKENSFEB. 18, 2015
NEWARK —  For Jaromir Jagr, the oldest active N.H.L. player, simply suiting up for games is significant.Jagr, who turned 43 on Sunday, is the last remaining active member of the 1990 N.H.L. draft class after the retirement of Martin Brodeur last month.Jagr is known for his conditioning and work ethic, but those are only two of the factors that have allowed him to survive 21 seasons in the N.H.L. and four more in Eastern Europe. Although he is on pace for the lowest point total of any 82-game season of his career, Jagr is surpassing some of the sport’s icons in career goals and points.“It’s a special thing for sure to play on the same team, and at times the same line as him,” forward Tuomo Ruutu said. “I have to say that I’m not surprised he has played such a great career because you can see he loves the game, and he’s still one of the hardest-working guys, and now that I’ve played with him, sometimes you can respect a guy even more.”AdvertisementHaving already passed Mark Messier, Steve Yzerman, Teemu Selanne and his former teammate Mario Lemieux on the career goals list in the past two seasons in New Jersey, Jagr will pull even with Phil Esposito for fifth place with his next tally — his 717th. Jagr is 15 goals shy of Marcel Dionne for fourth place and 25 short of No. 3 Brett Hull. With 1,784 career points, Jagr is 14 behind Ron Francis for fourth on the career list.AdvertisementBefore this season, all those marks seemed attainable. Jagr was coming off a team-best 67-point season, in which he scored 24 goals and the Devils narrowly missed the playoffs.But Jagr has endured considerable adversity in his second season in New Jersey. He was injured on an illegal hit from Pittsburgh’s Robert Bortuzzo in December, and then he had the flu, which cost him four games. He has only 11 goals in 53 games, and his current shooting percentage, 9.8, is a seven-season low.Jagr’s 29 points lead the Devils, but is the lowest number for any team leader.The club has floundered for much of the season, and entering Wednesday’s games, the Devils were 13 points from the Eastern Conference’s final playoff spot with 25 games left. Such facts have shifted the focus around the team from the playoffs to the March 2 trade deadline. Jagr is one of 10 Devils with an expiring contract and could be of interest to a team in need of a top forward. The Devils have been coy when pressed about Jagr’s — and any other player’s — potential trade status.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I don’t even want to get into any hypotheticals about whatever might or might not happen,” said Lou Lamoriello, the Devils’ president, general manager and interim coach.Jagr has not asked to be traded and has said he would like to remain in New Jersey. But he does not have a no-trade clause and understands the situation Lamoriello is facing.“What’s the reason to keep me?” Jagr told NJ Advance Media on Monday. “I’m not important to this team.”Although his speed may have waned, Jagr’s ability to possess the puck in the offensive zone and find scoring chances for him and his teammates has not.“The guy knows how to get the puck; he knows how to get open,” said Scott Gomez, who has been Jagr’s center since signing with the Devils in December. “He can still hold the puck in the offensive zone and create.”The Devils’ veteran-laden roster also appreciates Jagr’s loose and fun nature.“He loves the game; he loves coming to the rink,” Gomez said. “He’s a jokester. Sometimes it’s in Czech, so none of us know what he’s saying, but we still laugh.”A version of this article appears in print on February 19, 2015, on Page B15 of the New York edition with the headline: A History of Success, but an Uncertain Future.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.