AdvertisementSupported byBy Tim RohanPORT ST. LUCIE, Fla. — Bobby Parnell, the Mets’ closer, has had two major operations in the last two seasons: a procedure for a herniated disk in his neck in 2013 and Tommy John surgery in 2014. He has thrown only one inning in about a year and a half. He has sat and watched three young relievers flourish and establish themselves in his absence. Parnell is still recovering from the elbow surgery, and it would seem that someone in his position would be eager to get back. But there is a chance that he will start the season on the disabled list and return sometime in April, which he appears to be accepting mostly because the Mets have indicated that he is still their closer, despite his injuries and the team’s glut of talented relievers. “We’ve got guys that can throw at the end of the game, all day long, back there in the bullpen,” Parnell said Wednesday. “We’ve got a great bullpen. I don’t want to be a hindrance. I want to be the guy at the end that’s helping the team, not hurting it.”Even if his logic is sound, the catch is that if Parnell’s return takes too long, he could lose his closer’s job. Manager Terry Collins said at the winter meetings in December that the Mets had “four guys that could be closers on any team” — Parnell, Jenrry Mejia, Jeurys Familia and Vic Black. At one point, Parnell was considered invaluable. He emerged as the Mets’ undisputed closer in 2013, saving 22 games and posting a 2.16 E.R.A. In 2014, with Parnell out, Mejia assumed the closer’s role, recording 28 saves in 31 chances; Familia, one of the hardest-throwing pitchers in baseball, finished seventh in the N.L. rookie of the year voting; and Black compiled a 2.60 E.R.A. The Mets’ bullpen had a 3.14 E.R.A., which was eighth best in the majors and better than that of the renowned bullpen of the Kansas City Royals. When Collins was asked about the closer’s job at the December meetings, he said, “It’s Bobby’s to lose.”Collins also raved about Parnell’s new muscular physique. “Wait until you see him,” he said. On Wednesday, two months later, Parnell looked healthy, maybe even a bit husky. He had spent part of the off-season working with Mike Barwis, the Mets’ strength consultant. Parnell said that his weight was about the same, 205 pounds, but that he felt stronger, especially in his legs.Parnell is still regaining arm strength. Over the past week and a half, he threw three bullpen sessions. He seemed excited about recently throwing a curveball and not feeling any discomfort. “I don’t really want to know my time schedule,” Parnell said. “I just want to go from check mark to check mark, and the reason being is if I don’t make a check mark, I don’t want to be upset with myself and start pushing. I’m letting them make the decision off what they see. I feel great. I feel confident in the way I’m going.” His next bullpen session is scheduled for Sunday. EXTRA BASES:Terry Collins’s father, Loren Collins, whose nickname was Bud, died Tuesday night in Midland, Mich. He was 95. Terry Collins left the Mets’ informal workouts to be with his family. Advertisement