By ROBERT HARMSFEB. 18, 2015
DURHAM, N.C. —  At 9:02 p.m. Wednesday, eight minutes before No. 4 Duke and No. 15 North Carolina tipped off the 239th game of their rivalry, players and coaches from both teams huddled at midcourt of Cameron Indoor Stadium.Duke Coach Mike Krzyzewski placed his arm around the shoulders of North Carolina Coach Roy Williams. Players followed suit with one another. All the people on the court knelt in a circle and bowed their heads. The public address announcer asked the sold-out crowd to stand.Then the stadium fell silent.The moment was a tribute to Dean Smith, the legendary Tar Heels coach who died Feb. 7 at 83. For almost 60 seconds, it was presumably the quietest that Cameron Indoor, known for its noise, had ever been. A picture of Smith’s smiling face, with the words “Thank you, Coach Smith,” was displayed on the video board. Fans held up signs honoring Smith. One featured a photograph of Smith coaching and a Krzyzewski quote about him: “We have lost a man who can never be replaced.”Williams said of the tribute, “I just think it shows the class that this rivalry really has.”He added, “There’s a great deal of respect between the two programs.”AdvertisementKrzyzewski said that “Dean’s passing really affected all of us” and that his players had been moved by the tribute.Duke overcame a 10-point deficit with less than four minutes remaining in regulation and rallied to win in overtime, 92-90, in yet another classic game in the series. The freshman point guard Tyus Jones led the comeback and finished with 22 points, and Quinn Cook, who made 6 of 9 shots from 3-point range, also scored 22.Advertisement“One team had to win, and one team had to lose, and it’s one possession, and we won,” Krzyzewski said.Referring to Jones, Krzyzewski said, “He took the wheel.”Krzyzewski said he talked to his players about Smith on Tuesday night — “about who he was, what he did.” Krzyzewski added, “He may not have liked the result of the game, but I’m sure he liked the way both teams played.”Watching the game on television, somewhere, was Aaron Kirschenfeld, a graduate student at North Carolina and a Duke alumnus from the class of 2007. Two days after Smith’s death, Kirschenfeld was driving on Route 15-501, the road that connects Durham and Chapel Hill, on his way to class at U.N.C., when he thought of a way to honor Smith, who was celebrated not only for his basketball acumen but also for opposing racial discrimination.Kirschenfeld wanted to create a T-shirt paying tribute to Smith that could be distributed before Wednesday night’s game.“The message has been, Show some support when your rival is grieving,” said Kirschenfeld, who was the Blue Devils’ mascot for three years. “Honor this man’s legacy, however you do it.”The T-shirt is in traditional Duke dark blue with the white block letters “DUKE” replaced by “DEAN.” The North Carolina graduate Ryan Cocca, a co-owner of Thrill City, the store in Chapel Hill that produced the shirts, said there had been more than 1,600 orders as of 7 p.m. Wednesday.AdvertisementCocca, a U.N.C. fan whose store had sold unflattering Duke wear in the past, said the T-shirts — supplied by a U.N.C.-centric store, bought predominantly by Duke fans and born of cooperation between graduates of the two universities — embodied Smith’s transcendence and the respect inherent to the rivalry, which has produced no shortage of drama and indelible moments since its inception in 1920.“It’s one of those moments that kind of can affirm your belief in humanity, that people do realize that there’s people and personalities and groups that go beyond winning and losing basketball games,” Cocca said. “That was a big part of Dean Smith’s philosophy: not focusing on wins and losses.”North Carolina point guard Marcus Paige said the word “respect” eight times when asked about the shirts before practice Tuesday. Williams said it twice. The Chronicle, Duke’s independent student newspaper, featured a Smith quote across two pages of its Wednesday paper: “Everyone on the bench stands for the man coming out of the game.”“If you can’t make some kind of gesture of support to your rival, upon the passing of truly an incredible leader on their side, then I don’t think you actually have a rivalry,” Kirschenfeld said.On Wednesday, before the latest game of the rivalry — which U.N.C. now leads, 133-106 — there was ample snow, which did not deter hundreds of Duke students from gathering in “Krzyzewskiville,” the space outside the stadium named for the team’s coach.In 30-degree temperatures, the students, many of whom had camped out in tents since early January to claim a spot in line for the game, wore little clothing and a lot of blue paint. There were games of beer pong, and music thumped from speakers.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Kirschenfeld was not among them, but nine days earlier he had been spurred to action. At 2 p.m. on Feb. 9, he wrote a 161-word entry about the T-shirt idea on his blog. Attention to it swelled, and Kirschenfeld pitched the idea to several Duke-affiliated accounts on Twitter, with no response. Dejected, on Feb. 12, he approached Cocca, who had already created a design for the shirt after reading Kirschenfeld’s post.Cocca said Mike Musante, a Duke graduate living in Los Angeles, called and told him to pursue the idea. Cocca, initially reluctant to produce the shirts because he thought they should come from someone affiliated with Duke, jumped on board with the approval of two Duke alums. Musante and Kirschenfeld told him they wanted enough shirts only for them and a few friends.“We were joking, ‘We just need to get to 30 to make it worthwhile,’ ” Cocca said. Thrill City sold between 50 and 60 shirts, priced at $18 each, the first night. From there, powered by social media, the hashtag “Duke4Dean” and word of mouth, orders skyrocketed. Cocca said all profits, which are about $9 a shirt, would benefit the Inter-Faith Council for Social Service, in Carrboro, N.C., which the Smith family designated as a memorial charity.The cooperation, Williams said, epitomized “the respect that Coach Smith had everywhere.”“You may not have cheered for him or he wasn’t coaching your school,” Williams said, “but the respect that he had was just unmatched.”A version of this article appears in print on February 19, 2015, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: Reverent Tribute to Coach Befits Rivalry, and So Does Game.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.