By KEN BELSONFEB. 18, 2015
One of the longest lawsuits involving the N.F.L. appears to be nearing an end. American Needle, a cap maker that sued the league after Reebok became the league’s exclusive apparel provider, agreed to settle its case against the N.F.L.The two sides reached an agreement in principle on Monday to end their decade-long standoff, which included an appearance at the Supreme Court. The terms of the agreement were not disclosed.American Needle, which had licensing agreements with the N.F.L., was left behind when the league signed an exclusive deal with Reebok in 2000. American Needle, a nearly century-old company based near Chicago, sued the N.F.L. in 2004, arguing that the league violated antitrust laws because its teams conspired to reach the exclusive deal with Reebok.American Needle lost in Federal District Court, and its appeal was rejected. But the Supreme Court agreed to hear its argument that the N.F.L. was not a single entity and was instead a collection of 32 teams. The N.F.L. went along because it had a chance to receive a de facto antitrust exemption if the Supreme Court determined that the league operated as a single entity.AdvertisementIn May 2010, the Supreme Court unanimously rejected the N.F.L.’s request that it be granted broad antitrust immunity.“Although N.F.L. teams have common interests such as promoting the N.F.L. brand,” Justice John Paul Stevens wrote for the court, “they are still separate, profit-maximizing entities.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The case returned to Federal District Court in Illinois, and a trial date was set for this fall. The two sides will work toward completing their agreement before they appear in court on March 17.Jeff Carey, general counsel for American Needle, declined to discuss the details of the case. The N.F.L. refused to comment.But Jeff Standen, the dean of the Chase College of Law at Northern Kentucky University, said that once the Supreme Court answered the broad question of whether the N.F.L. was a single entity, the case became simply about damages. Antitrust cases are also expensive to litigate because they require a lot of outside experts to determine how a company was hurt, and juries can be unpredictable, he added.“The N.F.L. has always been a league that has been interested in litigating cases that it is interested in but not in cases that were basically about money,” he said.In 2013, the N.F.L. agreed to settle two other cases, including one involving thousands of retired players who said the league hid from them the dangers of concussions.A version of this article appears in print on February 19, 2015, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: Sports Briefing | Pro Football.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.