AdvertisementSupported byBy Andrew KehGREENBURGH, N.Y. — The longstanding drama surrounding Carmelo Anthony and his sore left knee — the endless queries, night after night, about how he felt and whether he would play the next game — was put to rest Wednesday when the Knicks announced that Anthony, their star forward, would have season-ending surgery this week. Anthony’s balky knee has been an enduring plotline amid the general wreckage of a season — the Knicks own the N.B.A.’s worst record at 10-43 — but details of his condition were never very clear.Anthony, who was not available for comment on Wednesday, when the Knicks reconvened for their first practice after the All-Star break, began experiencing pain during the first few games of the season. The Knicks simply characterized the injury as soreness. He missed games whenever the pain was too much to handle and last month sat out six consecutive contests to rest. There was slightly more clarity on Wednesday, when the team said in a statement that Anthony’s procedure “includes a left knee patella tendon debridement and repair.” The description left open the possibility that other problems would be addressed during the operation. Anthony had guessed that his recovery would take eight weeks, but that turned out to be inaccurate. Phil Jackson, the Knicks’ president, said during a news conference on Wednesday that team doctors were predicting the rehabilitation would take between four and six months. “We’re really confident he heals well,” Jackson said. Anthony’s decision to have surgery at this moment was not surprising. He had been candid that he would require surgery at some point during the season and that it was important for him to play in the All-Star Game on Sunday at Madison Square Garden. He was a de facto host of the weekend — coaching during the celebrity exhibition game, doing promotional appearances for the league and his sponsors, and addressing the crowd before the marquee game — and it was obvious he relished the moment. He played for 30 minutes, longer than expected, and scored 14 points on 6-of-20 shooting from the field. When Jackson was asked if he was ever compelled, given the long timetable for recovery, to push Anthony to have the operation before the All-Star break, he said no. After the spectacle of All-Star weekend comes the stark reality that the Knicks — who agreed this week to buy out the remainder of Amar’e Stoudemire’s contract, freeing him to sign with the Dallas Mavericks — could somehow be worse as a team than they have been to this point. One reporter at Wednesday’s news conference commented that the team’s current players “are not a very competitive group,” and Jackson did his best to counter that notion. “I would beg to differ with you — I’m not going to beg to differ with you; I will just differ with you on this,” he said. “I think they’re competitive. They may not be able to finish games and win them, but they’re competitive.”Jackson then made the arguable claim that the Knicks were “interesting to watch and entertaining.”More interesting will be how the Knicks retool their roster. Jackson said the Knicks were active in conversations about possible deals ahead of Thursday’s trading deadline. He acknowledged, though, that there was little interest around the league in Andrea Bargnani and Jose Calderon, two players the Knicks are open to moving. Jackson revealed, too, that he would make a more concerted effort to watch certain college players. The Knicks are expected to have one of the top picks in the draft this year. Any signings and draft picks, Jackson said, will be made with the understanding that Anthony will remain the centerpiece of the team for years to come. “He wants to be the guy that’s kind of like a guy that’s built around,” Jackson said. “He’s stated that, I think, in the past. We’re going to make assessments on players to play with him. And we anticipate that as a scorer that’s been prolific in his career, he’ll continue to be so, which is a big part of the game.”Anthony averaged 24.2 points and 6.6 rebounds while playing in 40 of the Knicks’ 53 games this season. Coach Derek Fisher said that the team’s young players probably thought they deserved more playing time, more chances to shine. “Well, the dance floor is now open,” Fisher said. Advertisement