By SCOTT CACCIOLAOCT. 12, 2015
Before missing the Knicks’ preseason game Monday night against the Philadelphia 76ers, Kristaps Porzingis offered assurances that his strained left quadriceps was no big deal.“We’re just being cautious,” Porzingis said. “Very mild. Not that serious. In a few days, I’ll be fine.”Porzingis said he felt a pinch near his left hip running up the court Sunday afternoon at practice. He had a magnetic resonance imaging test that revealed a mild strain, he said, and the team’s medical staff prescribed rest.If not exactly alarming, another injury for Porzingis — the third involving his left leg since the summer — was cause for some concern. Porzingis, 20, whom the Knicks drafted fourth over all in June’s draft, has been trying to add weight and build strength to endure the rigors of his first N.B.A. season. The Knicks can only hope that another setback does not become a part of a larger trend.Advertisement“There’s definitely something that we need to try to figure out to make sure we can limit the injuries and the setbacks,” said Coach Derek Fisher, who started Lance Thomas in Porzingis’s place against Philadelphia. “That’s for all of us. It’s for him, it’s for us, and it’s for our medical. We’ll figure it out.”AdvertisementIn the days ahead of the draft, Porzingis sustained a similar injury when he worked out for the Knicks — but it was much more severe, he said. He wound up being limited from physical activity for 10 days.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“This will be faster,” Porzingis said of his anticipated recovery from his current injury.Fisher said it was unclear what was causing the injuries. Porzingis was also at a loss, saying, “I’m not a doctor.”About two weeks ago, during the first week of training camp, Porzingis tweaked his iliotibial band, a ligament that runs down the outside of the thigh from the hip to the knee. He was limited in practice for a couple of days but returned without apparent issue.In the team’s first two preseason games, Porzingis showed flashes of promise, averaging 8 points and 6 rebounds in 20 ½ minutes. Fisher said he was hopeful that Porzingis would return Friday for the Knicks’ preseason game against the Boston Celtics.“He’s still a young man just in terms of his overall physical development,” Fisher said, adding: “The feedback is, O.K., this is the second time with this particular injury, so of course, let’s sit down and figure out how we can adjust his program so we can at least try as hard as possible to mitigate that from happening.”A version of this article appears in print on October 13, 2015, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: Sports Briefing | Pro Basketball; Knicks Prevail, but Porzingis Sits Out.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.