

 Benjamin Hoffman
 

KEEPING SCORE
FEB. 18, 2015
The most believable part about Alex Rodriguez’s public apology to the Yankees and fans Tuesday for past misdeeds might have been the section in which he acknowledged that most people would not believe anything he said. The most unusual part might have been his chosen medium for the moment: a handwritten letter, in cursive, in 2015. Most offensive, stylistically, was probably his decision to stretch the letter to a second page, making it aesthetically unpleasing on social media.But faults aside, the apology did not measure up in the pantheon of bad sports apologies. History will judge, but the note’s handwritten nature alone will not make it all that memorable. In fact, in an extreme case of Marshall McLuhan’s adage “the medium is the message,” the look of the letter remained a topic of discussion when Rodriguez’s words were already starting to fade.For a bad sports apology to endure, it must contain a unique element. In a parade of bad apologies that often begin with “I’m sorry” and all too often end with “if you were offended,” the really memorable ones set themselves apart by digging the hole even deeper and, in some extreme cases, end up surpassing the original transgression.The high-water mark for a situation in which an apology made things worse came from the baseball Hall of Famer Roberto Alomar, who spat in the face of the umpire John Hirschbeck after being thrown out of a game in 1996 for arguing a third-strike call. The act was bad enough, but when asked to explain his actions, Alomar upped the ante considerably by blaming Hirschbeck’s grief over the death of his 8-year-old son three years before for the incident.Advertisement“I used to respect him a lot,” Alomar told reporters. “He had a problem with his family when his son died. I know that’s something real tough in life, but after that he just changed, personality-wise. He just got real bitter.”AdvertisementAlomar later claimed that reporters had goaded him into mentioning the boy’s death. He and Hirschbeck have put the incident behind them and developed a public friendship, but at the time, Alomar’s words were so inflammatory that the well-respected Hirschbeck ran into the Orioles’ clubhouse threatening to kill Alomar, which would indicate he had not accepted the apology.Nick Saban, the Alabama football coach, showed a similar lack of perspective in 2007 when he discussed the Crimson Tide’s loss to Louisiana-Monroe by invoking some of the worst events in American history.“Changes in history usually occur after some kind of catastrophic event,” Saban said. “It may be 9/11, which sort of changed the spirit of America relative to catastrophic events. Pearl Harbor kind of got us ready for World War II, and that was a catastrophic event.”The apparent comparison was so outrageous that The Associated Press sought comment from a university spokesman, who tried his own version of the Jedi mind trick, insisting that reporters had not heard what they just heard.“What Coach Saban said did not correlate losing a football game with tragedy; everyone needs to understand that,” Jeff Purinton, the spokesman, said. “He was not equating losing football games to those catastrophic events.”Apologies can come in many forms, but some of the best ones have a touch of absurdity that makes them memorable.John Rocker won the award for strangest defense of himself after he came under fire for comments made to Sports Illustrated in which he managed, in a single quotation, to offend Middle Easterners, gay people, AIDS patients, ex-convicts, single mothers and immigrants. He found the time to wonder how Asians, Koreans and Vietnamese had gotten into the country.But then, in a first-person essay for The Atlanta Journal-Constitution, he offered unexpected evidence that he was incapable of racism.Advertisement“The family of my best friend is first-generation Lebanese,” he wrote. “His grandfather came through Ellis Island. As you can see, my actions do not support the racist label.”Later, he did defend Ozzie Guillen’s use of homophobic slurs and claimed that the Holocaust would have been prevented if only the Jewish people had guns, but he still had that rock-solid defense of knowing a Lebanese to excuse those actions.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.A tack Rodriguez has used in the past, but did not try this time, is to be defiant and self-righteous. It is possible he just understood he could never reach the heights Mike Tyson did in a 1997 apology for biting off, and spitting out, a piece of Evander Holyfield’s ear during a boxing match. In a rambling statement, Tyson offered what sounded like legitimate contrition. But for good measure, he reminded everyone that if not for the cannibalism that led to his disqualification, it might have been a good fight.“I’m only saddened that the fight didn’t go on further that — for that the boxing fans of the world might have seen for themselves who would come out on top,” he said.When all is said and done, Rodriguez may not even have the most memorable apology in Yankees history.In February 2005, Jason Giambi addressed reporters at Yankee Stadium for the first time since testimony had leaked in a case against the Bay Area Lab Co-Operative in which he acknowledged using illegal steroids.“I feel I let down the fans,” Giambi said. “I feel I let down the media; I feel I let down the Yankees, and not only the Yankees, but my teammates.”The problem with the apology was that Giambi never said what he was apologizing for.“I know the fans might want more,” Giambi said. “But because of all the legal matters, I can’t get into specifics. Someday, hopefully, I will be able to.”AdvertisementGiambi’s apology came off as weak to many, but he gets the benefit of the doubt for seeming to believe his words. That is more than can be said for Ryan Leaf, who set the standard for a lack of sincerity in sports apologies after an outburst in which he screamed at a reporter who had written about his cursing out a camera operator.His problem was not his words, but rather how he delivered them.“I have been selfish and have let my personal shortcomings get in the way of my professional behavior,” his statement began.For all the cameras to see, he read the remainder of the apology off a sheet of paper in a monotone voice, making clear that he either did not write the words or did not believe them. To drive the point home, when he finished reading the statement, he crumpled the paper and tossed it into his locker.With Rodriguez’s letter delivered by his public relations team, it is impossible to know how much he believed the words he wrote or, for that matter, whether he crumpled the letter and threw it away after writing it. But the medium was Rodriguez’s message, and if it was intended to make people eventually forget what Rodriguez had to say, it will probably prove to be a successful strategy.A version of this article appears in print on February 19, 2015, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Rodriguez’s Apology Was Bad. These Are the Worst.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »