By TYLER KEPNEROCT. 12, 2015
CHICAGO —  One after another, the home runs soared over the ivy wall of Wrigley Field. Six Chicago Cubs hitters combined for a record slugfest that pushed the St. Louis Cardinals to the edge of playoff elimination.The Cubs won Game 3 of this National League division series, 8-6, on a windy Monday night when their ace, Jake Arrieta, was mortal. It was the first time in postseason history that a team hit six home runs in a game, and the Cubs can close out this best-of-five series with another win on Tuesday.“Seeing the ball fly out of the yard as many times as it did was just incredible,” said Arrieta, who lasted only five and two-thirds innings. “The fans were kind of thriving off that, and they were in it from the first pitch.”Even if the Cubs lose the series — and they must face John Lackey, who stifled them in Game 1, on Tuesday — this game reminded the rest of the league of how imposing their young lineup can be. All of the home run hitters are under 30 years old: Kyle Schwarber, Starlin Castro, Kris Bryant, Anthony Rizzo, Jorge Soler and Dexter Fowler.AdvertisementSoler went 2 for 2 with two walks and has reached base in all nine plate appearances this postseason. No other player has ever started his postseason career that way.Advertisement“I’ve got tremendous confidence right now,” Soler said through a translator, and the rest of the team can relate. However they play, the Cubs seem to have a good chance to win.In the wild-card game, they won with an Arrieta shutout. In Game 2 of this series, they won with two well-timed squeeze bunts. On Monday, they won with brute force.“That’s how baseball is, man,” said Schwarber, who was toiling in instructional league a year ago. “It’s a crazy, crazy game. You don’t know what’s going to happen. That’s what makes this game so much fun.”Monday’s onslaught was enough to lift Arrieta to victory, despite a shaky performance. He had given up four earned runs in 1001/3 innings from the start of August through first three innings of Game 3. Then he allowed four earned runs Monday in the span of 12 batters.In the fourth inning, Arrieta walked two in a row. (“He wasn’t even close to the plate,” catcher Miguel Montero said, to laughs.) Two runs scored, and two more came home in the sixth on a home run by Jason Heyward.Arrieta said the Cardinals had a sound approach, resisting his cutters and sliders and, in Heyward’s case, making solid contact on a good, low curveball. The wildness bothered him; he had gone 26 innings without a walk until his lapse in the fourth.“Really, the takeaway for me was the two walks,” Arrieta said. “Both of them scored, so the damage was a little more than it probably should have been.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.It was the first time in 22 starts — a span of almost four months — that Arrieta failed to meet the minimum requirements for a quality start. Yet he simply does not lose. In his last 14 starts, he is 13-0 with a 0.70 E.R.A.AdvertisementHistory, of course, is filled with tales of teams that trumped an unbeatable ace. In 1984, the Cubs turned to Rick Sutcliffe, who had won 17 of his 18 decisions for them, in the final game of the N.L. Championship Series in San Diego. They lost.Last fall, the Cardinals went to Dodger Stadium to open their division series against Clayton Kershaw, who would soon be named the N.L. most valuable player. They battered him that day, then beat him again in Game 4 to take the series.Yet their relative success Monday was not enough to win, because Michael Wacha and the bullpen could not stop the Cubs’ offense. Wacha, a star of the 2013 playoffs, slumped at the end of this season and could not survive the fifth inning Monday.The Cardinals used five pitchers, and only Seth Maness, who faced just two batters, did not allow a homer. Even Adam Wainwright, who looked sharp in relief on Saturday, was greeted with a two-run blast by Soler on his first pitch of the sixth.“Those guys will make you pay, for sure, in this park when the wind’s doing what it’s doing,” Cardinals Manager Mike Matheny said.The game was costly for both teams. Yadier Molina, the Cardinals’ catcher and leader, aggravated a thumb injury and left in the sixth inning. Addison Russell, the Cubs’ rookie shortstop, left with tightness in his left hamstring in the fourth.Russell, 21, hurt himself racing to third for a triple, one base away from joining the Cubs’ home-run brigade. He is one of many offensive threats who could keep the Cubs contending for years as they chase their first title since 1908.“It’s encouraging, especially having so many young ones that can provide the power and consistency that they can on a daily basis,” Arrieta said. “It takes a lot of pressure off the arms. You can’t pitch — you can’t execute — while you have a mind-set of, ‘Oh my God, I can only give up one.’ That can’t be your mind-set. But knowing you have a lineup that can score four, five, six runs a game does make your job a little easier.”It did on Monday, when the game’s hottest pitcher wobbled but the Cubs slugged their way to the series lead.A version of this article appears in print on October 13, 2015, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: Youth Movement of Sizzling Bats Powers Cubs to Control Over the Cardinals.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.