By ROB HUGHESFEB. 18, 2015
LONDON — When Pep Guardiola ended his sabbatical in New York to take over as head coach of Bayern Munich two years ago, he knew the score. He had to improve upon perfection.His predecessor, Jupp Heynckes, retired with a clean sweep of titles — the German league, the German Cup and the Champions League, all won in style. To date, Guardiola’s Munich has scarcely missed a beat in the Bundesliga, as last weekend’s 8-0 thrashing of Hamburg accentuated.But being ruthless with hapless Hamburg on a Saturday doesn’t impress unless you follow up in style in the Champions League on Tuesday. Bayern’s bosses are good men, knowledgeable men, demanding men. They tend to expect more than a moribund 0-0 stalemate against Shakhtar Donetsk.To be fair, Shakhtar is a decent team. It has a solid defense built around its native Ukrainians, with six Brazilians bolted on as midfielders and forwards. But the Donetsk team started the first leg of the knockout round with two immense disadvantages. It had not played a competitive match for 10 weeks because soccer takes a winter break in Eastern Europe, and the rust from inactivity certainly showed.AdvertisementAnd, with its impressive Donbass Arena and much of Donetsk damaged by the fighting in the eastern part of the country, Shakhtar is without a home. The team has relocated to the capital of Kiev, and it now must play its Champions League matches in Lviv. In fact, Munich is closer to Lviv than Donetsk is.AdvertisementEarly on, there was every reason to appreciate why bookmakers have made Bayern the favorite to win this season’s Champions League, laying odds of 250-1 against the Ukrainian club reaching the final.Arjen Robben, who has overshadowed any other player in Germany for months and maybe years, cut in from his wing to create chances that Bastian Schweinsteiger and Thomas Müller failed to put away. The attacks kept on building and kept on failing.This led, it seemed, to Bayern players becoming petulant and peevish. Donetsk did not try to match the German champion in the attacking sense — even with all those Brazilians, they mustered only one shot on Manuel Neuer’s goal in the whole game, and that was a free kick.There could have been a reason for that beyond the circumstance that Ukrainian soccer is in right now. Mircea Lucescu, the wily old coach of this team, had suggested in the buildup to the match that, while Guardiola is trying to make Munich play with a Latin flair, Shakhtar has that trait in spades.“We have 13 Brazilians,” he told reporters without a hint of exaggeration. The club genuinely does have that many, six on the starting team and seven more waiting for their chances. “These Brazilians,” the nearly 70-year-old coach said, “are dreaming of exacting revenge against Bayern’s six world champions.”In that comment, perhaps, lay the key to the way this match turned out. Brazil’s national team crumbled without a fight in a 7-1 surrender to Germany during the World Cup last July. Donetsk’s Brazilian players worked like Trojans to ensure that Bayern would not overrun them on Tuesday.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.This was Lucescu’s doing, because he instructed the team that its first priority was not to lose. It frustrated Bayern over and over again, and with Robert Lewandowski left on the bench until late in the game, the German club’s forwards seldom threatened to score.Bayern resorted to bullying fouls. The Spanish referee used his yellow cards eight times during the game, and inevitably someone had to see red.AdvertisementThat turned out to be the Spaniard Xabi Alonso. Xabi left his mark on two opponents with unnecessary fouls and spoiled his 100th Champions League game by getting himself sent off.He is an experienced veteran of this type of game, having played in José Mourinho’s midfield when they were player and coach together at Real Madrid. There was much spite being shown in Lviv — far more than beauty — but Alonso should know better than to let his side down in that fashion.With his departure, Bayern’s purpose changed. It no longer sought to win, merely to remain unbeaten. So 0-0 it was, meaning ostensibly that Bayern should still prevail in the second leg in Munich next month.“If you’d offered this result to me beforehand, I wouldn’t have been satisfied,” Bayern’s sporting director, Matthias Sammer, told the club’s website after the game. “After the sending-off I can probably live with it a little better, but I consider it a dangerous result because it only sounds good on the face of it.”Sammer occupies the seat between the coach, Guardiola, and the administrative board led by Karl-Heinz Rummenigge. It is known that the board was not impressed by the way Bayern was knocked out of the Champions League by Real Madrid last year, and over and above retaining the Bundesliga title this season, it expects at the very least to reach this year’s final, set in Berlin.Sammer’s concluding words on Tuesday leave little to the imagination.“You can see we still have room to improve, and that’s the message,” he said. “We need to put it behind us now and shift up a gear if we’re to make the next round. It wasn’t bad, but it’s not the real Bayern yet — and that’s where we have to be.”The ball is in Guardiola’s court.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.