AdvertisementSupported byBy Tim RohanAfter the Mets’ regular season ended, they sent a number of players to Florida to train and play in case they were called upon in the playoffs. On Saturday night, several of them were in a hotel lobby watching Game 2 of the Mets’ National League division series against the Dodgers when Chase Utley, a base runner for Los Angeles, broke Ruben Tejada’s leg with a hard slide. In Florida, the players started shouting at the television.Logan Verrett turned to Matt Reynolds and said, “You may be going to New York.”On Monday, Reynolds, a rookie shortstop, arrived at Citi Field as a backup to Wilmer Flores for Game 3 of the series, which was tied, 1-1. The game was expected to be unusually dramatic: The Mets were still seething over Utley’s slide, the Dodgers were still defending Utley, and everyone was wondering if Mets starter Matt Harvey would retaliate.If Reynolds played, he would become the second player in the modern era to make his major league debut in the postseason. Mark Kiger was the first, with Oakland in 2006, according to the Elias Sports Bureau. “At someplace along the line, you got to enter the big stage,” Manager Terry Collins said. “This is a little more difficult than others. But you know what? He’s the highest-ranking shortstop we got,” after Flores.To die-hard Mets fans, Reynolds, 21, was not a complete mystery. After the Mets took him in the second round of the 2012 draft, out of Arkansas, he rose through the organization. In 115 games with Class AAA Las Vegas this year, he batted .267 and collected 43 extra-base hits and 65 R.B.I. He also gained a reputation as a hard-nosed, energetic player who had good instincts. When Reynolds arrived at the park, Collins pulled him aside and gave him a speech he typically delivered to rookies, as if this were any other call-up. He reminded Reynolds that he was still playing the same game. He told Reynolds to focus on his job. “Get yourself ready to play,” Collins told Reynolds, “because you never know when you’ll be needed.”The Mets chose Reynolds over another infielder, such as the utility player Eric Campbell, because they wanted to have a true shortstop behind Flores. Earlier in the season, when Flores struggled defensively at shortstop, he was booed loudly. Having Reynolds on the roster may relieve the pressure on Flores because Flores is not the team’s only option.But Collins was still unsure how he would use Reynolds. Like Flores, Reynolds is known more for his hitting than for his defense, and he is not much of a speed threat on the basepaths, although he stole 13 bases in 17 attempts this season for Las Vegas.“The kid’s first game in the big leagues is Game 3, with 48,000 people screaming,” Collins said, “and to put him in for defense in the ninth inning? I’m not sure how that’s going to fly. We’ll just wait and see what the scenario is.”However, the Mets were likely to turn to another rookie, Steven Matz, to start Game 4. Matz missed time with back injuries, but his six starts included wins over the Dodgers and the Yankees, and he posted a 2.27 E.R.A. He also proved to the Mets that he had both the stuff and the courage to succeed in big spots and overcome his emotions.Nevertheless, Collins said that Matz was not a lock to start Game 4 and that the decision depended on Game 3. If the Mets won, they would use Matz as planned. But if they lost, the Mets would consider bringing back Jacob deGrom, the Game 1 winner, on short rest.At a news conference Monday, Matz, who grew up on Long Island as a Mets fan, was asked how he would respond if he started. “I mean, I get butterflies before every start,” he said.Reynolds also met with the news media, for about 90 seconds outside the Mets’ clubhouse, before he was whisked away by a staff member.“Honestly, I don’t really feel that nervous,” Reynolds said. “I just keep telling myself it’s the same game, just a bigger stage. It’s going to be fun.”Advertisement