By PAT PICKENSFEB. 19, 2015
The Rangers were unbeaten on a four-game trip, scoring 11 third-period goals, including three in a come-from-behind 6-5 win over the Islanders on Monday.When they returned to Madison Square Garden on Thursday night, the Rangers netted two third-period goals but failed to maintain a late one-goal advantage in a 5-4 shootout loss to the Vancouver Canucks.Alex Burrows and Radim Vrbata scored shootout goals, and Ryan Miller made 30 saves, including stops on Mats Zuccarello and Derek Stepan and in the shootout, lifting the Canucks to their second straight win.Martin St. Louis and Carl Hagelin scored 21 seconds apart in the third, and Cam Talbot stopped 24 shots as the Rangers fell to 5-1-2 since goaltender Henrik Lundqvist went down with a vascular injury last month.AdvertisementHagelin and Stepan each posted two-point games, with Stepan and Rick Nash scoring goals.“Any time you score four goals, you want to win the game,” Talbot said. “Four goals should be good enough most nights, and that’s on me. I have to come up with a way to make that extra save.”AdvertisementThe Canucks tied the score with Miller sitting on the bench for an extra skater at the 18-minute mark. After Talbot stopped a Dan Hamhuis shot, Henrik Sedin collected the rebound and fired the puck into the vacant net for his second goal and forced overtime.“I feel like if he got all of it, it would’ve come off my pad a little bit hotter, and maybe Sedin wouldn’t have been able to handle it or it might’ve ended up in the corner,” Talbot said.Despite dominating possession for much of the first two periods, the Rangers fell behind after a power-play goal by Sedin gave the Canucks a 3-2 advantage 3:55 into the third.But St. Louis knotted the score 1:08 later when he took Stepan’s cross-ice pass in stride and flicked a backhand shot past Miller. On the next shift, Zuccarello forced a turnover in the offensive zone, pushing the puck to defenseman Dan Girardi, who sent it toward Miller. Hagelin redirected it for his 13th of the season at 5:24.“Obviously it wasn’t a great effort or good execution tonight, yet you find yourself up, 4-3, there,” the Rangers’ Ryan McDonagh said. “You wish you could find a way to close it out for sure.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Nash put himself two goals behind the N.H.L. leader, Alex Ovechkin, midway through the second, recording his 36th goal and giving the Rangers a 2-1 lead. Derick Brassard head-manned a pass that sent Nash on a breakaway, and Nash beat Miller between the pads at 11:00.Slightly more than two minutes later, the Canucks tied it again. Center Bo Horvat finished a two-on-one break, redirecting Ronalds Kenins’s pass past Talbot.The Rangers’ first-period pressure panned out when Stepan opened the scoring with his 11th goal of the season and second in two games. After Miller stopped Girardi’s initial chance, St. Louis retrieved the puck and pushed it back to Girardi. Girardi crisply passed the puck back to St. Louis, who centered it to Stepan. He beat Miller to put the Rangers up at 11:39.AdvertisementAfter Vancouver recorded the first four shots — three coming in the game’s first 19 seconds — the Rangers took over, peppering Miller with 14 of the final 15 shots, including eight in a row.The Canucks evened the score early in the second period when Jannik Hansen forced McDonagh to turn the puck over behind the goal. The puck squirted off Talbot’s stick and the side of the net and right to Shawn Matthias.“We had a lot of guys that played all right but not good enough to win,” Rangers Coach Alain Vigneault said.A version of this article appears in print on February 20, 2015, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Rangers, Again Prolific Late in Game, Are Beaten at Their Own Game.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.