AdvertisementSupported byBy Allan KredaUNIONDALE, N.Y. — Skating at Nassau Coliseum without igniting a flood of memories is most likely impossible for the Long Island native Eric Nystrom of the Nashville Predators, the N.H.L.’s best team.A glance at the rafters reveals the retired No. 23 jersey of his father, Bob Nystrom, who scored perhaps the most famous goal in Islanders history to win the Stanley Cup in 1980 in overtime against the Philadelphia Flyers.Drafted 10th over all by the Calgary Flames in 2002, Eric Nystrom has found a home with the top-flight Predators after 204 games with the Flames and stops in Minnesota and Dallas, contributing his checking-line role to perfection.“There are so many great memories, how I was on the ice with my sister when I was 3 or 4 and could barely walk or early mornings when my dad and I would come out, just me and him would have the ice with a million pucks,” said the 32-year-old Nystrom, who scored a goal in his first visit to the Coliseum, in 2010. “It’s great to be back here.”Bob Nystrom, who played his entire career for the Islanders from 1972 to 1986, never left Long Island, working in the insurance business and in various capacities for the team. Now 62, he is still known as Mr. Islander and annually presents his namesake award to a player best exemplifying “leadership, hustle and dedication.”So it is no surprise that effort has been a linchpin of his son’s success after playing four years at the University of Michigan.“Eric worked incredibly hard — as did many players who grew up on Long Island and reached the N.H.L.,” said his father, one of 16 Islanders who played for all four Stanley Cup champion teams from 1980 to 1983. “It’s absolutely a thrill to see him have the type of career he’s had.”The Predators are certainly happy to have Nystrom aboard. He personifies the hard-working style that Coach Peter Laviolette has espoused since training camp.In the first period Thursday, Nystrom knocked the Islanders’ Mikhail Grabovski out of the game with a hit. The Islanders scored three times in the first and added two third-period goals for a 5-2 win over the Predators (39-13-6), who still lead the league with 84 points.“That’s a good hockey team we lost to,” Nystrom said. “We just have to refocus and move on. I’m confident that we will.”The loss ended Nashville’s six-game winning streak and was the second straight win for the Islanders. Goaltender Jaroslav Halak made 30 saves to record his 32nd win, tying the Islanders’ franchise record.“We responded well against a quality team,” said John Tavares, the Islanders’ captain, whose 29th goal of the season, a team best, proved to be the game winner. “We played hard and did well in a lot of areas.”Brian Strait, Johnny Boychuk, Nick Leddy and Josh Bailey also scored for the Islanders.The Predators, meanwhile, led by goaltender Pekka Rinne and the rookie Filip Forsberg, are having the type of season that could bring the Nystrom family and the Stanley Cup into the same conversation this spring.The Metropolitan Division-leading Islanders (39-19-1) have similar dreams in their final season at the 43-year-old Nassau Coliseum, where Bob Nystrom played 11 games during his rookie campaign, in 1972-73.Leaving Long Island for Brooklyn’s Barclays Center saddens both Nystroms, particularly Bob, who along with his former teammates Clark Gillies and Denis Potvin have expressed exasperation over the failure to keep the team in Nassau County. With the Islanders winning with regularity in front of sellout crowds and resurrecting the thrilling buzz of the glory years, happiness mixes with melancholy.“You can see the excitement in the fans, the building and the full houses. It’s absolutely fantastic,” he said. “There’s no better building in the league to be on the ice when it’s rocking. To know that it’s going away next year is a disappointment. I think people will regret it. There will be a real sense of loss when they move.”Nystrom and his former teammate Gerry Hart were instrumental in the growth of hockey on Long Island. They even coached Eric on a select team that included the future N.H.L.ers Chris Higgins and Mike Komisarek.“It’s not that easy from this area,” Nystrom said. “Kids from Canada and regions of Europe, they can skate outside on frozen ponds most of the time. Gerry and I had a really good run.”The Predators had another Long Islander on their roster against the Islanders. Defenseman Anthony Bitetto, 24, a sixth-round draft pick by Nashville in 2010, played his sixth N.H.L. game after being recalled from Milwaukee.“For sure this will be special, a moment I dreamed about as a kid,” said Bitetto, who was born in Island Park and admitted he grew up as a Rangers fan. “The atmosphere at the Coliseum is very special.”Eric was happy to share the local spotlight with a young teammate as well as his famous father, who clearly enjoys his role as an Islander ambassador.“He’s so recognizable, and people have such nice things to say about him,” the younger Nystrom said. “Whenever we’d come to the Coliseum he’d have a mob following him around. That says a lot about what he did for Long Island and the Islanders. It’s amazing to know that’s my father.”Advertisement