AdvertisementSupported byBy Bruce WeberJerome Kersey, a hard-working forward from a small college who overachieved in pro basketball, starting on two Portland Trail Blazers teams that reached the N.B.A. finals, died on Wednesday in Tualatin, Ore., near Portland. He was 52.Ashley Stanford Cone, a spokeswoman for Legacy Meridian Park Medical Center, confirmed the death.The Portland newspaper The Oregonian reported that an autopsy on Thursday by the state medical examiner’s office determined the cause of death to be a pulmonary thromboembolism, the result of a blood clot in Kersey’s leg that broke off and migrated to a lung.In 1984, the year that Kersey graduated from college, Akeem (later known as Hakeem) Olajuwon was the N.B.A.’s No. 1 draft choice, going to the Houston Rockets, and Michael Jordan was taken third, by the Chicago Bulls. Between them, the Blazers took Sam Bowie, a center from Kentucky whose N.B.A. career was derailed by injuries and who became a source of great ache in the hearts of Portland fans, who could only wonder how history might have been different if the team had drafted Jordan instead.Deep in the second round, however, with the 46th overall pick, the Blazers found an unlikely gem. They chose Kersey, who had played his college ball at Longwood College (now Longwood University) in Farmville, Va., an inconsequential speck in the basketball universe that he put permanently on the map.He played for six teams over 17 years in pro basketball, including 11 years for Portland. In 2010, The Oregonian rated him the eighth-best Blazer in the team’s history. He is still the only Longwood alumnus to play in the N.B.A.He was 6 feet 7 inches, tough and muscular, listed at 225 pounds. A diver for loose balls, a rugged defender whose physicality was known leaguewide as an annoyance to the opponents he guarded, and an acrobatic leaper who once finished second to Jordan in the league’s annual slam dunk contest, Kersey played the hustling game of a player bent on proving himself.The clutch shooter Terry Porter, a teammate, called him “the hardest-playing, most physical player I have ever played with,” and he became known as “Mercy Kersey” after a refrain by the Blazers’ radio announcer, Bill Schonely, who was wont to declare after a dramatic steal or a dunk, “Mercy mercy, Jerome Kersey.”Kersey recalled his role on the Blazers to The Oregonian in 2010. “My role was to do all the dirty work,” he said. “Get on the fast break, dive for loose balls, grab the rebounds.”Even so, he was an effective offensive player. Not known early on as a scorer, he applied himself to his midrange jumper and had his best statistical years in the late 1980s, averaging 19.2, 17.5 and 16 points per game in three consecutive seasons.Playing with strong Blazers teams that included Porter and the smooth shooter and ballhandler Clyde Drexler, a Hall of Famer, as well as big men like Kevin Duckworth, Cliff Robinson and Buck Williams, Kersey was a force, especially in the playoffs.In 1990, the Blazers lost in the finals to the Detroit Pistons, but Kersey scored 20.7 points per game over 21 postseason contests, grabbing an average of 8.3 rebounds and playing nearly 40 minutes a night.Two years later, despite another disappointment in the finals, this time at the hands of Jordan’s Bulls, Kersey poured in 16.2 points a game with a field-goal percentage of 51 percent and averaged 7.7 rebounds.“When he developed that jumper off the dribble, he became a real player,” Drexler said in 2010. “If you played off of him, he could hit that 15- to 20-footer. Now, he was a player with all the intangibles. He was always healthy, always durable, and always played hard.”Kersey was born in Clarksville, in southern Virginia, on June 26, 1962, and though he played for the Golden State Warriors, the Los Angeles Lakers, the Seattle SuperSonics, the San Antonio Spurs — with whom, playing as a reserve, he won a championship in 1999 — and the Milwaukee Bucks (for whom he also worked as an assistant coach), he remained a Blazer at heart. At his death, he was employed by the team as director of alumni relations, and he lived around Portland for most of his life.A popular figure in the city, he represented the Blazers at community events and worked for charitable causes, including fund-raising to combat multiple sclerosis. He met his wife, Teri, shortly after she learned she had the disease in 2004. They married in 2013. In addition to his wife, Kersey’s survivors include a daughter.Advertisement