By PATRICK MAKSFEB. 19, 2015
INDIANAPOLIS — Inside a luxurious lounge that had been transformed into an area filled with cameras, laptops and seemingly endless ropes of cable cords at Lucas Oil Stadium, Marcus Mariota faced a line of questioning that ended with his being asked whether he possessed the skills to succeed in the N.F.L.Mariota, the soft-spoken Oregon quarterback who is a top prospect in the draft, enters this weekend at the combine with an opportunity for teams to inspect and dissect him as they search for potential applicants to their fraternities.It is a chance for Mariota to impress suitors, including the Tampa Bay Buccaneers, who hold the top pick in the draft after a miserable 2-14 finish in Coach Lovie Smith’s first season. Smith suggested that the Buccaneers would look at Mariota and Jameis Winston of Florida State, whose rendezvous with the news media was pushed back until Friday, as a remedy for those struggles.The Philadelphia Eagles could also be a landing spot for Mariota, who played for Coach Chip Kelly at Oregon.AdvertisementMariota disputed any notion that he was a system quarterback — a product of the Ducks’ flashy, up-tempo spread offense.Advertisement“Any player would stand in front of you and tell you they’re confident in their abilities, and I’m no different,” Mariota said Thursday. “What I’ve been able to do at the University of Oregon and what I’ve learned has prepared me for this.”Mariota compiled a stellar campaign in which he won the Heisman Trophy and amassed a loyal following in the Pacific Northwest. After a 44-10 Oregon win over Colorado in November, a 12-year-old student reporter at O’Hara Catholic School in Eugene, Ore., described Mariota’s importance to the middle school by saying, “There’s Jesus, there’s girls, and there’s Marcus Mariota.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Here, however, Mariota is one of hundreds of players under the most powerful of microscopes, and league executives and scouts will examine him with great rigor. Mariota’s hand size was measured at precisely 9⅞ inches long.“They’re two talented players that have different styles who have won a lot of football games,” Smith said on Wednesday, referring to Mariota and Winston. He added: “We need a quarterback that can throw the ball and make a variety of throws; we need a leader, a guy who makes great decisions. We’d like to have a guy who is mobile in the pocket. A guy who has won football games.”Mariota, who guided Oregon to a 36-5 record over three seasons, said, “All it takes is one team to believe in me and to give me an opportunity.”He added, “There’s a purpose of why I’m here and why I’m standing in front of you, and that’s because I love the game, I want to be part of this game, I want to be part of this game for a long time.”“My motivation isn’t to prove anybody wrong,” he continued. “My motivation is to make a dream come true for me.”A version of this article appears in print on February 20, 2015, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Teams With Eye to Future Train a Lens on Mariota.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.