AdvertisementSupported byBy Viv BernsteinWhen Kyle Busch was dropped by Hendrick Motorsports after 2007 and signed to race for Joe Gibbs Racing, few could have predicted what happened next. Busch went from one win with Hendrick in 2007 to eight victories with Gibbs in 2008.Fluke? Maybe not. Jamie McMurray left Roush Fenway Racing after struggling at that high-powered team and signed with Earnhardt Ganassi in 2010. That was the year McMurray won the Daytona 500 and the Brickyard 400 on the way to the best season of his career.It happened again with Matt Kenseth in 2013, when he changed teams, won seven races and nearly took home the Sprint Cup. And last season, Kevin Harvick and Ryan Newman essentially switched rides — Harvick went from Richard Childress Racing to Stewart-Haas Racing and Newman from Stewart-Haas to Childress — and they wound up first and second in the final Cup standings. New teams. Stunning results. It has happened too often to be mere coincidence.All of which makes Carl Edwards perhaps the driver to watch in this year’s Sprint Cup title hunt, beginning Sunday with the season-opening Daytona 500. After 10-plus seasons driving the No. 99 Ford for Roush Fenway Racing and twice finishing runner-up in the points standings, Edwards has moved to the No. 19 Toyota at Joe Gibbs Racing. And there is every reason to believe he will see the same resurgence in his first season with a new team as the others did.“There’s no excuses on not winning races now,” the broadcaster and former racecar driver Kyle Petty said of Edwards. “You put yourself in the best stuff — now you’ve got to make something happen. Carl’s in that position now. He’s put himself in really good stuff, stuff that’s capable of winning races, stuff that’s capable of contending for championships year in and year out.”The strength of Hendrick Motorsports was on display again Thursday, with Dale Earnhardt Jr. and Jimmie Johnson each winning qualifying races at Daytona that set the field for the 500. The front row had already been determined in qualifying on Sunday. The Hendrick driver Jeff Gordon will sit on the pole, with Johnson joining him on the front row.Better racecars help drivers who switch teams. Kenseth made the same move Edwards has made, from Roush to Gibbs, in 2013. Kenseth went from three victories to a series-best seven, finishing second to Johnson for the title.“We were just the fastest car I ever drove,” Kenseth said. “That was the biggest thing for me. You can’t win races without fast racecars.”Harvick was able to compete with equipment and engines supplied by Hendrick when he moved to Stewart-Haas and won five times, including the final two races on his way to his first career title. But that was not far from Harvick’s 2013 performance, when he won four races and had 21 top-10 finishes — one more than in 2014.So it is not just equipment. No one would say Busch, McMurray or Newman stepped into faster rides. Some took over equally fast racecars, and some did not. And yet they all showed marked improvement, as did Joey Logano, who went from Gibbs to Team Penske in 2013 and made the postseason Chase for the first time. He followed that by nearly winning the Cup last season.All of them needed more than a new car.“I was just tired of going to work,” Harvick said of his final season at Childress, the team that originally promoted him to the Cup series to replace Dale Earnhardt after Earnhardt was killed in the 2001 Daytona 500. Harvick had been with Childress for 13 seasons before making the switch.“I didn’t like my job,” Harvick said. “That’s not a healthy way to be productive in this environment because it takes a lot of work and effort and things to be competitive.“For me to come over and be with this group of people was very refreshing for me, very motivating.”Busch, too, said there was something to be said for a fresh start.“I don’t know why it happens that way; it just does,” he said. Busch added: “Obviously, new is exciting, and I think that’s something to be said for what I had, Kevin had, Matt had and what Carl hopefully has.”It is in part because of the success of those drivers that Edwards also decided to make a change. It does not hurt that he will be paired with the crew chief Darian Grubb, who won a Cup as crew chief for Stewart in 2011. The driver Stewart beat in the final race of the season to win the Cup was Edwards, so Edwards’s pairing with Grubb makes this season even more intriguing for him.Moving to a new team was the toughest decision of his career, Edwards said. But now that it is done, it is up to him to show it was the right move. In the end, all the drivers who have switched teams have that in common.“I looked around, and all these guys are making changes and doing very well,” Edwards said. “I didn’t understand that until we first made the announcement. I got that feeling we talked about earlier, that feeling, ‘Man, I’ve got to go prove myself’ — that little bit of insecurity that every driver walks around with a long time. I haven’t had that feeling for a while. I’m curious to see if that’s it. But either way, I hope I can do the same thing those guys have done and have a great year.”Advertisement