By PETER MAYFEB. 19, 2015
The 2012 N.B.A. finalists, Miami and Oklahoma City, each in danger of missing the playoffs this season, shook up the conference races on Thursday amid a wild rush of deals before the trade deadline at 3 p.m. The transactions prompted Philadelphia center Joel Embiid to summarize many observers’ feelings with a tweet: “Someone tell me what’s going on please help.”The Heat, thought to be waiting until 2016 for their next big personnel move, instead signaled their intentions for the final third of this season — and the playoffs — by acquiring the player widely considered to be the league’s top prize: point guard Goran Dragic of the Phoenix Suns. Miami gave up none of its core players to get Dragic, last year’s most improved player. The Suns received Danny Granger and Justin Hamilton and two No. 1 picks for Dragic, who had said he wanted to leave Phoenix.While Pat Riley, the Heat’s president, was bolstering his team for a push in the anemic Eastern Conference — the Heat are 22-30 and are tied for seventh place in the East — the Thunder were doing the same in the potent West. The Thunder got rid of two players and strengthened their bench, sending Kendrick Perkins to Utah for Enes Kanter and Steve Novak and trading Reggie Jackson to Detroit for D. J. Augustin and Kyle Singler.Analyzing the Thunder’s trades for NBA TV, the former N.B.A. coach and general manager Mike Dunleavy said Oklahoma City had gone from “dangerous to lethal.”AdvertisementThe Thunder, who played Dallas on Thursday night, started the day a half-game behind Phoenix in the race for the eighth playoff spot. Oklahoma City also gave up a draft pick to facilitate the deals.In the end, three players who had expressed a desire to be dealt because of frustration with their roles all got their wishes. Dragic was upset at playing off the ball in Phoenix, which also moved another point guard (Isaiah Thomas, to Boston) and acquired yet another (Brandon Knight, from Milwaukee).AdvertisementJackson had already rejected a contract extension from Oklahoma City and had seen his time and production slip since the Thunder acquired Dion Waiters. Kanter, the No. 3 overall pick in the 2011 draft, had lost playing time to Rudy Gobert.The top two teams in the West — Golden State and Memphis — and the top three teams in the East — Atlanta, Toronto and Chicago — did not make moves. The Grizzlies had acquired Jeff Green from the Celtics well before the deadline.In the East, Miami and Detroit, which also got Tayshaun Prince from the Celtics, appeared to be the big winners, with the Bucks also making significant moves. Milwaukee picked up Michael Carter-Williams, last season’s rookie of the year, from the 76ers. In a tweet, Carter-Williams said: “I can’t lie I’m shocked.” He will take the place of Knight, who has had a terrific season for the surprising Bucks. Milwaukee also received Miles Plumlee and Tyler Ennis.The Nets, thwarted in an attempt to trade away Brook Lopez, instead sent Kevin Garnett back to where his career began — Minnesota. Garnett waived a no-trade clause to return the Timberwolves, with whom he spent his first 12 years in the league. He will finish his 20th there.The Associated Press reported that the Timberwolves would like Garnett to play beyond this season. Garnett is close with Coach Flip Saunders and would be an ideal veteran presence on the Timberwolves’ young roster, which includes Andrew Wiggins, Anthony Bennett and Ricky Rubio. Garnett also is thought to be interested in an ownership position in Minnesota.The Nets received the versatile Thaddeus Young in the deal. Across the East River, the Knicks traded Pablo Prigioni to Houston, where his veteran savvy and presence should help the Rockets. The Knicks received two second-round draft picks and Alexey Shved.AdvertisementThe 76ers got a No. 1 pick and JaVale McGee from the Nuggets for the rights to a 2005 draftee — Cenk Akyol, from Turkey — who has not played a minute in the N.B.A. They also got the Lakers’ first-round 2015 draft pick, protected 1-5, in the deal for Carter-Williams.The Suns, who began the day with Dragic, Thomas and Eric Bledsoe as their three point guards, ended it with Bledsoe and Knight along with the flotsam from Miami and three first-round picks — the two from the Heat and a third from the Celtics (Cleveland’s No. 1 in 2016) in the Thomas deal. The Suns also took on the expiring contract of Boston’s Marcus Thornton.Denver not only dealt away McGee but also parted ways with Arron Afflalo, who was in his second stint with the Nuggets. He was sent to Portland along with Alonzo Gee for three Portland reserves.The Washington Wizards traded Andre Miller to Sacramento for Ramon Sessions. The trade reunited Miller with his former coach in Denver, George Karl, who will coach his first game for the Kings on Friday against the Celtics.An article on Friday about trades made at the deadline in the N.B.A. misstated, in some copies, the surname of a player who was recently acquired by the Oklahoma City Thunder. He is Dion Waiters, not Waters.A version of this article appears in print on February 20, 2015, on Page B15 of the New York edition with the headline: Trade Rush Shocks Some, Satisfies Others, and Overhauls Many Rosters.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.