By DAVID WALDSTEINOCT. 12, 2015
ARLINGTON, Tex. —  The Toronto Blue Jays had just begun a critical Game 4 against the Texas Rangers when signs of the Astros’ chilling collapse in Houston were flashed on the scoreboard.Blue Jays Manager John Gibbons was among the thousands of people taking note of the proceedings in Houston on Monday, and he viewed the Kansas City Royals’ late comeback there as a warning.He was not going to let that happen to his team.“You watched that Kansas City game,” Gibbons said. “You know how that works.”Gibbons had seen the Astros take a seemingly secure four-run advantage into the eighth inning and then blow it in losing by three runs. So even though the Blue Jays held a six-run advantage and even though R. A. Dickey, their starting pitcher, was having success with his hard knuckleball, Gibbons made a bold move: He removed Dickey with two outs in the fifth inning and only one runner on base and handed the ball to David Price, a left-hander who typically works as a starting pitcher.AdvertisementUltimately, it worked. Price was not as effective as Dickey, but he suppressed the potential rally that had concerned Gibbons, and for the second straight day, the Blue Jays avoided elimination in their American League division series, beating the Rangers, 8-4.AdvertisementThe Blue Jays swatted two home runs in the first inning and another in the second to force a decisive Game 5 on Wednesday in Toronto, where the Rangers won the first two games of the series. Toronto is seeking to become only the third major league team to lose the first two games at home and still win a five-game series.Josh Donaldson hit a two-run homer before Rangers starter Derek Holland recorded an out, and Chris Colabello also homered in the first. Kevin Pillar was responsible for the second-inning blast and had three hits in all, with three R.B.I.The Blue Jays scored three more runs in the third inning to effectively silence the disconsolate home fans; then it was all about pitching and, in the mind of Gibbons, keeping the Rangers from doing what the Royals had just done about 250 miles south.“One thing I’ve learned over the years: Sometimes the best way you win games is, don’t let the team get back into it,” Gibbons said.Adrian Beltre returned to the Rangers’ lineup after missing the previous two games with a back injury, but he and the other Texas batters showed little against Dickey, 40, a knuckleballer who was making his first postseason start. Dickey had previously spoken eloquently about how much it meant to him to do it here, against the team he first signed with, in 1996, and made his debut with, in 2001. He had family members here, he was pitching well, and with one more out, he would have earned the win.Gibbons knew all that.“Probably not a relationship-building move,” Gibbons said. “But a team win, and that is what I was looking for.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Dickey acknowledged he was disappointed, as any competitor would be. But he said he relished the outcome and did not argue the decision.“I’ve said this before, and I mean it: It’s amazing what you can accomplish when you don’t care who gets the credit,” Dickey said. “We won today, and so we’re going back to Toronto with a chance.”AdvertisementPrice, who threw 50 pitches, will be eliminated from consideration for Game 5, even in relief, Gibbons said. Marcus Stroman will start against Cole Hamels for the Rangers in a repeat matchup of the 14-inning Game 2.Price, who has never won a postseason start, was awarded the win Monday despite giving up three runs in three innings, and he ended a six-game postseason losing streak. His last postseason win had come in relief in a 2008 American League division series for Tampa Bay.“I’ll be ready for Wednesday,” Price said, regardless of what his manager said.Perhaps the best moment Price had all day was when he was in the bullpen playing catch with Stroman in the second, when Pillar’s home run ball came right to him. Price said that he had told Pillar before the game to hit a ball to him and that he would catch it.“I got it authenticated,” Price said. “I don’t know where it is right now, but that was pretty special.”Pillar has hit safely in all four games, and his batting average in the series is .417 (7 for 17). If the Blue Jays maintain their offensive production rate of the last two games, in which they scored 13 runs, pitching may not be a concern in Game 5.What the Blue Jays know for certain is that Rogers Centre, which became quiet and desolate after the Game 2 loss, should be abuzz again on Wednesday.“It’s going to be nuts,” catcher Russell Martin, a Canadian, said. “Love it. It’s going to be awesome.”Because of an editing error, a picture caption on Tuesday with an article about the Toronto Blue Jays’ 8-4 victory over the Texas Rangers in their Major League Baseball playoff series misstated, in some copies, the score of the game after Toronto’s Chris Colabello drove in Edwin Encarnacion in the third inning. It was 6-0, not 5-0.A version of this article appears in print on October 13, 2015, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: Two Teams in Texas Prompt a Bold Move From the Fearful Blue Jays.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.