AdvertisementSupported byBy Zach SchonbrunAs the N.B.A. All-Star festivities began to unfold last week, a less heralded exhibition kicked off quietly in front of a few hundred fans at the Steinberg Wellness Center in Brooklyn, 10 blocks from Barclays Center.This event, unlike the actual All-Star Game, included a good number of Knicks representatives: Two players (David Eng and Kevin Grant), two coaches (Gerry Fleming and Eddie Lopez) and even a part of the Knicks’ dance team were on hand for the 17th annual All-Star Wheelchair Classic, a game featuring top basketball players from the N.B.A.-affiliated teams of the National Wheelchair Basketball Association.Eng, Grant, Fleming and Lopez are members of the New York Rollin’ Knicks, and unlike Carmelo Anthony’s All-Star nod — he started Sunday’s All-Star Game at Madison Square Garden — theirs coincided with a good deal of team success. In fact, the Rollin’ Knicks are nothing like their better-known sponsors, who have the worst record in the N.B.A. as they prepare to face the Miami Heat on Friday night.Consider this: The Knicks are 10-43. The Rollin’ Knicks are 12-6. And last year the Rollin’ Knicks won the N.W.B.A. championship. This season they are ranked third in the 30-team championship division, which includes 14 N.B.A.-affiliated programs — teams like the Utah Wheelin’ Jazz and the Golden State Road Warriors.Eng, a two-time Paralympic gold medalist who took home the Most Valuable Player Award for the East squad on Feb. 12, is one of the best players on the Rollin’ Knicks. But he might not be as good as Patrick Anderson, a three-time Paralympic gold medalist. Both men are Canadian imports who joined the Rollin’ Knicks last year and, combined with Grant, gave the team an N.W.B.A. Big 3. New York City might not be a lure for the N.B.A.’s top free agents these days, but it is certainly attracting high-caliber wheelchair players.“We’ve got a collective bunch of guys that want to win,” Grant, 38, said.Fleming has coached the team since its inception in 1998, when practices were held at a facility on College Point Boulevard in Flushing, Queens, before the floorboards started warping and everyone relocated to a gym on University Avenue in the Bronx, which now serves as the club’s home court.The roster has teenagers as well as one player in his 50s. Games, which consist of two 20-minute halves, are played at tournaments, typically on weekends, and they can be sporadically scheduled. The Rollin’ Knicks, for instance, do not play again until early March, which is conveniently timed for when Anderson returns from a vacation.Most of the tournaments are held in Southern or Midwestern locations, where a majority of the teams are based. There are the Shepherd Stealers (Atlanta), the Lakeshore Storm (Birmingham, Ala.), the PossAbilities Rolling Bears (Loma Linda, Calif.), the Seattle Sonics (no longer Super) and, of course, the Rollin’ Knicks, who receive an annual stipend from the New York Knicks that covers much of the club’s expenses. The players and the coaches are not paid, however. Everyone is, in effect, a volunteer. The league uses a point scale to allow players with a range of physical limitations to be on the floor at the same time. For instance, Grant, who is partly paralyzed, is a 1; Eng, who has a leg length discrepancy but is ambulatory, is a 4.5. Over all, a team cannot exceed 15 points when on the court.Fleming was careful not to make a joke about the Rollin’ Knicks’ parent club, which is easy to do these days, but there are elements of his team’s game that Phil Jackson would not mind seeing the New York Knicks emulate. Floor spacing, communication and efficient outside shooting — the Rollin’ Knicks are good at all of them. And there is something else, too: top effort.“There’s no fear,” Eng said. “People don’t really care about getting hurt, so it’s all-out. You push and bang. People are training hard, pushing hard.”Indeed, even at the Feb. 12 all-star exhibition, bodies flew and metal clanked. Screens were set only one way — firmly. There is no easy way to maneuver around a planted wheelchair.Fleming said the game had evolved over the last decade with the development of more nimble chairs built with a small fifth wheel in the back for better support, angled wheels that help protect the hands and straps in the seats so players cannot easily fall out.“Before, you could flip people over and there were no straps,” Fleming said. “There were bodies flying all over the place.”There was no lack of high-speed collisions and intense action in the Feb. 12 game. Men with bulky upper bodies shoved one another for positioning under the boards. Wheelchairs rumbled down the floor in hot pursuit of any player on the loose.In other words, this all-star game was a lot more intense than the no-defense exhibition — West 163, East 158 — that took place three days later at the Garden.“I think we have a different mind-set,” Grant said at the Feb. 12 game.Eng, a Montreal native, said he watched N.B.A. games regularly and grew up a fan of Jackson’s Chicago Bulls. The triangle offense? Yes, the Rollin’ Knicks have dabbled in it, he said. Still, Eng noted: “With wheelchair basketball, there’s no lateral movement. You can’t go sideways; you’ve got to pivot or go in circles, a little bit more like hockey.”Holding his M.V.P. trophy after the game, Eng said he could relate to the struggles of the Knicks this season. He has been playing wheelchair basketball for 26 years, and sometimes he can momentarily lose focus.“It’s like anything; it becomes routine,” he said. But routine for the New York Knicks is another defeat in a season to forget. Routine for the Rollin’ Knicks is another victory.Advertisement