By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSOCT. 12, 2015
Le’Veon Bell scored on a 1-yard Wildcat run as time expired to give Michael Vick and the visiting Pittsburgh Steelers a stunning 24-20 victory over the San Diego Chargers on Monday night.With five seconds left, Bell took a direct snap, ran left and was buried in traffic before diving for the end zone and getting the ball across the goal line as Donald Butler dragged him down.Thousands of Pittsburgh fans waving Terrible Towels roared in a frenzy as the Steelers improved to 3-2. San Diego fell to 2-3.Vick, having an awful game until the fourth quarter, kept the drive alive with a 24-yard scramble up the middle and a 16-yard pass to Heath Miller one play before Bell’s big run.AdvertisementThe San Diego rookie Josh Lambo kicked a go-ahead 54-yard field goal with 2 minutes 56 seconds left.LUCK PRACTICES Colts quarterback Andrew Luck returned for practice, the first time he has been on the field in two weeks.AdvertisementLuck was still day to day with a sore right shoulder and had been limited in practice since leading Indianapolis to a 35-33 win at Tennessee on Sept. 27. The Colts (3-2) host the Patriots (4-0) on Sunday night.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Luck said he hoped he could play against New England after missing the past two games against Houston and Jacksonville.CHIEF’S SEASON IN DOUBT Kansas City expected that running back Jamaal Charles would miss the remainder of the season after he injured his right knee in the third quarter in a loss to the Bears.Chiefs Coach Andy Reid said that results of a magnetic resonance imaging exam on Charles were not yet available, but “the worst case is the A.C.L. is torn.”JAGUARS’ BORTLES INJURED Jacksonville quarterback Blake Bortles sprained his throwing shoulder in a 38-31 road loss against the Buccaneers. The Jaguars said Bortles sustained the sprain early in the game but played through it.“We think he should be in good shape” to play against the Texans on Sunday, Coach Gus Bradley said.A version of this article appears in print on October 13, 2015, on Page B15 of the New York edition with the headline: Steelers Shock the Chargers With a Late Touchdown Run.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.