By ROB HUGHESFEB. 19, 2015
LONDON —  If you switched off the lights in the huge stadium of Schalke 04, it still would be difficult to take your eyes off Cristiano Ronaldo.For one thing, Real Madrid now chooses to dress its players in shocking pink as an alternate away uniform to its normal white. For another, Nike equipped Ronaldo, the world player of the year, in luminescent yellow shoes. And then there is his talent, which would shine in the dark.So how, one wonders, could Schalke’s defenders lose sight of Ronaldo seven yards from the goalmouth? It happened midway through the first half in the northwestern German city of Gelsenkirchen on Wednesday night.Dani Carvajal, Madrid’s right fullback, had cut in from the touchline and floated the ball precisely toward Ronaldo. And CR7, who somehow was able to find yards of space, simply rose majestically to send a gently looping header past the youngster in Schalke’s goal.AdvertisementThere was no shame for 19-year-old Timon Wellenreuther in conceding that goal. He is, after all, Schalke’s third-string keeper, but he performed against the European champion with good, safe hands, with clear decision-making and with decent self-confidence throughout.AdvertisementLikewise it was a Champions League debut for Felix Platte, another Schalke player who turned 19 this month and who came on to replace Klaas-Jan Huntelaar, the team’s most experienced striker, who was injured shortly after Ronaldo’s goal.In that sense, with one teenager in goal and another leading the attack, there was an element of boys against men to this Champions League game. Madrid, in winning its 10th straight game in the competition, did not really have to sweat very much to ease Schalke out of the way and finish its away leg with a 2-0 victory.The German team gave all that it had. On Wednesday, Die Knappen — the Miners, as this team is known — labored long and hard to avoid the humiliation of last season’s 6-1 defeat at home against the same opponent.Real Madrid has shown some vulnerability of late, notably when it was hammered 4-0 by its neighbor, Atlético. And even against Schalke, there were moments when Ronaldo appeared human and when Real seemed less than sure of its undoubted superiority.One such moment came after 74 minutes, when Platte aimed a shot from the edge of the penalty area that comprehensively beat Iker Casillas, the most decorated goalkeeper in the sport. The ball struck the bar — the underside of the bar — and bounced down without crossing the goal line. Casillas reached up and touched the crossbar in gratitude.A few minutes later, Real broke away and scored. Typical Real Madrid: There is no better team in the world at luring opposing defenders out of position and then striking at a searing pace.The scorer, and the manner in which he struck, was a surprise. however. The Brazilian Marcelo is noted for having a left foot that is among the best in the game. He hit this shot, arched it away from the full reach of Wellenreuther with such curved precision that it rose inches away from the keeper’s fingertips.AdvertisementThe ball struck the underside of the bar, just as Platte’s had done at the other end. But it was a better placed by just a fraction of an inch, because it kissed the frame of the goal and then carried on into the back of the net.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Carlo Ancelotti, the Real coach, did something no one can recall his ever doing before in a long and illustrious Champions League career. He rushed onto the field, where coaches should not go. He raised his arms, though few of us have seen Ancelotti raise more than an eyebrow. And he allowed himself to be engulfed in the huddle as his players celebrated.Genuine Carlo deserves such a moment. He suffers with his players and works patiently with them when they lose the confidence and panache of champions, as Ronaldo and others have recently done.The English referee was sensible enough to overlook this moment of exuberance. And when Ancelotti was cornered by a television camera at the game’s end, he admitted he was embarrassed to have displayed such emotion.“Enthusiasm,” he explained. “My reaction was euphoric because this was not an easy pitch to play on and because I never before saw Marcelo score with his right foot. I was really surprised.”When he runs the video of the game against Schalke, he will note that both goals emanated from fullbacks who were using their “wrong” feet. Carvajal, predominantly a right-footed defender, sent the cross to Ronaldo by using his left foot to guide the ball.Marcelo cut inside in the other direction and accepted a pass from Ronaldo to shoot with his right shoe.You might argue that they are professional soccer players, so why wouldn’t they work until they are proficient on either side? The answer is, the best of them do. Carvajal and Marcelo are among the best attacking fullbacks, or wing backs in the Brazilian model that Marcelo has grown up to emulate.And Ronaldo? Right wing, left wing, head, chest or foot, he scores seemingly at will and virtually in any game he chooses. Madrid’s critics panned him in recent weeks because, how dare he fail to score in three whole games?AdvertisementNow that criticism is off his back. Wednesday’s was his 73rd Champions League goal. And this will annoy him, but only one man has scored more in the competition. Lionel Messi’s count is 75, in far fewer games.They are such extraordinary players that Ronaldo has scored four hat tricks in the Spanish league so far this season. Messi has scored four. And the entire rest of the league has scored a total of four hat tricks.And Messi? He plays for Barcelona against Manchester City next week.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.