By BRUCE WEBEROCT. 12, 2015
Dean Chance, a right-hander for five major league teams whose Cy Young Award-winning year, 1964, ranks among the great season-long performances in the history of the game, died on Sunday at his home in New Pittsburg, Ohio. He was 74.The cause was a heart attack, his son, Brett, said.A loose-limbed — and occasionally loose-lipped — farm boy with a variety of pitches and an unusual delivery that involved turning his back on the hitter until shortly before he released the ball, Chance pitched 11 seasons in the big leagues, twice winning 20 games and enjoying special success against the Yankees, a team he beat 18 times.“Every time I see his name on a lineup card,” Mickey Mantle once told the sportswriter Maury Allen about Chance, “I feel like throwing up.”Chance arrived in the majors in 1961, pitching in five games for the Los Angeles Angels at the tail end of the inaugural season of a franchise later known as the California Angels and now as the Los Angeles Angels of Anaheim. He had mixed success in his first two full seasons, but in 1964 he emerged as dominant.AdvertisementAlthough his season started slowly — he was beleaguered by a finger blister — he went 15-4 after July 1 and 20-9 over all, including 11 shutouts, five of them in games the Angels won by 1-0. The Yankees, who were American League champions that year, lost only 63 games, four of them to Chance, who shut them out three times; in a fifth game against them, he pitched 14 scoreless innings before a reliever lost the game in the 15th.AdvertisementIn 50 innings against the Yankees, he gave up 14 hits and one run — a homer by Mantle — for an earned run average of 0.18. Against the whole league for the whole season, his E.R.A. was 1.65, still the second-best figure in the American League (behind Luis Tiant’s 1.60 in 1968) in more than 70 years.For good measure, Chance also led the league in complete games and innings pitched.At the time, the Cy Young Award was given to the best pitcher in the major leagues — since 1967, the American and National Leagues have each awarded a Cy Young — and at 23, Chance was the youngest pitcher ever to receive it. (In the dual-award era, younger pitchers have won, including Fernando Valenzuela of the Dodgers in 1981 and Dwight Gooden of the Mets in 1985.)Wilmer Dean Chance was born on June 1, 1941, in Wooster, Ohio. His parents, Wilmer Chance and the former Florence Beck, were farmers.A stellar schoolboy athlete, young Dean played on state basketball and baseball championship teams for Northwestern High School in West Salem and reportedly won 51 of 52 decisions as a pitcher, including 18 no-hitters. Originally signed by the Baltimore Orioles, he was chosen by the Washington Senators in the 1960 American League expansion draft, then traded to the Angels.The Angels traded Chance to Minnesota after a subpar season in 1966, and he won 36 games for the Twins over the next two seasons, including 20 in 1967, when he pitched two no-hitters in August (one was a rain-shortened five innings), started the All-Star Game for the American League and won the league’s Comeback Player of the Year Award, given by The Sporting News.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.He finished his career playing briefly with Cleveland, the Mets and the Detroit Tigers. In all, he won 128 games and lost 115, with a career E.R.A. of 2.92.A marriage, to Judy Larson, ended in divorce. In addition to his son, he is survived by a sister, Janet Connelly, and two granddaughters.Besides his pitching, Chance was a baseball notable for other reasons. For one thing, he may have been the worst hitter ever to play in the big leagues; in 1966 he went 2 for 76, an .026 average, and for his career he hit .066, the lowest figure for any player with at least 300 plate appearances; in 662 official at-bats, he struck out 420 times.AdvertisementHe was also known as a good-time Charlie who served as a wingman for one of the game’s legendary night prowlers and ladies’ men, the pitcher Bo Belinsky.After retiring from baseball, Chance worked at a number of jobs, including boxing promoter (he managed the heavyweight Earnie Shavers and was president of the International Boxing Association) and carnival barker.He wasn’t shy. The Angels inducted Chance into the franchise Hall of Fame this year. In his speech, he graciously acknowledged the second baseman Bobby Knoop for making a fielding play that saved his 20th victory in 1964. That was a far cry from the young Dean Chance, who, before the 1965 season, suggested to The Saturday Evening Post that it call its article about him “The Most Exciting Pitcher Since Bobby Feller.”“My God,” he said to The Post, “you could go back further and call your story ‘The Most Exciting Pitcher Since Dizzy Dean.’ ”And he added: “Fifty thousand seen me at the All-Star game last year, and I was the best damn pitcher out there. You could call the story ‘From Rags to Riches.’ Or how’s this? ‘The Greatest Year Ever!’ ”A picture on Tuesday with an obituary about the pitcher Dean Chance was published in error. The photograph, provided by The Associated Press, was of the pitcher Bob Lee, not Chance. The obituary also misspelled part of the name of the town in Ohio where Chance lived. It is New Pittsburg, not New Pittsburgh.A version of this article appears in print on October 13, 2015, on Page B16 of the New York edition with the headline: Dean Chance, Star Pitcher, 74, Dies; Stymied Yankees .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.