AdvertisementSupported byHeat 111, Knicks 87By Zach SchonbrunMoments before the national anthem on Friday at Madison Square Garden, the Knicks produced a highlight reel, featuring players whom fans could expect to see over the remaining 29 games of the season. It was not so much an inspirational video as a reminder of who was still on the team.There was no Carmelo Anthony (knee surgery), Amar’e Stoudemire (waived), J. R. Smith (traded), Iman Shumpert (traded) or Pablo Prigioni (traded). There was a lot of Lou Amundson, Langston Galloway and Jason Smith. Ostensibly, there will be a lot more of them to come.This is how the Knicks slinked into the second half of the season, unraveling, it seems, almost hourly. The most optimistic fans might at least be able to view this as the beginning of the end. If the first game after the All-Star break — a 111-87 loss to Miami — was an indication, the two-month descent into April will be a palliative exercise, with no winning cure in sight.Typical of the Knicks’ season, the bigger story on Friday revolved around a star player on the opposing team, the All-Star forward Chris Bosh, who did not make the trip to New York after being hospitalized in Miami. Tests were being conducted on Bosh’s lungs, and the concern was that he might have blood clots in the area.The Nets’ Mirza Teletovic was sidelined for the rest of the season after pulmonary embolus, a formation of blood clots in the lungs, was discovered in January while the team played in California. More grimly, the former N.B.A. forward Jerome Kersey died Wednesday at 52 as a result of a blood clot in his leg that migrated to a lung.The Heat are responding to Bosh’s condition with caution. Coach Erik Spoelstra declined to speculate on the situation until further testing was completed.“He’s still going through more tests,” Spoelstra said before the game. “I’ve been in contact with him. Anything right now is still premature.”Bosh, generally viewed as the third leg of the LeBron James-Dwyane Wade triumvirate the past four seasons, was in the midst of a resurgent season after re-signing with the Heat during the summer. His scoring average (21.1 points per game) was its highest since 2009-10.“I want to send my thoughts and prayers to Chris Bosh and his family that he is O.K. and will be O.K.,” Knicks Coach Derek Fisher said to open his pregame news conference. “We’ll keep him in our thoughts and prayers.”Friday was supposed to be a celebratory day for Miami, which pulled off a coup at Thursday’s trade deadline by acquiring the playmaking point guard Goran Dragic from Phoenix in exchange for, among other things, two first-round picks. Dragic, who is a free agent at the end of the season, was thought to be a target of the Knicks, but the Heat swayed the Suns with their package of assets.Dragic had not joined the Heat, so the Knicks at least avoided the indignity of having to face him at home in his Miami debut.“They have a number of guys on their side who have experience and know what it takes to compete on this level,” Fisher said of the Heat. “We have guys who didn’t know how to sustain that. That is what this is about and what we are looking to do the last few months of this season.”The Heat are fighting for the eighth seed in the Eastern Conference, and although Spoelstra said there was concern among teammates about Bosh’s condition, Miami’s second-half effort showed that it was not too much of a distraction.The Knicks trailed by 10 points at halftime, and eventually that deficit trickled to 28 in the fourth quarter. They were outscored, 53-39, in the second half.Tim Hardaway Jr., effectively handed the keys to the offense in Anthony’s absence, steered the scoring effort at times, finishing with 17 points. Galloway led the Knicks with 19 points, including a long-range 3-pointer at the buzzer, which helped inflate his point total but did little to effect the final outcome.“We can’t make excuses,” Galloway said. “Whoever steps on the floor has to help in whatever way possible. It didn’t happen tonight.”Advertisement