AdvertisementSupported byBy Ben ShpigelFLORHAM PARK, N.J. — Their bye week done, the Jets reconvened Monday at team headquarters. Facing a stretch of 12 games without a rest, they returned refreshed and recharged, no one more so than the player wearing No. 91, practicing for the first time this season. The Jets were prepared to win without that player, the Pro Bowl defensive lineman Sheldon Richardson, as Coach Todd Bowles said in late July, and they did, three times in four games. Now they will prepare to win with Richardson, who completed his four-game suspension for violating the league’s substance-abuse policy. “I’m coming,” Richardson said. “I’m coming to eat, too.” His first feast comes Sunday against Washington, when he rejoins a defense that has allowed the fewest points per game (13.8) in the league, and the second-fewest yards (280.3). In welcoming Richardson, who led the Jets in sacks last season, Bowles stumped him by hailing his arrival as having a new guy back.“I don’t know how you got a new guy back,” Richardson said. But that is what Richardson is. As the Jets roared to a 3-1 start, Richardson remained on the periphery, permitted to work out at team headquarters and attend meetings but forbidden to participate in practices and games. The absence tested him more mentally than physically, he said. “Going from team M.V.P. to not playing, that was a lot, Pro Bowl season to not playing,” Richardson said. “I was down on myself, but I’m all right now.”He maintained his conditioning by working with the Jets’ strength coaches. He trained with tackling dummies and sleds. He ran on his own. Richardson said he felt confident that he was in shape. But Bowles, saying he wanted to protect Richardson from himself, figures to ease him into the defensive-line rotation, and Bowles has the luxury of integrating him into one of the best, and deepest, units in the league. “He still has to get breaks here and there,” Bowles said. “It would be unfair.”While he was suspended, Richardson said, he did not think about the additional punishment he could face from the league. He faces charges in Missouri for resisting arrest and traffic violations stemming from a July incident in which the police clocked him driving at 143 miles per hour. He may also face discipline from the N.F.L. for violating its personal-conduct policy for failing to notify the Jets of his arrest. His pretrial hearing was rescheduled for Nov. 9, the day after the Jets play Jacksonville, and Richardson said Monday he expected not to learn of any further penalties until the case was adjudicated. The layoff left Richardson chastened, though perhaps not humbled, at least not in a football sense. He said his return spells “no breaks for quarterbacks.” He said he will “dominate on the football field.” Asked about lagging behind his linemates’ production, he said, deadpan, “They got a head start.”He has already started challenging Muhammad Wilkerson and Damon Harrison, Leger Douzable and Leonard Williams, the rookie who played well in Richardson’s absence — and whose performance so far, Bowles said, has merited continued playing time. By drafting Williams, the Jets bolstered the strongest aspect of their team, a move that proved shrewd in July when Richardson’s suspension, for failing multiple tests for marijuana, was announced. Bowles said he hoped Richardson had learned from his mistakes.“I wish I could answer that question for you,” Bowles said. “When I see him in the building, he’s not doing anything. He’s kept his mouth clean, and his nose clean. It’s an ongoing process. I don’t think you learn a lesson over a month or so. I think it’s an ongoing deal that won’t be answered until later on in life.”Advertisement