AdvertisementSupported byOn BaseballBy Tyler KepnerTAMPA, Fla. — The Yankees did not assign a new player to Derek Jeter’s old locker at Steinbrenner Field. They knocked down the wall instead.Jeter has left and gone away. This is the Yankees’ 20th spring training off Dale Mabry Highway, and their first without Jeter. Some old-timers, like Goose Gossage, floated around the freshly renovated locker room on Friday, when pitchers and catchers reported to camp. More will come later, but not Jeter.In some ways this is good. We are again permitted to use the letter S, instead of the number 2, when writing the word “respect.” And the Yankees are free, finally, to install a rangy defender at shortstop, and to structure their lineup without regard to RE2PECT (oops) for the captain.Jeter’s retirement, though, underscores the point that the last two seasons have made: The championship era is over. Even when the Yankees were not winning the World Series with Jeter, they were usually good for about 95 wins, 900 runs and a clubhouse full of must-see stars. Not so much anymore.Now the Yankees aspire to be the Kansas City Royals, which is good for the game, if still unthinkable for many fans. The Royals won a wild card last season, with 89 victories, and nearly won the World Series. The Yankees missed the playoffs for the second year in a row, at 84-78. They have been outscored in each of the last two seasons.After the 2013 season, the Yankees tried to spend their way back to October. This time, they retooled a bit in the bullpen, traded for a young starter and shortstop and brought back a few veterans who propped up the roster last summer.They hope to score more, of course — the Yankees ranked 13th of 15 American League teams in runs last season — but Manager Joe Girardi said that depended largely on the health of Carlos Beltran and Mark Teixeira. Beltran will be 38 by the end of April, and Teixeira 35. Better to focus on another way to win.Perhaps the Yankees’ fielders can turn more batted balls into outs, and the power arms in the back of the bullpen can lock down even more leads. That was how the Royals did it.“Run prevention is a lot of times just as important as run production,” Girardi said at his opening news conference. “I know people talk a lot about the run prevention that Kansas City was able to use last year to get to the World Series and almost win the World Series, with the bullpen and run prevention that they had. I think it’s extremely important. I think it will lead to more wins, and I’m excited about our defense.”There is nothing wrong with spring optimism. It reigns at almost every camp. The Yankees can envision a scenario where everything breaks right and they win about 90 games. The defense and the bullpen do look strong. The over-30 lineup, with health and the right adjustments, might be better. The rotation is mostly young, and could be imposing if healthy. Masahiro Tanaka is already using that time-bomb elbow to throw splitters in the bullpen.But look around the league. Bud Selig has left the commissioner’s office, and his dream of competitive balance seems real. Which teams, today, can you confidently dismiss from contention? Let’s say six of 30: Tampa Bay, Minnesota, Houston, Philadelphia, Colorado, Arizona. A few more, perhaps, but not many.Nobody won 100 games last season. Nobody lost 100, either. Nobody seems to expect much from the Yankees, and Girardi — while stopping short of calling his team an underdog — understands that.“I don’t think the expectations in the clubhouse have changed,” he said. “I think there’s people that make predictions about how many wins you’re going to have as a club, there’s odds that are placed on it, who’s going to win the World Series and who’s the favorite. But inside the clubhouse our expectations are to be the best we can be and to win the World Series.”At VegasInsider.com on Friday, the Yankees were given 25-to-1 odds to win the World Series — the same as the Mets, the Baltimore Orioles, the Cleveland Indians and the Pittsburgh Pirates. Eleven teams had better odds; 14 teams had worse. Middle of the pack.The Yankees would hold more promise of rising if their players seemed more capable of improving. They know they must get younger, which explains their signing of Tanaka last year, their trades for starter Nathan Eovaldi and shortstop Didi Gregorius, and their aggressive pursuit of the free agent Yoan Moncada, a 19-year-old infielder from Cuba.Of course, an older player shows up next week, and the death rattle of the steroid era will groan through the clubhouse in his wake. Alex Rodriguez, who turns 40 in July, will see if he can still turn on fastballs, presumably without the banned drugs he has repeatedly chosen to take.“I don’t know what it’s like to be on ’em, so I wouldn’t know what it’s like to be off ’em,” Girardi said. “So it’s hard for me to judge, and it’s hard for me to try to play God and see what it’s like to be Alex Rodriguez.”Given his age, time off and past dependence on chemical help, Rodriguez probably has nothing extraordinary left in him. And the Yankees will probably not win 95 games, score 900 runs or suddenly become compelling personalities.But in February — in a new clubhouse, in a new season, in a new baseball era — they can dream big. They can dream of becoming the Royals.Advertisement