AdvertisementSupported byBy Zach SchonbrunALBANY — In the office of the Albany lacrosse coach Scott Marr, awards pile up like dishes in the sink. The all-American plaques are scattered across shelves. Assorted trophies fill bookcases and boxes in the corner.On a table between the couches, next to some framed photographs of Marr’s family, sits the Tewaaraton Award, given annually to the most outstanding lacrosse player in the country. Last year, in a first, it was bestowed upon two Albany teammates who happen to be brothers, Miles and Lyle Thompson.“They don’t even want to keep it,” Marr said with a hopeless look.The assistant Liam Gleason said: “That award means the world to them. But the trophy doesn’t.”And so it sits in Marr’s office, along with most of the Thompsons’ other accolades, collecting dust and stray compliments from visitors. The impact of the Thompson family — Miles, Lyle and their cousin Ty — as groundbreaking and record-breaking Native American athletes cannot be calculated in hardware. They were among the first players from the rich lacrosse tradition on reservations in upstate New York to attend a Division I university other than Syracuse, which has had a history of Indian athletes since the 1950s. The Thompsons flourished for more than three seasons at SUNY Albany, 150 miles from the Onondaga Reservation, where Miles and Lyle grew up, and 225 miles from the St. Regis Mohawk Reservation, where Ty was raised.This season, Lyle Thompson carries the mantle alone. Miles and Ty finished their careers last May, when the Great Danes lost to Notre Dame, 14-13, in an overtime thriller in the quarterfinals of the N.C.A.A. tournament. Lyle is widely considered the best player in a generation, drawing comparisons to the former Syracuse great Michael Powell as a playmaking virtuoso, and hockey’s Wayne Gretzky as a transcendent figure. But he is not used to missing Miles and Ty as the equilateral points in their all-American triad.When Albany’s season opens Saturday, opponents will surely square their attention on Lyle Thompson, double-teaming him continually and scheming other ways to prevent him from carrying the ball. But Thompson said he was not concerned about his ability to put up more dazzling numbers this season. In fact, he was excited to see what he could do on his own.“I’m going to miss playing with them,” he said, referring to Miles and Ty. “But I don’t feel alone.” There is not much more Thompson, 22, can accomplish in collegiate lacrosse. He comes into this season 76 points shy of breaking Rob Pannell’s record of 354 career points. Last season, Thompson set an N.C.A.A. mark with 128 points and tied the single-season record for assists (77).Over the summer, he added 15 pounds of muscle. He said he realized he needed to be stronger and tougher after playing with the Iroquois Nationals in the World Lacrosse Championships in Denver, where he scored 23 points in seven games and helped his team to a third-place finish among 38 competing nations. Marr said he thought Thompson had emerged from the off-season faster than he was last year. Marr has seemingly run out of adjectives to describe his star player without putting down his teammates. “He runs backwards faster than most of our guys run forward,” Marr said at one point.One might think that nothing would surprise Marr about Thompson’s game anymore, but then he jumped up from his seat to describe a no-look, backhand assist Thompson made in a scrimmage against Princeton this month.“One of the best passes I’ve ever seen,” Marr said.Reached by telephone, Chris Bates, Princeton’s coach, expressed adoration of Thompson’s pass. “Ridiculous,” Bates said. “I actually had to stop myself from clapping.”Thompson’s career highlight reel might require an intermission. Last season, the Thompsons combined for 300 points — most of them distributed to each other — a greater total than 53 other Division I teams had in 2014. But this is now a transitional year, and opponents have expressed curiosity about seeing how Albany’s offense will fare with Lyle Thompson as its focal point. “I told our kids he’s not only the best player in the country, he’s the best player in the last 10 to 15 years,” said Drexel Coach Brian Voelker, whose team will face Albany on Saturday. “He’s going to get his points. But you just hope that their offense in general isn’t clicking quite as well without the other two guys around.”Albany has found capable replacements in Seth Oakes and Connor Fields, as well as Ky Tarbell, who is expected to handle carrying duties as a midfielder. Oakes and Tarbell, transfers from Onondaga Community College, are from Akwesasne, a Mohawk reservation. Thompson said he expected to communicate in the Mohawk language on the field with Oakes and Tarbell, as he did with Miles.“We’re still getting used to playing with each other,” Thompson said. “I look forward to that. I’ve looked forward to it since the season ended last year.”Bates, the Princeton coach, added: “He’s going to distribute the ball to more people and create new connections. I think as that trust develops, and those guys get more confident with each other, they’re going to put up numbers, that’s for sure.” Marr said Albany’s offense might have more depth through the midfield and, as a result, more weapons for opponents to defend. Miles and Ty Thompson remain around campus as they finish classes (both are on track to graduate in the spring, according to an athletic department spokesman). The family goes bowling together weekly. Miles Thompson was selected in the third round of the Major League Lacrosse draft, by the Rochester Rattlers, and Ty Thompson was drafted by Rochester one round later.Lyle Thompson’s professional career is already lined up, too — he was selected first over all in the M.L.L. draft by the Florida Launch in January. He is considered a favorite to win the Tewaaraton Award for a second time. Like his other awards, though, the hardware pales in significance to what he considers his greater influence: succeeding in the game of his heritage. “I feel like I’ve been given an opportunity to make a difference in this game, and make a difference for younger generations,” Thompson said. “My success is more than just for me. It’s success for my people; it’s success for a lot of younger kids and for the game of lacrosse.”Advertisement