By VIV BERNSTEINFEB. 20, 2015
DAYTONA BEACH, Fla. —  The Sprint Cup driver Kurt Busch was suspended indefinitely by Nascar on Friday after a Delaware judge determined that Busch had choked his former girlfriend during a confrontation last September.The decision by Nascar came two days before Busch, the 2004 Cup champion, was to race in the season-opening Daytona 500. His team, Stewart-Haas Racing, announced Friday night that the veteran driver Regan Smith would replace Busch in the No. 41 Chevrolet on Sunday.Commissioner David W. Jones of Delaware Family Court in Kent County issued a protective order on Monday preventing Busch from contacting or seeing his former girlfriend, Patricia Driscoll, the president of the Armed Forces Foundation. Driscoll had accused Busch of assaulting her at Dover International Speedway in September. Both testified in a hearing in Dover, Del., in January.Busch’s lawyer, Rusty Hardin, appealed the protective order on Thursday and requested that Jones withhold release of his findings. The report was nevertheless released Friday.AdvertisementJones wrote that Busch had “committed an act of abuse against Petitioner by manually strangling Petitioner with his left hand on her throat, while placing his right hand against her chin and face, causing her head to forcefully strike the interior wall of Respondent’s motor home.” He added that there was enough evidence to conclude that Busch’s actions had “constituted conduct that a reasonable person would find threatening or harmful.”Steve O’Donnell, Nascar’s executive vice president, said that “Nascar has made it very clear to our entire membership in the broader industry that any actions of abuse will not be tolerated.” He declined to take questions regarding the decision.Hardin said Friday night that Busch would appeal Nascar’s decision. A hearing could take place as early as Saturday.Advertisement“We assure everyone, including Nascar, that this action against Mr. Busch will turn out to be a travesty of justice,” Hardin wrote.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Nascar is the latest sport to confront heightened expectations of accountability for domestic violence. The N.F.L. increased its penalties for domestic violence after criticism that it had not done enough to punish athletes convicted of abuse.Nascar’s chairman, Brian France, had allowed Busch to continue racing after Driscoll made the allegations in November. France had said series officials would wait to take action until they had seen the results of the family court hearing and a decision by a Delaware prosecutor’s office on whether to charge Busch with domestic assault. Although the investigation is complete, the prosecutor has not decided whether to charge Busch.Busch, 36, had qualified 24th for the Daytona 500. He did not participate in two practice sessions Friday.Busch has 25 victories in a 15-year Cup career, with a championship in 2004. He is widely considered one of the most talented drivers on the circuit.But he has also been involved in several controversies. He was suspended in 2005 by his former race team, Roush Racing, after an arrest on charges of reckless driving before a race in Avondale, Ariz. After a confrontation with a broadcaster during a race in 2011, Busch lost his job at Team Penske.Also Friday, Chevrolet announced that it was suspending its relationship with Busch.A version of this article appears in print on February 21, 2015, on Page D5 of the New York edition with the headline: After Ruling, Kurt Busch Is Suspended Indefinitely.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.