AdvertisementSupported byBy Bill PenningtonIn the aftermath of their come-from-behind victory over the San Francisco 49ers, Giants players and coaches on Monday connected via Skype with tight end Daniel Fells, who is hospitalized and dealing with serious complications of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus, or MRSA, a dangerous infection diagnosed in his foot.Although Fells amiably conversed with his Giants teammates from his hospital room, his football career may be over. Multiple operations to save Fells’s foot from amputation, and the harm caused by the infection, have damaged the foot seriously enough that it might be impossible for Fells to play again, according to people familiar with his treatment who were not authorized to speak on the record.Fells’s overall health has improved in the last few days since his doctors began administering a new and potent cocktail of antibiotics to combat the infection. But he faces more operations. Fells, who played in the Giants’ first two games this season, was originally being treated for generally minor toe and ankle injuries, and he received a cortisone shot. While the Giants have not said what caused the infection, he was admitted to the hospital about 10 days ago with a high fever and was found to have MRSA. A vast area of the Giants’ training center has since been scrubbed with disinfectant.Fells’s fever has dissipated with treatment during his hospitalization.On Monday, when Giants Coach Tom Coughlin was asked if a full recovery for Fells was still a possibility, he replied: “Oh, absolutely, yeah, for sure. That’s my understanding.”But when asked about the sometimes grim outcomes of a MRSA infection, Coughlin said: “I don’t believe he’s out of the woods. I didn’t say that.”Coughlin, who has visited Fells, said Fells had had three consecutive days of progress after responding well to the new combination of antibiotics.“I think these three straight days are really a wonderful sign, but there’s more tests to be done,” Coughlin said. “And again, the response to the antibiotic is critical.”Defensive tackle Jonathan Hankins said the players were heartened to speak directly to Fells and to see him on a big screen in the team’s auditorium.“It was good to talk to him and see how he’s doing,” Hankins said.Coughlin said: “We dedicated the game to him. We showed him the game ball that will be awarded to him. Everyone was able to cheer him on and try to make him feel better. He said he watched the game, and he was very proud of how we finished.”EXTRA POINTSWide receivers Odell Beckham Jr. and Rueben Randle have hamstring injuries that could jeopardize their readiness for the Giants’ next game, at Philadelphia on Oct. 19. Tom Coughlin said he was hoping Beckham and Randle could practice this week in some capacity, even if they were limited. Coughlin offered no update on the availability of Victor Cruz, another receiver, for the Eagles game. ... Middle linebacker Jon Beason, who left Sunday’s game against the San Francisco 49ers early in the first quarter with a concussion, was in “pretty good shape” on Monday morning, Coughlin said. Advertisement