AdvertisementSupported byBy Ken BelsonThe N.F.L.’s race to return to the Los Angeles area took a new twist Friday when the Oakland Raiders and the San Diego Chargers said they were willing to build a stadium together near the city if they were unable to get new homes in their current cities.The teams said that they had tried to find a “stadium solution for many years” in their home markets and that they would continue to work “to find publicly acceptable solutions” in 2015.But at the same time, they are considering building a $1.7 billion stadium in Carson, about 15 miles south of downtown Los Angeles.“We are pursuing this stadium option in Carson for one straightforward reason: If we cannot find a permanent solution in our home markets, we have no alternative but to preserve other options to guarantee the future economic viability of our franchises,” the teams said in a statement.The proposal is the latest in a string of bids to put a team in Los Angeles, which lost the Raiders and the Rams 20 years ago. In January, E. Stanley Kroenke, the owner of the St. Louis Rams, announced plans to build a stadium at Hollywood Park in Inglewood, about 10 miles from downtown Los Angeles. The sports and entertainment giant AEG proposed building a stadium downtown, while another group has plans for a stadium in the City of Industry. But neither proposal has the backing of an N.F.L. team.Building a stadium in Carson would have challenges. The land abuts Interstate 405, so traffic may be a concern, and the teams would have to obtain permits. It is unclear how the two teams would finance the stadium, although the Giants and the Jets found a way when they built a stadium together in New Jersey.The Chargers and the Raiders, who play in two of the oldest stadiums in the league, have tried for years to get new homes. Whether their announcement was meant to gain leverage over their home cities or to pre-empt Kroenke from moving to the Los Angeles area first was unclear.Civic leaders in St. Louis have proposed their own stadium in a bid to prevent Kroenke from leaving for California. Dave Peacock and Bob Blitz, the leaders of a task force in the effort to build a new stadium for the Rams, said in a statement, “Our focus is 100 percent committed to keeping the Rams here in their home of St. Louis and ensuring that we remain an N.F.L. city for generations to come.”The Chargers and the Raiders said in their statement that they would “adhere strictly” to the N.F.L. relation procedures, which say that no team can move without approval of at least three-quarters of the 32 owners.The owner Jerry Jones of the Cowboys said last month that while he preferred that owners follow league rules, Kroenke could ultimately move to Los Angeles without league approval. Jones’s comments rattled owners who were aware of the disruption caused in the 1990s, when several teams moved.To ensure that the league’s rules are followed, Commissioner Roger Goodell established a committee of owners last week to oversee the process of putting a team in Los Angeles, the country’s second-largest market. Notably, Jones and Kroenke were not chosen for the committee.Advertisement