AdvertisementSupported byBy Marc TracySeveral prominent conferences are considering rules to make freshmen ineligible in men’s basketball to discourage the so-called one-and-done phenomenon, in which the most talented players, who are prevented by N.B.A. rules from being drafted right out of high school, attend college for only one year.The Big Ten also has sought opinions from its members on whether to initiate a “national discussion” on freshman ineligibility in men’s basketball and football, the conference confirmed this week.“There is no official proposal, but we look forward to continuing the conversation with our campus leadership,” the conference said in a statement.The student newspaper at Maryland reported Thursday that the Big Ten was circulating a document titled “A Year of Readiness” that explores the ineligibility option.Critics of the current system contend that permitting freshmen to play — along with the N.B.A.’s rule that draftees must be at least 19 years old and one year removed from high school graduation — results in top players attending college for only two semesters (if that), thus reducing their educational experience.But declaring early often is an attractive option for the best players, as it means they can start receiving N.B.A. paychecks earlier and become eligible for larger contracts sooner. Last year 75 players filed as early-entry candidates for the draft, according to the N.B.A. The top five picks were all only one year removed from graduating from high school.Basketball players have options beyond playing in college, including teams abroad and the N.B.A.’s Development League. Emmanuel Mudiay, a top recruit from the class of 2014, last year backed out of a commitment to play for Southern Methodist and instead plays in the Chinese Basketball Association; he is widely expected to be a high pick in the draft on June 25.Many top football players, by contrast, would probably end up redshirting during their freshman years if they were ineligible to play. Before 1972, freshmen were ineligible for varsity football and basketball.In a letter last May outlining a broad agenda for reform, Pacific-12 presidents pledged to “consider restoring the freshman ineligibility rule in men’s basketball.” They made clear that they would prefer that the N.B.A. and its players’ union raise the age minimum.“It would make sure freshmen have time to make ties, socially adapt, and academically be going to classes and obtaining appropriate grades to stay eligible,” the Pac-12 commissioner, Larry Scott, said in an interview this week. “Right now, the notion of one-and-done is an exaggeration — it’s less than one-and-done. The student-athletes going to the N.B.A. for the draft are not completing their second semesters.”The commissioners of the Atlantic Coast and the Big 12 Conferences expressed similar sentiments last week to CBSSports.com.Freshman eligibility is not covered under any of the new autonomy areas for the so-called Big 5 conferences, an N.C.A.A. spokeswoman confirmed, meaning it would be regulated either at the conference level or by all of Division I. In the case of football, the issue could be regulated separately by the Football Bowl Subdivision and the Football Championship Subdivision.At a news conference last week, the Kentucky men’s basketball coach John Calipari — who has coached several players who played only one year in college and then departed to the N.B.A. — questioned the motivation behind freshman ineligibility.“Is that the best decision for these kids?” he said. “Or are we worried about individual programs?”He added: “Bill Gates leaves to go start a company, he’s fine. That kid’s a genius, and I’m happy for him. But this guy is ruining our college. What? I don’t get it.”Advertisement