AdvertisementSupported byBy Patrick MaksINDIANAPOLIS — On a blustery Friday afternoon, Jameis Winston arrived for his news conference at Lucas Oil Stadium seemingly carrying N.F.L. aspirations on one shoulder and the baggage of Tallahassee, Fla., on the other.It was there that Winston, the former Florida State star quarterback and the 2013 Heisman Trophy winner, grew into a college football star and one of the most polarizing figures in the sport.As a sea of cameras shuttered around him, Winston stepped to the lectern inside a club lounge, gripped it with his hands and surveyed the scene. His eyes widened, and he offered a mea culpa.“First off, before we start anything,” Winston said, “I want to let you all know I know I made mistakes. I know I have a past.”For Winston, the N.F.L. combine could be considered a three-day job interview in which he will need to convince league executives and personnel that his potential as a professional quarterback outweighs a series of off-field problems. In the days leading to the event, he was prepped by the new Michigan coach Jim Harbaugh, and it showed Friday.“I have to earn your trust,” Winston, who is expected to be a top-five pick, said. “I can’t talk about the situations or anything like that in the past, but what I can do is prove to you and let you watch me grow to being the face of your franchise.”Yet clouds have hovered over Winston, who was accused of raping another student in 2012. He was not arrested or charged in the case, and he was cleared of violating Florida State’s student code of conduct in December.There have been other red flags during his time in Tallahassee. He was involved in BB gun incidents and cited for shoplifting $32.72 worth of crawfish and crab legs at a supermarket. In a statement after that incident, Winston characterized the misdeed as “youthful ignorance.”Winston was also suspended for a game against Clemson last season after he yelled a crude statement inside the F.S.U. student union. At a news conference, Winston called the act “selfish.” He told reporters, “I did something, so I’ve got to accept my consequences.”On the field, Winston is regarded as an intelligent and assertive quarterback who has assumed a place in Seminoles lore. In two years, he amassed a 27-1 record, passed for 7,664 yards and 65 touchdowns, and guided Florida State to its first national title in more than a decade. In doing so, Winston has built a reputation as a fierce competitor and leader who commands respect in the huddle.“He speaks when it’s time to speak, and he shows when it’s time to play,” said Rashad Greene, a former Florida State wide receiver and a fellow combine invitee.Tackle Cameron Erving, who blocked for Winston at Florida State, said Winston was “a great guy.”“A lot of people think he’s a bad guy, he’s a troubled character, but that’s not an issue for him,” Erving said at the combine. “If you asked for the shirt off his back, he’d give it to you.”The quandary in selecting Winston lies in whether his upside is worth more than his past transgressions.“Everything that’s happened with him is so well documented and so public, I don’t know if it’s a burden of proof for him to come in here,” said George Whitfield, Winston’s tutor and mentor, who runs a San Diego-based quarterback camp. “It’s really a matter of ownership. They already have all the answers on you anyway.”This is why Winston is being thoroughly examined by N.F.L. clubs, which will seemingly study every cell that makes up the 6-foot-4, 230-pound quarterback’s frame. Among them are the Tampa Bay Buccaneers, who hold the No. 1 pick in the draft after stumbling to a 2-14 finish in Coach Lovie Smith’s first season.“I understand that he went through the justice system, the court system, to be exonerated on some allegations against him,” Smith said.He added: “I understand the college things a lot of guys do that you wish you wouldn’t later on. I understand some of the things that he did that are on his record right now.”Winston also faced criticism regarding a photo posted online, which made him appear out of shape while practicing shirtless. Asked about the image, he smiled and said: “A lot of people thought I was fat, but I’m proving everybody wrong. I look good, and I know it.”The Buccaneers, who are in the market for a quarterback to lead a dilapidated franchise, have also suggested they are considering drafting Marcus Mariota, the former Oregon quarterback and the 2014 Heisman Trophy winner.Winston played down the idea of dueling with the reserved Mariota for the top pick, saying, “This is not no competition between me and Mariota.”“Because one thing about me, I plan on winning the Super Bowl the next year. It’s going to be Jameis vs. Peyton Mannings and Jameis vs. Tom Bradys. I want to be viewed like that. After all this combine stuff, you’re not going to hear no more about Jameis Winston and Marcus Mariota. I want my name to stay relevant for the next 15 to 20 years of my career.”The moment seemed emblematic of Winston’s confidence and candidness, which has only seemed to grow over the years. At the combine, teams must decide whether it is genuine or a caper.Dane Brugler, a senior N.F.L. draft analyst for CBSSports.com, said Winston most likely followed a script that called for him to get ahead of questions about his past by acknowledging he had made mistakes and to use words like “trust” and “face of the franchise.”“We know he’s been coached,” Brugler said. “We know that’s part of it for all these prospects going through this.” Winston, whose voice seemed to boom off the walls of the lounge, said: “I want to make a first impression because first impressions last a long time. But I also want to be about what I’m saying. I’m a young man, but now I’m going to the next level to take a grown man’s position.”Advertisement