AdvertisementSupported byOn BaseballBy Tyler KepnerCHICAGO — The name is a beacon for Chicago Cubs fans. It is the elevated train stop closest to Wrigley Field: Addison.That is the name of a street that borders this timeless ballpark, which is under renovation on the outside but as charming as ever within. It is also the first name of the 21-year-old shortstop who has been a pillar of the Cubs’ reconstruction.Addison Russell started at short against the St. Louis Cardinals on Monday in Game 3 of this National League division series. He tripled in the fourth inning but left with a tight left hamstring. Manager Joe Maddon said the Cubs would learn the severity of the injury when Russell had tests on Tuesday morning.Shortstop has been Russell’s home since Aug. 7, when the Cubs shifted him from second base in a switch with Starlin Castro, a three-time All-Star. Maddon called that move pivotal in the Cubs’ surge to the playoffs.“That one particular move right there, probably more than anything we did this year, set us up for this moment,” Maddon said Monday, before the Cubs’ 8-6 victory. “When we went and got Addy at short and Starlin eventually at second base, it kind of tightened things up, and I think we’ve played a better brand of baseball since then.”Maddon praised Castro for the way he had handled the switch. Since taking some time to nurse his ego and learn a position he had not played in six years, Castro has thrived at second base. He hit .366 from Aug. 24 through the end of the regular season.Russell, perhaps, was destined to be the Cubs’ shortstop from the moment the team acquired him in a trade with Oakland on July 4, 2014. Maddon noticed his smooth fundamentals on the back fields in spring training, the way Russell picked up grounders with no wasted motion. Russell had never played above Class AA, but his polish stood out.Before Game 3, Russell credited Karl Jernigan, a family friend and a former minor leaguer, with teaching him the basics when he was 8 to 12 years old.“From there, it was pretty much analyzing everyone else,” Russell said. “I really didn’t have any other coaching; it was just pretty much looking at other shortstops and second basemen and seeing how they go about it — when they take a ground ball, a short hop, a slow dribbler, backhands, all that stuff. I pretty much just pick it up on my own, the way I want to do it, and it’s worked out.”After just 11 games in Class AAA, Russell joined the Cubs in April and hit .242 with 13 home runs. He executed a go-ahead sacrifice bunt in the Cubs’ Game 2 victory at St. Louis, and he started a pivotal double play in the wild-card game at Pittsburgh — just after making an error.That ability to collect himself and make adjustments on the fly impressed the Cubs. But in a way, they had seen it before. Russell has been surprising them for years.In 2012, the first draft for Theo Epstein as their president of baseball operations, the Cubs held the sixth overall pick. They chose Albert Almora, a high school outfielder from Florida, who is still in Class AA. They did not even consider Russell, another Florida high schooler.Epstein said the Cubs thought that Russell was out of shape as a junior and that his body looked too thick to project as a major league shortstop. They focused their attention elsewhere.“For high school kids, we like to zero in early and get to know a few really well and take them into consideration rather than get to know everybody,” Epstein said. “So he didn’t make it through our first gate for our first pick. We didn’t know him as well as we needed to to take him up there.“Three months after the draft, I saw him in instructional league, and he hit two home runs and made two great plays against our team, and I was kicking myself, mad at our process for missing him.”Epstein defended that process, saying that it had generally worked well and that being intimately familiar with a high draft pick was worth the risk of missing someone. He vowed to keep close track of Russell as a professional but never believed he would have a chance to trade for him, he said.Last season, though, things changed. The Athletics, who had picked Russell 11th over all, entered July with the best record in the major leagues — but needed help for their rotation. The Cubs were shopping the right-hander Jeff Samardzija, and Billy Beane, Epstein’s Oakland counterpart, expressed interest. Epstein said the Cubs would need Russell, and Beane did not reject the idea.With another ace soon to be traded — David Price, then of Tampa Bay — the Cubs were eager to make a deal. The A’s would not do a straight Samardzija-for-Russell swap, but the sides agreed to an expanded trade: The Cubs would include another starter, Jason Hammel, and the A’s would send back pitcher Dan Straily and another prospect, outfielder Billy McKinney.The rebuilding Cubs got talent for the future. The A’s got a better shot at a championship, although they lost in the wild-card game at Kansas City when Hammel allowed a game-ending hit to Salvador Perez. Hammel then returned to the Cubs as a free agent, and he is scheduled to start Game 4 on Tuesday. He knows who will play shortstop.“Addison came over and stepped right in and took the role and ran with it, and it’s a pleasure to watch him go,” Hammel said. “He’s already made some outstanding plays in this series for us, and he’s, what, 22, 20 years old, something like that? He’s just a pup. It’s nice to come over and actually see the guy that I got traded for working behind me.”Russell should be working at that spot, in the ballpark near his train station, for years to come.Advertisement