AdvertisementSupported byBy David WaldsteinTAMPA, Fla. — A small, sinewy piece of human anatomy has held precariously in place for several months, and with it perhaps the hopes of the Yankees’ season. The tissue in question is the ulnar collateral ligament in Masahiro Tanaka’s right elbow, the one that tore slightly last July and required more than two months of rest and rehabilitation to repair.In a somewhat risky move, Tanaka, the ace starting pitcher, decided not to have Tommy John surgery, which would have sidelined him for at least a year. Three doctors agreed that the tear was small and that the ligament was intact, allowing Tanaka to choose a more conservative approach of rehabilitation instead of surgery. The decision, however, comes with the haunting possibility that one day — any day — the ligament might tear again, at which point surgery would be unavoidable. Some pitchers, such as Adam Wainwright of the St. Louis Cardinals, have avoided surgery for years after similar tears. Wainwright was diagnosed with a tear like Tanaka’s when he was in high school, decided to rehabilitate and pitched six good years until he had the operation in 2011.Matt Harvey of the Mets made a brief attempt at rehabbing his right elbow in 2013 before opting for surgery a few weeks later. Each time Tanaka throws a ball off a mound — in practice or in games, particularly in spring training — many eyes will be fixed on the elbow. Will this be the fateful pitch?On Friday, Tanaka spoke for the first time since his season ended last September, expressing none of those worries. He declared the ligament healed, and despite numerous questions about the elbow’s structural integrity, Tanaka basically shrugged them all off. “I don’t even think about it,” he said through an interpreter. He added that he was confident that he could get through the season based on his ability to throw the ball without pain or discomfort.Tanaka may be the least concerned of anyone in the Yankees organization. At the end of last season, after a long rehabilitation, he made two starts, one of which was decent. But the last one, on Sept. 27 against the Boston Red Sox, was a disaster. He was knocked out in the second inning after allowing seven runs, seven hits and two walks.Manager Joe Girardi said he had checked with Tanaka that day in Boston to see if his elbow was O.K. and had been reassured by the pitcher that it was.“He just had a dud,” Girardi said.A few days later, Tanaka had a magnetic resonance imaging test. On Friday, Tanaka said the results of that test had been good. “The doctors just told us there is no problem at all,” he said.The tear, apparently, had not grown, and Tanaka could do his normal off-season conditioning program at his home in Japan, including playing catch.Girardi said he received regular reports that all had gone well for Tanaka. But Girardi also warned that playing catch and pitching in a game are two entirely different exercises.“It’s difficult, because he’s not pitching in games during the off-season,” Girardi said. “The fact that he had no issues during the off-season playing catch and doing those things is a great thing. But again, it’s not games. A lot of us feel great in the off-season.”Tanaka threw off the mound in the bullpen on Thursday and said he had thrown a couple of split-finger fastballs, his signature pitch, which some believe puts extra strain on the ulnar collateral ligament, and he reported no problems. He is scheduled to throw again Sunday. The Yankees spent $175 million to acquire Tanaka, including a seven-year, $155 million contract, plus a $20 million posting fee to the Tohoku Rakuten Golden Eagles, his former team in Japan.Through the first half of the season, the investment was a good one. Tanaka was well on his way to the American League Rookie of the Year Award, if not the Cy Young Award. He started 12-3 with a 2.27 earned run average, with 130 strikeouts and only 18 walks. But his next game was against Cleveland, and he allowed five runs and 10 hits in six and two-thirds innings.After that, an M.R.I. revealed the tear, and doctors recommended rehabilitation, sparing the Yankees the extended loss of their prized pitcher.“What he’s went through is not uncommon,” Girardi said. “There have been a lot of pitchers who have been through what he has and pitched for a substantial period of time before anything has to be done. But in saying that, you’ve also seen it go the other way.”Advertisement