By TIM ROHANFEB. 20, 2015
PORT ST. LUCIE, Fla. —  Sandy Alderson held a news conference Friday morning at the beginning of spring training, his fifth as the Mets’ general manager. Naturally, he was asked about his expectations for the team.This month, he said that the Mets were capable of winning 89 games — 10 more than last season — which could make them playoff contenders. Now, he was asked if that was still his expectation.Alderson began to answer, then stopped himself.“Didn’t we go through this last year?” he said, grinning.Sort of. A year ago, around this time, he said at a private meeting with other Mets executives and team ownership that the team could win 90 games. His statement was not meant for public consumption and seemed far too optimistic, but it leaked out anyway. Sure enough, it became something of a sarcastic footnote to a season in which the Mets finished under .500 for the sixth straight season.AdvertisementBut now Matt Harvey is back from Tommy John surgery, David Wright is healthy, and Zack Wheeler and Jacob deGrom seem poised to become 15- to 20-game winners. This time, Alderson’s prediction seems a little more realistic.Advertisement“I think what I’ve said is, Is the team capable of winning 89, 90 games? Yeah, I think the team is capable,” Alderson said as the Mets prepared for their first official spring training workout on Saturday. “I think it has that capacity. I think it has that potential.”He added: “What’s more important to me is not what I think, or what I estimate or think is our capacity. It’s what our players are thinking. What I’ve been impressed with is the way our players are approaching this season and the confidence level that they apparently have.”So the Mets’ rallying cry for 2015 is now 89 (or 90) wins or bust.To Alderson’s point, Mets players talked all winter about finally turning the corner as a club and possibly reaching the playoffs. Much of this confidence can probably be traced to Harvey’s return.The last time Harvey pitched for the Mets was Aug. 24, 2013, so it is easy to forget how dominant he was for much of that season. He flirted with no-hitters, compiled a 2.27 E.R.A. in 26 starts, and averaged more than one strikeout per inning. He also brought a presence, a swagger, that the Mets ordinarily do not have.Harvey’s return, Alderson said, “changes the whole tenor of things.”“That’s the sizzle side,” he added. “But he’s going to have to go out and perform. Do we expect him to be as outstanding as he was for half a season a couple of years ago? That’s a high expectation. But I think he has that expectation of himself.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.By opening day, about 17 months will have passed since Harvey had his operation. The plan is that he will pitch a full season — April to September and maybe beyond. But the Mets are expected to find ways to keep him from overdoing it, have him skip a start or two, or three, and have a few extra days off when possible.Alderson said he had an innings limit for Harvey in mind, but he declined to be specific.“If I give you a number,” he said, “then we’re going to hear about that number for the next 10 months.”Alderson said that the number could fluctuate based on how Harvey felt and had pitched. More specifically, he suggested that the Mets could shave Harvey’s workload by holding him back at the start of the season and by using the All-Star break wisely to give him extra rest.Advertisement“The plan is for him to pitch throughout the season and be able to pitch in the playoffs,” Alderson said.A year ago, Alderson would have been reluctant to use the word “playoffs” around reporters. Now, he seemed comfortable saying it. He gushed about the Mets’ pitching depth — in the bullpen and the rotation. He noted that the Mets were no longer relying on “stand-ins” for relief help, on veterans brought in on minor league deals. They were no longer using the “typical fifth-starter type” at the back of the rotation.Instead, Alderson has six quality starting pitchers, one too many. He tried to trade one of them — Dillon Gee in particular — in the off-season and could not. Now he might have to move a starter to the bullpen. It is an issue and a luxury. A seventh starter, Rafael Montero, a talented prospect, could be used out of the bullpen simply because there is no room for him in the rotation.But it is only February, when optimism always reigns in baseball. Alderson knows that.“Look, if you don’t make the playoffs, you’re disappointed,” he said. “If you win 79 games, and you don’t win 81, you’re disappointed. It’s relative. We have higher expectations for ourselves than we’ve had in past years.”As in 89 victories, or 90. Or maybe even more.A version of this article appears in print on February 21, 2015, on Page D4 of the New York edition with the headline: Mets Envision Playoffs, and Idea Isn’t So Blurry.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.