AdvertisementSupported byBy Tom PedullaBOYNTON BEACH, Fla. — When Nick Zito ranked among the most prominent trainers the previous two decades, this time of year was special to him. It brought an unveiling of sorts as his newly turned 3-year-old colts justified his keen eye for talent by distinguishing themselves in prep races ahead of the Kentucky Derby.It was that way in the 1990s, when Strike the Gold secured a breakthrough victory in the Kentucky Derby in 1991, and Go for Gin showed how much Zito, a raspy-voiced New York native, was a force to be reckoned with by winning the prestigious race three years later. Louis Quatorze added still more luster when he pulled an upset in the Preakness Stakes, the second leg of the Triple Crown, in 1996.The same air of expectation surrounded Zito’s young and untested but talented stock in the first decade of the new millennium. Horses conditioned by Zito, a Hall of Fame trainer, twice thwarted Triple Crown bids, when Birdstone mounted a dramatic rally to overtake Smarty Jones in the 2004 Belmont Stakes and Da’ Tara, underestimated by handicappers at odds of 38-1, pulled off an upset four years later in the same race when the Triple Crown contender Big Brown was eased.These days, though, uncertainty surrounds Zito’s operation at Palm Meadows Training Center as he searches for ways to revive his once-thriving stable.“I watch a lot in the sports world, and when a coach hits a certain age, they say he can’t coach,” Zito said. “But a lot of time, they don’t have the players.”Zito, 67, will learn Saturday whether he has a potential player for the first Saturday in May when he sends Frammento into the Fountain of Youth Stakes at Gulfstream Park in Hallandale Beach, Fla. The top four finishers in the race will earn qualifying points for the Derby, with the victor receiving 50.But the early odds — Frammento is the longest shot in the eight-horse field at 30-1 — and the horse’s unimpressive résumé suggest Zito may endure another empty spring.Frammento has one win in five starts, with his lone victory coming Oct. 4 at Keeneland Race Course in Lexington, Ky. He has not given any indication that he can keep pace with Upstart, the 8-5 favorite for the Fountain of Youth. In the Holy Bull Stakes on Jan. 24 at Gulfstream, Frammento struggled to a sixth-place finish behind the New York-bred Upstart, who won by five and a half lengths in what was the most recent race for both.Zito is adding blinkers for the Fountain of Youth, with the hope that the equipment will help Frammento focus and elevate a youngster who is still developing. Even so, Zito sounds as if he is bracing himself for another disappointment.“If he runs the same way, we back off: We’ve got a nice horse, but he’s not going to be a Derby horse,” Zito said. “I’m from the school that you’ve got to try.”Zito’s efforts, though, have been increasingly in vain. Through Thursday, he had won only four of 52 starts this year with five second-place finishes and one third-place showing. He ranked 155th nationally with earnings of $137,030. He was winning 8 percent of his races; his horses cracked the top three only 19 percent of the time. He finished 116th in earnings ($1,682,257) last year, when 29 of his 273 starters won, an 11 percent rate, while 35 percent finished in the top three.Respect for Zito remains high. Frammento — “fragment” in Italian — attracted John Velazquez, a Hall of Fame jockey. Angel Cordero Jr., Velazquez’s agent and a former Hall of Fame rider, is convinced that Zito can still take the right prospect to Triple Crown races.“You’re looking for someone who has done that before,” Cordero said. “He knows how to approach that kind of race, and he’s won with horses that were not supposed to win. I like that.”Zito acknowledged that he had struggled to replace Robert LaPenta, a big-spending owner with whom he enjoyed many successes with horses like Da’ Tara and War Pass, the 2-year-old champion in 2007, before their fortunes soured. War Pass, for instance, won the Breeders’ Cup Juvenile but never reached the Derby because of a career-ending leg injury.LaPenta, who could not be reached for comment, long trusted Zito to spot a yearling’s potential. He did not rattle when the bidding escalated at sales.Zito yearns to have such freedom and financial support again.“If I am allowed to do what I did, there’s a good chance I’ll get back into those big races,” he said.Zito blames himself for not looking to build on earlier success and for being content with doing well for a relative handful of owners instead of accepting additional clients. His current 47-horse stable does not approach the powerhouse operations of his younger New York rivals, Todd Pletcher and Chad Brown.“You figure it’s never going to end and you’re not really out looking for horses,” Zito said. “I could have stockpiled, and I didn’t.”He once had so much appeal that he saddled horses for five different owners, including the stellar Bellamy Road for George Steinbrenner in the Kentucky Derby in 2005. Now, he strives to make something out of seemingly very little, hoping to find another big horse or receive a call from an ambitious owner that could change everything.“Everybody wants to go out like Joe DiMaggio,” Zito said. “On top.”Advertisement