AdvertisementSupported byBy Benjamin HoffmanThe N.F.L.’s scouting combine moves to on-field drills Friday, and as with every other year, an event where no football is played will heavily influence draft decisions based on various measurements that may not translate to on-field success. The 40-yard dash in particular has a tendency to send some prospects soaring and others reeling. For every Kyle Boller who runs his way into being a first-round pick, there are players like NaVorro Bowman who see their stock tumble when their feet prove a bit slow.So before we start judging players strictly on how fast they run and how high they jump, here are the teams that have the first five picks in the draft and which players they might select to fill their various needs.Needs: Quarterback, offensive line, pass rush.The smart pick: Florida State’s Jameis Winston has the physical tools to be a No. 1 quarterback, and Oregon’s Marcus Mariota is a highlight reel waiting to happen, but it is questionable if either will be able to put all of the necessary elements together to become an elite N.F.L. quarterback. Rather than going the Alex Smith route and drafting the best quarterback available, Tampa Bay should use its pick on Leonard Williams, a defensive end out of Southern California, who is a game-changing talent with far fewer question marks. At 6 feet 5 inches and 300 pounds, he is an enormous lineman who could team with Gerald McCoy to help create one of the best defensive lines in football. That being said, passing up on Winston would most likely be unpopular, and would be disastrous if he developed into a star elsewhere.Needs: Pass rush, cornerback, quarterback.The smart pick: Provided Winston goes No. 1, as most mock drafts have him projected, Tennessee has an easy decision to make. Williams can shore up the team’s defense as the Titans give Zach Mettenberger another year to prove he’s capable of being a starting quarterback. If Winston does fall, the Titans should consider him, but with a roster in need of talent all over the field, a sure thing like Williams would be a far better choice than rolling the dice on Winston.Needs: Offensive line, cornerback, football players in general.The smart pick: Since the prospects who could fill the team’s key needs at offensive line and cornerback are underwhelming, the Jaguars should either trade the pick to amass more talent or use it on the best athlete available. Provided Winston and Williams are off the board, Shane Ray, a defensive end from Missouri, could be a fit. A relentless pass rusher, Ray is on the smaller end but has reportedly been bulking up to get ready for the N.F.L.Needs: Wide receiver, cornerback, pass rush.The smart pick: James Jones seemed like a nice complementary receiver last season, but for the team to progress, and for Derek Carr to have a chance to survive in the N.F.L., the Raiders need a true No. 1 receiver. Alabama’s Amari Cooper is not particularly big and is not as fast as he occasionally claims to be, but he is a precise route runner who has earned rave reviews for his ability to separate from defenders. The combination of Cooper and Jones would be difficult for most secondaries to handle. If Al Davis were still around, the team could be counted on to choose whoever ran the fastest 40-yard dash, regardless of actual talent, but with his son, Mark, running things, the team will most likely go with Cooper.Needs: Pass rush, secondary, offensive line.The smart pick: The Redskins have plenty of needs other than quarterback, but if Winston were to fall to them, they would at least have to consider him as the solution to their Robert Griffin III problem. Mariota would be in play as well. Otherwise, they could move to replace the aging Brian Orakpo with a player like Nebraska’s Randy Gregory. Tall and skinny, Gregory is 6-6 but weighs less than 250 pounds. To succeed in the N.F.L., even as an outside linebacker in a 3-4 scheme, he will need to get bigger. Provided the added bulk does not slow him down, Gregory could turn into a special player. Another alternative would be Washington’s Danny Shelton, a hulking defensive tackle and the type of player who commands a double team at all times — a nice asset to have when working with a defense that is short on talent.Advertisement