By BILLY WITZOCT. 12, 2015
HOUSTON —  If there were slumping shoulders and sagging hopes when the Kansas City Royals returned to the dugout at the end of the seventh inning trailing by four runs, Mike Moustakas made sure they did not stay that way for long.Moustakas, the Royals’ third baseman, occasionally ornery and often intense, had plenty to be cranky about: back-to-back home runs by the Houston Astros, which had followed an overturned call that short-circuited their own rally, conspiring to leave the Royals down to their final six outs of the season.So Moustakas had a message for his team: I’m not ready to go home.“It’s just that we’re not losing this game,” said Moustakas, whose words to his teammates carried a few expletives. “We’ve worked too hard, and we’ve come too far.”Whether the sermon by Moustakas served as inspiration, it clearly captured the Royals’ mood Monday after a stunning, off-the-mat 9-6 victory that sent this American League division series back to Kansas City for a deciding Game 5 on Wednesday.There seemed to be little chance of that happening after the bottom of the seventh, when the Astros’ Carlos Correa, the precocious rookie shortstop, hit his second home run of the game, a two-run blast, and Colby Rasmus followed with a solo homer, his fourth of the postseason. The home runs gave the Astros a 6-2 lead and sent the capacity crowd at Minute Maid Park into a frenzy.AdvertisementBut if there was anything to be gleaned from last year’s playoffs, it may have been this: Never count the Royals out. They won five games in their final at-bat during last year’s run, none more memorable than the wild-card playoff when Kansas City trailed Oakland, 7-3, but scored three runs in the eighth and one in the ninth to send the game to extra innings. After the Athletics took a lead in the 12th, the Royals scored two more runs to win it.Advertisement“After that, anything can happen,” said catcher Salvador Perez, whose two-run homer in the second had been the Royals’ only runs until the eighth. “We’ve got something in the back of our heads. It’s not hard to believe.”Still, it was not hard for doubt to creep in.Correa, who hit his first home run in the third to tie the score, had given the Astros a 3-2 lead in the fifth, when he ripped a double to right that allowed George Springer to sprint home from first base.When the ball whistled past Eric Hosmer, a two-time Gold Glove first baseman, it appeared to be a sign that things had turned against the Royals this October.A year ago, their thrilling wild-card playoff was a springboard for a run that ended agonizingly close to a World Series title and revitalized Kansas City’s interest in baseball.The Royals were a throwback to ’80s baseball: relentless on the basepaths, spectacular defensively and ready to swing at anything and everything. This season they backed up that run by racing to the best record in the league.But in this series, their playoff magic had begun to look ephemeral.No more so than in the seventh, when the pinch-running specialist Terrance Gore stole second and, with two outs, took off for third. Gore arrived comfortably ahead of catcher Jason Castro’s throw. But the Astros challenged the play, believing Gore’s foot had come off the bag for an instant.After a 2-minute-20-second review, Gore was ruled out.It was the first time in 13 career attempts he had been thrown out.AdvertisementWhen they came to bat in the eighth, the Royals searched for their momentum one pitch at a time.“Everybody got fired up in the dugout, like this is going to be the toughest six outs they’re ever going to get,” said Jarrod Dyson, who entered as a pinch-runner. “That’s the mentality that we took out there, and big things happened for us.”Alex Rios singled to left. Alcides Escobar grounded a single up the middle. Ben Zobrist laced a single to center to load the bases. Lorenzo Cain, the frustration of four strikeouts in his previous six at-bats evident in the way he carried himself, grounded a single to left.That made the score 6-3.Astros Manager A. J. Hinch lifted the right-hander Will Harris for the left-hander Tony Sipp to face Hosmer, who at that point in the series had one hit.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But Hosmer singled to right, cutting the Royals’ deficit to 6-4.The Astros appeared as if they might escape, but Kendrys Morales’s grounder up the middle kicked off the leg of Sipp and under the glove of Correa. Instead of a double-play ball, Zobrist and Cain scored, and the game was tied, 6-6.In came closer Luke Gregerson, and after Moustakas struck out, the backup catcher Drew Butera worked a 10-pitch walk. Alex Gordon followed with a groundout to the right side to put the Royals ahead, 7-6.The Royals saw 57 pitches in the inning.“The mind-set from the entire team was just make this at-bat count,” said Hosmer, who provided a cushion with a two-run homer in the ninth.As invigorating as the victory was for the Royals, it was crushing for the Astros, who were on the brink of the Championship Series, a year after they broke a string of three consecutive 100-loss seasons.The loss will be especially hard for Correa, whose error overshadowed a dynamic day at the plate. As the Astros packed up their belongings and prepared to head to Kansas City, they were also searching for hope to carry with them.“We went from pretty high, feeling pretty good about it, and then ... ,” said Castro, his voice trailing off. “It’s not what we were expecting, but that’s part of baseball. You never know. Anything can happen.”AdvertisementEspecially, it seems, when the Royals are involved.A version of this article appears in print on October 13, 2015, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: Barely Breathing, Royals Snap Back to Life .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.