By KAREN CROUSEFEB. 21, 2015
LOS ANGELES —  On Thursday, Sang-Moon Bae was so disgusted with his play, he signed for his round of even-par 71 at the Northern Trust Open and left the tournament grounds without bothering to try to find his swing on the range.“I was very upset,” said Bae, who made a double bogey and a bogey on his last two holes. “That was stupid play.”Convention holds that tournaments are not won, only lost, on the first day. But sometimes players whose games hit the skids on Thursday or Friday do not spin out. They are able to regain control in time to vie for the checkered flag.In the past decade, two players have won PGA Tour titles after surviving the cut on the number: Chris Couch at the 2006 Zurich Classic of New Orleans and Rory McIlroy at the 2010 Quail Hollow Championship.AdvertisementTwice on the Riviera Country Club track, Bae has taken the lead into the weekend, only to be passed by others. Through his rearview mirror, Bae watched John Merrick overtake him to win in 2013 and Bubba Watson zip past him in 2014.AdvertisementAfter surviving last year’s cut by two strokes, Watson carded consecutive 64s on the weekend while Bae played the final 36 holes in one over to finish in a tie for 12th.So Bae, a native of South Korea, was not too bothered when he posted another 71 on Friday and found himself betwixt and between: three strokes under the cut line and six strokes behind the halfway leader, Retief Goosen.Playing Saturday in the first threesome off the first tee, Bae knew what he had to do.“I remember Bubba’s play last year,” he said after scorching the course for a bogey-free, five-under 66.That resulted in a tie with Morgan Hoffman for the best score of the day and catapulted Bae, who has a victory and two other top-10 finishes in his first seven starts of the wraparound season, into a tie for third at five-under 208. He is joined by Carlos Ortiz (68), Sergio García (68) and J. B. Holmes (69). They are one stroke behind Graham DeLaet (70) and three behind Goosen, who carded a 69 for an eight-under 205.“It was a really, really solid round,” Bae said.His turnaround, he said, actually began on the 18th hole of his second round. After missing the fairway with his tee shot, Bae hit his approach to 24 feet and drained the putt. “That was kind of like medicine,” he said. “It woke me up.”Every week on the PGA Tour, several players enter the second round or the second nine of the second round so far behind the leaders that they need a favorable tailwind to catch up. Seldom do the golfers give up. They grind to the last putt, hopeful that one or two good shots in succession is all they need to fix what is ailing their games for the next round or the next week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Justin Leonard, a 12-time Tour winner, opened with a triple bogey on his first hole. He played the next 35 holes in even par to make the 75-player cut at three over with no strokes to spare. Given new life, Leonard carded a third-round 70 to climb up the leaderboard, into a tie for 39th.After Bae capped his second round with the 24-foot putt, something in his game clicked.“A little bit higher confidence level today because putting feels a little better,” Bae said, adding, “And also, iron shots were better than the first two rounds.”AdvertisementRicky Barnes could have been forgiven for mentally making weekend plans that did not include golf after playing his first nine on Friday in 41 strokes. Barnes, who started on the 10th hole, hit a rough patch early, making triple bogey, bogey and bogey on Nos. 12 to 14. At five over when he arrived at the first tee, Barnes told himself to hit one good drive and go from there.“You have to dig in,” he said. “I dug in.”He birdied the first and third, chipped in for another birdie at No. 4, made a 21-footer for birdie at No. 6 and hung on. Despite bogeys on his final two holes, Barnes carded a 74 to make the cut on the number.“It was a grind,” Barnes said afterward. “I’m a little fatigued.”He added, “When you’re going sideways, these are days to look back on and remember how you kind of dug into the batter’s box.”Despite being exhausted, Barnes was not done. He hit half a bucket of balls on the practice range to try to dull the memory of his last two holes.“It’s definitely the most frustrating game there is because when it starts going sideways, there’s nobody to blame but the guy in the mirror,” Barnes said. “That being said, the guy in the mirror can make it back, make the cut, shoot a pair of 66s on the weekend and do well.”On Saturday, Barnes got back to even for the tournament, but he made a double bogey and two bogeys on his final eight holes to finish with a 72. Meanwhile, Bae is halfway to the pair of 66s that will deliver him from frustration.“Really looking forward to playing the final round,” Bae said.A version of this article appears in print on February 22, 2015, on Page SP11 of the New York edition with the headline: Frustration Gives Way to Being in the Hunt.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.