AdvertisementSupported byBy Tom PedullaHALLANDALE BEACH, Fla. — Jack Wolf was not overly disappointed as he watched Itsaknockout, his blossoming 3-year-old colt, seemingly finish second by two and three-quarter lengths to the heavily favored Upstart in the Fountain of Youth Stakes on Saturday at Gulfstream Park.Wolf began the afternoon with modest expectations for Itsaknockout, who had won his first two starts but was taking a major step up in class by competing in a Grade II race that serves as a steppingstone to the Kentucky Derby.As Wolf, the managing partner of Starlight Racing, headed down toward the track to speak to his jockey, Luis Saez, he began to wonder if the outcome might have been better than he imagined. Stewards posted an inquiry sign, and Saez lodged an objection, saying that Upstart’s rider, Jose Ortiz, had impeded Itsaknockout in the stretch run.After a lengthy review, Upstart was disqualified and moved to second place. His owner, Ralph Evans, and his trainer, Rick Violette, quickly left the winner’s circle. Wolf and his trainer, Todd Pletcher, hurried in along with family members and friends.Pletcher applauded the reversal. “We definitely got impeded,” he said. “Luis had to stop on him for a couple of strides.” Violette insisted that the disqualification was unnecessary. “It’s disappointing,” he said. “The horse ran great. We just don’t get credit for it.”Itsaknockout returned $12.80 for a $2 wager to win. He remained perfect through three starts at Gulfstream Park after winning by a nose in his debut on Dec. 7 and dominating a one-mile allowance race by five and a quarter lengths on Jan. 4.Pletcher said he never doubted that Itsaknockout, a son of Lemon Drop Kid, could handle the increase in distance to a mile and one-sixteenth in the Fountain of Youth. “With his pedigree,” he said, “we feel the more he stretches out, the better he will do.”The long shot Frammento, trained by the Hall of Famer Nick Zito, rallied for third.Wolf expressed empathy for Evans and Upstart. “It really is weird to not win the race and win the race,” he said.Wolf said the next target for Itsaknockout would be the Florida Derby on March 28. He said that the mile-and-one-eighth contest would take priority over the Kentucky Derby, which will be held on May 2, as part of an effort to build the value of Itsaknockout as a sire. He was a $350,000 purchase as a yearling.“We don’t really point to the Kentucky Derby,” he said. “We try to win these graded stakes for 3-year-olds, and if it leads to that, fine. Winning the Florida Derby can make a sire, too.”Itsaknockout earned 50 points toward becoming eligible for the Kentucky Derby with his victory. The top 20 points earners will be eligible for the race.Violette, clearly irritated by the stewards’ decision, suggested that he might leave Florida and a track where Upstart has excelled to target the Wood Memorial at Aqueduct Racetrack in early April.“We might have to go to New York,” he said. He said the stewards’ decision was a “bad call.”On the undercard, Main Sequence, a horse of the year finalist in 2014, enjoyed a sensational start to his 6-year-old season by using a tremendous late burst to win the $200,000 Mac Diarmida by three-quarters of a length against Twilight Eclipse.It was the fifth victory in five races for Main Sequence, a gelding who arrived in the United States last season and came under the care of the trainer Graham Motion. Advertisement