AdvertisementSupported byBy Patrick MaksINDIANAPOLIS — For the last four days, deep within Lucas Oil Stadium, Marcus Mariota and Jameis Winston have had their heights, weights, arm lengths and hand sizes carefully inspected.The details — differences measured in fractions of an inch or in nanoseconds — have been duly recorded in what is proving a duel to be the face of the N.F.L. draft class.On Saturday afternoon, Mariota and Winston, quarterbacks with similar résumés but different approaches, finished what could be considered a thorough application process at the scouting combine in Indianapolis. During on-field workouts, the two players, each a Heisman Trophy winner expected to be among the top draft picks, ran the 40-yard dash and participated in position drills.“As different as those two are, there are a lot of similarities in terms of their winning pedigree,” Jason Licht, the general manager of the Tampa Bay Buccaneers, said last week, calling Mariota and Winston “ultra-competitors.”Mariota, who was known for his speed and his finesse at Oregon, ran the 40 in a 4.52 seconds. Winston, who was known for his confidence and his presence in the pocket at Florida State, was clocked at 4.97.The difference may seem inconsequential at a position where the ability to throw the football is paramount, but with Winston and Mariota seemingly so evenly matched in other ways, it seemed to stand out.“They both have 32-inch arms; height is both exactly the same; their hand size is almost exactly alike,” said Gil Brandt, a former vice president for player personnel with the Cowboys and an analyst for NFL.com. “I think it’s one of those things where they call the election too close to call.” He added, “These are two guys that are very, very, very evenly matched.”Where they clearly differ, however, is their personalities.Mariota seems hesitant in the spotlight, although he said his quiet demeanor should not be confused with diffidence.“Any player would stand in front of you and tell you they’re confident in their abilities, and I’m no different,” Mariota said Thursday in response to speculation that he might not have the skills to play in the N.F.L. “What I’ve been able to do at the University of Oregon and what I’ve learned has prepared me for this.”Then there is Winston, who laughed off questions during his news conference Friday about whether his shoulder was ailing, as well as comments about a photo posted online of him practicing shirtless that made him appear out of shape.“A lot of people thought I was fat, but I’m proving everybody wrong,” he said. “I look good, and I know it.”Winston acknowledged a series of off-the-field issues, including a rape accusation, that have cast a cloud over his on-field talents.“I want to let you all know I know I made mistakes,” he said. “I know I have a past.”Winston added that he intended to prove to N.F.L teams that he could be trusted. “I can’t talk about situations or anything like that in the past, but what I can do is prove to you and let you watch me grow into being the face of your franchise,” he said.In different ways and for different reasons, Mariota and Winston are trying to convince teams they are worthy of such an investment.The Buccaneers, who hold the draft’s top pick after finishing 2-12 last season, Coach Lovie Smith’s first with the team, are one such team. They are in the market for a quarterback and a new face of a ramshackle franchise. Winston and Mariota are viable options.“They’re two talented players that have different styles who have won a lot of football games,” Smith said last week. “We need a quarterback that can throw the ball and make a variety of throws. We need a leader, a guy who makes great decisions. We’d like to have a guy who is mobile in the pocket. A guy who has won football games.”Part of interviews, tests and workouts over several days, Saturday’s display offered a chance for questions to be addressed, even if answers were elusive.“We will be fighting this battle to see who’s the No. 1 quarterback selected until the day before the draft,” said Brandt, the former Dallas executive.Licht, in his second year as Tampa Bay’s G.M., said: “There are always challenges. Not to be broad here, but every player is a projection in the draft. There is no sure thing.“Sometimes we do an exercise of ‘which five guys do you know are going to be playing 10 years from now?’ Like, who would you bet on? But there are no sure things.”Advertisement