By TIM ROHANFEB. 21, 2015
PORT ST. LUCIE, Fla. —  A few hundred Mets fans crowded around the chain-link fence Saturday morning, down the right-field line, taking pictures and holding out baseballs to sign. They jockeyed for position just to watch Mets pitchers stand around, just to catch a glimpse of the next step in Matt Harvey’s return tour.Mets pitchers and catchers went through their first official spring training workout. For most of them, it was a routine day, more fielding drills. But for Harvey, it was a return to normalcy — he was one of the guys, again. And for the Mets franchise, in general, the crowd following him served as a reminder that Harvey is a headliner, a star, and that is why they are, in part, finally relevant again.Around 10 a.m., while the players first took the field, Fred Wilpon and Saul Katz, the owners of the team, chatted and looked on from the side. Fans lined the fence. There was a noticeable buzz and excitement in the air, and Harvey was front and center. He stood first in line, in the first row of players, for the first stretch of the season.Then, as Harvey trotted to the next field, the crowd frantically scattered.“That’s Matt Harvey,” a young boy whispered to his parents, peering through the fence at Harvey playing catch.AdvertisementEarlier Saturday morning, Mets Manager Terry Collins held his first official spring meeting with the pitchers. He did not have any grand message or make any predictions. But he made clear that a staff consisting of Harvey, Jacob deGrom, Zack Wheeler, Bartolo Colon, Jon Niese and, possibly, Dillon Gee was expected to do great things.Advertisement“This is a room full of as good a pitching staff as there is throughout the league,” Collins told them. “Now you’ve got to go out and show us each and every day what you can do. Because people are watching.”Harvey did not even throw a bullpen session Saturday — he had thrown one the day before — but fans still gathered for his fielding practice. He covered first on a ground ball to the first baseman. He made a pickoff move to second base. He fielded a high chopper. In between stations, fans chanted his name, hoping for an autograph.Harvey seemed to enjoy the attention. While in line for the drills, he often chatted with deGrom.DeGrom can relate to Harvey’s comeback. He had Tommy John surgery in October 2010, when he was a minor leaguer, then sat out the entire 2011 season before returning in 2012. His recovery time — about 18 months between the operation and his next start — was similar to Harvey’s.For Harvey, it will have been about 17 months.DeGrom said of his time off, “I felt like I was pretty close” to normal.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Harvey did not seem all that concerned.“There’s no easing into it for me,” he said at a news conference, a scene that seemed a bit surreal after a basic workout. “It’s a season. It’s a game. I’m prepared for that. I’ve prepared just like a normal season. My mind-set is just like it has been in the past. I’m moving on from the surgery. It’s been over a year now. We’re good to go.“The way things are feeling now,” he added, “I don’t feel a difference. I feel like nothing happened.”Collins’s job, then, will be to make sure Harvey continues to remain healthy.After missing a few days because of the death of his father, Collins addressed the news media for the first time. Such news conferences are often susceptible to grand pronouncements, and Collins was asked point-blank, as several other players and officials had been this winter, is this a playoff team?“Absolutely,” Collins said without hesitating. His biggest concern, he said, is the team’s health, given that its depth consists mostly of young, inexperienced players.AdvertisementThe issues facing the Mets entering spring training, Collins’s fifth with the team, are relatively simple. Collins has to choose a leadoff hitter between Curtis Granderson and Juan Lagares.Collins said Gee would go to the bullpen if he or one of the other starters is not traded, so Collins would have to make sure that transition goes smoothly. And he has to anoint a closer. He indicated Saturday that Bobby Parnell, who is also returning after Tommy John surgery, would have to re-earn his job.Yes, Collins thinks the Mets are a playoff team — especially with a healthy Harvey returning.“I say, ‘Hey, it’s time,’ ” Collins said. “We’ve been sitting around for four years, asking everybody to be patient, even the players. ‘Hey, it’s not going to happen overnight.’ Well, it’s time.”A version of this article appears in print on February 22, 2015, on Page SP2 of the New York edition with the headline: Harvey’s Return Brings Rare Buzz to Mets Camp.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.