By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSFEB. 21, 2015
Not even a week ago, Chris Bosh was talking about how eager he was to get home in an effort to turn the Miami Heat’s season around.Now his season is over.The Heat announced Saturday that as suspected, blood clots were found in one of Bosh’s lungs. The problem, if it had not been discovered, could have killed Bosh, 30, who had been suffering pain in his side and back for several days.“He was able to get in front of it early,” Heat guard Dwyane Wade said, adding that Bosh’s wife, Adrienne, encouraged him to get checked out when the problem would not subside.The team said Bosh “is receiving care under the guidance of Miami Heat team physicians” at a hospital, adding that “his prognosis is good.”AdvertisementBosh, an All-Star forward, posted a photo on social media accounts Saturday night showing him in bed wearing a hospital gown, with an oxygen tube.Advertisement“Thank you for all the messages, love and support. It has truly lifted my spirits through this tough process,” Bosh wrote, adding several hashtags, including one that read “Iwillbebacksoon.”Heat Coach Erik Spoelstra sounded upbeat about Bosh’s road to recovery. The team received the news Saturday morning, Spoelstra said, and welcomed the clarity after a frightening couple of days.“His health will be restored,” Spoelstra said. “That’s the most important thing. That’s bigger than basketball.”Spoelstra and Wade visited Bosh on Saturday.“It’s been very emotional for all of us,” Spoelstra said. “I was in constant contact with C.B. But he didn’t know, either, until they were able to go through all the tests and see all the specialists. “Bosh is the second N.B.A. player whose final game this season was the All-Star Game. The Knicks’ Carmelo Anthony was shut down for knee surgery earlier in the week, a move that was long expected.Bosh averaged 21.1 points and 7 rebounds for the Heat this season, his first in a five-year deal signed this past summer that will pay him $118 million.Bosh was part of the ballyhooed free-agent haul Miami landed in 2010, when he and LeBron James were brought in to play alongside Wade and form one of the most star-studded trios in league history.AdvertisementOn Saturday night, Eric Gordon scored 16 of his 24 points in the third quarter, and even after losing Anthony Davis and Ryan Anderson to injuries, visiting New Orleans beat Miami, 105-91.Omer Asik scored 15 points and Tyreke Evans added 13 to help the Pelicans end a four-game slide.Mario Chalmers scored 20 points for the Heat.Wade scored 19 points and Hassan Whiteside finished with 11 points and 16 rebounds for Miami, which retained the No. 7 spot in the Eastern Conference standings despite the loss.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Goran Dragic, making his Heat debut after being acquired in a trade from Phoenix, had 12 points. He got a crash-course in the Heat’s playbook about three hours before the game.ROCKETS 98, RAPTORS 76 Corey Brewer had a season-high 26 points, James Harden scored 16 of his 20 in Houston’s big third quarter, and the host Rockets cruised past Toronto.Harden, who leads the N.B.A. in scoring, got off to a tough start and had just 4 points by halftime. The Rockets led by 4 with less than four minutes left in the third quarter before going on a 12-1 run, with 7 points from Harden, to take a 68-53 lead into the fourth and end his night.A night after handling Atlanta, 105-80, the Raptors had a chance to extend their road winning streak to a franchise-record six games. Instead, they were done in by 23 turnovers to end a four-game winning streak over all and to lose on the road for the first time since Jan. 21.James Johnson’s 27 points led Toronto.THUNDER 110, HORNETS 103 Russell Westbrook had 33 points and 10 assists, Serge Ibaka and Enes Kanter also had double-doubles, and visiting Oklahoma City defeated Charlotte for its fifth straight win.With Kevin Durant sidelined with soreness in his right foot, Westbrook carried the Thunder.Westbrook was 12 of 27 from the field and 9 of 9 from the foul line, stretching his streak of consecutive foul shots made to 43.AdvertisementIbaka had 16 points and 12 rebounds, and Kanter had 10 points and 13 rebounds in his first game with Oklahoma City.Westbrook’s big night overshadowed Mo Williams’s debut for the Hornets. Williams, a veteran point guard, had 24 points and 12 assists after being acquired in a trade with Minnesota.BULLS 112, SUNS 107 Pau Gasol had 22 points and 14 rebounds, and host Chicago topped a revamped Phoenix.Jimmy Butler added 19 points, Derrick Rose had 16, Mike Dunleavy Jr. scored 15, and Taj Gibson and Aaron Brooks came on strong in the fourth quarter to finish with 12 points apiece, helping the Bulls win for the fifth time in six games.P. J. Tucker led the Suns with 20 points, Marcus Morris scored 17, Eric Bledsoe had 13, and so did Brandon Knight in his Suns debut, but Phoenix lost for the seventh time in eight games despite shooting more than 53 percent.TIMBERWOLF’S SEASON DONE Minnesota forward Shabazz Muhammad will have season-ending surgery on the middle finger on his left hand.The Timberwolves said Muhammad would have surgery on a ruptured ligament in his finger. It occurred on Wednesday, when his finger was caught in Andrew Wiggins’s jersey during practice.A version of this article appears in print on February 22, 2015, on Page SP8 of the New York edition with the headline: Blood Clots in Lung Bring End to Bosh’s Season.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.