By BILLY WITZFEB. 21, 2015
TAMPA, Fla. —  C. C. Sabathia looked as imposing as ever as he walked into the Yankees’ clubhouse Saturday morning. Whether he returns to being so imposing on the mound remains an open question.Having lost a career-high 13 games in a poor 2013 and had his velocity fall in 2014 before his season was cut short by knee surgery, Sabathia acknowledged that he had plenty to prove.“Of course I do,” said Sabathia, who made only eight starts last season.“Not being able to play last year and performing horribly in 2013, I have a lot to prove.”But Sabathia — to whom the Yankees owe $48 million over the next two seasons, with a vesting option worth another $25 million for 2017 based on his health — will have to deal with a diminished fastball and a degenerative knee.AdvertisementSabathia spent several days a week at Yankee Stadium during the off-season rehabilitating the knee, which also required three platelet-rich plasma shots after his season-ending operation, an arthroscopic procedure in July. He plans to receive another shot at the All-Star break.Sabathia, who was 17-17 with a 4.87 earned run average over the last two seasons, said he did not consider having microfracture surgery, a riskier option.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“It is kind of one of those things where it’s a bum knee,” he said, “but it feels good right now, so I’m ready to go.”Sabathia, who said he gained about 10 pounds over the winter, also said that when he his knee was examined on Friday, there was no fluid in it.Later on Saturday, Sabathia looked like his familiar self — with the bill of his cap askew and his high leg kick and fluid delivery — as he threw off an outdoor mound for the first time in Tampa. He threw 25 pitches, all fastballs and changeups.“It felt a relief,” he said.Sabathia understands that even if his knee is not a problem, he will have to become a different pitcher. He will no longer be able to thrive with an overpowering fastball, a subject he has broached with Andy Pettitte, who pitched effectively for the Yankees past age 40.“This is my 15th season in the big leagues, so my velocity is what it is,” Sabathia said. “I need my control where it needs to be. My two-seamer is good; my changeup is better than it’s been. I’ve been talking to Andy about how he attacked batters later in his career, so I think I’ve got a pretty good plan.”A version of this article appears in print on February 22, 2015, on Page SP3 of the New York edition with the headline: Sabathia Hopes His Results Recover With His Knee.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.