By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSFEB. 21, 2015
Anna Fenninger of Austria, the world champion, held on to her first-run lead to win a women’s World Cup giant slalom Saturday in Maribor, Slovenia. The victory left Fenninger within 84 points of Tina Maze of Slovenia, the overall leader, with 12 races left.Fenninger used a strong finish on her final run to finish in 2 minutes 24.50 seconds and edge Viktoria Rebensburg of Germany by 0.04 of a second. Tina Weirather of Liechtenstein was third.Lindsey Vonn failed to finish the opening run when she crashed, but she escaped injuries. Mikaela Shiffrin, Vonn’s fellow American, finished fifth.AUSTRIANS SWEEP DOWNHILL The Olympic champion Matthias Mayer led an Austrian sweep of a World Cup downhill in Saalbach-Hinterglemm, Austria. Mayer clocked 1:49.83 to finish 0.02 of a second ahead of Max Franz. Hannes Reichelt placed third.GERMAN WINS LUGE TITLE Felix Loch led a German sweep of the top three places to claim the luge World Cup title with his sixth victory of the season in Altenberg, Germany. Loch had a combined time of 1:48.193, 0.270 of a second ahead of Johannes Ludwig and 0.282 ahead of Andi Langenhan. In addition, Tobias Wendl and Tobias Arlt of Germany, the world and Olympic champions, won the doubles race.AdvertisementUPSET IN THE SKI JUMP Rune Velta of Norway stunned the favorites to win the men’s normal hill ski jump competition at the Nordic skiing world championships in Falun, Sweden. Velta, who had never won an individual World Cup competition, took the gold medal with 252.7 points. Severin Freund of Germany was second and Stefan Kraft of Austria finished third.AdvertisementIn addition, Maxim Vylegzhanin of Russia beat the Olympic champion Dario Cologna in the men’s 30-kilometer skiathlon, with Alex Harvey of Canada winning the bronze medal. And Therese Johaug led a Norwegian 1-2 finish in the women’s cross-country skiathlon race.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.AERIALS STANDINGS TIGHTEN Mac Bohonnon of the United States and Danielle Scott of Australia moved into World Cup aerials skiing overall title contention by winning the men’s and women’s rounds in Moscow.GAP IS CUT IN SKI CROSS Fanny Smith of Switzerland won a women’s ski cross race to cut the gap on Sweden’s Anna Holmlund in the freestyle World Cup standings in Tegernsee, Germany. Smith finished ahead of Alizee Baron of France for her 11th World Cup win and 507 points, 8 behind Holmlund, who took third.In the men’s race, Jean Frederic Chapuis of France took the lead in the standings with a victory over Germany’s Daniel Bohnacker and Sweden’s Victor Oehling Norberg in the final.A version of this article appears in print on February 22, 2015, on Page SP11 of the New York edition with the headline: Austrian Claims World Cup Giant Slalom.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.