By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSFEB. 21, 2015
Manchester City registered the biggest win of its English Premier League title defense on Saturday, taking full advantage as Chelsea dropped points on the same day.After 10-man Chelsea, the league leader, was held to a 1-1 tie by visiting Burnley, City trimmed its deficit to 5 points by sweeping aside visiting Newcastle, 5-0.Sergio Agüero put City in front less than two minutes in with a penalty before Samir Nasri and Edin Dzeko scored in the next 20 minutes. David Silva completed the rout with quick-fire goals at the start of the second half as City cut Chelsea’s goal advantage to three, with 12 games to go.Chelsea had led, with Branislav Ivanovic’s first-half goal, but Ben Mee headed in the tying goal for Burnley after midfielder Nemanja Matic was sent off.AdvertisementManchester United dropped to fourth with a 2-1 loss at Swansea. United lost for only the second time since November — but could find itself out of the Champions League qualification places by the end of the weekend.AdvertisementArsenal jumped ahead of United into third place with a 2-1 win at Crystal Palace, thanks to goals by Santi Cazorla, from the penalty spot, and Olivier Giroud. Fifth-place Southampton hosts Liverpool on Sunday.Tim Sherwood had a disappointing start to his managerial career at Aston Villa, which lost, 2-1, at home to Stoke.Queens Park Rangers is only out of the bottom three because of goal difference after losing, 2-1, at Hull. Sunderland was held, 0-0, by West Bromwich Albion.MáLAGA UPSETS BARCELONA Málaga stunned host Barcelona with a 1-0 victory to end Barcelona’s 11-game winning streak and prevent it from taking an overnight lead in the Spanish league.Málaga struck early and hung on after Juanmi Jiménez took advantage of a defensive error by Dani Alves and goalkeeper Claudio Bravo in the seventh minute.Coach Javi Gracia’s team held Barcelona to 0-0 in their first meeting this season, and it was Málaga’s first win at Barcelona since the 1999-2000 season.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Atlético Madrid and Valencia took advantage of Barcelona’s slip with wins that tightened the race among the top four.Antoine Griezmann scored his 13th and 14th league goals to lead Atlético to a 3-0 home victory over Almería, lifting the club to 3 points behind Barcelona. Valencia won, 2-1, at Córdoba to stay in fourth, 3 points behind Atlético, the defending champion.AdvertisementReal Madrid will play Elche on Sunday, looking to extend its 1-point advantage at the top.BAYERN ROUTS PADERBORN Arjen Robben scored twice and helped set up two more as visiting Bayern Munich routed 10-man Paderborn, 6-0, to go 11 points clear in the Bundesliga.Elsewhere, Augsburg goalkeeper Marwin Hitz scored in injury time to salvage a 2-2 draw against visiting Bayer Leverkusen. P.S.G. MOVES INTO FIRST Adrien Rabiot scored twice as Paris St.-Germain beat Toulouse, 3-1, to move provisionally atop the French league.SOLO RETURNS FOR U.S. Goalkeeper Hope Solo was reinstated by U.S. Soccer after a 30-day suspension and is on the national team’s travel roster for the Algarve Cup in Portugal next month.Solo was suspended in January by U.S. Soccer after her husband, the former Seattle Seahawks tight end Jerramy Stevens, was arrested in California on suspicion of driving under the influence in a United States team van. Solo, in training camp at the time, was with Stevens when he was pulled over.A version of this article appears in print on February 22, 2015, on Page SP11 of the New York edition with the headline: Goalkeeper Solo Reinstated After Suspension.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.