

 Benjamin Hoffman
 

KEEPING SCORE
FEB. 21, 2015
At the trading deadline, a flurry of activity had some people wondering how Goran Dragic would turn around the fortunes of the Miami Heat and others celebrating Kevin Garnett’s return to Minnesota. Brandon Knight, in the middle of a breakout season for the Milwaukee Bucks, was on the move to the Phoenix Suns, and the Philadelphia 76ers continued their pursuit of players no one has ever heard of.But a move that tended to fall into the bottom half of trade stories could be among the most significant in the Western Conference playoff race. The Oklahoma City Thunder worked out a three-team trade that landed them Enes Kanter and rid the team of Kendrick Perkins. There are trades that prove to be additions by subtraction, but this one should be addition by addition and by subtraction.Perkins has always had the attitude of a warrior, and his toughness is rarely questioned, but on the court he had become a liability. In more than 19 minutes a game, he was producing just 0.027 of a win share per 48 minutes and had a player efficiency rating of 7.4, well below the league average, 15. Among players who are on the court as often as Perkins, he was the seventh least efficient, and his offensive rating, an estimate of how many points he produces per 100 possessions, was 87, fifth from the bottom.Kanter, while a mild downgrade from Perkins on defense, could step directly into a starting role for the Thunder, especially while Steven Adams is recovering from hand surgery. Offensively, he could truly shake up Oklahoma City if given the opportunity. This season he has produced a solid 17.5 efficiency rating and an offensive rating of 105. When he is put into a lineup next to the defensively inclined Serge Ibaka, the pairing could be a solid one-two punch inside, which would open things up considerably for Kevin Durant and Russell Westbrook.AdvertisementThere is plenty of room for improvement in Kanter’s efficiency rating and offensive rating if the team works with him on his shot selection. At 6 feet 11 and 245 pounds, Kanter can be a devastating force inside, but he has been attempting long 2-pointers on 21.6 percent of his attempts despite hitting just 29.4 percent of his shots between 16 feet and the 3-point line. If he buys into a game plan in which Durant and Westbrook take care of the bulk of the outside shooting, it is easy to predict that his overall field goal percentage of 49.1 percent will skyrocket.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.With a victory Thursday, the Thunder improved to 29-25, the same record as the Suns, their chief competition for the No. 8 seed in the Western Conference race.The Suns, in their own push for the last playoff spot, sent Dragic to Miami and Isaiah Thomas to the Boston Celtics, while acquiring Knight. Knight’s statistics are comparable to or better than Dragic’s this season, but thinking of him as an upgrade may be unwise since Dragic was playing out of position, and was not happy about it, while Knight was in an ideal role as the alpha dog in Milwaukee. Forced to share the ball with Eric Bledsoe, a far more talented guard, Knight may see some decline, and the loss of Thomas hurts the Suns’ bench.The belief all along has been that if the Thunder could survive their tough start to the season, caused by injuries to Durant and Westbrook, qualifying for the playoffs at any seed would be enough to make them a serious contender. That dream could die if Durant, who left the game with soreness Thursday, aggravates the fracture in his foot that ruined the start to this season. Losing him would almost assuredly give the No. 8 seed to Phoenix.But if the Thunder are at full strength, Kanter could be the missing piece that the team has been searching for, even if the trade did not move the needle for most of the news media.A version of this article appears in print on February 22, 2015, on Page SP8 of the New York edition with the headline: Not a Splashy Move, but Maybe a Key One.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »