By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSFEB. 21, 2015
INDIANAPOLIS —  Ryan Grigson will go anywhere and do almost anything to find football players.His global view has taken scouts for the Indianapolis Colts to different pro leagues, college campuses of all sizes, regional combines, American basketball courts and even African rugby fields. Three seasons into his job as a general manager, Grigson believes this will be blueprint for the N.F.L.’s brave new world.“I think the guys that sit on their hands, they’ve got to live with themselves and look in the mirror and realize they didn’t take any chances,” Grigson said. “They’ve got to look at themselves and say, ‘Did I even deserve this opportunity?’ If you just sit on your hands and say, ‘I’m going to play it safe all the time,’ you might be middle of the pack. But if you don’t take a swing, you’re never going to hit it out of the park.”Grigson will never be considered averse to risk.During his brief tenure with the Colts, he has presided over four major moves: the release of Peyton Manning; the decision to draft Andrew Luck instead of Robert Griffin III; a high-profile trade for cornerback Vontae Davis in 2012, which worked out; and a blockbuster move for running back Trent Richardson, which did not.So with the N.F.L.’s annual scouting combine running through Monday, Grigson will continue to look for players who will fit into one of the league’s most diverse locker rooms.AdvertisementThe Colts’ current roster includes four players from the Canadian Football League, two of whom attended college in Canada; a long snapper from the United Football League and in af2, a lower-level arena league; an Arena Football League veteran; a quarterback who spent part of his childhood in Europe; linebackers from Germany and Africa; and a kicker who started his career in Amsterdam.AdvertisementThe Colts have at least two players from every American college football division; an American soldier; and two converted college basketball players.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Tommy Wiking, president of the International Federation of American Football, the sport’s governing body worldwide, thinks increasing international interest in American football will continue the melting pot.He points to the 2013 draft, when linebacker Bjoern Werner of Germany and defensive linemen Ezekiel Ansah of Ghana, Margus Hunt of Estonia and Star Lotulelei of Tonga were all selected among the top 53 picks. This year’s international contingent includes the Nigerian-born Tayo Fabuluje and Jean Sifrin, a native of the Bahamas.The Colts’ owner, Jim Irsay, acknowledged that player costs topped $1 billion every six or seven years.Grigson has succeeded with his unconventional philosophy.“Coach Andy Reid hit me with something, it was even before I had furniture in my office,” Grigson said. “He said, ‘Grigs, just be yourself.’ I think that kind of let loose the creative juices.”A version of this article appears in print on February 22, 2015, on Page SP8 of the New York edition with the headline:  Melting Pot Gets Bigger As N.F.L. Seeks Talent .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.