By BILLY WITZFEB. 21, 2015
TAMPA, Fla. —  When pitchers and catchers reported for spring training Friday, there were questions about the frayed right elbow of Masahiro Tanaka, the surgically repaired right knee of C. C. Sabathia and the expected return of Ivan Nova from elbow surgery by June. Then there is the frailty of Michael Pineda, who has been a revelation when he has not been on the disabled list, which is almost constantly.That leaves one vacancy in the Yankees’ hoped-for rotation, a spot for someone whom Manager Joe Girardi can count on to take his turn all season. Enter the newly acquired Nathan Eovaldi, who threw one out shy of 200 innings for the Miami Marlins last season.But if Eovaldi is not a question mark, he is a riddle.How can someone with an upper-90-mile-per-hour fastball, who walked less than two batters per nine innings, give up a major-league-leading 223 hits?“He kind of defies some of the logic with the analysis, as far as velocity and location and then giving up so many hits,” the Yankees’ pitching coach, Larry Rothschild, said. “I’ve watched the tape, but I want to sit and watch during the game and try to figure out, how do you eliminate that? There’s not any great explanation.”AdvertisementThe acquisition of the right-handed Eovaldi, who was 6-14 last season with a 4.37 earned run average, came at the cost of second baseman Martin Prado, one of the Yankees’ most productive players during the final two months of last season. Eovaldi’s arrival is an example of the team’s interest in getting younger. He recently turned 25.AdvertisementPerhaps the best way to understand Eovaldi’s appeal is to look at what people around baseball look at: hands that could hold a cantaloupe with a fastball grip, continually improving velocity and a competitive streak wrapped in a gentleman’s grace.“When I would long toss with Clayton Kershaw when I was in L.A., I’d have a lot of arc on the ball,” said Yankees pitcher Chris Capuano, who played alongside Eovaldi with the Dodgers in 2012. “Kershaw would throw it on a line, and I’d be waiting for it to bounce, but it would never bounce. Nate’s got that kind of arm where he can throw it on a line and it almost defies gravity the way it carries. It’s a power arm.”Eovaldi grew up near Galveston, Tex., in Alvin, best known as Nolan Ryan’s hometown. Eovaldi said that he had not met Ryan, who moved away when Eovaldi entered high school, but that it was impossible to miss his presence in the town. Coincidentally, Eovaldi was issued No. 30, the number Ryan wore when he came up with the Mets, and also with the Angels.As a high school freshman, Eovaldi threw a modest mid-70s fastball but then had a growth spurt as a sophomore and jumped into the mid-80s. By his junior year, he was regularly breaking 90 m.p.h. until he felt a twinge in his arm. It was a torn ligament in his elbow requiring Tommy John surgery.When he recovered, Eovaldi still had a scholarship offer from Texas A&M, but enough professional teams were scared off by the operation that he was not drafted until the 11th round by the Dodgers in 2008. When Los Angeles visited Houston that season, Eovaldi threw in the bullpen for Manager Joe Torre and the pitching coach Rick Honeycutt, then visited with pitcher Chad Billingsley, first baseman James Loney and outfielder Matt Kemp — all homegrown players drafted out of high school.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The sales pitch was not necessary. The injury, and the threat of a recurrence, persuaded him to sign.“I knew if something happened, I could at least say I tried it with a major league team,” Eovaldi said. “The doctors said if you had a second Tommy John, the odds weren’t as good that you’d be able to come back. I didn’t want to take that chance of it happening in college. And if I did get hurt again, I’d have school paid for, so I’d be able to go back.”The injury also influenced how Eovaldi trains now. Before, he would simply lift weights — the heavier, the better. In his rehab, it was light weights and many repetitions for specific muscles, building up the areas around his shoulder and elbow. It is a routine he maintains, crediting it for his continual increase in velocity.AdvertisementIf Eovaldi’s velocity is what got him to the major leagues by the time he was 21, his next leap will come when he develops a consistently effective complement to his fastball, which he controlled markedly better last season.Frustrated by his inability to command a changeup, he experimented with a splitter late last season at the behest of the Marlins’ pitching coach, Chuck Hernandez. It is a pitch he has spent the past three weeks here tinkering with under Rothschild. Eovaldi, whose long fingers are well suited for the pitch, is pleased with the velocity and movement he is getting with it.What Rothschild would also like to see is for Eovaldi to better harness his competitiveness.“Sometimes, I think it takes him into territory where he needs to back off a little bit, and not be not competitive but get it under control,” Rothschild said. “Or not always run it into the middle of everything. Step off and gather yourself and not try to necessarily power yourself through the inning.”Rothschild added, “Anybody with that makeup, you’re going to like, but he got to the major leagues quick, and I’m not sure that’s the fairest thing for a pitcher.”As he stood at his locker Friday, Eovaldi was a font of the optimism that spring training harbors. His wife and 8-month-old son are with him here. They still must look for a place to live in New York, and he said it was an undeniable thrill to pitch for the Yankees.Eovaldi was all smiles.If he can provide the durability the Yankees need, and the improvement they hope for, they will be just as pleased.A version of this article appears in print on February 22, 2015, on Page SP3 of the New York edition with the headline: Eovaldi’s Untapped Potential Has the Yankees Dreaming of Big Things.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.