AdvertisementSupported byBy Allan KredaUNIONDALE, N.Y. — Johnny Boychuk brings a booming slap shot, veteran leadership and a vital bonus quality to the first-place Islanders.Boychuk, a 31-year-old defenseman acquired just before the season opener, also has a sly sense of humor that is keeping teammates loose during the grind of an 82-game season.“He just makes me laugh, makes it light,” the Islanders’ captain, John Tavares, said of Boychuk. “He’s tremendous within the room when we do hit adversity, just staying with it. There’s no panic.”That mix of steadiness, focus and levity made Boychuk, a 6-foot-2 defenseman, a favorite with his former team, the Boston Bruins, who traded Boychuk in a salary-cap move despite his important contributions to Boston’s Stanley Cup championship in 2011 and return to the finals two years later. “He was a really good teammate and personality, one of those guys that you look up to,” his former Bruins teammate Dougie Hamilton said. “You definitely notice his presence in the room. That’s the part you miss the most.”Two people especially happy to see Boychuk thriving on Long Island are his parents, John and Audrey, who recently visited from Edmonton, Alberta, to watch him play at Nassau Coliseum. Their son played 374 games in the American Hockey League before establishing a foothold in the N.H.L. “John has put in the work to be where he is, that’s for sure,” John Boychuk said. “We have followed him everywhere — from Lowell, Worcester and Providence to Denver, Boston and now New York. So these are great times for us.”Boychuk is paired with Nick Leddy, a Cup winner with Chicago in 2013 who was also acquired just before the season. Leddy brings guile and craftiness, while Boychuk contributes size, speed and a constant offensive threat from the blue line.Boychuk scored a goal and had two assists in his first game with the Islanders. He has six goals — including two in the last four games — and 22 assists this season. Leddy has eight goals and 17 assists. Their play eases the pressure on Travis Hamonic, 24, whose locker is next to Boychuk’s.“He’s been one of our leaders, and he has fit in really well with us,” Hamonic said of Boychuk. “I think John is a great player, and as many great players as we can have on our team, all the better for us.”Such plaudits could lead to a swelled head for some. But Boychuk, drafted in the second round by Colorado in 2002, maintains a calmness that appears to rub off on his teammates. “I’m having fun and the guys have been great,” he said after a recent practice. “It’s been an easy transition for me, and it’s also been fun to get more responsibility. There’s always a time to be funny and loose, but when it’s time to get serious, you have to put away the lightheartedness and focus on what it takes to win.”The Islanders have not won a playoff series since 1993 and have reached the postseason only twice since 2004. But at 39-19-2 after Saturday’s 3-2 overtime loss to the Capitals, they lead the Metropolitan Division with seven weeks remaining in the regular season.Leddy, who is quieter than Boychuk, said the learning curve of joining a new club was aided by his new partner’s approach to the game. “From Johnny, I’ve learned how I can complement him and how we can complement each other,” said Leddy, 23. “How he’s become the player he is, that’s something we can all learn from.”Islanders Coach Jack Capuano, a stickler for structure and playing a brand of grinding but still creative hockey, values a top-tier pair like Boychuk and Leddy.“They are coming from teams that have been successful, and anytime you can have those types of players in your room, it adds a different dimension,” Capuano said. “Nick is a very elusive player — a guy that moves the puck and moves his feet — while John is a throwback. He’s one of those guys who plays physical and is not afraid to shoot a puck from anywhere on the ice.”Advertisement