By BECKLEY MASONFEB. 21, 2015
As the N.B.A. arrives at the stretch run of its grueling 82-game season, LeBron James and the Cleveland Cavaliers are far from the pole. In fact, if the playoffs started today, they would not even have home-court advantage. But after a blistering run in the month leading up to the All-Star break — at one point they won 12 in a row — the Cavaliers appear to have hit their stride and are gaining quickly on the rest of the Eastern Conference.The Cavaliers have transformed into the offensive juggernaut many expected at the start of the season. Over the last 17 games heading into the weekend, they had scored more points per possession than any team in the league. And the starting lineup of Kyrie Irving, J. R. Smith, Kevin Love, Timofey Mozgov and James has been the league’s best, outscoring opponents by 22.4 points per 48 minutes (per NBA.com/Stats). A caveat regarding the Cavaliers’ cupcake schedule is warranted, but they did beat the Bulls, the Thunder, the Trail Blazers and the Clippers (twice) during that stretch.If it appears the Cavaliers have an extra spring in their step, it is because they made moves to add younger, springier players. After trading for the Knicks players Smith and Iman Shumpert, and surrendering a future first-round draft pick to acquire Mozgov (a former Knick), the Cavaliers are noticeably more athletic on the wings and at the rim.Along with the new players, the Cavaliers also have a renewed James, who has been a different player since he returned from a two-week break that he said he needed to recharge after four straight trips to the N.B.A. finals.AdvertisementJames has increased his free-throw attempts and shots at the rim incrementally, but evidence of his increased explosiveness lies in his skyrocketing proficiency at the rim. After shooting 64.9 percent on rim attempts earlier in the year, he is now up to 76.8 percent, a figure more in line with his career marks.AdvertisementThe statistics are confirmation of what has been obvious in James’s last month of games: He is fresher, more active on the fast break and finding more room in the halfcourt for drives directly to the rim.As is often the case, an increase in shots at the rim corresponds to a teamwide rise in 3-point attempts. Shooting from distance opens up space inside, and the Cavaliers are bombing away. They are averaging 29.9 3-point attempts during their hot streak, a figure eclipsed during that span by only the run-and-gun Rockets. That is a six-attempt increase from the first two and a half months of the season, when they spent more time throwing the ball into Love in the post. Love still gets a few touches on designed post plays, but for the most part the Cavaliers have embraced an identity that de-emphasizes opportunities for Love to go one-on-one.Instead, the offense calls for Smith, Shumpert, Love and Irving to hoist 3-pointers at will, while Mozgov and the backup center Tristan Thompson maraud through the paint hunting for offensive rebounds and put-backs. More than 60 percent of Shumpert and Smith’s combined shots come behind the arc, while 70 percent of Mozgov and Thompson’s combined shots come at the rim.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.It is a simple but effective formula — not unlike the philosophy of the Cavaliers during James’s first run with the team. When you have two of the best attacking players in the league in Irving and James, it can be smart to do away with the intricacies and just create space for them to attack.The simplicity of the offense may also explain why the Cavaliers are moving the ball better. Every role is clearly defined, and fewer contingencies mean faster decisions.If the Cavaliers are to make a serious run at a title, they will need to continue scoring at scorching rates, because their defense is still decidedly average. Mozgov was brought in to replace the injured Anderson Varejao, and he helps as a willing if not especially intimidating force inside. Shumpert is also an upgrade, because he can guard either troublesome point guards or traditional scoring wings. His skills allow him to give Irving and James a break on defense. In the playoffs, he will no doubt be called upon to slow the likes of John Wall of the Wizards and Jeff Teague of the Hawks.The Hawks loom as the Cavaliers’ toughest challenge on their path to the finals. Like the Cavaliers, the Hawks shoot a lot of 3-pointers and have scored well all season. But the Hawks also play disciplined defense and use their mobile big men to clog driving lanes. The Cavaliers have yet to prove they can win consistently by relying on their defense, so a shootout against the Hawks, who will most likely own home-court advantage, would be a dangerous proposition.Another problem facing the Cavaliers is their relative lack of depth, a shortcoming caused and mitigated by the cost of accumulating so much star power. When one of the Love-James-Irving trio sits, the offense tends to falter. This may matter less in the playoffs, when every star plays longer minutes, but it is a concern for a team that still needs to make up ground in the standings and will have little opportunity to rest those stars at the end of the season.Even if they do not form the ideal profile of a championship team, the Cavaliers, as individuals and a collective, now know who they are. Whether what they are is enough to bulldoze a path to the finals, let alone take down whoever emerges from gantlet of the Western Conference playoffs, is still very much in question.A version of this article appears in print on February 22, 2015, on Page SP8 of the New York edition with the headline: Cavs Take Off Behind Soaring Offense.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.