AdvertisementSupported byBy Viv BernsteinDAYTONA BEACH, Fla. — Las Vegas bookmakers have already set the odds for the 2015 Nascar Sprint Cup championship, and the consensus is that Jimmie Johnson is the driver to beat. Kevin Harvick, last year’s champion, and Jeff Gordon are among the other favorites, along with the 2012 winner, Brad Keselowski.This should come as no surprise to anyone who follows Nascar. Johnson has won six of the last nine Sprint Cup championships, and Gordon has four titles in his career; both race for Hendrick Motorsports. Harvick competes for Stewart-Haas Racing, which uses racecars built with Hendrick chassis and engines. Harvick’s boss, Tony Stewart, won the Cup in 2011 in the same Hendrick equipment.For those counting, that is eight of the last nine Cup championships won in Hendrick cars and engines. Keselowski, with Team Penske, is the only driver to capture the Cup since 2006 who did not need Hendrick Motorsports to pull it off. Go back further, and it is 13 of 20 Cups for Hendrick, beginning in 1995 with the first of Gordon’s titles.Hendrick Motorsports has been called the Yankees of Nascar. But even the Yankees do not win like that anymore. It is a level of dominance never seen in the 66 years of Nascar. And after Hendrick won 19 of 36 races, including 6 of 10 in the playoff and the last two by Harvick to clinch the title in 2014, there is no reason to believe the Hendrick racecars will be any less formidable this season.So as Nascar heads into Sunday’s season-opening Daytona 500 — with Gordon on the pole, Johnson beside him on the front row after they topped all other qualifiers last Sunday, and Hendrick’s Dale Earnhardt Jr. starting third in defense of his victory here last February — the question facing the sport is whether that dominance has led to a competitive imbalance. And if so, what does that mean for Nascar?“You always like to see the success get spread around, but it goes through cycles,” Robin Pemberton, Nascar’s senior vice president for competition and racing, said last month. “You had manufacturers that dominated, and then you had other teams that dominated in different eras. So it all runs in cycles.”There has often been a driver to chase. Richard Petty won seven championships from 1964 to 1979, and Dale Earnhardt followed with seven titles from 1980 to 1994.“I think there’s always been a competitive imbalance in the sport,” said Kyle Petty, the broadcaster, former driver and son of Richard. “But the dominance that Hendrick has shown, honestly, for the last 20 years solidly, I don’t think any team, even including Petty Enterprises, has been as dominant as what they’ve been all the way around.”Some of the credit goes to Johnson and his crew chief, Chad Knaus, who combined to win five titles in a row from 2006 to 2010 and six over all. As the team owner Rick Hendrick said, “We’ve won a lot, but Jimmie Johnsons don’t come along — Chad Knaus and Jimmie Johnson combinations — that much. And you’ve got to kind of give those guys credit.”But Johnson and Knaus are not the only reason Hendrick is a juggernaut these days. Hendrick will field racecars for its drivers Johnson, Gordon, Earnhardt and Kasey Kahne, the maximum number of teams per owner allowed. All four made the playoff last season, although they did not make the four-car finale at Homestead-Miami Speedway, won by Harvick.Hendrick also supplies equipment and technical support to Stewart-Haas Racing’s Harvick, Stewart, the suspended Kurt Busch and Danica Patrick. Hendrick has another alliance with Chip Ganassi Racing with Felix Sabates, which includes the drivers Jamie McMurray and Kyle Larson. On top of that, Hendrick supplies the HScott Motorsports drivers Justin Allgaier and Michael Annett. That is more than a quarter of the field in a 43-car race driving Hendrick cars. The volume of information they are able and willing to share gives them an edge over every other organization.Rick Hendrick apologizes for none of it. He points out that it was Toyota that first declared that its teams would work together to win when it arrived in Nascar’s Sprint Cup eight years ago.“Other guys have the opportunity,” Hendrick said. “If they don’t do it, it’s their fault.”In the last year, companies like Nationwide Insurance and 3M ditched Roush Fenway Racing to move to Hendrick. Liftmaster dropped Ganassi’s team to switch to Hendrick. Napa, a longtime sponsor of Michael Waltrip Racing, left after 2013. Napa is now sponsoring Hendrick’s Chase Elliott.“It’s difficult to compete with them,” said Sabates, of Chip Ganassi. “We lost Liftmaster. That was our sponsor, and we didn’t get a chance to bid again. They just dumped us and went with Hendrick. You can’t blame them for doing that. If I was Liftmaster and I had a chance to go with Hendrick, I’d go with them.”In racing, money buys speed. The more money a team has, the more it can invest in equipment and engineers to find ways to go faster.“Those teams run well, those teams win championships and races, so they get big sponsors, they get a lot of funding,” said Greg Biffle, whose No. 16 Ford was sponsored by 3M for years before the company switched to Gordon this year. “They’ve got a lot of depth. Well, that makes them even stronger, right? So the snowball starts to grow.”How big is the snowball? Forbes estimates Hendrick Motorsports is worth $350 million, with projected revenue of $180 million this year. Joe Gibbs Racing is second with a valuation of $201 million and $115 million in revenue.“I think that’s just the normal ebb and flow of sport, and Rick has been at the top, and they’ve demonstrated it and they’ve earned everything they’ve gotten, and when you’re successful, you’re going to reap the rewards for that,” said Steve Newmark, president of Roush Fenway Racing. “The Patriots and the Seahawks right now, they’ve performed well over the last few years, but maybe in a couple years somebody else is on top.”But success by New England and Seattle does not mean Tampa Bay or San Diego may go out of business. The N.F.L. and other sports leagues are set up to ensure the survival of all through franchising and revenue sharing. That is not Nascar, where some teams have contracted after losing sponsorship and others have gone away, with new owners coming in to replace them.“Our model historically has always been free enterprise,” said Mike Helton, Nascar’s vice chairman. “And that free-enterprise culture, I think, is what we see.”Ford has responded to the challenge by building a 33,000-square-foot facility in Concord, N.C., devoted to improving the performance of its race teams with more engineers and a state-of-the-art racing simulator for drivers.So maybe Ford’s drivers, led by Team Penske’s Keselowski and Joey Logano, will edge Hendrick this year. Or perhaps it will be Gibbs and its collection of high-profile drivers, which includes Kyle Busch, Denny Hamlin, Matt Kenseth and Carl Edwards. It is a new year with a clean slate for all.“Every season, we’ve got to go out and prove ourselves,” said Marshall Carlson, president and chief operating officer of Hendrick Motorsports. “We could come into this season and get 10 races into it and be gasping for air.”Maybe. But if you are going to Vegas, don’t bet on it.Advertisement