By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSOCT. 12, 2015
GAINESVILLE, Fla. — Florida’s starting quarterback, Will Grier, has been suspended indefinitely for violating the N.C.A.A.’s policy on performance-enhancing drugs.The university announced the suspension at a news conference Monday. Grier, who failed a drug test, said he took an over-the-counter supplement.Florida plans to appeal to reduce the suspension, which, according to N.C.A.A. rules, could last one year and cost Grier one-quarter of his total college eligibility.Coach Jim McElwain said Grier had made a mistake that could have been avoided.“Will Grier won’t play this week and obviously in the near future due to taking a supplement, an over-the-counter supplement that had something in it that was on the N.C.A.A. list of things that you can’t have,” McElwain said. “Again, it’s something that he feels horrible about. It’s an honest mistake and yet can be prevented by just checking with our medical staff.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Grier was emotional while apologizing.“I really hope people can learn from this, learn from my mistake,” he said.AdvertisementThe No. 8 Gators (6-0, 4-0 Southeastern Conference) play at No. 6 Louisiana State (5-0, 3-0) on Saturday. Grier, a redshirt freshman, has started the past five games for the Gators. The sophomore Treon Harris was expected to start in his place.AdvertisementGrier and the Gators have been one of the most surprising teams in the country in their first year under McElwain, a former Colorado State coach and Alabama assistant. The Gators have already matched their regular-season win total from last year and have a commanding lead in the SEC East race.Harris started Florida’s opener against New Mexico State, and he and Grier split the snaps in the Gators’ second game, against East Carolina. Harris has not thrown a pass since. He is 19 for 27 passing for 269 yards and two touchdowns this season.He played nine games as a freshman last season, completing 49.5 percent of his passes for 1,019 yards and nine touchdowns, with four interceptions.A version of this article appears in print on October 13, 2015, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: Gators Passer Suspended.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.