AdvertisementSupported byBy Sam BordenDORTMUND, Germany — The home fans poured over the bridge from the city center toward Westfalenstadion, a wave of black coats and hooped scarves crashing into sausage shacks and beer kiosks. Finally, they arrived at the famed Südtribüne, the terraced stand at the south end of the stadium, which rises like a tilted baking sheet and clumps together some 25,000 spectators in what is known throughout soccer as the Yellow Wall.The singing and chanting started in earnest when Borussia Dortmund’s goalkeepers appeared for their pregame warm-ups (an event generally greeted elsewhere with ambivalence, if not complete ignorance). The stadium was in full throat by kickoff, the 80,000 fans, led by the Yellow Wall, shrieking and shouting as if this were a World Cup final instead of a league game against Mainz, a middling team from western Germany. They sang “You’ll Never Walk Alone.” They sang things far less polite.And then, suddenly, there was silence. Fifty-two seconds after the game began, Mainz’s Elkin Soto lofted the ball over Dortmund’s goalkeeper and into the net from 25 yards. The place went quiet, understandably. But seconds later, even before play had restarted, the noise returned, even louder than before. In a season of gut punches, the fans seemed to be saying, What’s one more?“It is like my girlfriend,” said Jan-Henrik Gruszecki, a longtime season-ticket holder. “I have a big fight with her; I am disappointed with her; I am gutted by her. But then, always, I realize that I love her and I want to be with her and I can’t imagine anything else.”He laughed. “This is what being a Dortmund fan has been.”Pick a simile, any simile: a tangled relationship; an amusement park roller coaster; a dripping, greasy bratwurst just before kickoff. How could something so wonderful feel so bad in the end? In 2012, Dortmund won the German league and cup titles. In 2013, it played in the Champions League final. In 2014, it was second in the league and the runner-up in the German Cup. Yet by early February, somehow, Dortmund had tumbled nearly to the bottom of the Bundesliga standings and was locked in a race to avoid an ignominious relegation.Suddenly, games like the one against Mainz, on Feb. 13, or Friday’s matchup with lowly Stuttgart are more important — and significantly so — than Dortmund’s first leg against Juventus in the Champions League’s round of 16, set for Tuesday. “I would be an idiot if I would rest players so they can play against Juve,” Manager Jürgen Klopp said last week when asked about the possibility of rotating his top stars so they might be fresh for the Champions League.What happened to Dortmund? Mathematically, the explanation is not complex: After winning two of its first three league matches, the team won only two of its next 16, a disastrous stretch in which the attacking tactics Klopp employs produced a total of 12 goals. The team was second to last going into Germany’s long winter break and was dead last in the Bundesliga after 19 matches.That rough start prompted Klopp, who has been generally forthright (if not altogether apologetic) this season, to point out after the team’s final first-half match that “the best news today is that football is over for 2014.”As it turned out, the nadir — or, at least, what fans hope will be the nadir — came after the break when Dortmund lost to a feeble opponent, Augsburg, despite playing a good chunk of the game with a man advantage. After that defeat, goalkeeper Roman Weidenfeller and defender Mats Hummels approached the steel fence that surrounds the Westfalenstadion field to speak directly to some of the most passionate Dortmund fans. Weidenfeller, resting atop the fence on his elbows, apologized as Klopp and his teammates watched.“They said, ‘We are sorry; we know we are in a bad moment, but we need support, please,’ ” recalled Gruszecki, the season-ticket holder, who was standing in a nearby section. “And that is right. A lot of fans might turn in on their team in this time, but at Dortmund it has never been like that.”Marc Quambusch, a Dortmund fan who is working on a film about Franz Jacobi, a founder of the club, said most people who love Dortmund had become used to the emotional swings. The team nearly went bankrupt in 2004 — less than a decade after winning the Champions League in 1997 — before Klopp arrived in 2008 and the team surged. Other examples are littered throughout the team’s history, including Dortmund’s victory in the 1966 European Cup Winners’ Cup, which was followed, five years later, by relegation to Germany’s second division.“You get all the emotions, always, which some people might think is interesting,” Quambusch said. “Some people might also think it’s crazy.”Günter Bork, a reporter who covers Dortmund for a German news service, said theories on Dortmund’s collapse varied. Some point to injuries, which have afflicted nearly every top player on the team at some point this season, or perhaps to the success of the German national team at last summer’s World Cup, which compressed the rest period that some players had before returning to their clubs.Neither explanation holds much weight for Bork, who said that many other teams, including first-place Bayern Munich, could make similar claims. Soccer is a game of small margins, Bork said, and this season has been unkind to Dortmund. In the first game of the season, against Leverkusen, Dortmund allowed a goal after nine seconds, the fastest goal in Bundesliga history. “It was crazy,” Bork said. “But looking back, you think, Maybe this is where the disease began.”The beginning, of course, is far less important than the end. Klopp has maintained throughout the tumult that his team can still play with the same flair and magic that made it a serious rival of Bayern Munich’s in recent years. That confidence is apparently shared by Hans-Joachim Watzke, Dortmund’s chief executive, who said the club was not making any contingency plans for relegation. Watzke has also given Klopp a vote of confidence, telling reporters earlier this season that Dortmund would never fire Klopp.When he said that, it might have seemed strange. But lately, the optimism has felt more justified. While it is still possible that Dortmund will follow the lead of teams like the 2012 Villarreal squad or Atlético Madrid of 2000, juggernauts who were relegated, the fans who stayed energized after that early goal against Mainz were eventually rewarded with a thrilling 4-2 victory. Combined with the news that Marco Reus, the team’s star midfielder, had signed a contract extension, it made for one of the most positive weeks the club has had in months. On Friday, Dortmund extended its winning streak to three games with a 3-2 win over Stuttgart, but with 25 points, the team remains only 3 points out of the relegation zone.For now, Champions League games such as Tuesday’s remain wholly secondary. There are 12 league games remaining for Dortmund, 12 more crucial games for fans to feel “the fear,” as Quambusch put it, before the season is saved.“Can we do this?” he said. “Why not? Look at what we have done before.”Advertisement