By JONAH BROMWICHFEB. 22, 2015
Every week, The New York Times will choose one essential game to watch, highlighting hot teams, winning and losing streaks and statistical intrigue in the N.B.A.Golden State at Cleveland, Thursday, 8 p.m. Eastern, TNTAfter a whirlwind week, the N.B.A. resembles a shuffled deck of cards. The Miami Heat acquired a star point guard (and, in a matter of hours, lost a star big man for the remainder of the season). The Oklahoma City Thunder rid themselves of some emotional baggage and added much-needed scoring help and roster depth. And many other teams, through moves big and small, changed their rosters in hopes of changing their luck.Some top squads, though, including the Cleveland Cavaliers and the Golden State Warriors, opted to stick with what they had at the trading deadline.“We can win a championship with this roster,” Cleveland’s LeBron James told reporters. (And that was before reports emerged that Kendrick Perkins had committed to signing with the team.)AdvertisementThe Warriors’ coach, Steve Kerr, told reporters, “I’m thrilled we stood pat.”It’s no wonder that James and Kerr are content with the way things are. The Cavaliers are 16-2 over a stretch beginning Jan. 15 — the best record in the league since that date. And the Warriors recently reclaimed the league’s best overall record; at 43-10, they are a half-game ahead of the Eastern Conference’s Atlanta Hawks.The last time the Warriors and the Cavaliers faced off, on Jan. 9, James sat out, and Golden State ran roughshod over Cleveland, with a 36-3 advantage in fast-break points and a 40-28 advantage in points in the paint. That game, played shortly after the Cavaliers acquired J. R. Smith, Iman Shumpert and Timofey Mozgov, came at a low point for Cleveland, during a six-game losing streak. Since then, Cleveland is scoring more points, rebounding more strongly and passing more readily.Of those three added Cavaliers, Mozgov has offered perhaps the most obvious help, plugging what had been a substantial hole in the frontcourt. But Shumpert, who is defending well and looks to have rediscovered his shot, and Smith, who is scoring with ease, have made significant contributions, too.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.More difficult to explain — yet impossible to miss recently — is the team’s sudden chemistry, which was on display in the team’s first game back from All-Star weekend, a 127-89 rout of Washington, and on Sunday in a 101-83 victory over the Knicks. Against the Wizards, the star guard Kyrie Irving had seven assists, and James had six, each looking eager to share the ball.A similar willingness to pass has helped make the Warriors a force. Their challenge as the playoffs approach will be mental: to stay focused on playing the kind of basketball that has propelled them to this point.They certainly looked dialed in for most of their victory over the San Antonio Spurs on Friday, building a 21-point lead through three quarters. But even with San Antonio’s starters sitting out the fourth quarter, the Spurs managed to outscore the Warriors, 31-21, in the final period. That is a small lapse but one that Golden State does not want to get in the habit of making.Some may suggest that the Warriors’ lack of a traditionally intimidating big man will keep them from succeeding in the playoffs as they have in the regular season. But those doubts may exist only because Golden State’s high-caliber offense continues to overshadow its league-best defense. The Warriors do not seem particularly vulnerable to the grinding style of basketball that some squads revert to in the playoffs. On the contrary, teams that play at a relatively quick pace have been responsible for handing Golden State most of its losses.AdvertisementStill, even if the Warriors finish at the top of the standings and even if their style works seamlessly in the postseason, they will have to survive three tough Western Conference series to reach the N.B.A. finals. The Cavaliers, who play in the less competitive East, should look at Thursday night’s matchup as a chance to do some scouting and search out any weaknesses that might spell doom for the Warriors during the gantlet of the playoffs.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.