By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSFEB. 22, 2015
Martin St. Louis scored two goals and added one in a shootout, and the Rangers blew a three-goal lead but won for the ninth time in 12 games by beating the Columbus Blue Jackets, 4-3, in a shootout on Sunday night at Madison Square Garden.St. Louis, a veteran forward, scored in the first and second periods as he appeared to have broken out of his slump. After going 15 games without a goal, St. Louis has four goals and two assists in the past four games.Kevin Hayes added a goal in the first, Derek Stepan had two assists, and Cam Talbot made 27 saves for the Rangers, 9-1-2 in their past 12 games.“We talk all the time about trying to find ways,” St. Louis said of the Rangers, who are 3-5 in shootouts. “Obviously, up three goals, it’s not the way you are trying to get two points. We should have pulled away and closed it out.”AdvertisementTalbot had been 0-2 in shootouts this season, having allowed four goals on five shots before stopping two of three against Columbus.Advertisement“We don’t want to give up any points to the other teams, but to get a win in the shootout was big for us,” said Talbot, who lost in a tiebreaker to Vancouver on Thursday. “The guys bailed me out huge.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.St. Louis scored in the first round of the shootout, and Rick Nash had a third-round goal. Talbot then poked the puck away from Cam Atkinson to seal it.The Rangers are only 2 points behind the Metropolitan Division-leading Islanders.David Savard forced overtime by scoring the tying goal with 4 minutes 19 seconds left in regulation. Marko Dano and Artem Anisimov had second-period goals for Columbus, which went 2-2-1 on a five-game trip. Curtis McElhinney stopped 34 shots through overtime.Columbus fell behind, 3-0, at 1:24 of the second on St. Louis’s second goal of the game, but the Blue Jackets needed only 53 seconds to begin their comeback.St. Louis slammed in a pass from Ryan McDonagh at the right post for his 18th goal. The Blue Jackets then got within 3-1 when Dano netted his second of the season and first in four games since returning from the minor leagues.A version of this article appears in print on February 23, 2015, on Page D7 of the New York edition with the headline: Rangers Squander 3-Goal Lead but Win.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.