AdvertisementSupported byBy Tim RohanPORT ST. LUCIE, Fla. — David Wright has learned a few tricks over the years to help him stay healthy for an entire season. He takes fewer swings during warm-ups now and fields fewer ground balls at third base. He is also more mindful not to overwork his body while training during the season. Essentially, he has tried to eliminate taking unnecessary risks. He has vowed, for instance, not to slide headfirst this season.In June, Wright slid headfirst into second base and jammed his right shoulder. He was not the same player the rest of the year. By the time the Mets shut him down in September, he had career lows in home runs (eight), on-base percentage (.324) and slugging percentage (.374). On Sunday morning, Wright, 32, met with the news media at the Mets’ complex for the first time this spring training. He said his shoulder was fine. He seemed to be more aware of his physical limitations, having played at least 135 games just once in the last four seasons as a result of back, shoulder and hamstring injuries. “That’s something that I’m starting to realize a little more, that a well-timed off day can do wonders over the course of the season,” Wright said.Manager Terry Collins, who said he would limit Wright to about 150 games in an effort to keep him healthy, believes that a healthy Wright will benefit the rest of the lineup by taking pressure off other hitters.Wright spent the off-season strengthening his shoulder and arrived in Florida in January, a month earlier than usual, to work out with Mike Barwis, the Mets’ strength and conditioning adviser. He also spent time with Kevin Long, the team’s new hitting coach, in Arizona and in Florida, and at times over the off-season, Long called Wright with insight on how to improve his swing. Last year, Wright hid the extent of his shoulder injury for some time, and he declined to blame the injury for the drop in his home run total. Even after he had the shoulder tested and treated and was playing in pain, he seemed reluctant to talk about it. “One thing about David, he’s never going to make an excuse, ever,” Collins said. “He never has, never will. But I think a lot of it had to do with that. He just couldn’t get the bat through the zone with the speed you need to have to hit for power.“I’m not worried about power with David Wright. I know David Wright does what he does offensively where you’re looking up and he’s hitting .320 or .318. He’s going to hit some home runs because he’s making better contact.”In recent seasons, as the Mets have tried to create a foundation built mainly on young players, especially pitchers, Wright has seemed aware that he is approaching the end of his prime. When he signed an eight-year contract extension in 2012, the Mets essentially promised to build a contender around him.Now, finally, that kind of team seems to be coming into focus. “It’s been a little longer than I hoped for, obviously,” Wright said. But he has high hopes for this season and said this was the best pitching staff he had played behind. He could not say the same about the Mets’ lineup. No matter who is pitching, the team very likely will be a contender only if Wright is healthy. “My track record — obviously, I expect to do certain things on the baseball field, and when I don’t do them, I’m pretty harsh on myself; I’m upset with myself,” Wright said. “I think it continues to drive and motivate me.“ When that stops happening, when I don’t expect to play at a high level, then it’s time to start thinking about doing something else.” INSIDE PITCHEven though the Mets have long indicated that Wilmer Flores will be their starting shortstop, Terry Collins said that there would be an open competition between Flores and Ruben Tejada. More than anything, it seemed to be a ploy to motivate Tejada, whose inconsistent play created an opportunity for Flores last season. “I’m not going to say that Wilmer Flores won’t be the shortstop,” Collins said. “I’m not saying that. All I’m saying is, I’m giving this other guy a chance.” Advertisement