By KAREN CROUSEFEB. 22, 2015
LOS ANGELES — Oh, baby, does James Hahn have a flair for the dramatic. In his last start before the impending birth of his first child, and with the minutes ticking down until the start of the Academy Awards a few miles down the rain-soaked freeway, Hahn made a 24-foot birdie putt on the third playoff hole Sunday to wrest the Northern Trust Open title from Dustin Johnson.Playing the 186-yard, par-3 14th hole, Johnson hit his tee shot to 12 feet. After Hahn made his putt, Johnson missed, giving Hahn his first PGA Tour victory in his 65th start. Hahn closed with a two-under 69 at Riviera Country Club to tie Johnson (69) and the Englishman Paul Casey (68) at six-under 278. Casey was eliminated on the second extra hole when he failed to make birdie.Hahn, who opened at five under for a share of the Thursday early lead, described the win as “amazing” and added, “I’m lucky to be here now.”He played the final 18 holes of regulation in a group with Johnson, who became a first-time father last month, and they talked about parenthood. “To me it was very calming, if anything, to talk about being a dad,” Hahn said, adding, “I’m more excited about being a dad than winning any golf tournament.”AdvertisementSergio García held the lead for most of the back nine before buckling. He walked to the 17th tee with a one-stroke lead and walked off the 18th green tied for fourth, one stroke out of the playoff, after his second straight bogey.“For whatever reason, my swing doesn’t seem to be clicking just yet,” García said. “So it’s been a little bit of hard work to be able to at least have a chance.”It was fitting that the 10th hole swallowed Casey in the playoff, because it was a burial ground for title hopes. A par 4 that measured 303 yards during the final round, the 10th is a persuasive rebuttal to every argument for lengthening courses to contain the damage wrought by bigger athletes and better technology.AdvertisementThe defending champion, Bubba Watson, was in the hunt, at five under, when he took aim at the hole’s turtle-back green and a pin placed in the far right quadrant. His 270-yard tee shot landed in the right rough, and after finding greenside bunkers with his next two shots, he walked off with a double bogey.Of the top-10 finishers, only Retief Goosen bettered par on the hole. Goosen, who finished at four under after a final-round 75, chose to lay up with his tee shot. He hit his approach to 17 feet and sank the putt. Blayne Barber, who began his round at No. 10, drained an 18-footer for birdie to foreshadow his bogey-free 65, which gave him a share of 12th.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Keegan Bradley, who closed with a 68, was kicking himself after the round. One of the tour’s longest hitters, Bradley missed the playoff by a stroke and gave a stroke back at No. 10. He described Riviera as his favorite course on the tour. He loves it; it’s perfect; but he would change the 10th, and not because his bogey there cost him dearly.“I just think that hole has gotten a little out of control,” said Bradley, who finished in a four-way tie for fourth with García, Jordan Spieth (70) and Hideki Matsuyama (67). “It’s not very fair for a course that’s so fair and so hard, especially today. It was almost impossible to get one close.”Hahn, 33, a Korean-born American, had no qualms about the hole. He escaped it with three pars and two birdies, with one of the threes coming in the playoff. After pitching to 10 feet from the rough, Hahn drained the putt. That eliminated Casey, who had missed his birdie attempt, and turned up the pressure on Johnson, who had landed his pitch from the rough inside four feet. Johnson made the putt to extend the playoff, but not for long.“The pitch shots those guys hit into 10 to make birdie — absolutely brilliant,” Casey said, adding, “I didn’t honestly think I would have the longest birdie putt of the three, seeing where those guys were after their tee shots, but those guys played phenomenal recoveries.”Hahn described the 10th as “a fun hole” and explained his reasoning: “You could walk away with an easy three or an easy six.” He added, “Two birdies out of five tries on the hole, I think that’s pretty good for me.”When he arrived at the media tent for his postround interview, a cold diet soda was waiting for him. He asked if he could have a beer instead, and when someone produced a cold one he twisted open the cap and took a sip.His first child, a daughter, is due three weeks before the Masters, which Hahn qualified for with the victory. Will he be able to make it to Augusta National?“Uh, yes,” Hahn said.The victory delivered a Masters berth and may have given Hahn and his wife something else they were missing: a name for the baby. “I’m going to have to talk to my wife about Riviera,” Hahn said with a smile.An article on Monday about James Hahn’s victory at the Northern Trust Open golf tournament misstated his age. He is 33, not 37.A version of this article appears in print on February 23, 2015, on Page D6 of the New York edition with the headline: Birdie on Third Playoff Hole Gives Father-to-Be His First Victory.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.