
On Pro Basketball By                     
 HARVEY ARATON
 
FEB. 22, 2015
David Blatt stepped into the corridor late Sunday morning, in front of reporters and television cameras, to say he had no information to share on the Cleveland Cavaliers’ interest in the former Oklahoma City center Kendrick Perkins, who was waived by Utah after a trade.The primary report of the imminent transaction had come from the noted journalist LeBron James, who, in a Twitter post on Saturday, wrote: “The Land welcome my bro as well as my muscle (LOL) @KendrickPerkins to the city with open arms! Happy and thrilled to have u aboard homie!!”For the record, Blatt, the Cavaliers’ coach, would not comment on what James, playfully referred to by many as the team’s de facto general manager, had already confirmed. It’s all part of the multidimensional and ever-expanding LeBron brand, going to vocational places where no other No. 23 — specifically Michael Jordan — has gone before.One week after offering an All-Star weekend greeting that teased New York — “If I could have 82 regular-season games in the Garden, I would because it’s the mecca of basketball” — James returned to Madison Square Garden with the rapidly rising Cavaliers to toy with the summer-league Knicks in a 101-83 win.AdvertisementOver 28 leisurely minutes, James entertained himself with H-O-R-S-E-caliber 3-point shots (he made 1 of 6), behind-the-back passes and impromptu chats with courtside fans. He then sat back and watched extended garbage time until Cleveland’s ex-Knicks Iman Shumpert and J. R. Smith teamed up for the game’s takeaway highlight, a reverse alley-oop dunk by Smith in the fourth quarter.AdvertisementThat was worth standing for, according to James, the artistry judge.“I was planning on not getting up too many times,” he said. “I was starting my treatment session, but that was special.”Past the knee soreness that sidelined him from late December until late January and coincided with the Cavaliers’ slide to a game under .500, James indicated that the next-best thing to playing full time in the Garden was to have a few former men of the now-malnourished mecca on his side in Smith, Shumpert and the Russian center Timofey Mozgov.James orchestrated the arrival of Kevin Love upon his arrival in Cleveland last summer, while David Griffin, the Cavaliers’ official general manager, engineered the trades for the three aforementioned ex-Knicks, shoring up a paper-thin roster.Since losing in Phoenix on Jan. 18, the Cavaliers have won 16 of 18. No more is there a nightly scrutiny for signs of mutiny, supposedly directed by James, against the rookie N.B.A. coach Blatt. Hopes are soaring again in Cleveland, with the bandwagon driven by the homecoming King.We’ll find out how serious a title contender the Cavaliers are come spring, when pressure will mount on the first-time playoff participants Love and Kyrie Irving, when Smith and Shumpert will be asked to knock down open jumpers and use their heads, and when Mozgov will have to stay on the floor through grueling series against the most accomplished tall people in the Eastern Conference, not Lou Amundson and Jason Smith.But if what we are seeing now is a preview of what’s to come, then the plan James and his management team hatched after last season — to build a legacy that is different from Jordan’s, as a player with even more operational power and purpose — will have progressed to a new level. James will have won with a bully franchise in Miami and with a sad-sack city whose last major professional sports title came in 1964.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.James may never match Jordan’s six championships in Chicago, or his commercial dominance in the growing global market of the 1990s that still resonates, even as he flabs out in the owner’s suite in Charlotte.For sure, Jordan is a tough act to follow, but he was never granted the leverage in personnel consultation that James has in Cleveland. Jordan chose to please his corporate underwriters by playing it straight down the social and political middle — in effect, by saying nothing — but James has grown as a real-world commentator, even as he wielded more commercial power, his marketability flourishing after he buried his bumbled 2010 departure from Cleveland.AdvertisementHe has been busy setting his own paradigm, including his recent acceptance of the players’ union’s vice presidency, muscling up for a fight with the owners over soon-to-balloon N.B.A. television revenue.Jordan fancied himself a lifelong Bull, at least until 1998, while James appears to consider himself the quintessential free agent. By returning to Cleveland after winning two titles in Miami, by walking out on Pat Riley, Dwyane Wade and Chris Bosh after four successive finals appearances, James became the ultimate inverse of reserve clauses and other long-dead player constraints.Even as the returning hero to Cleveland, he negotiated for an out in a two-year contract that will end just as the league’s salary cap is likely to rise significantly. Has he merely positioned himself to bleed every last dollar out of Dan Gilbert, the Cleveland owner? Is he back with the Cavaliers until career death do they part? Is he just being respectful of the real estate with his Garden of Eden testimonials, or would he actually consider resurrecting another moribund franchise — in New York, Los Angeles or elsewhere — should he complete his mission in his native Northeast Ohio?On the historical championship scoreboard, Jordan may have won six, but how many broken teams did he fix?James is 30, with more prime years ahead, more opportunities to build on his brand, his very own No. 23 legacy. He wants to keep the world guessing, to continue following his breaking-news feed on Twitter.A version of this article appears in print on February 23, 2015, on Page D1 of the New York edition with the headline: Playing Forward (and Pundit, and Savior), LeBron James.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »