By VIV BERNSTEINFEB. 22, 2015
DAYTONA BEACH, Fla. —  Few drivers in motorsports have ever had the view that Jeff Gordon had Sunday at the start of the Daytona 500. Gordon was on the pole for his final 500, with nothing but track in front of him and a racecar capable of putting him in victory lane one last time in the final year of his career.“I think he’s going to take a mental picture of that,” said Ray Evernham, his former crew chief. “He’s going to look out that windshield, and it’ll be emotional. But then again, as soon as they throw that green flag, he won’t think about it again until after the checkered.“It’s going to be all about winning that race.”And for most of the first half Sunday, Gordon looked as if he would take that checkered flag, too. But even at the conclusion of a storybook career, he could not quite script that ending to his last Daytona 500. Instead, Gordon, who will retire from full-time racing after 2015, was caught up in one of those multicar wrecks that are so typical at Daytona. He was 13th coming down to the last lap but was scored in 33rd place after the crash on the backstretch.Afterward, Gordon drove down pit road and climbed out of the No. 24 Chevrolet for the last time in this race.Advertisement“I’m still smiling and enjoyed every moment of it,” said Gordon, who led for 77 of the first 100 laps and for 87 laps over all. “Obviously, I enjoyed the first half a lot more than the second half.”AdvertisementHe added: “This was an amazing week, an amazing day. I’m just in this different place that’s so foreign to me, but so incredible to just be taking it all in, enjoying every moment.“Yeah, right now, I’m a little bit sad. This is my final Daytona 500. But I’m more upset we didn’t have a shot at winning there at the end.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Still, he gave his fans hope for most of 500 miles that he had such a shot — fans like Lorraine LaChapelle of Daytona Beach, who said she had been unable to control her emotions when she heard the news that Gordon was planning to retire.“I started crying,” she said before the race as she walked in the infield. “I love Jeff. I don’t know who I’m going to root for now.”LaChapelle, 69, wearing a red Gordon jersey with the familiar yellow No. 24 on the front, was one of many fans at the track dressed in Gordon gear. Al DeMichele, of Marmora, N.J., wore a rainbow hat from Gordon’s early days.DeMichele said he had attended 12 Daytona 500s.“This might be my last year here,” he said, pointing to Gordon’s retirement and his own frustration with changes in the sport.Tim Casperson, of Menominee, Mich., said he had been shocked when he heard Gordon’s announcement and had decided to attend the Daytona 500 because it would be Gordon’s last.“There’s going to be a hole when he leaves no one’s going to be able to fill,” Casperson said, comparing Gordon’s impending departure to the loss of Dale Earnhardt, who was killed in a crash at the 2001 Daytona 500. “You can’t fill those shoes. Well, no one’s going to fill Jeff’s shoes, either.”A version of this article appears in print on February 23, 2015, on Page D6 of the New York edition with the headline: Despite Wreck, Gordon Is Smiling After His Final 500.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.