AdvertisementSupported byOn BaseballBy Tyler KepnerCLEARWATER, Fla. — Ruben Amaro Jr. played eight seasons as an outfielder in the 1990s. He had 150 singles and 16 home runs. Singles are much easier.Amaro, now the general manager of the Philadelphia Phillies, could hit another single, if he wanted, by trading his best player. But Amaro needs to swing big. He needs a home run to trade his ace left-hander, Cole Hamels. The future of the Phillies depends on it.“What people have to understand about Cole Hamels is Cole Hamels is a performer,” Amaro said the other day as his team worked out here. “Cole Hamels has won games in the postseason. Cole Hamels has been a World Series M.V.P. Cole Hamels is one of the best pitchers currently in the major leagues.“So any player that you would acquire — any player, whether it’s 10 or 12 of them — who is not of that ilk is taking a step backward. I mean, just on the surface, you take a step back immediately because there’s not a player who would equate with what he has done and what he can be. There’s no risk with Cole Hamels, other than injury, because he’s going to perform.” This is Amaro’s pitch to rival general managers. So far, it has not succeeded. The Phillies added pitching depth in the high minors this winter by trading Jimmy Rollins, Antonio Bastardo and Marlon Byrd. But Hamels remains, and his presence holds up a rebuilding effort that started too late.The Phillies finished last in their division last season for the first time in 14 years. Attendance at Citizens Bank Park fell by almost 600,000 from 2013, the steepest decline in the majors. The front office is finally in agreement with the fans: It is well past time to start over.“Certainly, after ’13,” said Pat Gillick, the team president and a Hall of Fame general manager, “we should have moved much quicker.”Instead, they gave the old gang one more try. They spent a franchise-record $177 million on a roster that went 73-89. Their golden era, which included a championship and five successive National League East titles through 2011, was officially buried.Hamels, though, had the best E.R.A. of his glittering career, at 2.46, and he is the rare veteran Phillie signed to a reasonable contract. He is owed four years and $96 million, much less than he would get on the open market. While Hamels can block trades to 20 teams, he has made it clear he would welcome a deal.“If I’m one of those pieces to help them win a ballgame or win a championship, then I feel like they’re going to keep me,” Hamels said Saturday. “At the same time, they have to do a business that I want no part of. I like what I do.” At 31, Hamels is young enough that in theory, he could be part of the Phillies’ next winning team. Amaro and Hamels have said as much. But the essential question is how much the Phillies’ reconstruction depends on the pieces they could get by trading him.Several teams seem well positioned to send those pieces to the Phillies. The Boston Red Sox have title hopes and prospects close to the majors, but they lack an ace starter. The St. Louis Cardinals and the Chicago Cubs also have deep farm systems, high payrolls and lofty goals.For now, though, no team seems motivated to meet Amaro’s demands. That could change as the season goes on, though a rental ace — like Cincinnati’s Johnny Cueto, a free agent after this season — would command a lower price.Without a deal, the Phillies’ farm system remains thin at the upper levels. Besides reliever Ken Giles — who averaged 12.6 strikeouts per nine innings as a rookie last season, with a 1.18 E.R.A. — few young players offer enticing, immediate potential.“There’s a lot of work to be done,” Amaro said. “I think Pat was right when he said we want to consistently be contending starting in 2017 or 2018. To us, it’s about trying to build an organization, much like the St. Louis Cardinals, that’s going to be out there contending pretty much every year. We have the resources to do it.”The Phillies used those resources to reward their stalwarts, especially Ryan Howard, the first baseman with two years remaining on a bloated five-year, $125 million contract. Howard tore an Achilles’ tendon while grounding out to end the Phillies’ 2011 division series, and he has since been a shell of himself.This winter, Amaro caused a stir when he acknowledged publicly that he had told Howard the team would be better off without him. (Amaro has since apologized.) The comment exemplified the sudden shift in mind-set of an organization that had been overconfident.“Listen, it’s just a different goal, and the goal is to look more down the road than what our current team is,” Amaro said. “I hope that our players believe that we can win, and I like the fact that they’re kind of edgy about it — particularly the veteran guys, because they want to win. But our expectations are little different than they’ve been in the past. That’s the nature of the beast when you’re rebuilding or retooling.“To me, we’ve always been honest — we’ve either tried to go for it every single year, which we have till this year, or we go into the mode where we are right now.”In the Phillies’ new reality, three veteran pitchers — all available in trades — have held news conferences to address their uncertain status. Starter Cliff Lee took a Magic 8 Ball to his session. Closer Jonathan Papelbon, with intentional irony, considered wearing a T-shirt bearing the words “Fan Favorite”; he did, but under a zip-up hoodie.Lee is owed $25 million this season, plus a $12.5 million buyout for 2016. Papelbon makes $13 million this season, with a vesting option for the same amount for next year. Amaro has been unable to move those contracts, leaving the Phillies with more veteran place-holders than most teams in transition.“We want to rebuild, but we don’t want to be embarrassing,” Gillick said. “We don’t want to embarrass our fans. We have to put a good product on the field, and at the same time do what we have to do to get back to being competitive.”Deep down, Hamels would most like to win again in Philadelphia. A San Diego native, he lives in the city year round and is active in the community. He spoke of players like Derek Jeter and Chipper Jones who spent their full careers with one team.But the best gift Hamels could give the fans, at this point, would be to accept a deal that helps the Phillies win sooner, without him. He grasps that reality.“To make my home in Philly and see what sports really do mean to Philly fans, it’s been nice,” Hamels said. “And being able to go out and represent not only the organization but the city of Philadelphia has been an honor. And I think I’ll remain to do so until I’m told that I can’t.”Advertisement