By BILLY WITZFEB. 22, 2015
TAMPA, Fla. —  Whoever ends up in the closer’s role for the Yankees, the shadow of Mariano Rivera, constructed over 17 nearly impeccable seasons, still looms.That is not to say, though, that the team’s two leading candidates, Dellin Betances and Andrew Miller, are not capable of casting shadows of their own.The right-handed Betances and the left-handed Miller, who are expected to pitch the eighth and ninth innings for the Yankees between them, stand large when they stand on the mound: Betances is listed at 6 feet 8 inches while Miller is a shade less imposing at 6-7.Whether or not the Yankees’ embrace of the outsize is an organizational ethos, it seamlessly extends to their pitching staff. Miller and Betances are joined by starters C. C. Sabathia and Michael Pineda, each standing 6-7. Among the relievers in camp hunting for a roster spot are Chris Martin, a 6-8 right-hander who pitched for Colorado last season, and Tyler Webb, a 6-6 left-hander.Advertisement“I was taught the bigger, the better,” General Manager Brian Cashman said. “It doesn’t always play out that way, but I like big power pitchers, so I do have a lot of those types, and I’ve always gravitated to those types.”AdvertisementTaller pitchers have the advantage of throwing with an atypical arm angle and releasing the ball closer to home plate, and a sharper downward plane leaves less room on the bat for contact. The one disadvantage is that bigger men are typically less agile, making it challenging for them to repeat their deliveries.“It might take us a little longer for us to figure out our bodies,” said the 210-pound Miller, who is gangly compared with the 260-pound Betances. “But if you can find a way to get over the plate often enough, it’s something that’s going to work for you.”The competition between Betances, 26, and Miller, 29, is interesting in part because their height, as well as the fact that they began their professional careers in 2006, is about all they have in common.Betances, a Yankees fan while growing up in Manhattan and an eighth-round draft pick, blossomed unexpectedly last year, his first full season in the majors.Miller, a native of Gainesville, Fla., had a stellar collegiate career at North Carolina and was selected by Detroit sixth over all in the 2006 draft, one pick before the Los Angeles Dodgers chose Clayton Kershaw. Miller made his major league debut that year.Miller struggled to establish himself as a starting pitcher, bouncing to Florida and Boston, where he was moved to the bullpen and began to flourish. He developed into an excellent setup man for the Red Sox and then solidified Baltimore’s bullpen when the Orioles acquired him last summer on the way to winning the American League East.The Yankees landed Miller, the premier free-agent reliever on the market this off-season, with a four-year, $36 million offer, although Houston is thought to have offered him $40 million and others made competitive bids.Advertisement“Obviously, I got to play in Boston the last few years,” Miller said. “Playing in front of these fan bases and the history and the expectations are situations that I not only thrived in but I’ve also really enjoyed. The Yankees offer that as much as anybody anywhere in any sport. So an opportunity to play for this organization, an opportunity to play at home in spring training and to stay on the East Coast, as well as they offered me a great contract.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.He added with a smile, “I’d be lying to say that wasn’t part of it.”Manager Joe Girardi indicated he would have plenty to consider over the next six weeks, one possibility being interchangeable roles for Miller and Betances, with a game’s circumstance dictating when to use the left-hander or the right-hander.“It would not be my first choice, but it’s something you can definitely think about,” Girardi said. “I would like to have it ironed out before we leave.”For 20 years, the back of the Yankees’ bullpen has been the least of their managers’ worries. John Wetteland, the closer when the Yankees won the World Series in 1996, gave way to Rivera, whom David Robertson succeeded superbly last season. But Cashman said the Yankees did not want to pay Robertson’s price on the free-agent market, which they expected to be $12 million per year. (Robertson ended up signing a four-year, $46 million contract with the Chicago White Sox, and the Yankees gained a draft pick as compensation.)Pitching meaningful innings in Yankee Stadium can be an unforgiving proposition for players who turn out to have thin skin. That makes Betances grateful to have had a miserable 2012 season in the minor leagues, when he had a 6.44 E.R.A., almost entirely as a starter. He went to the Arizona Fall League and discovered a new role — reliever — and a new joy for the game.“I had never struggled the way I did that year, and it was hard,” said Betances, who was 5-0 with a 1.40 E.R.A. last season and made the All-Star team as a rookie. “You have to have a short memory, which is something that I’ve learned and I’m still learning. It’s hard sometimes when you give up the lead and you dwell on that overnight.”Miller has taken some steps to prepare for his transition to New York. The bushy beard he had in Boston is gone, as are the long hair and the soul patch he wore in Baltimore. He is now cleanshaven, with a buzz cut.The more daunting expectations concern the ninth inning. Although Rivera has been retired for a year, Miller and Betances said they understood that he had left a standard, even if it is not an entirely realistic one.“He might be the best that ever was, and nobody wants to be compared to that,” said Miller, who in high school did not like being compared to Randy Johnson, the model for tall, left-handed pitchers. “The fans get spoiled in a sense when a guy is so good and makes it so automatic. We’re human, and not everybody can be as good as those guys who make it seem automatic. They’re special people, and we have a special place for them — the Hall of Fame.”Still, with so many what-ifs, the Yankees could clearly use someone able to fill Rivera’s shoes with more than big feet. They will need someone to stand tall.A version of this article appears in print on February 23, 2015, on Page D5 of the New York edition with the headline: With Closer Spot Up for Grabs, Yanks Look to 2 Big Arms (Emphasis on Big).  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.