
On Soccer By                     
 ROB HUGHES
 
FEB. 22, 2015
The wind billowed, the rain lashed down, and regardless of all that Philippe Coutinho, a 22-year-old Brazilian, scored one of the finest goals of the season for Liverpool at the home of Southampton.It was a strike that truly reminds us what a beguiling, at times baffling, sport soccer can be. Less than three minutes had elapsed when Coutinho, for no particular reason other than that his instinct told him to do something adventurous, did something quite out of the ordinary.Coutinho stands slightly more than 5 feet 7 inches and is a lightweight at that. The Saints’ goalkeeper Fraser Forster is 6 foot 7 and over the past two years has made breathtaking saves from Messi, Iniesta and the like.But from 30 yards out, seeing a packed home defense between him and the goal, Coutinho did as famous Brazilians have done down the decades. His right foot sent the ball up and over that massed defense, and somehow made it dip over the outstretched hands of Forster, dropping centimeters beneath the crossbar.AdvertisementDid he mean it? You bet. Did he know he could impart that power, the rise and fall, that precision upon the inanimate object that is a soccer ball? No doubt.AdvertisementThe questions Coutinho cannot answer are just how Brazil, with such a natural affinity with the game, could have failed so embarrassingly at the World Cup on its own soil last July. And how and why would Inter Milan, the Italian club that first plucked him away from Vasco da Gama in Rio de Janeiro when he was an even smaller 16-year-old, let such a talent slip between its fingers?Liverpool was the beneficiary, and with the 2-0 victory at Southampton on Sunday, Liverpool moved significantly closer toward the top of the Premier League in England, and a qualifying spot in next season’s Champions League.You could feel resentment around the Saints’ St Mary’s stadium, from where Liverpool had pillaged three Southampton players last summer.Not pillage, Liverpool in fact paid Southampton almost 50 million pounds — two thirds of the sum it received from Barcelona for Luis Suárez — to take away Adam Lallana, Dejan Lovren and Rickie Lambert.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In less than Saintly terms, the home crowd booed their erstwhile sons, especially Lallana who rose through the youth structure there, and who Southampton had raised from a youth who required keyhole surgery to correct an irregular heartbeat.Lallana is no villain, merely an ambitious man who, now in midcareer, wanted to play at one of England’s traditional clubs which was willing to pay a fair price to his former team to acquire.For half this season, Southampton’s marvelously recast side under the Dutch coach Ronald Koeman dared to look down on Liverpool (and on a good many other supposedly bigger clubs). Koeman’s crafty recruitment of players, and his astute counterattacking strategies, confounded the fears that the Saints might struggle, and victories over Manchester United and Arsenal, plus a draw with Chelsea, were all well earned.That said, Liverpool took months to get over the loss of its talisman Suárez, who scored over half its goals last year and almost led the team to its first English league title in more than two decades. Almost couldn’t keep the Uruguayan, especially when he sensed the opportunity to join Lionel Messi and Neymar in, on paper, an attack to die for.AdvertisementBut, aside from the wonder of what Coutinho delivered in the opening minutes, there had been an emerging English talent among the Reds last season. His name is Raheem Sterling; he can be as good as gold in his best moments, and midway through the second half at Southampton, young Sterling, who turned 20 in December, sealed the victory for Liverpool.His was the surest footing on this slippery field where, first the home defender Matt Targett then another defender fell in the crowded penalty area. Balance is Sterling’s finest attribute, and from 12 yards he powered in a low shot that squirmed through the gloves of keeper Forster and across his goal-line.Liverpool had won, but has little time to enjoy the spoils. On Thursday it must defend a slender 1-0 lead in the second leg of its Europa League encounter with Besikitas if the snow in Istanbul permits that game to go ahead.Then next Sunday, the Reds of Liverpool are at home against the light blues of Manchester City, who have scored nine goals in City’s last two Premier League games. Given that Liverpool has just equaled a 30-year record of the club not conceding a goal in five consecutive games, that game at Anfield stadium should be as decisive as — well as at St Mary’s this weekend.A version of this article appears in print on February 23, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »