By ANDREW KEHFEB. 22, 2015
Iman Shumpert and J. R. Smith were smiling all Sunday morning as they moved around Madison Square Garden and encountered all the security guards, elevator operators, ushers, team staff members, coaches, onetime teammates and reporters they used to see when they were Knicks players.They kept smiling through the afternoon as they helped the Cleveland Cavaliers trample their former team, 101-83, and contributed an outlandish late-game alley-oop that sent an electric charge through the building.And Shumpert and Smith could barely suppress their smiles afterward, when they stood together along a wall for a joint news conference, answering questions about how different they felt since the Knicks traded them to Cleveland on Jan. 5.“Our mind-sets have changed: as opposed to trying to get a win, to expecting to win every game we play,” Smith said, as Shumpert nodded his approval. “Our whole total approach is different. Both of us feel rejuvenated.”AdvertisementTheir day reached its happy peak with just over nine minutes to play in the game. Smith was trying to get open inside the right corner, but his defender had closed him off there, so he instead cut to the basket along the baseline. Seeing his teammate’s move, Shumpert whipped a pass toward Smith, who went airborne as the ball was released. With his back to the hoop, Smith caught the pass above his chest, cocked the ball between his knees, and slammed it through the rim behind his head.AdvertisementLeBron James, who had already begun receiving his postgame treatment on the bench because the Cavaliers had built such a comfortable lead, jumped up and put his hands on his head as if in disbelief. The arena buzzed. Smith and Shumpert celebrated together on the court as the Knicks called timeout, and when Smith finally skipped back to the bench, James leapt up and smothered him with a bear hug.In the huddle, Cavaliers Coach David Blatt told Smith the play was worth the price of admission.“That was special,” Blatt said after the game.Knicks Coach Derek Fisher said Smith was more effective, and happier, with the Cavaliers because their roster — with James, Kyrie Irving, and Kevin Love — allowed him to be a catch-and-shoot player and not a playmaker, a role in which he sometimes struggles.Almost as soon as the game began, Smith exhibited the dichotomy Fisher had mentioned, receiving a pass in the left corner from Irving, who had barreled into the core of the Knicks’ defense, and smoothly draining a 3-pointer. About a minute later, Smith dribbled wildly toward the baseline, encountered two defenders, spun around and tossed up an off-balance jump shot from medium range. It cleared the rim altogether.But Smith stayed under control, scoring 17 points while shooting 7 for 11 from the field. With less than a minute left in the first half, he caught an outlet pass from James and finished a breakaway with a stylish two-handed windmill dunk. It increased the Cavaliers’ lead to 29 points. When the halftime buzzer sounded, Smith paused along the baseline to greet James L. Dolan, the Knicks’ owner, before bouncing toward the locker rooms.Midway through the third quarter, Smith caught a crosscourt bullet pass from James and banked in a 3-pointer off the glass. He jogged back with a comical expression of exaggerated bewilderment. It was obvious he was having fun.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Shumpert said the situation he and Smith were in with the Cavaliers reminded him of his time with Knicks two seasons ago, when they won 54 games.“It’s kind of the same sets — get out on the break and run, throw lobs,” said Shumpert, who had 4 points, 7 assists and 5 rebounds. “Everybody’s just having fun, and everybody’s together.”AdvertisementShumpert said that he was initially disappointed to be traded and that he regretted that he would not be able to help with the Knicks’ turnaround. But playing alongside James and winning, he acknowledged, was nice.James (18 points, 7 assists) opened the scoring Sunday afternoon at the Garden roughly the same way he did at the All-Star Game there a week earlier: with a soaring two-handed dunk that portended how easily he and his teammates would create and finish over the next 47 minutes. Last week, James was playing against superstar peers, players who could not be troubled to play defense during an exhibition game. On Sunday, he was playing against the Knicks.“We took the game seriously,” Blatt said after the game.Such assertions have apparently become necessary when playing the Knicks.Cleveland has now won 16 of its last 18 games. It seems highly unlikely that the Knicks will reach 16 total wins for the season.On Sunday, Smith and Shumpert saw firsthand the competitive misery they were spared when they were traded. There was little mystery about why they looked so happy.A version of this article appears in print on February 23, 2015, on Page D3 of the New York edition with the headline: Smith and Shumpert Revel in Return to Garden as Cavs.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.