AdvertisementSupported byGlobal SoccerBy Rob HughesLONDON — The extremes of imported artistry and homegrown belligerence that make English Premier League soccer a compelling spectacle were on full view this weekend.The darkness came first, when a referee overlooked a horrendous foul by a Burnley player but showed the red card to a Chelsea player who reacted by pushing the perpetrator to the ground Saturday.The violator got off scot-free. The retaliator got a red card. And Chelsea’s manager, already heavily fined this season for claiming there is a refereeing bias against his team, made his point by saying nothing more than asking viewers to look at the replay.That video would show a lunge by Burnley’s Ashley Barnes that was so late and so high above the ball that it might easily have broken the outstretched lower leg of Chelsea’s Nemanja Matic.How Martin Atkinson, a highly rated FIFA referee, could not see the recklessness of the foul is beyond understanding. But he saw Matic get up from the ground, chase after Barnes and push him with both hands in his back and shoulders.It resulted in a justified red card for Matic, a midfielder from Serbia; not even a caution to the Englishman Barnes; and a sick feeling in the pit of the stomach for those who despair when potentially dangerous play is overlooked.Atkinson twice failed to award Chelsea a penalty in the first half, first when Burnley defender Michael Kightly turned his back and was hit on the arm by the ball, and again when Jason Shackell blatantly shoved Diego Costa with both hands.The outcome was that Chelsea, playing under par after a tough game in Paris the previous Tuesday, was surprisingly held, 1-1, by a Burnley club that is battling relegation at the bottom of the league.The tie, along with a 2-1 defeat of Manchester United by Swansea City, paved the way for Manchester City to enjoy a gainful evening in the Premier League. City’s players heard the results during their warm-ups, then hammered Newcastle United by a score of 5-0, a showing that was as beautiful as it was emphatic.City has the maestro David Silva, who could grace any lineup when he is at the top of his form. It would not be too far to suggest that if any player could orchestrate a midfield in the same way that Xavi Hernández did during the finest decade of Barcelona’s history, Silva would be that man.Barça, which snapped an 11-game winning streak in La Liga when it lost at home to Málaga on Saturday, will know all about Silva when they meet in the Champions League on Tuesday in Manchester.Fortunately for Barcelona, Silva will not have his teammate and foil, Yaya Touré, at his side in the same way he did Saturday. Touré, playing his first game in England after six weeks away at the African Cup of Nations, is the physical force for City that Silva can play off, but he is suspended because of a red card in his previous Champions League match.Saturday was only the third time this season that City has had its complete midfield quartet of Touré, Silva, Samir Nasri and the Brazilian Fernandinho together.What harmony that combination can muster. What freedom they allow Silva and Nasri to outwit and bewitch opponents. Newcastle was outdone within 30 seconds of the start when Vurnon Anita lost control of the ball and fell over Edin Dzeko for a penalty, which Sergio Agüero scored with aplomb. It was the second-fastest penalty ever in the Premiership, after one by Stuart Pearce for Nottingham Forest 20 years ago. It was 2-0 after 12 minutes when Nasri danced through the central defense and shot high into the net. In the 21st minute, Silva, known as “the magician” by the City fans who have enjoyed him for four years, carved out a third goal with a breathtaking pass. While running with the ball, he looked up toward the far side of the penalty area and landed the ball on the chest of Dzeko with pinpoint accuracy. Dzeko obliged with a shot that gave the goalkeeper no chance to stop.The rout was on, finished with two more goals shortly after halftime. For the first, Agüero ran with the ball from the halfway line and released it to Nasri, who unselfishly squared the ball into the path of Silva.The Spaniard’s movement gave him a free run on the goal, and the finish was sweet and easy.Barely two minutes later, Agüero and Silva combined to cut through the Newcastle defenders as if they were dummies on a training field. Silva’s shot, struck into the ground from the edge of the penalty box, was once more too precise for goalie Tim Krul to get anywhere near.That was the signal for the City manager to begin protective measures with Barcelona in mind. He took off Silva, Agüero and Nasri, not that their replacements — Jesús Navas, Wilfried Bony and Frank Lampard — would cut down on the tempo.The end result means that City closed to within five points of the league leader Chelsea with 12 games left. But this is the time of the season when both clubs not only go head-to-head for the English title, but also attempt to progress in the more difficult Champions League.To that end, City paid 25 million pounds, about $38 million, during the January transfer window to get the Bony, a striker, from Swansea. Dzeko, who said Saturday on television that he thinks David Silva is the best player in the Premier League, was asked whether he felt Bony was a rival for his place in the lineup.“We are all players for the team,” Dzeko calmly replied. “He’s very welcome.” Chelsea, he concluded, is the competition, not anyone within.Advertisement