AdvertisementSupported byBy Richard SandomirFor decades, the Pawtucket Red Sox have been a minor league team as familiar to baseball fans as the Toledo Mud Hens, the Memphis Redbirds, the Durham Bulls or the Birmingham Barons. Playing at McCoy Stadium, which opened during World War II, the Rhode Island team, commonly known as the PawSox, has sent future stars such as Jim Rice, Carlton Fisk, Nomar Garciaparra, Roger Clemens, Mo Vaughn and Jacoby Ellsbury to the big club in Boston.The longest game in professional baseball history was played in Pawtucket — 32 innings over eight hours in April 1981 and a deciding inning in June. The PawSox beat the Rochester Red Wings, 3-2, with a roster that included the future major leaguers Wade Boggs, Rich Gedman, Marty Barrett and Bob Ojeda, the winning pitcher. The best-known Red Wing was Cal Ripken Jr.But on Monday, the group of investors that bought the team, which plays in the Class AAA International League, said it had plans to move the club to Providence, into a ballpark to be built on land at the edge of downtown and near two interstates. The park is expected to open in 2017.“This will rip the heart right out of us,” said Mayor Donald R. Grebien of Pawtucket, whose grandparents and parents took him to PawSox games. “It’s really the psychological impact this will have.”McCoy Stadium was built on a pond for more than $1 million and was named for the political boss and mayor, Thomas McCoy, who had pushed for its construction. Nicknamed McCoy’s Folly, it sits between a struggling residential neighborhood and an industrial district in a city that now has about 70,000 residents. Under the ownership of Ben Mondor, a gruff businessman who acquired the team in 1977 and died in 2010, the PawSox became known as a model franchise that provided low-cost entertainment.Anne Canann, who lives in East Providence, said she was paying $585 for her season ticket above the visiting team’s dugout. From there, she engages in the tradition of snaring autographs by dangling a two-liter soda bottle, with a portion cut out to fit a ball or a card. Her husband is a bartender there. Her son was the head usher.“It’s been like a home away from home,” Canann said. “It’s got atmosphere. Prices so low, families could afford to go. And accessibility to players.” She added: “It was a dump before Ben Mondor took over, and he really made it what it is today. You walk down the tunnels, and you see all the memorabilia and history.”Despite the appeal to budget-conscious fans, attendance has been falling over the last decade, from an average of 9,561 a game in 2005 to 7,367 last season.“McCoy has certainly done her job and outlived her useful life,” said Pat O’Conner, the president of Minor League Baseball. But he added: “You’re not leaving a desperate situation. It’s not a fire sale. It’s a pretty successful situation in Pawtucket, and some awfully smart people have taken a look at it and said new ownership and a new site will benefit them over the long haul.”The new owners see McCoy as a relic and Providence as a better market. They do not have a ballpark design or approvals for the land they intend to build on, near Interstates 95 and 195. “It’s right on the Providence River, will have a relatively short right field, and home runs will go in the river,” James Skeffington, one of the investors, said by telephone. “That’ll be kind of cool.”Grebien said he wanted to renovate McCoy Stadium — a project of the Works Progress Administration that was overhauled in the 1990s — the way the Boston Red Sox refurbished Fenway Park.Recognizing the difficulty of the struggle ahead, though, Grebien said, “The reality is that it will be tough to fight this.”Advertisement