AdvertisementSupported byBy Tim RohanPORT ST. LUCIE, Fla. — When Matt Harvey went into the training room for his normal routine Monday morning, Dave Pearson, the Mets’ minor league rehabilitation coordinator, shook his hand, congratulated him for finishing the rehabilitation program and presented him with a small coin, a token of appreciation for his hard work. The coin was covered with references to the Mets, the rehabilitation unit and Port St. Lucie. On one side, it had a saying: “Every winner has scars.” On the other side was a picture of Mr. Met in sunglasses next to a palm tree. For the last few years, the Mets’ rehabilitation team has given metal coins like these to more than 40 players for getting through a program designed to get them healthy. Not every player receives one. The injury must be a significant one — such as Harvey’s Tommy John surgery — that keeps the player out for a while, and the player must put forth a genuine effort.The coins, then, are their reward. Pearson views them as a motivational tool, something the players can strive for, a keepsake they can cherish later in life. Some players are ecstatic to receive their coins; others are indifferent. But in general, they understand the coin’s purpose.“A lot of times,” Pearson said, “these are situations where this is the first time these kids have been really, truly injured, and it’s a big shock. This is the first time they’re told, You’re not going to play this year.”Pearson got the idea for the coin a few years ago after he noticed that players in the Mets’ strength and conditioning program were getting new T-shirts every year. He wanted something for the rehab program. But, he figured, “Nobody wants to wear a shirt that says ‘rehab.’ ”Then he remembered a gift he had received, before he worked with the Mets, from a patient who had served in the military. As a sign of thanks, the man had given him a challenge coin, a special token that signified the unit to which he belonged.Peterson thought the idea might work with the Mets. He sketched out a design for a coin that represented the Mets’ rehab program. The result was a mash of Mets history, medical references and, of course, a motto. Pearson searched Google and found “Perfer et obdura; dolor hic tibi proderit olim,” which is Latin for, “Be patient and tough; this pain will be useful.” But on the coin, “Perfer” is misspelled as “Prefer.” There are now two versions of the coin. Harvey was among the first to receive the second one. Among its new features is the phrase “Best summer ever,” a sarcastic reference among Mets players who have had to spend a summer isolated in Port St. Lucie.Pearson and Jon Debus, the minor league pitching rehabilitation coordinator, essentially run the Mets’ rehabilitation program at Port St. Lucie year round. Pearson, a physical therapist and athletic trainer, handles the off-field treatment. Debus, an old-school baseball type, conducts the on-field workouts. The players seem to enjoy working with Debus, in particular. He jokes with them and shares some of their interests. He has gone fishing with Bobby Parnell, who is now back from his own Tommy John surgery. He has had pitchers take fielding practice in Hawaiian shirts. He has had them wear camouflage. He has had them run to get smoothies for a conditioning drill. The players say that Debus and Pearson answer every question and soothe every concern. Pearson guessed that he had helped a few dozen pitchers in the Mets’ system recover from Tommy John surgery in his six years with the team. Debus has been in his current position for about three years. When a Mets player is nearing the end of his rehabilitation stint, Pearson and Debus sit down and have a discussion: Should this guy get a coin? “If you’re the one that’s going out all night and getting sloshed and showing up late, being a bad influence, that’s not going to get you a coin,” Pearson said. Pearson is realistic enough to know that the players, once they get the coin, might be a little casual about what happens to it. David Wright said he had a collection of about 50 military coins that he had received as gifts during his professional career. “At some point, I’d like to make a nice display for all my military ones,” he said. “I’m not sure if the Mets one is going to make it.” Jenrry Mejia said he keeps his Mets coin at home in the Dominican Republic; it might be in a drawer somewhere, he thinks. Steven Matz, who has also had Tommy John surgery and has an outside chance to make the Mets this season, said he kept his coin in the center console of his truck. He said the sun might have melted it a bit. Juan Lagares forgot that he had ever received one.“I might use it as a golf-ball marker,” Harvey said, examining his coin. He was being serious, sort of.In a way, the coin that Harvey received marked the end of his well-publicized rehabilitation. At times, he seemed to clash with the Mets about how he was conducting it, since he did not want to spend all his time in Port St. Lucie. In the end, he did not. But Debus and Pearson both indicated it was ultimately not an issue. “He did everything,” Debus said. “He met every date, every milestone, every time. There was never a day where I had to go out there and say, ‘Hey, we’ve got to get after this.’ It was, ‘Whoa, hey, take it easy there.’ ”Harvey smiled as he showed off his coin Monday. His manager, Terry Collins, noted how, in the military, when someone puts their challenge coin on a bar, as tradition goes, the other person must produce a coin, too. Or else they have to buy drinks. “Maybe we’ve started something,” Collins said. Advertisement