
On Baseball By                     
 TYLER KEPNER
 
FEB. 23, 2015
Yoan Moncada sits at the intersection of dollars and dreams. He is a blank slate, completely unknown beyond the relatively few people who have watched him play. His potential, therefore, seems limitless.The Yankees liked Moncada enough to commit $50 million in an effort to sign him. The Boston Red Sox committed $13 million more, so Moncada’s future will unfold with them.Moncada, 19, is a switch-hitting Cuban infielder who worked out multiple times for the Yankees in recent weeks. The team affixed his name to a locker at Steinbrenner Field for his tour. The Yankees’ bonus offer would have easily been the most ever paid to an international amateur.“I would doubt there’s any disagreement on the scouting assessment of the player,” Yankees General Manager Brian Cashman told reporters in Tampa, Fla. “It just comes down to how much money you’re willing to commit, and we put our best foot forward yesterday. It was a significant offer, but it fell short.”AdvertisementDesperation tends to drive deals like Moncada’s, and the Yankees have reason to be desperate. Years of thin drafts have left them with no homegrown players under 31 years old in their starting lineup.Advertisement“I thought the Yankees would have pushed harder at the end, because I thought the Yankees had a greater need for Yoan in their system,” said Moncada’s agent, David Hastings.The Red Sox made the highest offer, and Hastings said the Los Angeles Dodgers had also outbid the Yankees, whose offer would have paid Moncada $25 million. Any team that signed Moncada for more than a few million would have paid an equal penalty to the commissioner’s office for exceeding the international spending limit for this signing period.The Yankees are already far over that figure, having pillaged the market last July by signing seven international amateurs for $1 million or more each. Under the rules of the collective bargaining agreement, the Yankees must effectively sit out that market for the next two years, starting July 2.So there was plenty of motivation for Hal Steinbrenner to make one more push and stretch for Moncada. Yet the Red Sox stretched further. Their agreement with Moncada, first reported by Jesse Sanchez of MLB.com, will cost them $63 million — $31.5 million to Moncada and the same amount as a penalty. They now face the same restrictions for the next two years.“Obviously, if we were going to go all out, there would have been more,” Cashman said. “We went to where we were comfortable going — and it was an uncomfortable number to put forth — but it still fell short.”Because he is not yet 23 and has fewer than five years as a professional, Moncada is classified as an international amateur, in contrast to other recent Cuban imports like Jose Abreu, Rusney Castillo and Yasmany Tomas. The lavish deal — and teams’ clear willingness to pay the fines as part of doing business — could bolster Commissioner Rob Manfred’s push for an international draft, which he said last month was inevitable.The on-field impact will not be known for a while. Officials from other teams wondered on Monday where the Red Sox would put Moncada, and the team itself is not sure where he fits for the long term. At 6 feet 1 inch and 220 pounds, Moncada might not stay in the middle infield.AdvertisementThe Red Sox seem to have long-term answers at second base (Dustin Pedroia), shortstop (Xander Bogaerts) and third base (Pablo Sandoval), with solid infield depth in the high minors. Their crowded outfield includes Castillo, who signed for $72.5 million last August, and others.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Red Sox have not acknowledged their agreement with Moncada, who must pass a physical, but their plan is clear. In an age of declining offense, they are stockpiling young hitters they can control for their prime years.Theo Epstein, who preceded Ben Cherington as Boston’s general manager, is using the same strategy with the Chicago Cubs. Last summer, the Cubs traded two starters to Oakland for Addison Russell, a top shortstop prospect, despite already having depth at the position.Conventional wisdom had the Cubs swapping a prospect — perhaps to the Mets — for pitching. So far, the Cubs have hoarded their best prospects and bought pitching. The Red Sox have done roughly the same, resisting — for now — the temptation to trade for Cole Hamels, the Philadelphia Phillies’ ace.Maybe the presence of Moncada will make the Red Sox more likely to deal top prospects. If nothing else, they have another talented player trying to force his way into Fenway.By signing Castillo and Moncada from Cuba and Sandoval and Hanley Ramirez as major league free agents, the Red Sox have invested $318.5 million in four players in the past six months, including the penalty for Moncada. It is a staggering amount, but the Yankees topped it last off-season.After missing the 2013 playoffs, the Yankees invested $458 million in Masahiro Tanaka, Jacoby Ellsbury, Brian McCann and Carlos Beltran, including the posting fee to Tanaka’s team in Japan. Then they missed the playoffs again.None of this spending guarantees success. The Red Sox sandwiched their 2013 World Series title between last-place finishes. Then again, bailing on a season early is a calculated move: The Red Sox have the No. 7 pick in this June’s draft. And in Moncada, they have added the equivalent of another high first-rounder.Maybe Moncada will be a bust. A lot of top prospects never make it. But the Yankees were willing to gamble on his talent, and lost to a rival that risked even more for a potential long-term reward.Billy Witz contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on February 24, 2015, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: Red Sox Place Big Bet on Latest Cuban Prospect.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »