By VIV BERNSTEINFEB. 23, 2015
DAYTONA BEACH, Fla. —  Jeff Gordon’s last Daytona 500 began as an ode to his legacy, but it might be best remembered as a harbinger of what is to come in Nascar.Joey Logano announced his arrival as a star on Sunday when he held off a pack of elite, veteran drivers — Dale Earnhardt Jr., Kevin Harvick, Denny Hamlin and Jimmie Johnson in the final laps — to become the second-youngest driver to win Nascar’s most prestigious race (Trevor Bayne was 20 when he won in 2011).Even though he is a nine-time Sprint Cup race winner and a Daytona 500 champion, Logano, 24, says it is too early to start talking about legacy.“I feel like I got over 20 years left in my career,” Logano said. “It’s hard to look that far down the path.”AdvertisementBut projections of greatness followed Logano even before he was a teenager, when none other than the future Hall of Famer Mark Martin anointed Logano the next great champion. Logano was expected to step into Nascar and win Daytona 500s at 18. Even Gordon did not do that — he was 25 when he won the first of his three Harley J. Earl Trophies.AdvertisementIt was all too much too soon for Logano, and he nearly washed out after four mostly unsuccessful seasons at Joe Gibbs Racing.If not for a failed drug test by A. J. Allmendinger, who lost his job at Team Penske in 2012 as a result, Logano might not have had a landing spot in the Sprint Cup in 2013. But when the seat opened, the Penske driver Brad Keselowski lobbied for Logano.“I think it’s no secret that I got thrown into the series too young, inexperienced, didn’t know what I had to do,” Logano said. “Obviously the switch over to Team Penske — the best move of my career. To be here, get teamed up with a great team: It was an opportunity for me to regroup, be who I wanted to be as an adult — not an 18-year-old kid anymore — go out there and work hard.”Logano has shown the promise that Martin saw all along, qualifying for the 10-race playoff for the first time and finishing eighth in the standings.In 2014, he won five races and was contending to win at Homestead-Miami Speedway before a disastrous pit stop late in the race cost him a chance at winning the event and the 2014 Cup championship that went to Harvick.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“You move on,” Logano said. “It’s history. It’s past. You focus on the future. If you dwell on the past, you never move forward.”It did not take long to erase that memory. Logano was a factor throughout Sunday’s race, even when Gordon led for 87 laps, with his teammates Johnson, Earnhardt and Kasey Kahne providing escort and demonstrating the power of the Hendrick Motorsports engines. Logano was never far away. He had led for six laps early, fell behind and kept battling, leading six separate times for a total of 31 laps.On the final restart, he held off one last challenge from the leaders with two laps to go and then outgunned the field to take the checkered flag. Gordon finished 33rd after crashing on the backstretch.Advertisement“He was my favorite driver when I first started racing when I was 6 years old,” Logano said of Gordon. “I rooted for the 24 car because he was the young guy. Now I’m racing against him. He’s not the young guy anymore, but he’s still a lot of fun to race against. Being able to race against him today for the lead multiple times in the Daytona 500, that’s a dream come true for any kid. I’ll always remember that, for sure.”It was an inauspicious ending for Gordon. It was a magical beginning to 2015 for Logano. The victory means he will be in the playoff for the third year in a row. But that is to be expected for Logano, one of the premier drivers in Nascar now.“Every single weekend, you know you’re going to have to beat the 22,” said Hamlin, Logano’s former Joe Gibbs Racing teammate. “That’s something we didn’t say about Joey just three years ago.”The only question is how many years they will be saying that about Logano. Roger Penske, who has worked with the best in motorsports for decades, thinks he already knows the answer.“You saw what he did last year,” Penske said. “This is just the start, I think, of a career; he’s going to be a guy at the top for a long time.”A version of this article appears in print on February 24, 2015, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: Young Driver’s Daytona Win Fulfills Early Promise.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.