AdvertisementSupported byBy Zach SchonbrunThree months after he retired with nine Ivy League titles in 23 seasons at the University of Pennsylvania, Al Bagnoli stunned the conference on Monday when he abruptly joined Columbia as its new football coach.The announcement by Columbia’s president, Lee C. Bollinger, came as a sudden reversal for the 62-year-old Bagnoli, who declared last April that the 2014 season would be his last as a coach. He was expected to remain as part of Penn’s athletic administration.“Al Bagnoli is one of the most successful coaches to ever work in the Ivy League,” Peter Pilling, Columbia’s new athletic director, said in a statement. “He is a proven winner whose record speaks for itself. We are thrilled that he has decided to commit his widely admired leadership to building the long-term success of Columbia football.”The hiring gives the downtrodden Columbia program some long-awaited credibility. The Lions last won an Ivy League title in 1961, have not had a winning season since 1996, and are in the midst of a 21-game losing streak.The Lions’ former coach, Pete Mangurian, resigned in December amid accusations that he verbally and physically abused players.Bagnoli arrives after having just three losing seasons in 33 years as the coach at Penn and at Union College in Schenectady, N.Y. He recorded three perfect seasons (1993, 1994 and 2003) and six years of undefeated conference play at Penn. From 2009 to 2012, Penn won three of four Ivy League titles outright, a feat that had not been accomplished since Yale in 1980. He holds the second-highest winning percentage in Ivy League history.“It’s a coup,” said Rich Forzani, chairman of the Committee for Athletic Excellence at Columbia, a booster group. “Just getting him sends a message to everybody that we are in this to succeed and to win. We’ve never, ever had that message before.”When reached by telephone, Princeton Coach Bob Surace said he was not surprised to hear the news. Instead, he had been more astonished when Bagnoli announced his retirement to serve as a fund-raiser and athletic department figurehead.“I couldn’t imagine him sitting at a desk all day without just pulling his hair out,” Surace said. “He’s a competitor, his teams have always been competitive. It was always, for us, such a big game because you knew you were going to be in for a dogfight no matter what team was better than the other.”Penn’s athletic director, M. Grace Calhoun, said in a statement that Bagnoli would “always hold a special place here at Penn.”Ray Priore, who was Bagnoli’s defensive coordinator for 16 years before taking over as Penn’s coach, also issued a statement: “We are sad to see Al leave, but remain extremely excited about the future of our program. Our goal is the same, and that is to bring Penn back to the top of the Ivy League.”Penn visits Columbia on Oct. 17. And for the first time in a long time, it will be a highly anticipated matchup.“We really needed a dealmaker and an earthshaker,” Forzani said. “That’s what we’ve got in Al.”Advertisement