By DAVID WALDSTEINFEB. 23, 2015
TAMPA, Fla. —  Not for the first time in his career, Alex Rodriguez spent part of his first day of spring training fielding questions from reporters about his use of performance-enhancing drugs.The last time was in February 2009, at a formal news conference at the Yankees’ complex, with scores of news media members on hand and teammates like Derek Jeter there to support him.On Monday, six years later, Rodriguez faced the reporters alone. Dressed in a green University of Miami warm-up suit, he leaned casually against a fence on a sidewalk next to the team’s minor league complex as people in passing cars gawked at the spectacle.Rodriguez, making his first unscripted comments to a group of reporters since he began serving a season-long suspension last April, said that nothing he had done could be justified or explained and that he recognized the morass he had put himself in.Advertisement“I cringe sometimes when I look at some of the things I did,” he said. “But I paid my penalty, and I’m grateful that I have another opportunity.”AdvertisementRodriguez, 39, did not specify what his mistakes were, but presumably he was referring to Major League Baseball’s allegations, stemming from its investigation of the now-defunct South Florida clinic Biogenesis of America, that he had used P.E.D.s, which resulted in his suspension for all of last season.Rodriguez could also have been referring to his often combative strategy to overturn his suspension, which included numerous lawsuits, all of them subsequently withdrawn, and attacks by his lawyers and others acting on his behalf against members of the Yankees, Major League Baseball and the players’ union.“I created a big headache for a lot of people,” Rodriguez said, “so I don’t blame whoever is mad at me. I understand.”Rodriguez’s arrival at camp Monday morning, his first appearance at a Yankees baseball activity since the team’s final game of the 2013 season, came unexpectedly: Position players are not required to report until Wednesday. Rodriguez took a physical exam and then drove to the minor league complex to work out.Word of his possible arrival had circulated through camp in the morning, and a few reporters and fans hoping to intercept him moved between the sidewalk at the minor league complex, where they believed he might speak, and the fields, where he would eventually work out. The Yankees do not allow reporters inside the complex until their spring training officially opens, so the reporters, along with photographers and fans, gathered beyond the outfield fence. They peered over it as Rodriguez took batting practice, even hitting a few balls out of the yard.At about 3 p.m., Rodriguez dressed and drove to the front of the complex, where he got out of his sport utility vehicle and signed autographs and posed for photographs for about seven minutes. Fans welcomed him back to the Yankees, with one holding up a sign that had “apology accepted” written in marker, a message that seemed to refer to a handwritten note to fans that Rodriguez issued last week.Other fans handed Rodriguez baseballs, bats, hats and photographs. No one had a cross word for him.“Eight hours,” one fan said, referring to how long he had waited on the sidewalk. “Well worth it.”When he had signed for everyone, Rodriguez spun around to face the roughly three dozen assembled reporters. The Yankees had specifically prohibited Rodriguez from having a formal news conference in Tampa — as he had done in 2009 — so the sidewalk on Himes Avenue served as his conference hall.Advertisement“I paid my penalty,” he said. “I’m moving on and focusing on 2015.“Everybody in the league and the commissioner’s office and the P.A.,” he continued, referring to the Major League Baseball Players Association, “everyone said it’s behind us, and I am, too.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Asked if he thought his penalty was justified, Rodriguez said: “That’s not for me to say. I know that I served my time and tried to use my time productively.”Rodriguez, who is owed $61 million in salary over the next three seasons, has been at odds with the Yankees since he was named in the Biogenesis investigation in 2013. He apologized to team executives in person this month, but some lingering resentment exists. In December, the Yankees re-signed Chase Headley to a four-year deal to take over third base, Rodriguez’s position, and the team has said Rodriguez must earn playing time at other spots — designated hitter and perhaps first base.Rodriguez, who made his major league debut in 1994, said he accepted that and had no expectations about his role. His approach, he said, is that he must prove he deserves a place on the roster.“It reminds me of when I was 18 years old and trying to make Lou Piniella’s team,” Rodriguez said, recalling his early days with the Seattle Mariners.He added: “I’m excited. I love to compete. I’m here a couple of days early, kind of get a jump start, and I love baseball. I love being in uniform, and just so happy to have an opportunity to be back in uniform.”Rodriguez, primarily a shortstop before he joined the Yankees in 2004, said he was willing to try first base if Manager Joe Girardi asked, but he also said he could not recall having taken ground balls there in his life.Girardi has been one of Rodriguez’s few allies with the Yankees and supported him through Rodriguez’s tumultuous return to the team after an injury in 2013; his first game back was on the same day that baseball initially suspended him.AdvertisementWhen Rodriguez spoke Monday, he and Girardi had not yet met in Tampa, but that will come.“The most important thing about an apology is for it to be sincere,” Girardi said earlier Monday. “And you want it to come from the player where he makes the decision who and who not to apologize to. So we have not had a talk face to face yet. I’ll let him make that decision on what he wants to do and go from there.”The Yankees are still hoping that Rodriguez can give a boost to an offense that was near the bottom of the American League in runs scored last year. But he will turn 40 in July, has had two hip operations and has not played in a game since 2013.Rodriguez said he was not using any P.E.D.s. Asked how, given that fact, he could be confident that he would still be productive, Rodriguez said, “I’m confident that if I stay healthy, I can do some good things.”Then, having spoken for just eight minutes, he got back in his car, alone, and drove away.Billy Witz contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on February 24, 2015, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: In With the Old, in With the New.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.