AdvertisementSupported byBy Bruce WeberHarold Johnson, a boxer who spent a year as the undisputed world light-heavyweight champion but who more often fought in the shadow of hard luck, getting the short end of a rivalry with Archie Moore and losing his title in an upset, died on Thursday in Philadelphia. He was 87.His son the Rev. John Roberts said the cause was pneumonia. Johnson also had dementia, his son said.Johnson, whom The Ring magazine once ranked as the seventh greatest light-heavyweight in boxing history, was a sculptured athlete who was known as a superb technical fighter with a wide range of skills and strategies.“Johnson was a beautifully proportioned 5-foot-11 specimen who used a picture-perfect stance, a textbook high guard, compactly crisp punches and uncommon patience,” The Ring said in an appreciation after his death. “He struck only when the openings presented themselves and not a moment sooner.”During a 25-year career, Johnson won 76 of 87 fights, with 32 knockouts. He defeated some of his era’s most formidable fighters, including the heavyweight contender Nino Valdes; a former heavyweight champion, Ezzard Charles; and Moore, with whom he had five bouts, losing four of them.Their final fight, in 1954, was for the light-heavyweight crown — Moore was the reigning champion — and Johnson was on the verge of winning until Moore knocked him down in the 14th round and won on a technical knockout. It was seven years before Johnson would get another chance to be champion.In 1960, the National Boxing Association (now the World Boxing Association) stripped Moore of his title for failing to defend it within a specified time; Johnson then earned the association’s crown in 1961 with a technical knockout of Jesse Bowdry. The next year, after the New York State Athletic Commission also stopped recognizing Moore as the champion, Johnson won the undivided and undisputed light-heavyweight crown with a unanimous decision over Doug Jones in Philadelphia, Johnson’s hometown.He successfully defended his title the next month in Berlin with another unanimous decision, over Gustav Scholz.But his reign ended in June 1963, when he fought Willie Pastrano in Las Vegas. A decided underdog who could not match Johnson’s punching power or reach, Pastrano employed a strategy of jab and dance, jab and dance, forcing Johnson to stalk him. Johnson failed to knock him down, and Pastrano won in a split decision, which made great fodder for disputatious boxing fans.“I never heard of a fighter running and still winning the fight,” Johnson said afterward. “If you want to fight the champion, you have to take the fight to him.”He added, “I’m just disgusted about this fight.”John Harold Johnson was born in the Manayunk section of Philadelphia on Aug. 9, 1927. His father, Phil, was also a fighter, and the two are thought to be the first father and son professionals to be defeated by the same opponent. On the way to becoming the heavyweight champion in 1951, Jersey Joe Walcott beat Phil Johnson in 1936 and Harold Johnson in 1950.Harold Johnson began boxing in the Navy, which he entered after dropping out of high school and lying about his age. He turned professional in 1946.His one marriage ended in divorce, his son John Roberts said. Johnson’s survivors also include another son, Derrick Johnson; three daughters, Deborah Downey, Charlotte White and Valerie Johnson-Roberts; a sister, Charlotte White; and several grandchildren.John Roberts said that he, too, had been a boxer, fighting under the name Chuck Johnson in honor of his father. (His father and mother never married, he said; Roberts is his stepfather’s surname.) A successful amateur light-heavyweight, Roberts was surprised at the start of one bout, he said, to discover that Walcott was the referee.“When I stepped into the ring,” he said, “I told him, ‘Don’t hurt me, too.’ ”Johnson was involved in one of boxing’s more bizarre episodes. In the second round of a bout in Philadelphia in 1955 against Julio Mederos, Johnson suddenly dropped to his knees without being hit, and though he finished the round, he struggled to his corner and collapsed. He was taken to the hospital, where a urinalysis indicated that he had been drugged with barbiturates. Johnson blamed an orange he had eaten before the fight that he said had tasted bitter.The governor of Pennsylvania, George M. Leader, suspended professional boxing in the state while an investigation was conducted, but it was never determined who drugged Johnson or how the drug was administered. Boxing authorities suspended Johnson for six months, however, ruling that he had known he was feeling weak and yet had failed to report that he was not in condition to fight. His trainer and his manager were suspended as well.To the end of his career, Johnson lamented that he never landed the purses that went to bigger names like Moore.“If I had it to do all over again, I wouldn’t be a fighter,” he told The Associated Press after he won his National Boxing Association title in 1961. “I’d look for a steady job, a weekly pay. I’d even dig ditches.”Advertisement