AdvertisementSupported byMaryland 59, Wisconsin 53By Marc TracyCOLLEGE PARK, Md. — Early in Tuesday’s matchup between Wisconsin and Maryland, Wisconsin forward Nigel Hayes was fouled, and his first free throw was not even close: It struck the back right of the rim before falling to the ground like a brick.Hayes stared at the basket, less upset than surprised. He shoots 72 percent from the line, which is itself subpar on a team that ranks 12th in the N.C.A.A.’s Division I in that category. But the Badgers, who on average make more than 15 free throws and attempt more than 20 per game, were just 7 for 12 from the free-throw line against the Terrapins. Maryland’s Dez Wells made seven three throws on his own and added another 19 points from the field, leading No. 14 Maryland (23-5, 11-4 Big Ten) to a 59-53 victory. The Terrapins denied No. 5 Wisconsin (25-3, 13-2), at least for a time, a share of the Big Ten’s regular-season title, as well as ending the Badgers’ 10-game winning streak.The sellout crowd at the Xfinity Center enjoyed introducing itself to the leader of the Terrapins’ new conference, from the boos the fans rained on the Badgers when they emerged for warm-ups to the fervor with which many rushed the court at the end of the game even as the public address announcer intoned, “Please do not rush the court.”“Man, this place is great,” Wisconsin’s Sam Dekker said after his first game here. “Can’t say enough about how great their fans are. It was a pleasure to play here.”But it was Melo Trimble, Maryland’s freshman point guard, who may have paid the crowd its highest compliment. “It was just like I imagined it was before I came here, like when they would play Duke,” he said, harking to the Terps’ days in the Atlantic Coast Conference.With Wisconsin’s athletic director, Barry Alvarez, and the Big Ten commissioner, Jim Delany, in attendance, the game represented Maryland basketball’s coming-out party in the Big Ten, which the university formally joined last July.Trimble contributed an acrobatic 16 points. The offense ran through him and occasionally, on isolation plays, it effectively was him. Michal Cekovsky, the Terrapins’ 7-foot freshman forward from Slovakia who was recently praised by Coach Mark Turgeon for his improved play, provided some necessary size against Wisconsin’s big men.Wisconsin scored 20 points in the first half — the lowest of any half this season for the Badgers, according to ESPN Stats & Info, and an embarrassing showing for the most efficient team on offense in Division I, as calculated by the analysis site KenPom.com. During the half, Wisconsin shot 29.6 percent from the field and made only one of 11 shots from 3-point range.At halftime, according to Wisconsin center Frank Kaminsky, a national player of the year candidate who muscled his way to 18 points, Coach Bo Ryan instructed his players to get the ball inside more. For a time it worked, with the Badgers erasing the 11-point halftime deficit and lifting themselves into a 47-47 tie with fewer than six minutes left.“The second half is how we have to play all the time,” Kaminsky said.But Maryland slowly pulled away again, and Wisconsin’s demoralization became evident. With 4 minutes 5 seconds left, Wells drove right by his defender, Dekker. Hayes — who had been dominated by Wells in the first half — was too late to slide over to prevent Wells from dunking. Before inbounding the ball, the Wisconsin senior guard Josh Gasser slammed the ball in frustration.Maryland did not appear to be the more athletically gifted team. While the Terrapins stayed on their men during screens, the Badgers casually switched, knowing that the mismatch would generally be in their favor. At one point, the 6-foot-5 Wells found the 6-foot-9 Dekker switched onto him. Knowing he was quicker, Wells drove to the basket, but Dekker, who is projected as a first-round N.B.A. draft pick, shuffled over and cleanly blocked his shot. With the Badgers trailing, the sophomore point guard Bronson Koenig had to take many of his team’s shots near the end of the game. He finished 2 for 12 with 6 points. Within the next week or two, the senior Traevon Jackson is expected back from injury, and he will presumably start instead of Koenig. On Tuesday, four of the Badgers wound up playing for 36 or 38 minutes. But Wisconsin discarded any talk of excuses.“I wouldn’t say we were too tired,” Dekker said. “Some things just didn’t go our way.”Advertisement