AdvertisementSupported byN.H.L. RoundupBy Seth BerkmanThe Calgary Flames rookie Johnny Gaudreau and the Rangers rookie Kevin Hayes won a national championship at Boston College in 2012. Last summer, they lived and trained together in Boston. When Gaudreau arrived in New York on Monday, they watched the Eagles defeat Harvard, 3-2, in overtime in the Beanpot consolation game, then went out to dinner.On Tuesday, Hayes scored the game-winning goal as the Rangers topped the Flames, 1-0, at Madison Square Garden.Three minutes into the third period, Derick Brassard corralled a takeaway in the Flames’ zone and passed the puck across the ice to Hayes for the forward’s 12th goal of the season. During February, Hayes has become more proficient on offense, totaling 10 points, outpacing Gaudreau, who has 7.“Not a lot was going on there for the first two periods, but during the last 10 minutes, it was pretty exciting,” Hayes said. “It was playoff-type hockey.”The Rangers’ offense overwhelmed the Flames throughout the game, but goaltender Karri Ramo made 28 saves, including a notable athletic one on J. T. Miller.Early in the first period, a wrist shot by Ryan McDonagh bounced off the post. Miller controlled the rebound and appeared to have an open net before Ramo dove to his left to make the glove save inches before the puck crossed the goal line.Cam Talbot made 21 saves for the Rangers, who were without Rick Nash because of neck spasms.ISLANDERS 5, COYOTES 1 Matt Martin and Johnny Boychuk scored less than a minute apart early in the third period to break a tie, and the host Islanders routed Arizona.Kael Mouillierat — with his first N.H.L. goal — and Brock Nelson also scored in the third for the Islanders. (AP) SABRES 4, BLUE JACKETS 2 Zemgus Girgensons had a goal and an assist before leaving with a leg injury, and visiting Buffalo defeated Columbus. (AP)OILERS 2, WILD 1 Benoit Pouliot scored twice, Ben Scrivens made 33 saves, and visiting Edmonton topped Minnesota. (AP)PREDATORS 5, AVALANCHE 2 Calle Jarnkrok, Craig Smith, Roman Josi and Filip Forsberg scored as host Nashville beat Colorado. (AP)CANADIENS 5, BLUES 2 Alex Galchenyuk and Brendan Gallagher had two goals apiece, and Carey Price set a franchise record with his ninth straight road win as visiting Montreal thumped St. Louis. (AP)JETS 4, STARS 2 Adam Lowry put in his own rebound to break a second-period tie as host Winnipeg beat Dallas. (AP)BLACKHAWKS 3, PANTHERS 2 Host Chicago lost Patrick Kane to an injury in the first period, then blew a two-goal lead before escaping with a shootout victory over Florida. (AP)CANUCKS 2, BRUINS 1 Zack Kassian broke a 1-1 tie with a goal early in the third period, and Eddie Lack preserved the lead with 13 of his 40 saves in the third as visiting Vancouver edged Boston. (AP)HURRICANES 4, FLYERS 1 Justin Faulk had a goal and an assist, and host Carolina routed Philadelphia. (AP)Advertisement