AdvertisementSupported byBy Tim RohanPORT ST. LUCIE, Fla. — Lucas Duda was coming off the season of his life. He had established himself as a bona fide slugger in 2014, hitting 30 home runs. He had settled into a groove with his swing. His body, feet and hands were moving in unison.So he kept swinging.He returned here to work out immediately after the season. He played a few games in Japan with a contingent of fellow major leaguers. He worked out with Mike Barwis, the Mets’ strength and conditioning consultant. He kept swinging and swinging and swinging. If he took any time off, it was measured in days, not months.The Mets were expecting him to anchor the middle of their lineup, possibly to learn how to hit left-handed pitching, to essentially repeat his stellar season. This was going to be an important spring training for him, and he wanted to be ready.Gradually, after all those swings, his left intercostal muscle — a muscle in the chest wall — started to feel sore. It became sore enough that for the last few weeks, Duda has stopped swinging altogether. He will not swing a bat for at least a few more days. Duda and the Mets say they are not concerned, but the Mets’ depth, especially on offense, is limited. Manager Terry Collins has said that keeping everyone healthy is his highest priority.In part because of the fitness camp Barwis ran this winter, there seemed to be more players arriving early for spring training than in recent years. The atmosphere was also competitive — a positive development that could have unintended consequences.The players push themselves to get better, but too much work can lead to injuries like the one Duda has sustained. Collins said the Mets were starting to track every player’s swing, even in workouts, as a way to limit their workloads. “These guys are competitors,” Collins said. “They want to win. They want to be successful.”His goal is, essentially, to save the players from themselves.“I guess it’s a fine line between overworking and trying to get better,” Duda said. He added: “I don’t foresee it being a big issue. Should be ready to go in a couple days or so.”The Mets’ first official full-team workout is scheduled for Thursday.Advertisement