AdvertisementSupported byBy Karen CrousePALM BEACH GARDENS, Fla. — Davis Love III was on the United States Ryder Cup task force that picked a captain — Love — for the 2016 competition. But it was not a case in which the veteran was asked for a list of candidates and suggested he was the best person for the job.Far from it. Love was awarded the captaincy precisely because he is not a self-promoter. In the wake of the Americans’ loss to Europe last fall — their sixth in the past seven Cups — the other members of the task force were looking for a leader focused on the big picture. Love, 50, who guided the 2012 team to a 1-point loss on home soil, said: “I did offer that I would be the full-time cart guy and towel boy. I just enjoy it. I love being there. I love being a part of it.” It turned out to be precisely the attitude that the other 10 people on the task force were looking for in their next leader, which led to Love’s introduction Tuesday for the matches at Hazeltine National Golf Club in Chaska, Minn.“I’m here with the same goal I had in 2012, but not as the same captain,” said Love, who watched his United States team lose a 10-6 lead in the singles at Medinah Country Club outside Chicago. He added: “I don’t think we have to make massive changes. We have to make some small changes that add up to half a point here or half a point there.”To that end, the P.G.A. of America, which is in charge of the United States Ryder Cup team, announced that Love would have four captain’s selections, one more than Tom Watson, the 2014 captain, was given, and that he will make his discretionary picks later. The final one will come at the conclusion of the Tour Championship, just days before the start of the biennial Ryder Cup.The change in the selection process seemed like a reaction to the fact that last year two of the hottest American players at the end of the season, Chris Kirk and Billy Horschel, were left off the team. The eight golfers who earn their berths will be selected based on a points process that begins at next week’s World Golf Championship event outside Miami and ends with the first FedEx Cup playoff event in 2016.The P.G.A. of America officials followed a stapled script, turning the pages in unison. Unscripted comments by the five-time major champion Phil Mickelson in the immediate aftermath of last year’s loss provided the impetus for the task force’s creation and the changes announced Tuesday.When Mickelson, a member of the current task force, bemoaned the system employed in 2014 and the lack of players’ say in what seemed thinly veiled criticisms of Watson, was this the outcome he hoped for?“I wasn’t thinking that at the time,” Mickelson said, “but I’m excited about where we are now and I’m excited about where we are headed, the direction we are headed, not just into 2016 but really for the next 10 or 20 years.”Mickelson was asked later why Love was the unanimous choice to lead the 2016 effort, becoming only the second captain, after Jackie Burke, to get a second chance after a losing captaincy. Fred Couples, who has captained three Presidents Cup teams to victory, was among the others who were considered.“We wanted somebody that is well liked and respected, who does not have such a strong ego to where he won’t listen to a number of different viewpoints,” Mickelson said. “But also, he’s going to be under a lot of scrutiny so somebody that is confident enough to take on the scrutiny that comes about in 2016.”He added: “There’s nobody who is as unselfish, there’s nobody who can take the hits, who can pass the credit who has past experience to work off of. If those are all the things you want, there’s only one guy that fits that bill.” Some might say the description also fit Mickelson, 44, but he said he would not consider being a player-captain because the responsibilities of the captaincy were too great and too time-consuming to do justice to both.“I want to make the team playing,” Mickelson said.With a smile, Love said, “I think he said something about playing five or six more of them is what I remember.”Mickelson will be part of a six-person Ryder Cup committee that will include Love, Tiger Woods and three P.G.A. of America officials, including Pete Bevacqua, the chief executive officer. They will be entrusted with helping name the assistant captains as well as future captains.The captain can do only so much, as Bubba Watson, a member of the last three Ryder Cup teams, noted last week. “If I make putts, I make a point for him; if I miss putts, probably not going to make a point,” he said.He added, “So when you look at it that way, the Ryder Cup captaincy should be about his honor of his career and what he means to the game of golf, and that’s where Davis Love, obviously he shows that tremendously.”Advertisement