AdvertisementSupported byBy David WaldsteinTAMPA, Fla. — Alex Rodriguez and Chase Headley, the player whom the Yankees re-signed to remain Rodriguez’s replacement at third base, worked out side by side on Tuesday, taking ground balls, hitting in the batting cage and running easy sprints in the outfield.Headley is the starting third baseman. Rodriguez may not even be the first choice as his backup. That depends on how Rodriguez performs in his return from a yearlong suspension for performance-enhancing drugs.Rodriguez, once an excellent fielder, moved from shortstop to third base in 2004 to accommodate Derek Jeter, even though Rodriguez was considered by some the better shortstop. He probably still considers himself an excellent third baseman.“I’ve always had that approach since I was 18, and I love to compete,” Rodriguez, 39, said.Shortly after the workout, Manager Joe Girardi finally said what people have expected since the end of last season. He will ask Rodriguez to move around the infield again, this time to first base.“I’m going to talk to him and see how coachable he is,” Girardi said, without a trace of a smile.The idea would be to add insurance at first base, where Garrett Jones is Mark Teixeira’s backup. Girardi cautioned how difficult it is to play first base, but Teixeira, 34, moved from shortstop to third to first, where he became one of the best in the majors. Rodriguez has said he will do whatever Girardi asks, but he also pointed out Monday, his first day of camp, that he had never taken a ground ball at first base. It was either a hint that he does not like the idea, or a warning intended to lower expectations.The Yankees had no idea what to expect from Rodriguez, who also said Tuesday he would supposedly help fill the leadership void left by Jeter’s retirement.Headley impressed the Yankees at third base last year after he was acquired in a trade. During negotiations, he made sure there would be no competition with Rodriguez. He was assured that was the case. “I don’t want to make any demands, but this is what I do best,” Headley said. “So for me to be here, I feel like that’s what makes sense. So we established that early on. There’s a lot of things that can happen over the course of the season, so obviously, the more bodies that you have that can fill a position, that’s great. “But if I thought I was coming here to be a first baseman or a left fielder or whatever, I wouldn’t have come back,” he said. “That wouldn’t make sense for me, or the Yankees.”Of course, with Rodriguez, not everything appears to end up making sense.Billy Witz contributed reporting.Advertisement