By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSFEB. 24, 2015
MANHATTAN, Kan. —  Kansas State Athletic Director John Currie promised to review the program’s security procedures after the Wildcats’ upset victory over eighth-ranked Kansas on Monday night led to a chaotic scene as students and fans rushed the court.Currie apologized Tuesday morning in a long statement to Sheahon Zenger, the Kansas athletic director, and to Jayhawks Coach Bill Self and his team. Currie said the university would review video of the episode along with law enforcement personnel to identify unruly fans.“Although no one was hurt last night,” Currie said, “we fell short of our expectations for securing the court and escorting K.U. to its locker room without incident.”David Worlock, an N.C.A.A. spokesman, said that there were no national rules against court-storming but that conferences and individual programs were expected to provide sufficient security.AdvertisementThe Big 12 said in a statement that it was reviewing the postgame celebration, and that “in accordance with conference policy, home team game management is responsible for the implementation of protocols to provide for the safety of all game participants, officials and fans.”AdvertisementCurrie said that security formed a human barrier Monday night, just as instructed. But he said that security workers were unable to get into position in time, even though the Wildcats led for several minutes at the conclusion of the game, and it had become apparent long before the final buzzer that fans were ready to rush the floor.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.As the court was engulfed after Kansas State’s 70-63 victory, Self was pressed perilously against the scorer’s table, and Kansas State Coach Bruce Weber tried to shield him. At the other end of the floor, the Jayhawks assistant Kurtis Townsend could be seen yanking away a student who was taunting several players.Kansas forward Jamari Traylor was hip-checked by a student rushing onto the court. The video spread quickly online, and the Kansas State police posted a picture of the student on Twitter on Tuesday and asked for the public’s help in identifying him.Throughout the game, students also engaged in profane chants directed at their rival.“It’s a ballgame,” Self said. “It’s not about chicken-winging somebody when the game’s over. Hopefully, they can get that corrected. It’s fine if you want to celebrate when you beat us; that’s your business. That’s fine. But at least it shouldn’t put anybody at risk.”This was the second time this month that a court was stormed after a Kanasas defeat. A similar scene unfolded after a loss at Oklahoma State.“While we are proud of the incredible atmosphere of Bramlage Coliseum and the passion of K-State students and fans, we are saddened by the insistence of some fans to sully the image of our great institution with audible profane chants,” Currie said. “We will continue to work with our student leadership to provide a better example of sportsmanship for our audiences.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.