By SAM BORDENFEB. 24, 2015
MANCHESTER, England —  Luis Suárez ran in every direction. He slid at midfielders’ heels. He banged into defenders. Once, when the opposing goalkeeper was trying to throw the ball to a teammate, Suárez even jumped up in front of him, hand in the air, as though he might try for a basketball-style blocked shot.It was as if Suárez wanted to be everywhere and do everything for Barcelona on Tuesday night. Energy and excitement dripped from Suárez, who was returning to England for the first time since leaving Liverpool last summer. There was no petulance, no reminders of the biting episode that marred his World Cup; there were only pep and two pretty goals that pushed Barcelona to a 2-1 victory over Manchester City in the first leg of their Champions League round of 16 matchup.“It meant something to return to England,” said Suárez, who scored 69 goals in three years for Liverpool. “The tie is still open, with the return leg. But we’re Barca.”The teams will play again in Spain on March 18, giving Manchester City Manager Manuel Pellegrini plenty of time to consider his tactics after watching his team ripped open by Barcelona for the early part of the opener. Suárez scored both goals — and broke out in wide, toothy smiles after each — but Lionel Messi played with the sort of unparalleled panache that has made him a global superstar. Barcelona took full advantage of a wide-open midfield to dominate the flow and tempo at Etihad Stadium.AdvertisementMessi glided around the field, dancing and darting and turning tiny crevices of space into gaping holes. He played the ball through the legs of a defender; tiptoeing along the end line, he brought a spinning high ball under control as if he had it on a leash.AdvertisementPellegrini, in starting forwards Edin Dzeko and Sergio Agüero together, allowed Messi and Barcelona that freedom as a consequence of his effort to take the attack directly to Barcelona. A year ago, City was knocked out of the Champions League at this stage by Barcelona in a relative rout, the 4-1 aggregate score a reasonable reflection of City’s timidity.On this night, Pellegrini’s formation seemed to promise more but could not deliver without its midfield stalwart, Yaya Touré, who was suspended. With little defensive pressure, Suárez, Messi, Neymar, Andrés Iniesta and the rest of Barcelona’s savvy artisans showcased their considerable abilities on the ball, while the home fans (mostly) watched quietly.“We couldn’t put three passes together in the first half,” Pellegrini said.Barcelona could. First, there was Messi chipping a pass into the penalty area in the 16th minute, the ball bouncing kindly for Barcelona off City’s captain, Vincent Kompany, and landing right in Suárez’s path. Suárez did not hesitate, unleashing a wicked shot past goalkeeper Joe Hart and turning away, arms raised, as he was mobbed by his teammates.It was a well-taken opportunity, to be sure, but nothing compared with the quality of Suárez’s second goal about 15 minutes later. Messi began the move again, dancing and feinting his way past defenders before sending Jordi Alba through with a deft pass that Alba cut back across the 6-yard box to where Suárez, dipping and slashing into free space, could push the ball over the line.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“It is quite evident that we pressed until the first goal, and then we panicked a bit,” Hart said. “I think that was blatantly obvious to see.”After the second goal, Barcelona’s manager, Luis Enrique, pumped his fist on the sideline, shouting at his players as they celebrated again. It has been a difficult stretch for Barcelona, and a surprising loss to Málaga during the weekend had only served to make the crisis feel more real.Now, with two away goals conceded and a one-goal deficit to overcome, the pressure is squarely on Pellegrini and City, who will be trying to avoid yet another disappointing performance on the sport’s biggest stage. City has flourished since receiving an infusion of cash from Abu Dhabi-based investors in 2008, winning two Premier League titles, an F.A. Cup and a League Cup, but has found success in the Champions League to be elusive. Last year, Barcelona thrashed City, while this year, the team barely qualified for the knockout rounds before running into Barcelona again.Will it be different this time? Perhaps. Pellegrini can at least take solace in Agüero’s 69th-minute goal, a beautiful piece of play that featured David Silva’s gorgeous flick before Agüero blasted a shot past Barcelona goalkeeper Marc-André ter Stegen.AdvertisementSo, too, can Pellegrini look to his goalkeeper, Hart, who saved a penalty from Messi in the closing seconds as City, which played the final 16 minutes with 10 men after Gaël Clichy was sent off for a second yellow card, tried to hang on.But there is still the daunting reality: To advance, City will have to beat Barcelona at Camp Nou. And when one considers that Enrique’s biggest concern may be whether to continue letting Messi take penalties (Enrique said he was not considering a switch), it is abundantly clear which team is in command.“It was not the best result at home,” Pellegrini said. “But we will try.”He added: “This tie isn’t over until the game finishes in Barcelona. We can analyze things then.”A version of this article appears in print on February 25, 2015, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: In Champions League, a Painfully Familiar Thorn in Man City’s Side.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.