By ANDREW KEHOCT. 12, 2015
Don Mattingly was watching a baseball analysis show on television early Monday. Hours later, as his Los Angeles Dodgers were preparing to resume their National League division series with the Mets at Citi Field, he felt compelled to recount what he had seen.In quick succession, the show presented instant replays of four players — Didi Gregorius of the Yankees, Rougned Odor of the Texas Rangers, Matt Holliday of the St. Louis Cardinals, and his own player Chase Utley — completing physical takeout slides on plays at second base. “All really, really similar,” Mattingly said, “and nobody got suspended.”Nobody, that is, except Utley, who received a two-game ban from the league late Sunday for what Major League Baseball determined was an illegal slide on Saturday into Mets shortstop Ruben Tejada, who broke his right leg on the play.Utley, a 36-year-old infielder, appealed the suspension through the players association, and after some confusion about whether the league and the union could conduct a hearing before Game 3, it became apparent that the process could take several days. That meant the Dodgers would probably have Utley’s services at least through Game 4 on Tuesday in Queens, regardless of the result of his appeal. He did not play in Game 3.AdvertisementMajor League Baseball had looked into expediting the process with the players union, given the urgent stakes of postseason games. But the M.L.B. collective bargaining agreement specifies only that a hearing must take place within two weeks after an appeal has been filed. A person with knowledge of the situation said that John McHale Jr., baseball’s executive vice president for administration, was likely to set a date for the hearing on Tuesday afternoon.Advertisement“The union, let me say reasonably, wants some time to get things pulled together,” Commissioner Rob Manfred said. “But given the issues involved, I’d like to think it could be done before the end of the series.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.On whether Utley’s suspension was out of the ordinary, Manfred said, “I think it’s important to realize that no two on-field incidents are exactly the same.”Before the game, officials from the league and the two teams met briefly to ensure that all parties were on the same page about trying to avoid or minimize any confrontations on the field.Utley released a short statement Monday afternoon, emphasizing that he would rely on his agent and the players association to handle the appeal. “I have nothing more to say other than to reiterate that I feel terrible about Ruben’s injury,” he said.David Wright also revealed on Monday that he had received a message from Utley to pass along to Tejada, though he declined to specify its contents.Still, the anger at Utley emanating from social media, talk radio and from the Mets’ clubhouse was still obvious on Monday.Mattingly said he had numerous conversations with Utley, a longtime star with the Philadelphia Phillies, since the incident — partly to check on his physical state, but mostly to ensure he and his family felt safe. “When that stuff, those kind of things, get talked about, you know you’re over the line,” Mattingly said about the personal safety of players and their families. “But in today’s society, I don’t think you can take that lightly.”The debate, meanwhile, raged on about the legitimacy of Utley’s slide. Manfred said the league had been looking into adding safety-oriented rules for plays near second base before this incident. Many players said they would welcome a reduction of the gray area in which those plays have long resided.Advertisement“Guys play hard,” said Mets infielder Daniel Murphy, who has been injured on takeout slides in his career. “I think that Major League Baseball is in the process right now of determining the line between hard and possible reckless for all of us, not just for Chase, and I think the situation on both ends of it has brought up a great conversation.”A version of this article appears in print on October 13, 2015, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Deciding Utley’s Appeal Could Take Several Days.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.