
On Baseball By                     
 TYLER KEPNER
 
FEB. 24, 2015
LAKELAND, Fla. — Three teams in recent seasons have hoarded most of the World Series championships. The Detroit Tigers helped each of them.The San Francisco Giants, the Boston Red Sox and the St. Louis Cardinals have combined for eight of the last 11 titles. The Giants and the Cardinals beat the Tigers in the World Series, and the Red Sox did so in a championship series.Naturally, this has not escaped the attention of Dave Dombrowski, the Tigers’ president and architect. He wishes his team had played better against St. Louis in 2006 and San Francisco in 2012. He still thinks about the high changeup David Ortiz lashed into the Boston bullpen for a grand slam, a crucial blow in the 2013 playoffs.The Tigers cannot break through. They have won four consecutive American League Central titles, and that 2006 A.L. pennant. But October heartbreak haunts the team and its fans, as Dombrowski learned at a January banquet in Bloomfield Hills, Mich.AdvertisementA fan asked Dombrowski if he changed his philosophies based on the models of teams that win the World Series. Dombrowski said he always pays attention to his rivals, and praised the Kansas City Royals for reaching Game 7 of the last World Series.But the Giants team that won it, he pointed out, did so mainly on the golden left arm of Madison Bumgarner.Advertisement“If I told you that the recipe for success, for winning a championship, was to have one great starting pitcher and not have anybody else that was going to pitch well for you — is that how you would want that constructed? No,” Dombrowski said. “But it worked. It worked at that time, and they rode it.”The Tigers, meanwhile, did not win a postseason game. They started former Cy Young Award winners in each game of the division series but lost in a sweep to Baltimore. David Price, acquired from Tampa Bay at the trading deadline, fired eight innings in the finale but lost, 2-1.“We felt like we had a team that was built to go to a World Series and win it,” Price said this week, adding later: “If we had lost the series, so be it. But we expected at least to put up a better fight, and that’s not what we did.”Every move affects another, and reflects the Tigers’ strategy. Detroit wanted to extend Max Scherzer’s contract last spring, but Scherzer turned down a $144 million extension. Believing (correctly) that Scherzer would sign elsewhere for 2015, Dombrowski traded center fielder Austin Jackson, starter Drew Smyly and the infield prospect Willy Adames for Price.Now Price, who is entering the last year of his contract, has said he was open to negotiating even after the season starts. The rotation around him has continued to evolve; Rick Porcello left in a trade, but Alfredo Simon arrived.Doug Fister left for Washington — where Scherzer now pitches — after the 2013 season in a widely criticized deal that brought starter Robbie Ray to the Tigers. Dombrowski shipped Ray to Arizona this winter in a three-team deal that brought Shane Greene from the Yankees.AdvertisementFister faces free agency after this season, but Greene has six years of team control. The deal can still be salvaged, and Greene’s presence upends the common narrative about the Tigers: that they are purely a win-now team, soon to decay all at once.“When people talk about our club and where we are in the aging process, I think it’s well overblown,” Dombrowski said. “We have a lot of finances available at the end of this year. Big time. We have the finances to compete to try to not only keep David, but if it’s not him, there are other starting pitchers out there. So there’s options. And then you have a foundation going into next year of Verlander — and I’d be very surprised if he didn’t bounce back and pitch well — Sanchez and Greene.”With Price, Justin Verlander and Anibal Sanchez, the Tigers still have an imposing rotation, especially if Verlander is stronger another year removed from core-muscle surgery. Trading Porcello to Boston brought left fielder Yoenis Cespedes — another free agent-to-be, but a big bat who will join Miguel Cabrera, Ian Kinsler, J. D. Martinez and Victor Martinez.Cabrera (ankle) and Victor Martinez (knee) are limited now but should be ready early in the season. Cabrera is signed for nine more years, Martinez for four, and Verlander will make $28 million in each of the next five years. With a top-heavy payroll, the roster is bound to have questions.“Just because the dollar figures are so high, you can’t fill every void on your roster,” Manager Brad Ausmus said. “You just can’t do it; it costs too much money. The only way to do it is to find some inexpensive players to perform at similar levels, or higher levels, than the players you lost.”Dombrowski traded eight prospects, as well as Jackson and Smyly, in the deals for Price, Simon, Greene, reliever Joakim Soria and center fielder Anthony Gose. But he is high on other young players, like catcher James McCann, reliever Bruce Rondon and outfielder Steven Moya, and found a gem in J. D. Martinez, who thrived after being released by Houston last March.The bullpen could be a problem again, but Dombrowski said Soria would be better this season, to help Joe Nathan at the back end. Rondon, Tom Gorzelanny and Joba Chamberlain will work in the middle.Maybe one of those pitchers will get the last out of the World Series for the Tigers’ first title in 31 years. Or maybe a starter can channel Bumgarner’s magic. The Tigers need to get there, of course, but for Dombrowski and his staff to win the credit they deserve, they must finally solve the riddle of October.“From an organizational perspective,” he said, “you’re looked at a little bit differently if you win the whole thing.”A version of this article appears in print on February 26, 2015, on Page B15 of the New York edition with the headline: Tigers Reload After Another October Failure.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »