AdvertisementSupported byBy Seth BerkmanWhen Kevin Hayes, now a Rangers forward, was a sophomore at Boston College in the summer of 2011, he was the tour guide for Johnny Gaudreau’s campus visit.Throughout the day, Hayes was mystified that in a few months, the cherubic Gaudreau — who four years later is still listed as only 5 feet 9 inches and 150 pounds — would be old enough to share the ice with him.“I couldn’t believe he was coming in that year,” Hayes said. “My first impression was probably the same impression everyone gets: He’s really shy and doesn’t say a lot, and you really don’t know what to expect from the kid.”Eight months later, Gaudreau, Hayes and Chris Kreider, another future Rangers forward, helped lead the Eagles to the national championship. As a junior, Gaudreau edged Hayes for the Hobey Baker Award, given annually to the nation’s top collegiate hockey player. Around Boston College, he became known as Johnny Hockey, a play on Johnny Manziel’s nickname, Johnny Football.In his first full N.H.L. season, the soft-spoken Gaudreau, 21, has played a key role for the Calgary Flames, who are contending for their first playoff appearance since 2009. Through 59 games, Gaudreau, a left wing, has 15 goals and 29 assists. He has quickly become a fan favorite in Calgary with his smooth dekes and clutch performances.On Dec. 22, with the Flames trailing the defending champion Los Angeles Kings, 3-0, Gaudreau scored three consecutive goals, and the Flames won in overtime, 4-3. In January, he was named as a replacement in the All-Star Game.Tuesday’s game against Hayes, Kreider and the Rangers, which the Flames lost, 1-0, began a five-game tour of the Northeast for Johnny Hockey.In Brooklawn, N.J., a few miles from where Gaudreau spent three years at Gloucester Catholic High School, the Flyers erected a billboard this month advertising the Flames’ March 3 game in Philadelphia. It shows Flyers forward Jakub Voracek and Gaudreau, calling him South Jersey’s own.Among those planning to attend the game that night is Bishop Dennis Sullivan of the Diocese of Camden, who was invited by a group of Gloucester Catholic administrators and alumni.The day before the Flyers game, Gloucester Catholic will retire Gaudreau’s jersey at a school assembly. Gaudreau said his family also planned to attend the Flames’ games against the Devils on Wednesday and the Islanders on Friday. Teammates and friends from Boston College are expected at the March 5 game against the Bruins in Boston.While Gaudreau will be the center of attention for much of the next 10 days, Boston College Coach Jerry York said Gaudreau had not always been comfortable in the spotlight while in college, unlike Manziel at Texas A&M.“He did not like it at all at first,” York said of the nickname. “He thought it brought too much attention to him. I think he got used to it. I don’t think he’s enamored by it. He wants to be just like everyone else.”York first saw Gaudreau play at age 15, at a hockey festival in Syracuse. While other coaches and scouts scoffed at his size, York had a knack for developing undersize players like Brian Gionta, Nathan Gerbe and Cam Atkinson. York realized Gaudreau was taking advantage of his superior vision to compensate for size deficiencies.“He was like 135 coming to school,” said York, who was talking about Gaudreau’s weight and who thought a more fitting football comparison was Doug Flutie, the 5-foot-10 Boston College alumnus who played 12 years in the N.F.L. “You had to be concerned. But once you watched him play, it became not a factor. He knows how to utilize the whole ice surface. His hockey I.Q. is right off the charts. He’s elusive and knows where to go and handles the puck well.”Gaudreau stopped caring about his measuring-tape shortcomings when he left Gloucester Catholic to play a season with the Dubuque Fighting Saints of the United States Hockey League. There, he proved he could score against top prospects and was the league’s rookie of the year in 2011.Another affirming moment occurred when the Rangers visited Calgary in December. Gaudreau had dinner with Hayes and Martin St. Louis, a 5-foot-8 player whom he had grown up idolizing.“Marty was asking him questions, Johnny was asking him questions; it was a pretty cool experience,” Hayes said.Last month, Gaudreau was also able to get advice from players like Jonathan Toews at the All-Star Game in Columbus, Ohio. The charisma of Johnny Hockey quickly became the buzz of the weekend.With his teammate Mark Giordano, Gaudreau concocted an idea to pay tribute to the Flames’ nickname during the skills challenge exhibition by lighting his stick on fire.“I said, ‘All right, are you just going to use a lighter?’ ” Gaudreau said. “He said: ‘Nah, we’ll grab some gasoline from somewhere in the building, and I’ll bring a bucket of gasoline up. You dip it in, and I’ll light the stick on fire.’ I was like, ‘All right, that sounds perfect to me.’ ”League officials nixed that plan. But Gaudreau still drew some of the loudest cheers of the night when he later allowed himself to be used as a prop by Voracek.Earlier in the skills challenge, Columbus Blue Jackets forward Ryan Johansen picked up a child and guided him toward a shot on goal. Following in their footsteps, the 6-foot-2 Voracek mimicked Johansen’s attempt with Gaudreau.“He’s got quite a bit of an accent, so I didn’t quite understand him at first,” Gaudreau recalled. “I just said, ‘Yeah, sure.’ ”In contrast to Manziel’s rookie season with the Cleveland Browns, Gaudreau’s performances have drawn wide praise from opponents and teammates.Giordano, the team’s captain, said: “He wouldn’t be someone’s first pick to be a pro hockey player when you look at him, but when you watch him on the ice, I think he has a lot of similarities to Patrick Kane with the way he handles and moves the puck and makes plays and can see things quicker than other guys. He’s going to be a good player for a long time, no doubt.”Advertisement