AdvertisementSupported byAnalysisBy Chase StuartThe Denver Broncos have been largely synonymous with offensive success since Peyton Manning joined the team in 2012. In Manning’s first three seasons with the Broncos, they scored 1,569 regular-season points, at least 100 more than any other N.F.L. team. But this year Denver is 5-0 despite ranking 30th in offensive yards per game, 27th in net yards per pass and 31st in yards per carry. The team’s success has been powered by a dominant defense.The Broncos are allowing only 4.3 yards per play; if that number holds, it will be the lowest average allowed by any defense since the 2009 Jets. The Broncos are giving up a league-low 4.7 net yards per pass attempt, thanks in part to a remarkable 22 sacks, the most by any defense through five weeks. There is no weakness to this unit. The rush defense ranks in the top quarter of the league in both yards and yards per carry. Situational defense? The Broncos are covered there, too: Their third-down defense has been the best in the league, allowing first downs 29.7 percent of the time.Look at any defensive metric, and there is a good chance the Broncos are at or near the top of the list. Denver has forced 14 turnovers, the most in the N.F.L. And the Broncos’ defense has allowed only seven touchdowns this season, second best in the N.F.L. to the Jets, who have played one fewer game.Denver’s defense has even chipped in when it comes to scoring. With three touchdowns, it is tied for the league lead with Atlanta’s and Arizona’s defenses. More important, all three defensive scores have come in critical situations. In Week 1, with the Broncos trailing the Ravens, 13-9, in the final seconds of the third quarter, Aqib Talib intercepted a Joe Flacco pass and returned it 51 yards for a touchdown. Four days later, Bradley Roby recovered a fumble and returned it 21 yards for a touchdown to win a game in Kansas City. And on Sunday, as the Broncos led by 9-7 with seven minutes remaining and the Raiders in field-goal range, Chris Harris intercepted Derek Carr and went 74 yards for the game-clinching score.Although Manning is failing to meet his typically lofty standards, his team is tied for the best record in the league, thanks to perhaps the best defense he has ever had.Advertisement