AdvertisementSupported byCeltics 115, Knicks 94By Peter MayBOSTON — Phil Jackson, the Knicks’ president, may not have built a quality N.B.A. team this season, but at least he has built a following on Twitter.Jackson castigated his team Sunday after a blowout loss to Cleveland, writing that the Knicks had given the basketball gods heartburn. He closed his post with “smh” — Internet speak for “shaking my head.” He might have added that LeBron James and the rest of the Cavaliers were ROFL — rolling on the floor, laughing.Three nights later, as the Knicks played their first game since the loss to Cleveland, the basketball gods again could not have been pleased. The Boston Celtics crushed Jackson’s ragtag collection, 115-94, at TD Garden, sending the Knicks to their eighth straight loss. The upside for Knicks fans with an eye on the future is that the team’s record — the N.B.A.’s worst at 10-46 — ensures that the Knicks will have a high pick in the upcoming draft, and their roster is full of players who are hungry, if not talented enough to do much winning outside the Las Vegas Summer League.Lou Amundson may not be back with the Knicks next season, but he will be able to tell his grandchildren that he set a team record — for games started on a 10-day contract (six, according to the Knicks).Amundson, whom the Knicks acquired in the trade that sent J. R. Smith and Iman Shumpert to Cleveland, is now a certifiable regular, starting on Wednesday for the 15th time in his 16 games with the team. Another 10-day contract addition, Langston Galloway, started his 15th game for the Knicks as well.The Knicks have only three road victories this season, but one of them came in Boston, a 101-95 victory on Dec. 12. Still, that result could not have given the Knicks much confidence heading into Wednesday: Carmelo Anthony, now injured, and Amar’e Stoudemire, now with the Dallas Mavericks, played starring roles against a Celtics team that was led by Rajon Rondo, who has also moved on to the Mavericks, and Jeff Green, now with Memphis.This time, the Knicks had a 6-point lead midway through the third quarter. Andrea Bargnani, playing in only his seventh game this season, was able to get to the line — at one point, he had attempted more free throws than the Celtics had combined — and he finished with 17 points. Then a 20-0 run turned Boston’s 72-71 deficit with three minutes left in the third quarter into a 19-point lead with 9 minutes 19 seconds to play.It was a familiar denouement for the Knicks, who have not won a game since Feb. 1. They also lost their starting point guard, Jose Calderon, with a sore Achilles’ tendon. He said he was not certain when he would return. Amundson, who scored 14 points, said of the Celtics’ run, “They went small, they started hitting shots, they got confident, and we couldn’t find a way to stop their momentum.”He added, “It’s disheartening when that happens.”The Celtics are also rebuilding, but unlike the Knicks, they are including many of their current players in their plans. One of them, Evan Turner, had his first triple-double Wednesday (10 points, 10 assists, 12 rebounds). Another, Isaiah Thomas, had 19 points. Jerebko had 20.The Celtics are only a game out of the No. 8 spot, and the final playoff berth, in the Eastern Conference, and they have said that they will try to secure it, even if it drops their first-round pick out of the draft lottery.The Knicks have no such dilemma.Advertisement