AdvertisementSupported byBy Andrew DasThis week is all about the end of qualifying for Euro 2016 and the start of a new era at Liverpool (and maybe with the United States national team).It is last-chance time in qualifying for the European championships, where only a few open chairs remain before the music stops. Russia is in with a win or a tie against Montenegro in Moscow on Monday (noon, Eastern time, ESPN2), while Zlatan Ibrahimovic and Sweden — which missed out on the last World Cup — will most likely be facing a playoff after they host Moldova at the same time (Fox Sports 1). Spain and England play later Monday, but they are both in.Tuesday will be a challenging day for fingernails in several countries. Israel shot itself in the foot with a loss to Cyprus on Saturday, but it can still claim a playoff spot with the right result in its game at Belgium (2:45 p.m., FS2) combined with help from the Cypriots, who play third-place Bosnia-Herzegovina. Turkey can claim the playoff spot in Group A with a tie against Iceland, which is in. If the Turks lose, however, the door is open for the Netherlands, the most frustrating national team in the world and one you should consider grumbling about. The Dutch need a Turkey loss, a win over the already qualified Czech Republic (2:45 p.m., ESPN2) and then a two-legged playoff triumph to avoid missing the Euros for the first time since 1984.All the Euro possibilities are here.At first glance, Jürgen Klopp, he of the hipster architect vibe and the technical-area gyrations, would seem an odd fit for Liverpool, but Reds fans were ecstatic when he signed on the dotted line to replace the dour Brendan Rodgers last week. Klopp’s debut match is Saturday at Tottenham (7:45 a.m., NBCSN), and while it is hard to see him fixing all of Liverpool’s problems with the set of players he inherits, it will sure be fun to watch him try.The United States plays Costa Rica on Tuesday night in what was a meaningless friendly but now may take on the feeling of a wake — or a therapy session — after Saturday night’s Concacaf Cup playoff loss against Mexico. Tuesday’s game is listed as a 6:30 p.m. kickoff, but U.S. Soccer officials expect it to start closer to 7, which is where ESPN lists it. Several of the United States players who faced Mexico will miss the game after a roster shuffle on Sunday, but Coach Jurgen Klinsmann will be there — uncomfortably close to the fans in cozy Red Bull Arena. Mexico hosts Panama a bit later Tuesday (10 p.m., Univision) in what will surely be a more, uh, celebratory atmosphere.Advertisement