AdvertisementSupported byBy Tim RohanPORT ST. LUCIE, Fla. — Noah Syndergaard was brushing his teeth last September, the day after his minor league season had ended, when he noticed he had missed a call from Sandy Alderson, the Mets’ general manager.Syndergaard, a right-hander widely considered the Mets’ top prospect, figured this was the call he had been waiting for, that he was finally being called up to the major leagues. All year, he had heard the chatter about his mammoth frame and his dynamite fastball, about how much the Mets needed him and all the potential he had and how his time was fast approaching.Instead, Alderson was calling to say he would not be called up. “It was heartbreaking,” Syndergaard, surrounded by reporters, said Wednesday morning. Compared with a year ago, when he was the focus of so much attention during spring training, the 22-year-old Syndergaard seemed more levelheaded. He had a new look, too: long blond hair and a scruffy beard. Perhaps Syndergaard has matured some. He seemed to have a positive attitude even though there is little chance he will make the Mets’ roster out of spring training regardless of how well he pitches. With the return of Matt Harvey, the team has six established major league starters vying for five spots, and Manager Terry Collins has indicated that they all rank ahead of Syndergaard. “My goal is to go out there and compete every day, compete for a job in the starting rotation, and hopefully get to New York as soon as possible,” Syndergaard said. He sounded as if he had been humbled, acknowledging that he did not have his best season in 2014 and pointing out his missteps. He had relied too much on his fastball. He had read too much about himself on Twitter. He had waited for the Mets to promote him, and when they did not, he said he “started pressing a little bit more.”Pitchers like Syndergaard tend to draw attention. At 6 feet 6 inches and 240 pounds, he is built like an N.F.L. tight end. His fastball easily touches 98 miles per hour, and last year Collins described his curveball as a “hook from hell.” The news media scrutiny will probably only grow from here, and Syndergaard appears aware of that. “I have to trust the front office that there are still some things I need to work on,” he said.His 2014 season was not a complete disaster. Although he posted a 4.60 earned run average in 26 starts with Class AAA Las Vegas, he led the Pacific Coast League in strikeouts, with 145. “His stuff, we all know, it’s off the charts,” Collins said. “Now it’s, how are you going to get people out with it?”To that end, Syndergaard is learning the finer points of pitching this spring. In particular, the Mets’ coaching staff wants him to speed up his delivery. He is making tweaks here and there. His biggest improvement, though, may be mentally. “It’s night and day,” said Frank Viola, Syndergaard’s pitching coach with Las Vegas last year. “I’ve watched his first three throwing sides; he’s a different person from the Noah I had last year. What he learned last year, though it was a negative in a lot of people’s eyes, I think it was the best thing that could happen to him.“It was the first time he ever struggled. It was the first time he had to figure out who he was as a pitcher without somebody telling him who he was. Now, he has a better understanding. He looks possessed now, in a positive way.” Syndergaard still thinks about that call from Alderson in September. “I kind of use that as a little extra motivation,” he said. “I don’t want to hear that phone call again. I’d rather have a more positive connotation to it.”Advertisement