AdvertisementSupported byBy Billy WitzTAMPA, Fla. — Mark Teixeira arrived Wednesday for the start of spring training, declaring himself a changed man. No longer does he eat sandwiches or muffins, and when his children eat pancakes for breakfast, he joins them with a plate of turkey bacon and a veggie smoothie. (For inquiring minds, coconut yogurt, spinach and frozen berries are the go-to ingredients.)Teixeira’s new gluten-free diet was prompted by a desire to restore his health after the last several seasons, when wrist, hamstring and lower-back injuries gave him the look of a player in decline. But Teixeira’s eagerness to alter his habits does not extend to the batter’s box.His solution to the drastic shifts that are increasingly a part of baseball’s defensive strategy and have been used against him for several seasons is threefold: Hit more doubles, hit more home runs and draw more walks.“Every time I try to slap the ball the other way, it doesn’t go well for everybody,” said the switch-hitting Teixeira, who batted .216 last season after wrist surgery cut short his 2013 season after 15 games. “That’s what the other team wants. They want to take the middle-of-the-order power hitter and turn him into a slap hitter.”After the Yankees let Robinson Cano leave as a free agent, Teixeira and Carlos Beltran struggled through injuries last season. The Yankees were left without a threatening left-handed bat in their lineup, an asset that is vital at Yankee Stadium. That lack of punch contributed to the Yankees’ 11th-place finish in runs scored in the American League, leading to the hiring of a new hitting coach — Jeff Pentland replaced Kevin Long, who was fired after eight seasons — and a discussion throughout the organization on how to combat shifting defenses.When catcher Brian McCann, another left-handed pull hitter, took his first batting practice swings at George M. Steinbrenner Field on Saturday, he drove the ball to left field. “I’m not going to ask you to do something that you’re not comfortable doing,” Manager Joe Girardi said. “But it’s something we need to have conversations about and see how we attack it.”Told that Teixeira, who turns 35 in April, did not consider himself a slap hitter, Girardi said: “That’s fine with me. It’s not easy to change the way you hit if you’ve hit one way for 15 years. So the adjustments you talk about with hitters, you’re not asking a guy to revamp his swing. But there are things you can do to possibly make it tougher on them, and we’ll talk about it.”Relaying that message will be Pentland, who is familiar with many on the Yankees’ staff. Pentland was the hitting instructor for the first-base coach Tony Pena when he managed in Kansas City. And when Pentland was the hitting coach for the Cubs, he worked alongside the pitching coach Larry Rothschild and under Jim Hendry, who was then the Chicago general manager and is now a Yankees adviser. Girardi, in his second stint with the Cubs, at the end of his playing career, also worked with Pentland. “I learned a lot from him,” Girardi said. “He taught me about your legs and swing path, all the things it takes to be a good hitter. As a catcher sometimes, from a physical standpoint, your legs become really difficult for you as the season goes on. But he really understood the swing.”Pentland has worked with only one current Yankee, Beltran, when they were with the Royals. But he has had plenty of high-profile pupils. He worked with Barry Bonds at Arizona State, with Gary Sheffield in Florida and with Sammy Sosa in Chicago. Matt Kemp thought enough of Pentland that in 2013, a year and a half after Pentland was fired by the Dodgers, he persuaded the team to allow Pentland to work with him in spring training. Pentland recalled watching Alex Rodriguez when he was in the Instructional League after signing his first professional contract, in 1993. Pentland expects Rodriguez to have a strong season hitting despite his injury history, his age (39) and his return from a one-year suspension for using performance-enhancing drugs. “He was born to hit,” Pentland said. Pentland has studied the Yankees’ hitters on video, but he said it was premature to make any assessments until he saw them in person, something he will begin to do Thursday when the entire team conducts its first workout. Pentland said it was up to him to adjust to the hitters, but concerning shifts, he made clear how he preferred that they approach them.“The biggest thing for me is don’t let it get in your head and force things, but obviously the ability to use the whole field is important,” Pentland said. “I’m not going to stand here and tell you we’re going to try to force things through the shift.”INSIDE PITCHAlex Rodriguez met with Joe Girardi, who asked him to work at first base — a position Rodriguez has never played. Both declined to say whether Rodriguez had apologized to Girardi for his admitted use of performance-enhancing drugs. Girardi said Rodriguez told him that he would do whatever Girardi asked. ... Mariano Rivera, who is in camp as an instructor, shagged fly balls in the outfield during batting practice, a favorite activity of his as a player but also one that caused him to miss most of the 2012 season after he tore knee ligaments. Advertisement