By PAT PICKENSFEB. 25, 2015
Like many young hockey players, Mark Arcobello spent his formative years trekking around New England for youth tournaments. But even the most intense schedule would pale in comparison with Arcobello’s road during his first full N.H.L. season.Arcobello, a 26-year-old center for the Arizona Coyotes, has spent this season living out of a suitcase: He is on his fourth N.H.L. team, tying a league record.“It’s been crazy, but it’s a good experience, I think,” said Arcobello, a native of Milford, Conn. “I can now say I’ve been traded, picked off waivers, been on four teams in one year. I’ve seen a lot of coaches, a lot of players. It’s kind of a cool experience.”Arcobello matched the four-team mark established by Dennis O’Brien in the 1977-78 season and shared by Dave McLlwain since 1991-92. “I don’t know if that’s a really good one to tie,” Arcobello said.AdvertisementAfter a standout high school career in Connecticut, Arcobello went to Yale before signing with the Edmonton Oilers in 2011. After 42 games in parts of two N.H.L. seasons, Arcobello started his fourth campaign in Edmonton’s organization this season. But after 36 games with the last-place Oilers, he was traded to the Nashville Predators, one of the best teams in the Western Conference, on Dec. 29.AdvertisementTwo weeks and four games later, Arcobello was placed on waivers and claimed by the Pittsburgh Penguins on Jan. 14. The Penguins had been bitten by a rash of injuries to forwards and kept Arcobello for 10 games. When Patric Hornqvist and Blake Comeau returned, Arcobello was again placed on waivers. He was picked up by the Coyotes on Feb. 11.Although Arcobello has been living in hotels since his trade from Edmonton, he is developing continuity. Despite the Coyotes’ seven-game losing streak, he has four goals in his six games entering Thursday night’s contest against the Rangers.“He’s been opportunistic around the net,” Coyotes Coach Dave Tippett said. “He’s getting some opportunity to play, and he’s capitalized on his chances.”Arcobello has played for four teams and six coaches, but he found a rare familiar face in Arizona. Sam Gagner was his teammate in Edmonton last season before Gagner was traded twice in the off-season and landed with the Coyotes. Gagner helped Arcobello acclimate to Arizona’s dressing room.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I think it’s been tough for him, going around to new teams,” Gagner said. “He hasn’t really been with a lot of guys he knows on those new teams. So I think for him to come here, it helps him. He’s one of the guys already.”Arcobello added, “It’s kind of tough even talking to guys, so having him definitely helps me get used to it a little bit quicker.”Gagner and Arcobello shared a line with Tobias Rieder during Arcobello’s first five games with the Coyotes, but Arcobello played on the third line with Martin Erat and David Moss in Tuesday night’s game against the Islanders and scored in a 5-1 loss.“In our situation, he’s getting more opportunity than he was getting on the last couple of teams he played on,” Tippett said. “It’s nice to see a kid jump in and take advantage of an opportunity.”AdvertisementAlthough going from two of the N.H.L.’s top teams to an also-ran has been difficult, Arcobello has viewed it as an opportunity to show other organizations that he can play as a top-two center and top-six forward in the league.“I know I can,” Arcobello said. “I did it in Edmonton early last year, and this year, too. I played top six at the beginning of the year. I’ve shown it in the past, and it’s just a matter of maintaining that consistency.”He has one off-season of restricted free-agent status, meaning he will probably spend at least next season with Arizona.“I like it here,” Arcobello said. “I like all the guys in here, and the staff has been really good to me. So hopefully I can make an impression and stay here.”A version of this article appears in print on February 26, 2015, on Page B16 of the New York edition with the headline: Leading League in Nomadism, Player Has Home, for Now, With Coyotes.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.