By JEFF ARNOLDFEB. 25, 2015
CHICAGO —  When the public-address announcer reached the climactic portion of the Chicago Bulls’ starting lineup inside a darkened United Center on Wednesday, what was coming next — or what wasn’t coming — came as no surprise.Nearly 24 hours had passed since the news that Derrick Rose would require surgery after tearing the medial meniscus in his right knee. When the announcer, Tommy Edwards, introduced the fifth starter — the spot reserved for Rose and before him for Michael Jordan — Edwards continued without missing a beat.“And the man in the middle. Number 13. Joakim Noah.”Bulls Coach Tom Thibodeau knew that his team, with the journeyman Aaron Brooks starting in Rose’s place, had to move on.“They’ve been down this road before,” Thibodeau said. “We know when you’re short-handed, what you have to do. We have to stick together. We have to fight.”AdvertisementFollowing a 98-86 loss to Charlotte Hornets, in which the Bulls were outscored by 10 points in the fourth quarter, Rose’s teammates spoke of the challenge they faced.“Mentally I think we’re a little bit drained by everything that happened,” Noah said.“We’ve got to figure it out,” said guard Jimmy Butler, who later added, “We just love having the guy around.”As Butler spoke, Rose’s nearby locker remained unchanged. The black chair with a Bulls logo shielded the stall’s belongings, which included five pairs of basketball shoes, a knee brace and a collection of warm-up gear.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Butler spoke with Rose Tuesday night and again Wednesday morning. He described Rose’s mood as mostly upbeat, and he is optimistic that Rose will return this season — as is Rose.But as hopeful as Rose sounded, Butler could sense the disappointment in the voice of his friend and teammate, a former N.B.A. rookie of the year and most valuable player.“He’s not happy when he’s hurt,” Butler said.The Bulls’ fans can relate. Although they were coming to grips with the disappointment of yet another injury to the team’s most dynamic player, there was a palpable sense that this time was different.Advertisement“I was honestly devastated,” said Ashil Mathews, a 21-year-old student at the University of Illinois-Chicago, who had huddled around a smartphone Tuesday night with friends waiting for more details about the injury. “This was the year when we had all the pieces together. So when I got the news, I was heart-broken.”Like their fans, the Bulls will attempt to adjust. Although Rose’s past knee injuries — a torn anterior cruciate ligament in 2012 and a torn meniscus 10 games into last season — were difficult to deal with, the Bulls understand the necessity of not allowing a hangover to linger. Once the immediate shock is gone, the players’ focus will turn to pushing forward, knowing they could again be without Rose for a long period of time.“It’s a different feeling,” said Brooks, who was 4 for 12 from the field Wednesday night. “We’ve got to adapt to one another. It’s a different lineup out there.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.