By PAT BORZIFEB. 25, 2015
MANKATO, Minn. — It still happens once in a while. Assem Marei will introduce himself to someone at Minnesota State University, Mankato — a professor, a fellow student or a fan of the Mavericks basketball team he plays for — and brace for the quizzical look and the questions that often follow.It is not so much that Marei is from Egypt, a country historically lacking in basketball excellence, or that he is Muslim. Minnesota State’s student body of 15,000 includes about 900 international students, so Marei’s presence on campus is not unusual. Instead, the way Marei pronounces his given name — awesome — stops them in their tracks.“Probably the most common thing is, when you ask him what his name is, they would say, ‘Austin?’ because they never heard Assem as a name,” said Mike Busack, a redshirt sophomore guard who shared a townhouse with Marei and other teammates the last three years. “People were kind of caught off guard by that.”Marei laughed when asked about it after a basketball practice last week at Taylor Center, where the Mavericks play.Advertisement“I’ve had to explain how to pronounce my name around 500 times since I’ve been here,” he said. “But it’s all good. Everybody that knows me doesn’t call me Assem anymore. They call me Aus, not to make it all weird.”AdvertisementIn Arabic, Assem — which may also be spelled Asem or Asim — means protector, guardian, defender. The Mavericks’ basketball coach, Matt Margenthaler, simply calls Marei, a senior center, one of his most reliable players.Listed at 6 feet 9 and 250 pounds, Marei leads the N.C.A.A. Division II Northern Sun Intercollegiate Conference in scoring, at 20.1 points a game, rebounding (8.9) and blocked shots (1.9) and is shooting 61 percent from the field. He finished the regular season by scoring at least 24 points in each of his final four games and shooting 69 percent from the field.Though unranked nationally, the 22-6 Mavericks are fifth in the latest Division II Central Region poll. The top eight teams in each of the nation’s eight regions qualify for the N.C.A.A. tournament, so Minnesota State could secure a third consecutive N.C.A.A. bid with a high finish in this week’s conference tournament.Minnesota State faces the University of Minnesota, Crookston, at home Wednesday night in the first round.Only one player born in Egypt has played in the N.B.A.: Alaa Abdelnaby, a former Duke standout who was raised in New Jersey and played for five N.B.A. teams from 1990 to 1995. Marei would love to be the second, but he is not counting on it. Though his name appears on two online mock draft lists, university officials say no N.B.A. scout has seen him play live this season. Marei expects to play professionally in Europe.“That’s the plan,” he said.How a child of Cairo gravitated to basketball and landed in Mankato, a college town about 80 miles southwest of Minneapolis, is a story in itself.Egypt is not known for basketball, but the Marei family is. Marei’s father, Ahmed Marei, averaged 2.3 points for the Egyptian Olympic team at the Los Angeles Games in 1984 before going into coaching. Egypt lost all six games in that Olympiad, most by large margins, and finished last. It qualified for the Games one time after that, in 1988, also losing all six games.AdvertisementAssem Marei said he grew up playing soccer before switching to basketball. “I liked basketball more,” he said. “My dad kind of pushed me to it, and I just loved it.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Five years ago, at age 17, Marei was among 100 youth players from the African continent invited to a Basketball Without Borders camp in Johannesburg sponsored by the N.B.A. and FIBA, basketball’s world governing body. Bill Bayno, an assistant coach with the Portland Trail Blazers at the time, met Marei there and kept in touch.Marei showed even more promise at the 2011 FIBA under-19 world championships, averaging 18.5 points and 12.3 rebounds. That fall, Bayno tried to help Marei find a Division I program.“He could have played anywhere in the country,” Bayno said.But there were problems. Because Marei suited up occasionally for Zamalek, a club in the professional Egypt Super League, he forfeited one year of N.C.A.A. eligibility. He also had to sit out a season as an international transfer. And because Marei’s five-year window of N.C.A.A. Division I eligibility began in 2009 when he enrolled at the Arab Academy for Science, Technology and Maritime Transport in greater Cairo, he was running out of time.According to Bayno, Mississippi considered Marei until its compliance department determined he was eligible for only one season. In Division II, which has no eligibility timetable, he could play the full three years he had left.By then Bayno was working as an assistant for the Minnesota Timberwolves. He did some checking and steered Marei to Minnesota State, the alma mater of the Timberwolves’ majority owner, Glen Taylor, who had donated $10 million toward the construction of the university’s basketball arena, which bears his name. Taylor was in Margenthaler’s office when Bayno called to recommend Marei.“I was just starting with the Timberwolves and hadn’t met Glen yet,” Bayno, now an assistant with the Toronto Raptors, said in a telephone interview. “I called and Matt said, ‘Your boss is right here.’ It was fate.”At Minnesota State, Marei lost baby fat, added muscle and developed post moves off both low blocks. “He didn’t have that left hand at all when he first came here,” Margenthaler said. Marei was named first-team all-conference last season while leading the Mavs in scoring and rebounding.He misses his mother’s cooking, he said, but otherwise has adjusted well to American college life.“I love it here,” Marei said. “I’ve been loving it since I’ve been here. But that homesickness and all, that gets to you once in a while.”AdvertisementLeft knee surgery kept Marei out of last summer’s FIBA World Cup tournament, where he could have raised his profile. Margenthaler said Marei might be too small to play center in the N.B.A., but he believes he can thrive in a European league.“He’s got a lot of people who know about him,” Margenthaler said. “The experience he’s had in FIBA will help him immensely in getting a good contract over there.”And in making a name for himself.A version of this article appears in print on February 26, 2015, on Page B18 of the New York edition with the headline: In Division II, an Egyptian Center Makes a Name for Himself.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.