AdvertisementSupported byGlobal SoccerBy Rob HughesIn a bygone era, Italy depended upon the Old Lady of Turin, otherwise known as Juventus, to lift the nation on European soccer nights. And in more recent times, Borussia Dortmund has been Germany’s darling.But 18 years have passed since Dortmund beat Juventus, 3-1, in the Champions League final in Munich. That night included a goal from the legendary Alessandro Del Piero for Juventus and one from the prolific Karl-Heinz Riedle for Dortmund. When the clubs met in Turin, Italy, on Tuesday for the first time since 1997, it was a close and decent enough contest, won by Juventus, 2-1, in front of a packed house of 41,000.The way the match went, one could see why the Old Lady had not lost in 47 games in what is now the best and most atmospheric soccer arena in Italy. The crowd and the team are as one, and Juve has not lost the hallmark of Italian play: defending a lead by any means necessary, fair or a little bit foul.That said, though Dortmund is in the recovery phase of what had been a chastening season near the bottom of the Bundesliga, Juventus deserved — just — to win Tuesday. Whether the Italian champion has the tools to withstand Borussia playing at a faster tempo in front of packed house of 80,000 in Germany is another matter.This Champions League encounter remains balanced, but little from the first leg suggests that either team could compete at the level of Real Madrid, Bayern Munich or Barcelona should they get drawn against any of those clubs along the way to the final in Berlin on June 6. That is perhaps looking too far ahead. From Dortmund’s perspective as it tries to avoid relegation, the game it most needs to concentrate on is Saturday’s against its near neighbor, Schalke.Dortmund Coach Jürgen Klopp saw things that encouraged him in Turin, especially the way that his team dominated the rhythm of the first half. But he also saw, and admitted, reasons why Borussia is having such a nervous season.Klopp described his players’ defending on both goals, particularly in the second half, as “too passive.” He was being polite. The first Juventus goal came after a low cross shot spilled out of the hands of goalkeeper Roman Weidenfeller and was gifted to Carlos Tévez, who was barely two yards from the net.The second Juventus goal, created by Tévez and Paul Pogba, again was too easy for Álvaro Morata to tap in from short range. Give Tévez and Morata credit for anticipating and getting in the right place to strike, but passive does not quite explain the absence of Dortmund defenders.In between those wounding blows in the first half, Marco Reus, by far the finest Borussia player these days, scored what also appeared to be an easy goal. Giorgio Chiellini, the veteran Juventus defender, slipped and lost possession of the ball and exposed his goalkeeper, Gianluigi Buffon, to a hopeless situation. Reus quickly pounced on the loose ball, sped away from the grounded Chiellini and drove the ball into the goal.It was a crisp, dry night in Turin, so there was no accounting for the fall, other than error and awkwardness.The close score, and the importance of an away goal, satisfied Klopp slightly more Juventus Coach Massimiliano Allegri. The Italian told reporters after the game: “We needed this because in Serie A we’re not used to playing 70 minutes without the ball or defending. In the second half, we did both, and this is a step forward for the team to do well in Europe. We are well aware of the problems we may have to face in the second leg.”Allegri’s point is that Juventus is running away with the Italian league title this season, as it did last. However, the Champions League is a step up in class, and the studious Allegri concluded by saying: “You can’t always dominate games. In games like these, you can dominate by not conceding — it’s just a different way of dominating.”So for Juventus, the Champions League offers a new way of stretching the minds and the capabilities of players to whom winning at home is almost too easy, too predictable. For Dortmund this season, playing in Europe has become a happy release from the tension over relegation that is a strange new experience for extremely good players.Klopp will not say it, but what his team lacked on Tuesday and has lacked throughout this season is a natural goal scorer, a leader of the attack like Robert Lewandowski, the Pole who departed for Bayern Munich as a free agent when his contract expired last summer.And Munich has such a powerful roster, such a surfeit of talents, that it left Lewandowski on the bench for most of its Champions League game in Ukraine against Shakhtar Donetsk last week. Reus, for sure, misses him.Advertisement