By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSFEB. 26, 2015
LeBron James scored a season-high 42 points, and the Cleveland Cavaliers beat the visiting Golden State Warriors, 110-99, on Thursday night for their 18th victory in 20 games and their 11th straight home win.James added 11 rebounds, outplaying his fellow Most Valuable Player Award candidate Stephen Curry and leading Cleveland (37-22) past the team with the N.B.A.’s best record.Curry scored 18 points, but had only 6 after the first quarter and was 5 of 17 from the field. David Lee led Golden State (44-11) with 19 points.James was out with knee and back injuries when Golden State beat Cleveland, 112-94, on Jan. 9. Although James hit 15 of 25 shots from the field on Thursday, his back appeared to still be an issue. James stretched out on the floor instead of sitting on the bench when he had a rest in the fourth quarter.AdvertisementCavaliers guard Kyrie Irving, who scored 24 points, left the game in the third quarter with an injury to his left shoulder, but returned early in the fourth.AdvertisementKevin Love added 16 points for the Cavaliers.Cleveland led by 61-56 at halftime, then took control in the third quarter. James scored 12 points, including two 3-pointers, and found Timofey Mozgov for an open jumper that pushed the lead to 86-70.Warriors Coach Steve Kerr was given a technical foul in the second quarter and had to be separated from the official Bennett Salvatore after Draymond Green was assessed a technical in the third quarter.The game was tied eight times and had 12 lead changes in the first half. James scored 13 points in the first quarter and finished the half with 24. Curry made three 3-pointers in the opening period.Curry missed Sunday’s game at Indiana with a sore right foot, but returned to score 32 points Tuesday at Washington.BEASLEY BACK WITH HEAT Michael Beasley is back in Miami for a third time after signing a 10-day contract with the Heat, who drafted him No. 2 over all seven years ago.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Beasley’s addition came less than a week after the Heat learned they would lose the All-Star forward Chris Bosh for the remainder of the season because of blood clots on a lung. Miami (25-31) entered Thursday in the No. 7 spot in the Eastern Conference standings.Beasley had spent this season in China, putting up big numbers, including a 59-point performance in the Chinese league’s All-Star game.ROSE’S SURGERY IS SET Chicago Bulls guard Derrick Rose will have surgery on Friday on the medial meniscus tear in his right knee. A timetable for his return will be determined afterward, but members of the Bulls’ organization sounded optimistic that Rose would be back this season.“I don’t want to speculate until he goes in, but we’re certainly hopeful,” General Manager Gar Forman said.AdvertisementRose played in only 10 games last season before having surgery for a similar injury in November 2013, cutting short his long-awaited comeback from a torn anterior cruciate ligament in his left knee.A version of this article appears in print on February 27, 2015, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: James’s 42 Propel Win Over Warriors.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.