By JOE LEMIREFEB. 26, 2015
The Rangers assistant coach Ulf Samuelsson was reviewing scouting reports on the Coyotes on Wednesday afternoon when a phone call interrupted him. On the line was his younger son, Henrik, who told him, “You better throw another guy in the loop there.”Arizona had promoted Henrik Samuelsson, 21, its first-round draft pick in 2012, to make his N.H.L. debut Thursday night against the Rangers, the team for which his father helps construct defensive game plans.The Coyotes’ Mark Arcobello scored 41 seconds into the game, and Arizona led nearly all night. But Lee Stempniak backhanded a rebound past goaltender Mike Smith with 2 minutes 14 seconds remaining to give the Rangers a 4-3 victory.It was their fourth straight win and their 11th victory in 14 games, enabling them to tie the Islanders atop the Metropolitan Division standings with two games in hand.Advertisement“We have a deep team, so a lot of guys are stepping up and contributing,” said Stempniak, a fourth-line wing whose last multigoal game was on Jan. 21, 2012.AdvertisementStempniak also scored in the second period, and Chris Kreider chipped in two power-play goals, the second tying the game with 40 seconds remaining in the period.Sam Gagner scored two goals for the Coyotes.The Rangers withstood a furious late rally exacerbated by a late hooking penalty on Martin St. Louis. With their goalie, Mike Smith, pulled, the Coyotes had a two-man advantage and kept the puck inside the Rangers’ zone. They had three good scoring chances in the last 16 seconds, but goaltender Cam Talbot turned aside each one — the last with two seconds remaining and the Rangers’ captain, Ryan McDonagh, sprawled across the crease.“Obviously, six-on-four is a tough situation,” McDonagh said. “You need your goalie to make a save, and Cam was there when we needed it.”Henrik won his only face-off and had a third-period scoring chance saved by Talbot in his 9:33 of ice time. But as expected, he did not single-handedly ignite the Western Conference’s lowest-scoring offense.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“It was a fine game for the young man,” Coyotes Coach Dave Tippett said. “I thought he jumped in and did a solid job for us.”Before the game, Ulf Samuelsson admitted he would have two voices in his head while watching his son play: one saying, “Score”; the other saying, “Don’t score.”Indeed, Ulf prepared a scouting report on his son: “He’s a big forward, strong along the wall and pretty crafty with the puck.”As rare as occupying the dual role of father and opposing coach is, Ulf Samuelsson had done it before. His oldest son, Philip, played his second career game for the Penguins against his father’s Rangers on Dec. 18, 2013. Until Wednesday, Philip and Henrik had been teammates for the American Hockey League’s Portland Pirates.AdvertisementTippett praised the younger Samuelsson’s development, noting that he was Portland’s leading scorer the last 10 games and that he was an example of a rare first-year professional receiving a promotion.Henrik said he appreciated his father’s support and encouragement but said staying power superseded sentiment.“I’m more worried about what Coach Tippett has to think than what my dad has to think,” Henrik said with a smile.A version of this article appears in print on February 27, 2015, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: Rangers’ Victory Pleases a Coach, but Not His Son.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.