By TIM ROHANFEB. 26, 2015
PORT ST. LUCIE, Fla. —  The 2015 Mets officially convened for the first time Thursday. Matt Harvey and David Wright were back and healthy. Bobby Parnell was on his way back. And optimism was in abundance, although it often is at the start of spring training, no matter how strong or weak a team might be.For weeks, a number of Mets have spoken openly about making the playoffs. Manager Terry Collins echoed those thoughts last Saturday.It may all seem a little bold in light of the futility that has surrounded the team for so long, but expectations have clearly shifted for a group that came close to a .500 record last season and has so many good starting pitchers.While Collins has been among those upbeat voices, he chose to give a more measured speech in private Thursday to his team. As he said, it was nothing “rah-rah.”AdvertisementIn previous springs, he acknowledged, he felt that his opening speech had to sometimes fight the prevailing wisdom that the Mets would spend the spring and summer losing more games than they won.AdvertisementThis time he wanted to remind the players of the task at hand — to contend for the playoffs for the first time in seven seasons, to be a team that will be relevant as July turns into August. In other words, no cheerleading necessary. Just a message that it is time to get to work.“You got to have the mind-set that this is going to get done,” Collins told reporters.With a number of veterans in the starting lineup — Curtis Granderson, Michael Cuddyer and Wright — and with some younger Mets turning into veterans, Collins indicated that it was time to take a more no-nonsense approach.NO SWINGS FOR DUDA First baseman Lucas Duda appeared to be the Mets’ only injured position player. He strained an intercostal muscle from swinging too much in the off-season and has not been swinging for a few weeks.Collins said Duda — who led the Mets with 30 home runs and 92 R.B.I. last season — would not swing a bat for at least another week, although he did participate in defensive drills.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“He just overdid it, and now he’s got to back off,” Collins said. “I told him, ‘Listen, we’ve got a long way, a long time to get you ready.’ ”Collins and Duda have not seemed too concerned about the injury. Duda missed time with a calf injury during spring training last year and had an oblique injury in 2013 that kept him out for several weeks.PITCHING INTRIGUE Much of the hype surrounding the Mets this spring has focused on the depth of their starting pitching. So that added some intrigue to the early spring training pitching assignments.Dillon Gee, whom the Mets have been seeking to trade, will pitch the spring training opener on March 4 against the Atlanta Braves.AdvertisementBartolo Colon will pitch the next day, and Matt Harvey will make his long-awaited return to the mound on March 6 against the Detroit Tigers.The next day, the Mets will play a split-squad doubleheader. Jacob deGrom, the National League rookie of the year last season, will pitch, along with two top prospects, Rafael Montero and Steven Matz.In Harvey’s game, which will be broadcast on SNY, Noah Syndergaard, another top prospect, is scheduled to pitch in relief.A version of this article appears in print on February 27, 2015, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: Collins Sets Aside Cheerleading for Measured Tone.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.