By PAT PICKENSFEB. 26, 2015
The Devils traded Jaromir Jagr to the Florida Panthers on Thursday for two draft picks.The Devils acquired Florida’s second-round pick in the 2015 draft and a conditional third-round selection in 2016. The Devils are 6 points behind the Panthers in the standings and 8 points out of the Eastern Conference’s eighth and final playoff berth with 21 games left.“Timing is something sometimes that you don’t, and can’t, control,” said Lou Lamoriello, the Devils’ president, general manager and interim coach, whose team lost, 3-1, to the Calgary Flames on Wednesday.“It had nothing to do with us winning or losing last night,” he said. “It gave us the opportunity to acquire two picks, which could help us in the future.”Jagr, 43, had 96 points in 139 games over one and a half seasons with the Devils. He led the team in scoring last season and was third on the Devils with 29 points in 57 games this season.AdvertisementLamoriello said Martin Havlat or Michael Ryder, who, like Jagr, are unrestricted free agents after this season, would probably fill Jagr’s spot on right wing on the Devils’ second line with Scott Gomez and Tuomo Ruutu.Advertisement“We have two players who haven’t been playing, in Havlat and Ryder, who deserve to play,” Lamoriello said.Although the trade signaled a white flag of sorts from the Devils, Lamoriello said, “By no means are we feeling we are out of a race.”He said the team could add a player before the trade deadline at 3 p.m. Monday.The Panthers will be Jagr’s eighth N.H.L. team, and his fifth since he returned from the Kontinental Hockey League in 2011-12. The Boston Bruins acquired Jagr near the trade deadline during the 2013 season, and they reached the Stanley Cup finals.Jagr has 716 goals, one behind Phil Esposito for fifth place on the career list. With 1,784 points, Jagr trails Ron Francis by 14 points for fourth on the career list. Jagr has not recorded a point since Feb. 7, a span of eight games, and recently lamented his diminishing ice time.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Lamoriello said Jagr had not sought a trade. “We never had a discussion about a trade,” Lamoriello said. “It isn’t the way we feel we should operate. You have to think of what’s best for the organization.”The Panthers trail the Bruins by 2 points for the No. 8 playoff spot and have not made the playoffs since 2011-12. Florida has won only four postseason games since its run to the Stanley Cup finals in 1995-96.BLACKHAWKS 3, PANTHERS 0 Corey Crawford earned his second shutout of the season for visiting Chicago. Brandon Saad and Teuvo Teravainen scored goals before Jonathan Toews added an empty-netter with 46.8 seconds left. (AP)CANADIENS 5, BLUE JACKETS 2 Carey Price made 25 saves to extend his franchise-best road winning streak to 10 games, and P. K. Subban had a goal and two assists for Montreal.The rookie Jacob De La Rose scored twice, Andrei Markov had a goal and an assist, and Max Pacioretty also scored as Montreal recorded its 11th win in its last 13 games on the road. Price earned his 35th win of the season. (AP)AdvertisementSABRES 6, CANUCKS 3 Torrey Mitchell scored twice — his first goals since No. 22 — to lead host Buffalo past Vancouver. (AP)A version of this article appears in print on February 27, 2015, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: Devils Deal Jagr to Florida but Say They’re Not Quitting.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.