By KAREN CROUSEFEB. 26, 2015
PALM BEACH GARDENS, Fla. — An hour before his scheduled tee time, Ben Crane stood over a putt on the practice green while his caddie, Joel Stock, lined up behind him and used his smartphone to shed a little light on the situation. Only by the glow of Stock’s phone was Crane able to see the hole.Sunrise came at 6:47 a.m., two minutes after the first threesomes in the 144-man Honda Classic field started off the first and 10th holes at P.G.A. National.The PGA Tour officials are in charge of the tee times, the tournament’s operations team is responsible for the lights on the driving range and the practice green, and Mother Nature controls the cloud ceiling. On Thursday, all three entities conspired, however unwittingly, to keep the initial wave of golfers in the dark.The first 18 players on the Champion course prepared for their rounds in near or total darkness, which was easy to overlook on a day when afternoon gusts swept several of the world’s best golfers off course, including top-ranked Rory McIlroy, who shot a three-over 73.AdvertisementBut it was no trifling matter for the early starters, a group that included Jason Bohn and the former No. 1 player Lee Westwood.AdvertisementBohn was in the second group off the first tee, and after posting a 73, he lingered in the scoring room to register his disgruntlement to the PGA Tour officials stationed there. Upon emerging from the room, Bohn spoke about how his complaint was competition-related. He was forced to modify his warm-up routine, he said, because it was too dark to putt on the practice green before hitting the range roughly an hour before his 6:55 tee time, as is his custom.“It’s unfortunate for those 18 guys who can’t prepare, do their routine, the same way,” Bohn said, adding, “We didn’t have any light to practice until 10 minutes before our tee time.”The average score of the first 18 players out in the morning was 72.2. The morning wave over all averaged 71.7 and was led by Jim Herman’s five-under 65. Among the top 12 players, only Patrick Reed (67) and Jamie Donaldson (68) teed off after noon.Ken Kennerly, the tournament director, said there were lights on the driving range, which came on roughly 10 minutes before the first golfer appeared at 5:40 a.m. Although the entire range was not bathed in light, he said, there were ample areas for the pros to hit.The lights on the practice green were timed to go on at 5:30, he added, but did not.Crane, who teed off at 7:15, in the fourth group off No. 10, picked a spot on the practice green bathed in faint light from a nearby broadcasting set to get in his pre-range putting session.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I was definitely putting in the dark,” said Crane, who posted a 69.A few of the early starters positioned themselves on the range so they could take advantage of the glow from a nearby leaderboard, Westwood said. Others used their smartphones as flashlights so they could see the ground to tee up their balls.“Unfortunately, it wasn’t quite light enough when we teed off,” said Westwood, who was in the first group off No. 1. “That’s not ideal really. I think we could have delayed it five minutes, 10 minutes.”Westwood, who carded a 71, added drolly, “I’m generally not a big fan of playing at night.”Until the clocks move forward for daylight saving time on March 8 and days get longer in the spring, tour officials are resigned to trying to squeeze 144 rounds of golf into roughly 690 minutes. On the California swing, darkness did not pose as great a hazard because the players were spread out over more than one course on three of the stops.AdvertisementOne way to ease the problem is to limit the field here and at other single-course events to 120 players in January and February. That is unlikely to happen with more card-carrying members clamoring for a chance to play in the beginning of the calendar year than there are available spots.“There are guys who last year went out to the Web.com Tour, played well, got their tour cards, and only got six or seven starts,” Crane said, referring to the circuit that serves as a launching pad to the regular tour. “For a guy who has played well, that’s not a good way to reward him.”Crane added: “We can’t take away spots at this point. We’ve got to give guys opportunities.”Westwood, who shared ninth place this month in the 132-man field at the Dubai Desert Classic on the European Tour, described the American fields as “too big.” He added: “They’re trying to give as many people an opportunity to play as possible, and if you’re going to do that, then you’ve got to use all the time you’ve got. For some, that means warming up in the dark.”Bohn said he hoped that the lighting would be better for the first players off in the second round.“We know you can rent proper equipment,” he said, adding, “The funny thing is we addressed this issue last year as politely as we could because we were in the same exact scenario.”After consulting with his operations team, Kennerly acknowledged on Thursday evening that the LED lighting on the range was not bright enough. He said generator lights would be used for Friday’s round.“You’re going to be able to see the range from the moon tomorrow,” he said.An article on Friday about the early starters in the first round of the Honda Classic golf tournament, who had to practice before sunrise, misstated the date when clocks spring forward for daylight saving time. The change will be Sunday, not Monday.A version of this article appears in print on February 27, 2015, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Tournament’s Earliest Starters Take Dim View of Practice Conditions.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.