By JOE LEMIREFEB. 26, 2015
The athletic-looking group of men at “Jersey Boys” on Wednesday consisted of Arizona Coyotes players enjoying a day off. The 6-foot-2 Swede taking selfies in the N.H.L. store in Midtown was the Arizona defenseman Oliver Ekman-Larsson. Tables at Mr. Chow in TriBeCa and Del Frisco’s Grille near Rockefeller Center were recently filled by professional hockey players, some on their way to “The Book of Mormon.”“We did have a New York day,” Arizona right wing David Moss said.The Coyotes, the Vancouver Canucks and the Calgary Flames have taken up residency in the area over the past two weeks to play the Devils, the Islanders and the Rangers. During their lengthy stay, visiting players did not limit their sightseeing to Prudential Center, Nassau Coliseum and Madison Square Garden.The league makes a concerted effort to schedule games against all three New York-area teams on one trip for Western Conference teams, particularly those in the Pacific Division. But it rarely works out so efficiently, and it is unusual for so many teams to be in the region concurrently.The Canucks played the Rangers on Feb. 19, the Islanders the next day and the Devils last Sunday. The Coyotes arrived Sunday and faced the Devils on Monday, the Islanders on Tuesday and the Rangers on Thursday night before leaving for Boston. The Flames landed Monday afternoon and played the Rangers on Tuesday and the Devils on Wednesday. They close out the teams’ residency Friday night against the Islanders before leaving for Philadelphia.AdvertisementCalgary’s team services manager, Sean O’Brien, said that in his 18 years with the Flames, they had never played all three area teams in one visit without getting on a plane in between. In the past, the Flames often played two teams in one stop and maybe even the third on the same East Coast swing, but only after an intermediary stop in Boston, Philadelphia or another nearby city.AdvertisementThe Flames stayed in Manhattan on Monday, with a few players doing a little exploring. The rookie left wing Michael Ferland said he had never been to New York City. Joe Colborne went to the 9/11 Memorial.After Tuesday night’s 1-0 loss to the Rangers, the Flames took a bus to New Jersey, where they spent the night ahead of Wednesday’s 3-1 victory over the Devils. On Thursday, they bused to Nassau County for a 2 p.m. practice and stayed on Long Island before Friday’s game at Nassau Coliseum.Rangers defenseman Dan Boyle, who played six years for the San Jose Sharks, remembered staying in one Midtown hotel for the duration of similar trips.“It makes for a longer bus ride, but I’ll take that over moving hotels and packing your stuff all the time,” Boyle said. “I’ve done both. I prefer to stay in one spot. I prefer to stay in New York City, personally.”O’Brien said he had consulted with Flames coaches before making bookings and, sounding like a true New Yorker, blamed traffic for the relocations. (Some in the N.H.L. say the worst trip is between Newark and Nassau County, with its multiple river crossings into and out of Manhattan.)“We’re here to work, so we like to be close to the office,” O’Brien said.The Flames are in the midst of a seven-game trip spanning 13 days because their home rink, the Scotiabank Saddledome, is the site of a men’s curling tournament.“It’s not my favorite sport in the world right now,” Colborne, smiling, said of curling.Calgary may be on a longer trip, but Arizona will be unmatched in miles traveled this regular season. The Coyotes are flying a league-high 49,818 miles, according to calculations by the website Hockey Gear HQ. Spending five days in the same metropolitan area — even when packing and changing hotels — is a luxury for Western Conference teams.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“To be in a hotel before midnight on the road, we don’t see it that very often,” Moss said. “This trip has been nice to actually get a pretty good night’s sleep.”AdvertisementIn recent days, New York has been visited by a number of players who came from the same geographic areas or who attended the same schools. The Rangers’ Kevin Hayes and the Flames’ Johnny Gaudreau, who played together at Boston College, watched the Eagles play Harvard in the consolation game of the Beanpot hockey tournament Monday. Colborne planned to catch up with two Islanders defensemen: Thomas Hickey, with whom he went to Edge School in Calgary, and Matt Donovan, his college teammate at Denver.Still, most of the socializing was limited to rinkside greetings because of other commitments.“It seems like now, after games, you’re working out, then eating at the rink and trying to get some sleep before you’re back at practice the next morning,” said Rangers right wing Lee Stempniak, who played for the Flames from 2009 to 2011 and for the Coyotes from 2011 to 2014.The Devils’ Mike Cammalleri, who spent the last three seasons in Calgary, said that game schedules conflicted with outside socializing but that playing against his former teammates “brings up the energy level.”The proximity of the games is helpful to family and friends. Flames center Mikael Backlund’s family was able to see four games — the three in the New York area and one in Philadelphia — without having to get on another plane after its flight from Sweden.Unlike the Flames, who had only a few spare hours off in the city, the Coyotes were off Wednesday. When asked about their adventures, the players excitedly shared their stories, turning the dressing room conversation into one better suited for a newspaper’s arts section.“It didn’t disappoint — hilarious,” Moss said of “The Book of Mormon,” an outing organized by forward Lauri Korpikoski, who used to play for the Rangers.Shane Doan, Arizona’s captain, was not disappointed in Mr. Chow, where he had first gone with the former Rangers player Brad Richards.“I took some heat about how excited I was about it,” Doan said.He added, “We had eight different dishes last night, and every single one was amazing.”The players were largely in agreement that New York was at or near the top of the list of cities worth spending extended time in. Doan was thrilled to deviate from the standard road-trip fare of Italian, steak or sushi.Advertisement“You don’t want to eat those same three things again and again and again,” Doan said. “You’re not trying a fancy Mexican restaurant when you’re on the road because if you’re playing the next day, you just don’t want to make that mistake.”A version of this article appears in print on February 27, 2015, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: These City Tourists’ Plans: A Play, Then a Power Play.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.