AdvertisementSupported byTV SportsBy Richard SandomirWhen FIFA sold the 2026 World Cup rights in the United States to Fox Sports and Telemundo this month, the announcement came with few details and no explanation for its timing.Why, 11 years before the tournament was to be played, did the agreement need to be made, especially if the United States had a chance to host the Cup?Why, without having televised a single World Cup match under their 2018 and 2022 deals, were Fox and Telemundo being rewarded with a third cycle of World Cup events?And why would FIFA’s TV director later that day say the deal was made after “reviewing the market for its media rights” without talking to ESPN and Univision, its former rights holders, in that review?Earlier this week, FIFA dropped its drawers a bit to provide a glimpse at its motivation. Jerome Valcke, the organization’s secretary general, said the deal with Fox was made to avoid facing a lawsuit from the media giant over shifting the 2022 Cup from the heat of the Qatari summer to the late fall and winter. The admission was surprising, but it made sense. The summer is a less competitive time for viewers and advertisers than the late fall and winter, so Fox was unhappy at the prospect of FIFA moving the World Cup from its traditional June-July time frame — a decision that is now a fait accompli. Fox might have been fighting a losing legal battle because FIFA contracts do not disclose the time of year that a World Cup is to be played, just the year, according to executives who have seen them. But a potential court fight raised the delicious possibility of deposing Sepp Blatter, FIFA’s president, and other executives, on American turf.FIFA executives would prefer to keep their organizational secrets out of the American court system. The organization has done its best to quash the full disclosure of a 430-page report by its chief investigator, Michael Garcia, into allegations of corruption in the bidding for the 2018 and 2022 World Cups. Garcia had dug into those allegations for more than a year but resigned after only a summary of his report — one that he said had distorted his findings — was released. A fuller but redacted version, which FIFA said last December was forthcoming, has yet to come forth. Having fostered such opacity to maintain its self-preservation, FIFA must have calculated it was best to mollify Fox, not fight it.What has financial hardball yielded for Fox? An apparently sweet deal. According to an executive made aware of the terms of the contract, Fox will pay about 10 percent more than in its current contracts for 2018 and 2022, which are worth a total of $425 million. In Canada, CTV and TSN, networks owned by Bell Media, will pay about 4 percent more than the $40 million they are scheduled to pay in 2022, and will pay an extra 10 percent if the United States hosts the 2026 tournament.This is an odd way to value elite soccer rights. Two days before the 2026 deals with FIFA were announced, the English Premier League announced that Sky and BT had agreed to pay $7.8 billion to carry its games from 2016 to 2018, a 70 percent leap above current payments.Juan Carlos Rodriguez, the president of sports for Univision Communications, said in a phone interview Thursday that FIFA failed to maximize the value of the United States rights in its deals with Fox and Telemundo and that the agreements jeopardized the possibility of the 2026 World Cup coming to America. “If the rights are already fixed,” he said, “there’s little incentive to FIFA to award 2026 to the U.S.” He added: “If we had been asked to bid, we would have taken it very seriously.”It is rather backward to sell the TV rights before the host country is chosen, especially if you’re selling rights to American networks for what could be an American World Cup.John Skipper, the president of ESPN, said by phone, “We’re puzzled as to why FIFA wouldn’t talk to their former partner, which did an outstanding job.” But, he added, he understood why it happened, thanks to Valcke’s comments. “They were forced to do it in order to avoid legal consequences,” Skipper said.ESPN and Univision, which are still stung at losing the open bidding for the 2018 and 2022 tournaments, are smarting at being excluded from bidding for the 2026 Cup. They felt blindsided, as did M.L.S., which would have liked to be embedded in the deal as a way to build the sport in the United States. All sides were hoping that they had gotten a heads-up that the 2026 deal was in the works — as long ago as early December — from Sunil Gulati, the president of U.S. Soccer and a member of the FIFA executive committee. How much and how well he lobbied to open the bidding is not known, and confidentiality kept him from informing anyone, even the U.S. Soccer board, about his knowledge of the coming deals. Those who hoped for Gulati to strongly object over the sweetheart deals during FIFA’s direct talks with Fox and Telemundo doubtlessly wanted him to follow the lead of the former American soccer powerhouse, Chuck Blazer. In 2005, from his seat on the FIFA executive committee, Blazer persuaded the organization to stop considering a pre-emptive offer by NBC and Telemundo for the 2010 and 2014 World Cups and open up the bidding, which was won by ESPN and Univision. Blazer seemed almost heroic to ESPN, Univision and M.L.S. back then. But in recent years, he has been accused of many counts of corruption.Email: sandor@nytimes.com Advertisement