By BILLY WITZFEB. 26, 2015
TAMPA, Fla. —  As Alex Rodriguez stood a few feet away and signed autographs for dozens of clamoring fans on Thursday, Chase Headley skipped down the steps of the dugout, deposited his bat and helmet, and grabbed a glove before heading to the outfield. He did so all but unnoticed.This crossing of Yankees third basemen was, in a sense, a passing of the torch.Everything that Rodriguez has been in recent years — a magnet for attention, a sometimes-feared anchor to the lineup, an increasingly immobile fielder — Headley is not. Since he was acquired before the trade deadline last July, Headley has provided several game-turning plays in the field and a reliable bat.Words like leader, sincere and disciplined follow him. “A real grinder,” said General Manager Brian Cashman, who compared Headley to Scott Brosius, the third baseman who won three World Series with the Yankees.For Headley, who signed a four-year, $52 million contract after becoming a free agent at the end of last season, the decision to rejoin the Yankees was not difficult. Coming to New York after spending his entire career in San Diego, with Petco Park’s cavernous dimensions, its sleepy atmosphere and the Padres’ limited payroll was a liberation.AdvertisementAnd when the Yankees told him he would begin the season as their third baseman, with Rodriguez being shifted to designated hitter and backup corner infielder after a yearlong suspension, it was not much of a decision for Headley, who worked alongside Rodriguez during the team’s first full-squad workout.Advertisement“I felt like I fit in right from the beginning,” Headley said, praising the Yankees’ staff and their care for his family. “This is just a special place. When you look back at the history of talent, of expectations, of class — there’s a whole hodgepodge of things that, when you put on that jersey, you feel different. It’s something I haven’t felt in my career — that pride, that responsibility.”When it was suggested that he sounded like a propagandist, Headley smiled. Growing up in Fountain, Colo., about 80 miles south of Denver, Headley despised the Yankees. He recalled a conversation with Jerry Hairston Jr., a former teammate in San Diego who had played for the Yankees.“I said I hate the Yankees and he looked at me and said, ‘You’d love playing for them, though.’ ” Headley said. “And I was like, ‘I don’t know if I would or not.’ And then you get here and you see what he meant.”Headley had a stirring introduction to New York. The Yankees completed a deal with San Diego in the afternoon on July 22, and Headley landed at La Guardia Airport less than an hour before the Yankees’ game against the Rangers. Headley was in the dugout by the second inning, entered the game in the eighth and ended it with a game-winning single in the 14th.Though the Yankees were interested in acquiring Headley in 2013 when Rodriguez was injured, his audition in New York cemented their desire to re-sign him.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“There wasn’t anything that didn’t turn us on about him,” Cashman said. “But until you get to see him and see him in New York, you don’t always know. Some players come here and the totality of New York can constrain somebody from being what they’re capable of being. He seemed like he’d been here a long time.”The Yankees expect that Headley and the newly acquired shortstop Didi Gregorius will drastically upgrade the left side of their infield defense by replacing Rodriguez and Derek Jeter, whose range had declined in recent years.How much the Yankees will get from Headley at the plate is more uncertain. He seemed poised to become a star in 2012 when he complemented a Gold Glove performance in the field with a breakout offensive season, hitting .286 with 31 home runs and 115 R.B.I., which helped him finish fifth in the National League’s Most Valuable Player voting.AdvertisementBut Headley regressed the last two seasons, something he attributed to a slip in mechanics that he is now trying to correct. What impressed the Yankees was that after they acquired him, the right-handed-hitting Headley managed to get on base and drive the ball, his .768 on-base plus slugging percentage leading all Yankees with at least 150 at-bats.“Whether that was my career year, who knows?” Headley said of 2012. “I’m not going to say that’s a year that should happen every year, but driving in 75 runs and hitting 18 to 20 home runs should be a standard year. That’s the challenge — I haven’t been able to consistently do that.”Somewhat counterintuitively, Headley said the Yankees’ environment was more conducive to relaxing at the plate than the Padres’ had been.Not only is the park more hitter-friendly, but in a lineup including Jacoby Ellsbury, Brian McCann, Mark Teixeira, Carlos Beltran, Brett Gardner and Rodriguez — if they are healthy and reasonably productive — Headley can be just another cog. In San Diego, it was at times a burden to be the biggest bat in an often-anemic lineup.“You try not to think like that, but you’re struggling as an offense and you’re a veteran guy, and you’ve had success in the past, you want to be the guy that helps, that gets the big hit,” Headley said. “Sometimes that gets in the way. Trying harder and wanting more is not always beneficial in our game.”A version of this article appears in print on February 27, 2015, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Headley Hopes to Build on Solid Audition.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.