AdvertisementSupported byNot the Knicks10 PhotosView Slide Show ›Karsten Moran for The New York TimesBy Scott CacciolaRich Micallef spent 13 years as a foreign exchange trader, specializing in the German mark. He enjoyed his work, he said, in large part because it was so competitive. His tie often acted as a barometer for the day’s proceedings.“You’d tighten it up or loosen it up, depending on whether you were making money or losing money,” Micallef, 52, said. “Those were fun times. But I missed basketball.”Micallef, a standout at Brooklyn College in the early 1980s, eventually found his way back to the game — and all the way back to Brooklyn. On Wednesday night, in his first season as the head coach at his alma mater, he patrolled the sideline at an event that felt oddly familiar to him: the semifinals of the City University of New York Athletic Conference men’s basketball tournament.“It’s one of those surreal moments,” said Micallef, who guided Brooklyn to an 80-70 victory over Lehman College. “It’s almost like I’ve come full circle.”The tournament is celebrating its 50th anniversary — the Dutch Shoe, awarded to the champion, will be up for grabs Friday night — and the semifinals were held at Nat Holman Gymnasium on the campus of City College, one of nine universities in a Division III conference that has long been a colorful thread in the city’s basketball fabric.It would be impossible for the conference to have more of a New York feel. All nine colleges are in the city’s five boroughs. Road games are measured in city blocks rather than in miles. And among the four teams that participated in the semifinals, 85 percent of the players grew up in the city.“We understand the position we’re in, as a nonscholarship league in Division III, in the largest media market in the world,” said John Alesi, the coach at Baruch College, whose team defeated York College in the other semifinal. “We know this is a pro sports town. We’re not grabbing any of the headlines from those teams. But it’s important to the city.”Because most students commute to these colleges, recruiting can become provincial — especially for Lehman, the lone representative of the Bronx. Lehman Coach Steven Schulman said he had a hard time persuading prospects to come north of 125th Street in Harlem, an unofficial line of demarcation.“Very few kids are going to take the train past Hunter College and City College to visit my school, even if the kid loves me,” Schulman said.If the players are rooted in their neighborhoods and at their colleges, then so are the coaches. Like Micallef, Alesi is coaching at his alma mater. He won a CUNY title as a freshman guard at Baruch in 2000. Ronald St. John, a former three-year captain at York, has coached the Cardinals since 1988. In the semifinals, Schulman was the outlier: He did not attend Lehman. But he has spent the past 15 seasons at the college.“You have coaches who are deeply embedded,” Zak Ivkovic, the conference’s executive director, said. “They all want to give back.”In a twist, the conference was formed in the shadow of one of the sport’s most notorious point-shaving scandals. In 1951, City College was a national power when several players were arrested for taking money from gamblers. The college soon dropped Division I athletics in favor of a more pure game at the Division III level.Some six decades later, City College and its CUNY brethren are fighting for respect on a smaller stage — a continuing effort that was highlighted last season when the College of Staten Island assembled a 28-3 record but failed to receive an at-large bid to the N.C.A.A. tournament after losing the CUNY championship game to York.The conference viewed Staten Island’s omission as a gross misjudgment on the part of the selection committee, and York appeared to validate the point by advancing to the second round of the N.C.A.A. tournament before falling to Amherst College, the defending national champion.“We knew that we couldn’t allow our league to be looked at that way,” Alesi said. “So we’ve really made it a point to improve our nonconference scheduling and our profile. When you put yourself in those positions, you might lose a couple of early games, but I think you’re preparing yourself and you end up with a better product.”The conference’s product was on display when Baruch, the top seed, faced York, the defending champion, in the first semifinal on Wednesday. A defensive tussle throughout, the game was tied, 50-50, when Alesi called for a timeout with 6.4 seconds remaining. He drew up a play for the inbounds pass to go to Granville Gittens, a senior center. Gittens caught the ball at the right elbow and drained a 16-foot jumper that lifted Baruch to a 52-50 victory. His teammates mobbed him in front of the bench.“A dream come true,” Gittens told a smattering of local news media.As his players took the court for warm-ups ahead of their semifinal against Lehman, Micallef could relate. As a sophomore in 1982, he helped lead Brooklyn to the Division III Final Four. At the time, the Knicks were struggling (some things never change), and St. John’s had exited the Division I tournament with a second-round loss, which meant that the city’s basketball spotlight shone, unexpectedly, on Brooklyn.“All of a sudden, we’ve got Channel 7 following us to the airport,” Micallef recalled. “I’ll never forget it.”Buoyed by the team’s success, Brooklyn moved to Division I the next season — a halting experiment that ended in 1992 when the college dissolved its athletics department. Men’s basketball was reinstated in 1995 but as a Division III program, back where many at Brooklyn felt it belonged.Micallef, meanwhile, was working on Wall Street, at least until the introduction of the euro as a form of currency made both the German mark and Micallef’s job obsolete. With more time on his hands, he decided to coach his daughter Courtney’s recreation league team. He later resuscitated the boys’ basketball program at Fair Lawn High School in New Jersey. When the head coaching position at Brooklyn opened up last year, Micallef applied.“The next thing I know, they’re calling to tell me I’m the next head coach,” he said. “My jaw dropped. I remember sitting in my driveway, like, ‘Are you kidding me?’ ”On Wednesday, Brooklyn’s game against Lehman was played at a pace that bounced between furious and reckless. Jerrome Jones, a junior forward, keyed Lehman in the first half, burying a 3-pointer as Lehman extended an early lead.It was the latest act in a nomadic career for Jones, 28, who enrolled at Lehman before the start of last season after balancing work with the duties of fatherhood. Jones, who has a 7-year-old daughter, continues to work full time at a school for disadvantaged children, he said. He practices in the afternoon and goes to class at night.“Basketball is kind of an escape for me,” Jones said. “Any troubles I have or any stress I have, I’m freed from all that when I’m here on the court.”Lehman went into the half ahead, 48-41, but Brooklyn kept exerting pressure — running and defending, scoring and celebrating. Micallef typically makes substitutions early in the second half. But with his starters building their lead, he turned to his bench only to apologize.“I just said, ‘Guys, they’re on a roll,’ ” Micallef recalled. “And they said, ‘Coach, we know.’ And that’s what a team is all about: sacrifice.”Brooklyn (22-5) went on to secure a spot in Friday’s 8:30 p.m. final against Baruch (20-6), back at Nat Holman Gymnasium. The game will be streamed on ESPN3.For Alesi and Micallef, the game will be bound up in their shared histories. Both coaches are products of Xaverian High School in Brooklyn, where Alesi’s father, Jack, is the longtime coach.Brooklyn and Baruch might be playing for the conference championship, but it is, above all, a city game.Not the Knicks: Articles in this series are chronicling Scott Cacciola’s sabbatical from covering the woeful Knicks. He will check out some of the good basketball around the country, recommended by readers of The New York Times.Advertisement