By KEN BELSONFEB. 26, 2015
A United States District Court judge overturned the suspension of Minnesota Vikings running back Adrian Peterson, who argued that he was unfairly penalized by the N.F.L. The reversal was another setback for the league’s commissioner, Roger Goodell, who had suspended Peterson until at least April 15 for disciplining his 4-year-old son with a switch in May.In November, a former federal judge found that Goodell had also overstepped when he suspended the former Baltimore Ravens running back Ray Rice indefinitely after a graphic video surfaced showing Rice punching his fiancée, whom he later married.Peterson had been on leave with pay while his legal case was pending, and he expected to be reinstated once it was resolved. He pleaded no contest to a misdemeanor charge in November. Yet days later, Goodell suspended Peterson for at least the rest of the season, saying he had not showed sufficient remorse and urging him to seek counseling.Harold Henderson, a league-appointed arbitrator, upheld Goodell’s decision in December. Henderson’s decision was based on the league’s personal conduct policy, which was overhauled after Peterson’s legal case had already concluded. AdvertisementThe N.F.L. Players Association filed a case on behalf of Peterson, arguing that the N.F.L. had retroactively penalized Peterson. Peterson’s lawyers also argued that Henderson was biased because he once worked for the N.F.L. and was chosen by the league to serve as arbitrator.“This is yet another example why neutral arbitration is good for our players, good for the owners and good for our game,” the players union’s executive director, DeMaurice Smith, said in a statement.AdvertisementJudge David S. Doty in Minneapolis agreed with the bias claims when he vacated the arbitration ruling.Peterson, 29, is set to earn a base salary of $12.75 million in 2015.“Adrian Peterson is an important member of the Minnesota Vikings,” the team said in a statement, “and our focus remains on welcoming him back when he is able to rejoin our organization.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.How soon Peterson returns to the Vikings is unclear. The N.F.L. has appealed Doty’s ruling. That could delay any resolution by weeks, if not months, while a panel of judges is assembled at the United States Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit.Until that appeal is heard, Peterson will return to the commissioner’s exempt list, which calls for leave with pay.“We believe strongly that Judge Doty’s order is incorrect and fundamentally at odds with well-established legal precedent governing the district court’s role in reviewing arbitration decisions,” the league said in a statement.A version of this article appears in print on February 27, 2015, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Judge Overturns Suspension of Peterson.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.