AdvertisementSupported byOn BaseballBy Tyler KepnerTAMPA, Fla. — If you never knew about the lies and the lawsuits, never knew all the ways Alex Rodriguez turned himself into one of baseball’s greatest con men, Thursday would have seemed normal.At 9:15 in the morning, Rodriguez strode through the clubhouse to his corner locker at Steinbrenner Field. A couple of hours later, he stretched and jogged and played catch in the outfield as the Yankees began their first full-squad workout. He took grounders and flipped baseballs to kids and signed autographs and took batting practice.He hit some balls to right, some balls to left, some up the middle. He hit three over the fence in 32 swings. A small crowd watched from the stands on a slightly chilly day. Rodriguez got a few more cheers than the other players, but nobody booed. Actually, nobody really seemed to care.“All routine,” General Manager Brian Cashman said. The Yankees hope that is what A. R. represents this season. But can they trust the repentant cheater not to disgrace himself again?“One of the things we talk about is coming together as a club, and that involves trust,” Cashman said. “We trust all of our guys are going to put forth a good, honest day’s work on a daily basis and we’ll come together as the best team we possibly can. And Alex certainly is one of many, one of them all.”Rodriguez will never be just one of the boys. That was never his fate, from the moment the Seattle Mariners selected him first in the 1993 draft. He was destined for fame, but chose infamy instead. He took steroids for a while, got caught, apologized, juiced again, got caught again, and served a yearlong suspension.There is no way to rationalize those decisions, no matter how much a sympathetic, all-access magazine piece tried last week. Rodriguez had obstacles as a child, but so did many others without his talents. His decisions to repeatedly cheat defy reason.“Alex is not a bad person,” first baseman Mark Teixeira said. “I’ll be the first one to tell you that. I’ve known Alex for a long time. But Alex has made bad decisions, and he’s owned up to them. Hopefully now we can kind of get past it.“If he was still denying it and still coming in here trying to put on a different face,” Teixeira continued, without finishing the thought. “He told everyone he was sorry for what he did.”Yes, he did. Rodriguez’s apology letter was better than a news conference on live television. He has been polite to the news media this week, taking questions after closed practices, and again on Thursday. But it is an exercise in futility, really. Rodriguez’s history of lying makes his words, whatever they are, sound hollow.If you care, Rodriguez said that he felt like a rookie again on Thursday and that he would do whatever Manager Joe Girardi asked. He said he could not evaluate his swing until he faced real fastballs; the best pitching he has faced recently was from Freddy Garcia, a former teammate who threw to him during his exile.Practicing with the Yankees again, Rodriguez said, felt like going to Disney World. He showed off a stiff, new Rawlings first baseman’s mitt. He cited, correctly, that Michael Jordan played all 82 games on the N.B.A. schedule at age 39. Rodriguez is 39 now.“In this day and age, anything’s possible,” Rodriguez said.Well, maybe not. Stretching the possibilities of human performance previously led Rodriguez to that notorious anti-aging clinic, Biogenesis, and Tony Bosch’s testosterone gummies. But the Yankees retain at least faint hope that the year away helped heal Rodriguez’s body and that he can somehow turn on fastballs again.“We’ve prepared for the worst and we’re hoping for the best,” Cashman said. “So the ideal situation: middle-of-the-lineup bat. The worst-case scenario, we’ve got coverage because of a lot of the moves we’ve made this winter. Now it’s about, over time, getting a feel for what we’ve got on our hands.”Cashman would not give a direct answer to the simple question of whether he was happy to have Rodriguez back on the team. The real answer, of course, is no — the only reason Rodriguez remains is because of the ludicrous 10-year contract the Yankees gave him in December 2007.But Cashman seemed more weary than agitated by the question, just as Girardi was when asked the same thing.“I don’t understand what kind of question that is, to be honest,” Girardi snapped. “He’s a player of ours; of course I want him back.”The story is clearly compelling: One of the game’s statistical leaders is making a comeback after serving a record suspension for using performance-enhancing drugs. And Rodriguez has such a long rap sheet that he is, in some ways, the new George Steinbrenner — an unpredictable newsmaker you cannot ignore.It may be asking too much for Rodriguez to avoid the decisions that make us all cringe. A routine day like this was a good start, but you wonder how long it can last. Rodriguez has always craved the spotlight, and he never stays boring for long.Advertisement