AdvertisementSupported byBy Tyler KepnerVIERA, Fla. — On his way to the airport last month, after a news conference in Washington announcing the richest free-agent pitching contract in major league history, Max Scherzer had parting words for his agent, Scott Boras.“Wait till you see my new cutter,” Scherzer said.Boras, who negotiated Scherzer’s seven-year, $210 million deal with the Nationals, thought about that on his own flight home. Scherzer had just signed a landmark deal, a reward for becoming a star, and here he was, just as self-motivated and driven as he had been at the University of Missouri.“When you have players who are never satisfied and always trying to compete at the highest level, you love to represent them,” Boras said. “Because you know you’re always going to get excellence, and both sides are going to be happy.”It is easy now, in his first Nationals spring training, to imagine the best for Scherzer and his new team. He is the shiny sports car still idling in the dealership lot. Never mind that lavish contracts for pitchers in their 30s are often losing bets.But there are exceptions, and Scherzer wears a reminder on his back. He wore No. 37 for the Detroit Tigers, his team for the last five seasons. Stephen Strasburg wears No. 37 in Washington, but Scherzer did not want it anyway. He chose No. 31 — perhaps for Greg Maddux?“Actually, you’re right,” Scherzer said on a recent morning, by his locker at Space Coast Stadium. “In Detroit, they gave me 37. I liked the number, but in college I was 31 — I really liked that number, and Greg Maddux was 31. I always looked up to him when I was a kid. It worked for me in college, and I’ve had it a couple of other times. So when I had a chance to pick a number, I wanted to be 31.”Scherzer said he admired the consistent dominance of Maddux, a Hall of Famer whose 355 wins are the most of any pitcher alive. So many talented pitchers, Scherzer said, struggle to stay on top, year after year. In a game of constant adjustments, Maddux mastered the trick of staying one step ahead of the hitters.He also aged well. Scherzer will be 30 for most of this season, as Maddux was in 1996. Maddux made every start in the first seven seasons of his 30s, going 123-59 with a 2.76 earned run average.The Nationals — who deferred half of Scherzer’s contract and will pay him through 2028 — would be elated with similar production. General Manager Mike Rizzo, who drafted Scherzer for Arizona with the 11th overall pick in 2006, thinks he might get it.“He’s a pitch-ability guy that has power stuff,” Rizzo said. “He misses bats, but he really does have an appreciation for the craft of pitching. You combine that with the stuff and the performance that he’s had and the durability and the makeup and the character he has, it was a good fit for us.”Boras represented Maddux, too, and said Maddux was as hypercompetitive off the mound as on it. From bowling and golf to “Jeopardy!” and Scattergories, Maddux sought every edge, and usually found it. Scherzer, Boras said, is the same way — but with a better fastball.The pitchers also took the same approach to free agency. Maddux was happy with the Chicago Cubs but told Boras he wanted to explore his market value in free agency, a path that led him to the Atlanta Braves. Scherzer, over dinner at Rocco’s Tacos in Orlando, Fla., last spring, told Boras the same thing: The Tigers’ six-year, $144 million offer did not represent the current market. He wanted to test free agency.“You really have to check your motivations,” Scherzer said. “It’s not easy turning down $144 million. The thing was, in my mind, I was not going to let that affect me. You have everybody talking about you, but for me, I could only have one singular goal, and that was to win with Detroit.”He added: “It’s a very easy trap to fall into when you try to prove people wrong. You go into that mentality: ‘I can, I am worth it.’ But you can’t think that way, because you’re taking away from baseball. Every time I stepped foot in the clubhouse, it was 100 percent about baseball.”Dave Dombrowski, the Tigers’ president, said he was surprised that Scherzer turned down the money, because he risked getting injured and making less in free agency. But Dombrowski was not surprised that Scherzer pitched so well: 18-5 with a 3.15 E.R.A. and 252 strikeouts. Scherzer is talented, Dombrowski said, and committed to his own evolution.The Tigers acquired Scherzer in a three-team, seven-player deal with Arizona and the Yankees in December 2009. He pitched well enough for two seasons, getting by with his usual mix of fastballs, sliders and changeups, but felt limited against left-handed hitters. His slider tended to break into the barrels of their bats. When he tried to start the slider outside so that it caught the back corner, the pitch would not obey.In the second half of the 2012 season, Scherzer worked with the pitching coach Jeff Jones on throwing his slider slower. Soon, the looping break was tumbling right to the back door, where the slider would not go. It was a curveball, and when Scherzer found a comfortable grip, he added it to his mix and quickly joined the league’s elite.Scherzer used the curve to help win the American League Cy Young Award in 2013. In New York the next January, on the dais at the baseball writers’ dinner, he sat beside Sandy Koufax and quizzed him about the curveball, eager to learn more about its shape and spin, and the mentality behind it. As Koufax talked, Scherzer typed notes to himself on his iPhone, so he would not forget.“My God,” Scherzer said, “could you imagine a better person in life to ever talk to about throwing a curveball?”Now Scherzer is on to that cutter, refining a fifth pitch to unleash on the National League. He said his philosophy was simple: Nobody stays the same, so the choice is easy.“That’s kind of my motto right now,” Scherzer said. “You either get better or you get worse. So for me, I’m focused, in every way, on getting better.”Advertisement