AdvertisementSupported byGlobal SoccerBy Rob HughesLONDON — What next for England in the Champions League? The Premier League attracts players from all over the world, and the television revenue it receives makes other national leagues green with envy.But right now in the UEFA Champions League, the English cannot buy a victory.Liverpool is gone already, eliminated in the group phase. Chelsea is holding on after a fortuitous draw in the French capital against Paris St.-Germain. On Tuesday, Manchester City was outplayed on its home field by Barcelona for the second year running. And on Wednesday, even more embarrassingly, Arsenal lost, 3-1, in its own stadium to A.S. Monaco.Losing is not humbling in itself. It happens to everyone, because no club has won back-to-back Champions League titles since the tournament started in 1992. But England’s teams, and its media, lose that perspective.Newspapers suggested before the Manchester City game that Barcelona looked desperate and ripe for the taking at Etihad Stadium. If Lionel Messi and Luis Suárez read the headlines, they were unimpressed. But they, at least, are Barça.Monaco has a relatively inexperienced team, and it was weakened by injuries and suspensions. But Monaco must have seen the papers, because its coach used such boastful headlines as “Arsenal On Easy Street” to motivate his players. Coach Leonardo Jardim, another of those Portuguese coaches who has tactics for everything, implied that it is right to respect the opponent, but not right to be cast as inferior.Arsenal’s pedigree under Arsène Wenger has seen them play in every Champions League season for the past 17 years. But Monaco has such a tight defense, such good discipline, that it had conceded just three goals in 17 games, and only one goal in its six Champions League matches up to Wednesday.Those who watch Monaco on a regular basis say its biggest asset is an ability to negate an opponent’s strengths through discipline and organization. Wenger knew what to expect because he, long ago, coached the team. He maintains cordial relationships and studies French soccer as if he never left it.Imagine, then, Wenger’s feelings on Wednesday. His Gunners tried to overrun Monaco from the start and put the contest out of reach before the second leg of the series on March 17. No early breakthrough came, though.Out of the blue after 38 minutes, the away team hit the net with its first shot. It was fired by Geoffrey Kondogbia, who later admitted he was just trying his luck. He was 35 yards out, but Arsenal barely moved to close down his space. When Kondogbia let fly with his left foot, the shot deflected off the chest of Arsenal defender Per Mertesacker, and the change in flight completely bamboozled goalkeeper David Ospina.Kondogbia isn’t a household name the way that Arsenal’s Mesut Ozil, Santi Cazorla and Alexis Sánchez are. But the grapevine speaks of Wenger considering whether he should buy Kondogbia, an athletic 22-year-old midfield player, for his own team.Why wouldn’t he? Wenger is partial to French talent and made Thierry Henry, once a Monaco player, into Arsenal’s all-time leading scorer.After the first goal, Wenger and the 60,000 Arsenal fans in attendance expected a reaction. It came in the guise of an increase in tempo, and once more, it seemed likely that Premier League speed and talent would overrun the cheeky visiting French team.Not so. Olivier Giroud, the Gunners’ main man when it comes to scoring, was getting into all the right places but making all the wrong shots. With the goal gaping in front of him, Giroud repeatedly fired off balance and high or wide.Monaco, by contrast, had a player whose head was cool enough to take the one chance put before him. Arsenal players knew all about Dimitar Berbatov because he scored against them when he played for Tottenham Hotspur and for Manchester United during his time in the Premier League.Now 34, he waits languidly while others, like the exciting and swift teenager Anthony Martial, create opportunities for him. Sure enough, Berbatov struck the second goal on 53 minutes. Wenger had spoken of this danger, warning that Monaco could strike like a reptile.The Bulgarian was deadly when Mertesacker wandered out of position, leaving a gap for Martial to feed Berbatov, who only had the goalkeeper to beat, which he did with an angled shot out of reach and inside the far post.Wenger showed his agitation: the lines on his brow deepened. He made changes, taking off the errant Giroud and bringing in the speedy Theo Walcott and later, Alex Oxlade-Chamberlain.Time was against Arsenal by that point, but one minute into added time at the end, the Ox struck with a fine shot from outside the penalty box. A 2-1 final might not have been too much to turn around in Monaco, but three minutes after the Chamberlain goal, things turned catastrophic for Arsenal when Yannick Ferreira-Carrasco was given the freedom to shoot in a third goal for Monaco.Wenger was livid and fearful at the same time. “A horrible night,” he said on television as soon as he left the field. “Congratulations to Monaco, but the second and third goals were suicidal.”He was asked at the postgame news conference if his players had been complacent. “I hope not,” Wenger responded. He repeated the phrase three times before adding: “They were well organized and physically very strong. They didn’t weaken the whole night, and we did.“We lost our nerve and our rationality on the pitch. It looks like the heart overruled the head, and at this level, it doesn’t work. The task now is massive.”Out of earshot, Berbatov had his say on TV. “Nobody expected it,” he said, “but you cannot say it is over because Arsenal are a good team. I don’t think they can afford to underestimate us; if they did, its bad for Arsenal.”Berbatov left his hardest shot for last. “Maybe,” he said, “we wanted it more than them.”Advertisement