By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSFEB. 28, 2015
AUBURN HILLS, Mich. —  Shane Larkin’s 3-point play in the final minute of the second overtime helped the Knicks end an eight-game skid with a 121-115 victory over the Detroit Pistons on Friday night.Larkin put the Knicks ahead by 4 points with 28 seconds remaining, and they held on to win a game that Detroit appeared to have control of after two quarters. The Pistons led by 18 in the second and by 12 at the half but blew what had appeared to be an easy game against the Knicks, who have the N.B.A.’s worst record.Detroit squandered a 5-point lead in the final minute of regulation, allowing the Knicks to tie the score at 95-95 on a pull-up 3-pointer by Langston Galloway with 6.3 seconds remaining.With his team down by 105-103 with 12 seconds left in the first overtime, Detroit’s Greg Monroe scored while drawing a foul, but he missed the ensuing free throw.AdvertisementThe Pistons would go on to miss several more crucial free throws in the second overtime.Andrea Bargnani scored 25 points for the Knicks. Lou Amundson added 17 points and 14 rebounds.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Andre Drummond had 21 points and 15 rebounds for Detroit, but the recently acquired point guard Reggie Jackson shot 5 of 24 from the field. The Pistons went 8 of 31 from 3-point range.AdvertisementTim Hardaway Jr., whose father is an assistant coach for the Pistons, scored 18 points for the Knicks. Down the stretch, the younger Hardaway played with a bandage above his left eye after receiving four stitches for a cut.The Pistons observed a moment of silence before the game for Earl Lloyd, the first black player in N.B.A. history. Lloyd died Thursday at 86. He played two seasons with Detroit and later coached the Pistons.Also Friday, Detroit assigned forward Quincy Miller to the team’s N.B.A. Development League affiliate in Grand Rapids, Mich.A version of this article appears in print on February 28, 2015, on Page D4 of the New York edition with the headline: Knicks Outlast Pistons to Halt a Skid.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.