By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSFEB. 27, 2015
Jaroslav Halak set a team record with his 33rd win of the season, and Ryan Strome scored a power-play goal in the first period to lift the Islanders to a 2-1 victory at home over the Calgary Flames on Friday night.Halak stopped 26 shots but was denied a shutout with 20.9 seconds left on a goal by Josh Jooris that cut Calgary’s deficit in half. The Islanders had made the score 2-0 with 41.3 seconds remaining on Cal Clutterbuck’s empty-net goal.“I’m not happy about it,” Halak said, referring to the spoiled shutout bid. “But we got the goal and we won, 2-1. They don’t give up. They play until the last second. I was glad when it was over.”The Islanders moved 2 points ahead of the Rangers for first place in the Metropolitan Division.Karri Ramo stopped 37 shots for the Flames, who were without the injured Mark Giordano, their leading scorer, and missed a chance to move into a wild-card position in the Western Conference playoff race.AdvertisementBRUINS 3, DEVILS 2 Ryan Spooner scored his first N.H.L. goal with 2 minutes 14 seconds left in overtime, and visiting Boston defeated the Devils after blowing a two-goal third-period lead.AdvertisementDaniel Paille and David Pastrnak scored for the Bruins, who won for only the second time in nine games.Niklas Svedberg had 29 saves starting in place of Tuukka Rask, who had played in the last 18 games for Boston.Travis Zajac and Jordin Tootoo had goals for the Devils. Cory Schneider made 31 saves as the Devils lost their second straight and fell 9 points behind Boston in the race for the last wild-card spot in the Eastern Conference.The Bruins, who swept the three-game season series, are 4 points ahead of idle Florida for the final wild-card position.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.AVALANCHE 5, STARS 4 Ryan O’Reilly scored on the first shot of a shootout, and that was enough for Colorado to win at Dallas.Colorado’s Semyon Varlamov stopped all three Stars shots in the shootout after O’Reilly lifted the puck over Dallas’s Kari Lehtonen and in off the crossbar.HURRICANES 3, CAPITALS 0 Anton Khudobin stopped 28 shots to earn his first shutout of the season and help Carolina beat visiting Washington.Brett Bellemore and Jeff Skinner scored, and Nathan Gerbe added an empty-net goal with 10.4 seconds left as the Hurricanes won for the fourth time in six games. Carolina, last in the Metropolitan Division, moved 3 points behind seventh-place Columbus.AdvertisementLIGHTNING 4, BLACKHAWKS 0 Ben Bishop made 28 saves for his second shutout, Steven Stamkos scored two goals, and Tampa Bay won at home over Chicago.Brian Boyle and Ryan Callahan also scored for the Lightning. Stamkos has 11 goals and 17 points in nine games against Chicago.The Blackhawks’ backup goalie, Scott Darling, stopped 25 shots.TIMONEN HEADS TO CHICAGO The Blackhawks acquired defenseman Kimmo Timonen from the Philadelphia Flyers for a second-round 2015 draft pick and a conditional 2016 fourth-round pick.Timonen, 39, a native of Finland, is set to return after being sidelined all season because of blood clots found in his leg and lungs last summer. He had been expected to retire after this season, although the trade could change his plans.A version of this article appears in print on February 28, 2015, on Page D2 of the New York edition with the headline: Halak’s 33rd Win of Season Sets an Isles Record.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.