AdvertisementSupported byPrinceton 67, Yale 49By Brendan PruntyPRINCETON, N.J. — Inside the locker room of the season’s last undefeated team in women’s college basketball is a hastily written checklist. It names the other seven teams in the Ivy League, with two underscore marks next to each abbreviated name. This is how Princeton is taking inventory of its season.There is a giant “10-0” written with a big, bold, black marker, and circled twice.“This is our little challenge board throughout the season,” Princeton Coach Courtney Banghart said. “Every time we played a different team from a different conference, we’d say our record against that conference. ‘We’re 2-0 against the A.C.C. We’re 1-0 against the Big East. We’re 1-0 against the A-10.’ It’s silly, but it’s our thing.”Slowly but surely, it is becoming a thing for the rest of the country as well. After Friday night’s 67-49 pummeling of Yale, Princeton is 10-0 in the Ivy League. Most important — and most notable — the Tigers are 26-0 over all, and they rank alongside the Kentucky men’s program as the only Division I teams without a loss this season.“It still feels a little surreal to me,” the junior forward Annie Tarakchian said. “Each and every day, I’ve just been enjoying the girls next to me and having a good time.”Starting with Saturday’s senior night send-off against Brown, four games separate the Tigers from perfection. While the last three of those games are on the road, they will be played against teams — Cornell, Columbia and Penn — that Princeton has already beaten by an average margin of 32 points. Entering the N.C.A.A. tournament with an unbeaten record is certainly within the Tigers’ reach, and exactly what they are aiming for.Banghart — who set the program’s career record for victories on Friday night, winning her 164th game in just her eighth season — confessed that she was gunning for 30 wins (with no losses, of course) because it would give her Tigers the most wins ever by a team in Ivy League history — men’s or women’s.Currently, the record for wins in a season is held by the 1970-71 Penn men’s team, which started 28-0 before falling in the N.C.A.A. tournament.“You better believe that I want these guys to be in the record books,” she said. “It’s going to be very hard to beat 30-0,” because teams are supposed to play 29 games. The Tigers were allowed an extra game this season because they played a game in Cancun, Mexico.Princeton’s offense is rooted in three things opposing defenses have found increasingly difficult to guard against: speed, physicality and finesse. With guard Blake Dietrick, who scored 18 points to lead the Tigers against Yale, racing up and down the floor, Princeton is able to open lanes for its powerful forwards. Tarakchian, who averages almost 10 rebounds a game, causes matchup problems for other forwards because of her ability to shoot.The game against Yale on Friday was the latest case in point. Two weeks ago in New Haven, the Tigers had their closest decision of the season, winning by 6 against the Bulldogs. Ahead by 16 at the half on Friday, Princeton rode a 19-4 run at the start of the second half to turn the game into a rout. “We knew that game was an aberration,” Dietrick said of the previous contest against Yale.Princeton’s biggest problem could occur off the court: convincing the selection committee that it is worthy of a seed high enough to give the Tigers two home games to begin the tournament.Banghart’s team might make that the next item on the dry-erase board.“I’m enjoying every second of it,” Banghart said. “I know how hard it is to win. It’s hard to win any game you play. I’ve been enjoying every day of it.”Advertisement