By TIM ROHANFEB. 27, 2015
PORT ST. LUCIE, Fla. —  With about a dozen cameras trained on his every move, Matt Harvey toed the rubber on the mound Friday and stared down a batter for the first time in about 18 months. It did not matter that it was February, that the batter was his teammate and that the teammate was not going to swing at a single pitch.Welcome to Harvey hype, which is likely to continue for a while. In some ways, the Harvey coverage is a New York bookend to the news media swarm in Tampa chronicling every move made by Alex Rodriguez. But Harvey is coming back from an injury, and Rodriguez from a yearlong drug suspension. And Harvey, the Mets hope, will probably be a huge presence in New York long after Rodriguez has moved on to retirement.On Friday, Harvey threw about 40 pitches. Taking turns in the batter’s box were David Wright, Michael Cuddyer, Curtis Granderson and Daniel Murphy, or as Harvey called them, borrowing a phrase from the Yankees, the Mets’ Core Four. This early in camp, it would have been almost taboo for them to swing. But the occasion was still sort of momentous. It was the first time Harvey had faced “live” hitters in his long comeback from Tommy John surgery.“I was kind of surprised about how well things felt,” Harvey said after he finished. “I felt like I picked up right where I left off.”AdvertisementLooking for feedback, Harvey approached Wright when the session was over and asked if the ball was coming out of his hand the same as it had before he was injured in August 2013.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“He felt like it was very similar, if not better, than before,” Harvey said.Wright said, “The biggest thing was that it looked like the ball was coming out free and easy.”AdvertisementThere were hints all day that Harvey was getting closer to truly returning, that anticipation was building. The crowds watching Jacob deGrom and Jon Niese throw were much smaller than those who watched Harvey. And Harvey threw everything in his repertoire, even his slider. Manager Terry Collins guessed that Harvey’s last pitch went about 94 to 95 miles per hour, which is regular-season speed.“I was in compete mode,” Harvey said. “I wasn’t holding back.”Harvey’s next small step might come next week, when he faces batters who actually swing. Then next Friday, Harvey will face an opponent for the first time, the Detroit Tigers. That game will be the Mets’ spring training home opener and the first televised on SNY.It will be still one more moment in which Harvey will be front and center and everything else for the Mets.A version of this article appears in print on February 28, 2015, on Page D6 of the New York edition with the headline: No Swings vs. Harvey, but Cameras Don’t Miss.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.