By KAREN CROUSEFEB. 27, 2015
PALM BEACH GARDENS, Fla. —  Rory McIlroy’s four worldwide victories, including the British Open and the P.G.A. Championship, made for a memorable 2014, but it did not give the full measure of his excellence.In 17 PGA Tour starts, McIlroy did not miss a cut and did not finish outside the top 25. One of his goals for 2015 was to clone that consistency.So much for that.McIlroy, who was making his American season debut this week at the Honda Classic, chased an opening round of three-over-par 73 at P.G.A. National’s Champion course with a 74 on Friday, leaving him three strokes outside the projected cut line of four over. The second round was not completed because of weather delays totaling nearly four hours.Before play was suspended because of darkness, Brendan Steele birdied all four holes he played to climb to eight under. The leader in the clubhouse was Patrick Reed, who was at six under after consecutive 67s.Advertisement“I didn’t know if today was ever really going to end, with the weather and the rain,” Reed said, adding, “It made for a long day.”AdvertisementAnd a long weekend for McIlroy, the world No. 1. He opened his Friday round with a bogey and did not make his first and only birdie until his 14th hole. After showing fine form on the range and during the Wednesday pro-am, McIlroy lost his swing as he might a napkin in a gust of wind, and he was not happy about it.“I don’t like missing cuts,” McIlroy said, adding, “I’m not going to be playing this weekend, which is not nice.”The low round of the day came out of McIlroy’s threesome, which was like rubbing his nose in his score. The magician who managed to make his free weekend disappear was Brooks Koepka, who followed his opening 78 with a 64.Koepka won his maiden Tour event, the Phoenix Open, on the same weekend that McIlroy captured the Dubai Desert Classic on the European Tour. Neither distinguished himself much in the early going Friday. A bogey at the group’s seventh hole, No. 16, left Koepka at eight over, four strokes behind McIlroy.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Their rounds diverged on the 550-yard, par-5 18th after McIlroy’s second shot found the water on the right and Koepka’s second shot caromed off the left grandstands and nestled in no-man’s land, between the back of the grandstands and the practice green.While McIlroy made his bogey, Koepka waited for a ruling. He received a free drop on the other side of the grandstand, hit a flop shot to 23 feet and made the birdie putt.“I guess you could say it was kind of the kick-start that I needed,” said Koepka, who finished with four birdies (and no bogeys) on the second nine.McIlroy limped home with bogeys at Nos. 6, 7 and 9. His last bogey came on a three-putt. He finished with 31 putts to Koepka’s 23.Advertisement“He was giving himself chances on that front nine, and he holed putts to get himself back in there,” McIlroy said, referring to Koepka. “It was an impressive performance.”Koepka, 24, a native of Palm Beach County, is a year younger and eight PGA Tour titles poorer than McIlroy, a transplant to the county. For Koepka, digging in to make the cut in his home Tour event, in front of people who had watched him grow up, was a victory in itself.“I have so many family and friends out that you almost don’t want to let them down,” Koepka said. “That’s kind of how it feels.” He added: “The last two days was a grind, with the weather and everything. So I’m very pleased.”A version of this article appears in print on February 28, 2015, on Page D4 of the New York edition with the headline: As a Local Favorite Rises, McIlroy Will Take an Unexpected Weekend Off.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.