AdvertisementSupported byBy Billy WitzTAMPA, Fla. — The Yankees’ grand experiment of spring training, teaching Alex Rodriguez to play first base, began with a rudimentary lesson: Don’t forget your glove.The new first baseman’s glove that Rodriguez had to procure vanished Friday morning, leaving Rodriguez to do drills at the position with his third baseman’s glove.Rodriguez spent a little more than 10 minutes rotating in with Mark Teixeira and a nonroster invitee, Kyle Roller, working on fielding bunts and soft grounders to the right side of the infield. The first basemen were required to make throws to third base and toss to the pitchers covering first. The hardest part?“Finding my first-base mitt,” Rodriguez said. Asked if it was broken in yet, Rodriguez said, “I’ve got to find it first.”The mystery was solved when Rodriguez wrapped up a four-minute session with the news media and prepared to leave. A clubhouse attendant pointed to the glove atop a locker and told him it had been found in the trainer’s room. What was most striking about Rodriguez’s first workout at first base was how disengaged he appeared to be. While other Yankees did the drills at close to game speed, pitchers pouncing off the mound and fielders focusing on their footwork, Rodriguez went about his work with a degree of nonchalance. He casually flipped a ball to a pitcher covering first, leaving it behind his target, and he looped an off-balance throw to third base that bounced wide of its mark.Teixeira, a former Gold Glove first baseman who made the transition from third base early in his career, carried on a dialogue after each grounder with Roller about the finer points of footwork, balance and taking proper angles to the ball. Rodriguez, as if he were a third wheel, did not participate in the discussion.Asked about Rodriguez’s perceived indifference, Manager Joe Girardi said: “I think he’s paying attention and trying to learn. He’s never taken balls over there. He’s never seen what a bunt defense looks like over there. I think he’s trying to take it all in, and that’s going to take some time.”Girardi said he planned to play Rodriguez at first base at some point during spring training because he needed to assess whether Rodriguez, returning from a yearlong suspension by Major League Baseball, could play there in the regular season. Rodriguez, 39, will also be asked to back up Chase Headley at third base, where he also worked out Friday.Teixeira has not been healthy enough to play more than 123 games in any of the last three seasons, and when he struggled last year in his return from wrist surgery, the Yankees discovered how hard it was to plug someone in. Headley and Kelly Johnson, both new to first base, were far from comfortable there. Catcher Brian McCann also played first last year. Now the Yankees have the left-handed-hitting Garrett Jones, acquired from Miami, to serve as Teixeira’s primary backup. But Girardi said Jones might also be needed in right field to spell Carlos Beltran. Girardi may also be looking for a right-handed hitter to step in for Teixeira at times, so Rodriguez could be an option at first base. “Anybody can play first base, but not anybody can play it well,” Teixeira said. “It’s not the ground balls; it’s not the throwing. It’s where to be.”Rodriguez said that the session was too brief for him to have learned much, and that he would be out early Saturday to work with the infield coach Joe Espada more at first base. He repeated his mantras of the last week: He is eager to learn and will do whatever Girardi wants him to do.Asked if he was afraid of embarrassing himself, Rodriguez laughed. “Yeah, sure,” he said. “Any time I’m on a baseball field, I’m close to getting embarrassed.”INSIDE PITCHShortstop Brendan Ryan, who is vying to back up Didi Gregorius, will be sidelined for about five days with a strained muscle behind his rib cage. Ryan said he injured himself last week doing biceps curls. ... Joe Girardi expected to know on Saturday who would be the starting pitchers next week for the first few games of the spring training season.Advertisement