AdvertisementSupported byRugbyBy Huw RichardsCARDIFF, Wales — The clash that has loomed since the Rugby World Cup draw nearly three years ago will take place Saturday night when the defending champion New Zealand plays France, the team it beat in the 2011 final, in the quarterfinal here in Cardiff.That contest leaps out from the quartet of clashes between teams from the Northern and Southern Hemispheres this weekend. Ireland will play Argentina in Cardiff on Sunday while Twickenham, England, hosts Wales versus South Africa on Saturday, and Scotland against Australia the following evening.France was propelled into the path of the favorites when it lost 24-9 to Ireland in Cardiff on Sunday. The Irish undoubtedly have the better team, but there is little doubt New Zealand would rather have played them.No matter that this is a distinctly ordinary French team. So, too, was the team of 2007 that ambushed the All Blacks at the same stage on the same Cardiff field, the 1999 vintage that sank the Kiwis in the semifinal and even that of 2011, which pushed New Zealand all the way in the final, losing by the slimmest of margins, 8-7.France spooks New Zealand like no other team. It is the one team in the world that might believe it has a better chance against the All Blacks than against Argentina.“Today Ireland deserved to win. We don’t have the choice so we have to play New Zealand,” was French Coach Philippe Saint-André’s good-humored response when it was suggested Sunday night that he might not have minded losing to Ireland. “We know it is a tough game, but we are not out of the competition. We need to stick together, and to play much better than we did today.”Ireland is the one European team that will be favored against a Southern Hemisphere team. Scotland seems unlikely to trouble Australia, while battered Wales — which had a seventh back, Liam Williams, ruled out of the tournament Sunday — must face the unrestrained physicality of South Africa. But Ireland is warily respectful of Argentina.“The big attraction of playing Argentina is the seven-day turnaround, not because we want to play them,” said Ireland Coach Joe Schmidt. “They will challenge us immensely.”Cardiff’s Millennium Stadium — soon to be renamed Principality Stadium — is a home away from home for the Irish. Ireland has a 6-3 record there against Wales, and the venue has hosted some of the greatest European triumphs of Irish provincial teams. On Sunday night, the green-clad hordes in a crowd of 72,000 created what its stand-in captain Jamie Heaslip, a big game veteran, reckoned was “an atmosphere which surpassed pretty much anything I’ve played in.”Ireland, though, like Wales, is seriously banged up. It lost three key players — its inspirational lock forward and captain Paul O’Connell, the midfield playmaker Jonny Sexton and back-row forward Peter O’Mahony — to injuries during the victory over France. Another back-row forward, Sean O’Brien, is likely to be disciplined for punching a French player.The applause of Irish fans as O’Connell, a veteran of 108 matches for his country who turns 36 this month, went off on a stretcher with what coach Schmidt reckoned was probably an upper hamstring injury, had a valedictory air. If it was his last international rugby match, he will join New Zealand’s 118-times capped prop Tony Woodcock, ruled out on Saturday, as a legendary forward forced to say goodbye while his team is still in the World Cup.All of the remaining World Cup matches will be played in the two national rugby stadiums, Twickenham, England’s home outside London, and the Millennium in Wales. And while England’s team is the most disappointed of the 12 eliminated teams, the stadiums in its provincial cities of Milton Keynes, Brighton, Exeter, Gloucester, Leicester and Newcastle all produced capacity crowds and a vibrant atmosphere.Brighton hosted the outstanding contest and result, when Japan beat South Africa on the opening weekend. Rugby union’s ingrained hierarchies were shaken, but did not fall. The last eight are the teams expected before the tournament, with the exception of England.The Tier Two nations remained on the short end of scheduling, refereeing and disciplinary procedures. But there was clear progress.Japan, whose 28-18 victory over the United States on Sunday night made it the first team ever to win three pool stage matches and not make the knockout phase, at least had the consolation prize — along with ever-improving Georgia, Italy and England — of a third-place finish securing qualification for the 2019 World Cup, when it will be host.Those outcomes leave the Pacific Islanders from Fiji — which was unlucky to land in the “Pool of Death” — Samoa and Tonga to chase places in 2019. Nor was it a happy tournament for North America, with the United States and Canada a combined 0-8.Even Namibia, still winless after five tournaments, departed happy after claiming its first competition point in a spirited 17-16 loss to Georgia and scoring on its final play of the event, cutting its deficit against Argentina to 64-19.“The future looks bright for Namibia rugby. Proud of the boys,” retiring captain Jacques Burger posted on Twitter.Advertisement