AdvertisementSupported byBy Pat BorziCEDAR FALLS, Iowa — Every time Seth Tuttle sits in the renovated video room at Northern Iowa’s McLeod Center, in one of the new black leather seats with the Panthers’ logo affixed, his gaze shifts to his left. A purple-tinted photograph of jubilant Panthers players celebrating the program’s signature victory, a 2010 upset of  Kansas, the overall top seed in the N.C.A.A. tournament that season, covers the lower half of the wall.Northern Iowa has not been back to the N.C.A.A. tournament since that magical run to the round of 16, which ended with a 59-52 loss to Michigan State. Tuttle, a 6-foot-8 senior center, thinks about that a lot because he cannot escape it. More photos from that time, the last of five N.C.A.A. appearances over seven seasons, are displayed in the players’ lounge down the hall.“I look at that stuff all the time,” he said. “I don’t know what it feels like because I never got to experience it. From the moment I walked on campus, that’s what I wanted to experience.”It may be coming.With five starters back and Tuttle as the catalyst, Northern Iowa (27-2) has won a program-record 16 consecutive games, finished 15-0 at home and climbed to No. 10 in this week’s Associated Press poll, its highest ranking ever. Tuttle developed into one of the country’s best all-around players, one so savvy that Coach Ben Jacobson lets him, instead of the point guards, call the Panthers’ plays.A 70-54 upset of the defending Missouri Valley Conference champion, Wichita State, here on Jan. 31 gained the Panthers national attention. Saturday afternoon’s rematch with the No. 11 Shockers in Wichita is so big that ESPN’s “College GameDay” crew will be on hand. The teams may meet a third time in the M.V.C. tournament in St. Louis in March.Through Wednesday’s games, Northern Iowa ranked 15th nationally in Rating Percentage Index, a key evaluation tool used by the N.C.A.A. tournament selection committee. Wichita State was 14th.“Now we’re in the mix with them,” Jacobson said. “It’s going to be a different deal and a great experience to be in that environment, to see if we can raise our level to the level we’re going to see from them.”A recommitment to team defense and Tuttle’s all-around play put the Panthers in this position.Northern Iowa has been known for defense since Jacobson succeeded Greg McDermott as head coach in 2006. But last season, the Panthers slipped. Jacobson presumed N.C.A.A. rule changes eliminating hand-checking and redefining the block/charge call would lead to higher scoring, so he dropped his best defensive drills to emphasize offense.That proved to be a mistake. Northern Iowa allowed 69.3 points per game, by far the highest in Jacobson’s tenure, in a 16-15 season. Seven losses were by 6 points or fewer.“Looking back on it, I never should have done it,” Jacobson said. “We couldn’t get a defensive stop. So we would lose close games.“I didn’t fully understand how different we looked and how much toughness we lacked until we got into league play this year and I started watching our team from last season play the same teams. So I’m watching the games and I wanted to throw the remote at the TV. I couldn’t believe I allowed us to get to that point.”Jacobson told Tuttle he needed to improve defensively, and his teammates followed. This season, the Panthers rank fourth nationally in scoring defense at 53.9 points per game.“It’s almost a night-and-day difference,” point guard Wes Washpun said.Tuttle embraced the challenge.“What Coach talked to me about quite a bit was making sure I do everything the right way all the time, not taking any plays off, leading by example for the rest of the guys,” he said.“At the defensive end, I had to make a couple of changes as well, as we all did. Last year, we kind of let people get by with not being where they were supposed to be, or not rotating when they were supposed to. This year, we don’t let that happen.”Conference coaches rave about Tuttle, who leads the Panthers in scoring (15.6 points per game), rebounding (6.6) and assists (3.2) while topping the conference with a 62.7 field-goal percentage. Loyola-Chicago Coach Porter Moser, a former assistant to Rick Majerus at Saint Louis, said Majerus, who died in 2012, would have loved Tuttle’s game.“This, by far, would be his favorite player in the country,” Moser said. “He’s a great passer. He can shoot it. He can pass out of the double-team. He is a coach’s dream. You don’t see post players with that kind of feel and command of their team.”Tuttle grew up in Sheffield, Iowa, a town of about 1,200 people in the north-central part of the state, with one traffic light and a nine-hole golf course. As a senior quarterback at West Fork High School, Tuttle was so adept at reading defenses and calling plays that Eric Burt, then the head coach, scrapped his single-wing offense and installed a spread for him.“He would come in every day and talk about plays and draw them up,” Burt said in a telephone interview. “It was pretty impressive.”Wichita State Coach Gregg Marshall said he had never heard of a center calling plays in basketball. Jacobson had not, either, until Tuttle arrived.But Tuttle, who aspires to become a college coach, has a knack for spotting weaknesses in an opponent’s defense. Northern Iowa has two savvy point guards in Deon Mitchell and Washpun, yet Tuttle remains in charge on the floor, frequently pointing teammates to specific spots.“He’s got that kind of quarterback/point guard/starting pitcher mentality,” Jacobson said. “It isn’t something where we sat down and said, ‘O.K., Seth is going to call the plays.’ He’s just kind of taken that on.”Tuttle said: “I did it throughout high school. Over the years, I think he got more comfortable with me doing that. He understands I can see what they’re in and what might be open. Especially in the first half, and we’re on the other end, instead of having him yell, I’ll just throw out a play that I know is going to work and we might have a good look off it.”Last Saturday, Bradley Coach Geno Ford took the unusual step of playing a diamond-and-one defense on Tuttle, positioning a guard facing Tuttle in the post to deny him the ball. Tuttle generally handles the ball on every offensive possession.“Personally, I got a little annoyed,” said Tuttle, who took only four shots. He made them all, for 9 points, and grabbed 8 rebounds in a 56-39 victory.Ford said his team had no chance defending Tuttle any other way. He compared Tuttle to Doug McDermott, the former Creighton star, for his impact on a game.“We know he’s a good rebounder and an unbelievable passer,” Ford said. “He’s the best frontcourt passing big man in our league. The level he’s playing at is the level that McDermott played at as a senior. McDermott scored more, but if you’re talking complete game, I can give you one heck of an argument about Tuttle.”Tuttle appreciates the praise, but does not obsess over it. The photos in the players’ lounge and video room at McLeod Center offer daily reminders of potentially meaningful times ahead.“All the buzz and all the media is nice, and it’s nice to see your name and your school up there on the TV whenever you can,” Tuttle said. “But we have higher goals and stuff we haven’t accomplished yet that we really want to.”Advertisement