By ANDREW KNOLL and BILLY WITZFEB. 27, 2015
EL SEGUNDO, Calif. —  A lone figure skated to the top of a face-off circle, receiving passes from a coach and firing pucks at the net. All three shots sailed wide, slamming against the plexiglass as two youth hockey players scurried past on their way to practice.“It’s Voynov,” one said. “No way! Does that mean practice hasn’t started yet?”The other said: “It already ended. He can’t practice with the team, so he’s on his own. Remember him?”The man on the ice was Kings defenseman Slava Voynov, who helped Los Angeles win two Stanley Cup championships in three seasons but has spent this season in exile after being accused of domestic violence.On Monday, Voynov, 25, is scheduled to be in a Torrance, Calif., courtroom for the first day of his trial on a felony count of corporal injury to a spouse. Voynov pleaded not guilty to the charge. If convicted, he could face up to nine years in prison, and as a Russian citizen, he could also be deported.AdvertisementVoynov’s case has drifted to the background since his arrest in October, but it nevertheless provides a subtext to the season for the Kings, who have grappled with unusual salary-cap problems and managing a lineup without one of their most significant players. While Voynov’s future hangs in the balance, the Kings have vaulted back into the playoff picture. Entering Friday night’s game against the Anaheim Ducks, they were sixth in the Western Conference and had won eight of their past nine games.AdvertisementVoynov was arrested on suspicion of domestic violence on Oct. 20, less than two weeks into the season. With the N.F.L. still defending its handling of the Ray Rice domestic abuse case, the N.H.L.suspended Voynov later that day, pending the outcome of his legal situation.Voynov has served as a prominent example of how professional sports leagues have changed their approach to domestic violence cases since video surfaced of Rice striking his fiancée, whom he has since married. No longer is it viewed as appropriate for leagues and their franchises to allow players to compete in games or participate in practices until their cases are adjudicated.“There’s no question in my mind that if this had happened a year or two ago, the response would have been very different, as it would have been different in the N.F.L. or Major League Baseball,” said Kim Gandy, president of the National Network to End Domestic Violence. “There really has been a sea change since the Ray Rice incident became public. It really made the teams and the leagues sit up and take notice. They realized that their fans held them responsible for lionizing abusers by allowing them to represent the teams.”During a pretrial hearing in December, a Redondo Beach detective testified that Voynov’s wife, Marta Varlamova, had told him that Voynov threw her to the ground, kicked her and choked her. The officer testified that Varlamova had said that Voynov pushed her into a flat-screen television that was mounted to their bedroom wall, opening a cut that required eight stitches to close. However, both Voynov and Varlamova, through their lawyers, have described the encounter as an accident.Voynov skates regularly at the El Segundo rink where the Kings practice. But he is prohibited from working out with his teammates, a point the league made clear when it fined the Kings $100,000 in December after allowing Voynov to practice with the team. He is permitted to use the team’s facilities, such as the rink and the weight room, and to work with its coaching staff, so long as no other members of the team are present.“Guys see him at the rink,” said Dustin Brown, the Kings’ captain. “It’s not awkward, but it’s uncomfortable because everybody knows his situation. It’s not the same, but like an injured guy, you’re not around the guys as much. I’m sure he’s trying to do his best to stay ready if and when that time comes, but I’m sure he’s focused on other stuff.”The Kings have moved on without Voynov, although they first had to navigate complex salary-cap and personnel problems brought on by an indefinite suspension with pay.AdvertisementGeneral Manager Dean Lombardi was critical of the N.H.L. for its slow handling of the Kings’ finances. Before being granted a salary-cap exception in November for Voynov’s $4.17 million salary, the Kings were able to dress only 17 skaters against Philadelphia in October and only five defensemen against Vancouver in November because of financial constraints.Coach Darryl Sutter also struggled to replace Voynov in certain roles, particularly on the second power-play unit. Sutter has also tested the stamina of the team’s top defenseman, Drew Doughty, who leads the N.H.L. in minutes played and is averaging about three and a half minutes more per game than he did last season.Defensemen Brayden McNabb, Jamie McBain and Jeff Schultz have seen some expansion in their roles because of Voynov’s suspension and injuries.“They’re good people,” center Jarret Stoll said. “They’ve come right in and fit right in system-wise in the way they think the game, the way they see the game and the way they act. They’re pros. It doesn’t matter how old you are; you have to play the right way, especially on this team.”Defensemen Matt Greene and Jake Muzzin credited a more collective, more cohesive defensive effort for the Kings’ recent surge, praising the improved defensive play of the team’s forwards.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Kings further strengthened their defense Wednesday, acquiring the veteran Andrej Sekera in a trade with the Carolina Hurricanes. Sekera, 27, was considered one of the top defensemen available as Monday’s trade deadline approached.Lombardi offered a cryptic response when asked about the impact that the acquisition of Sekera would have if Voynov were reinstated before season’s end.“There are a number of moving parts that we’ve kind of looked at,” he told reporters Wednesday. “Our formulas on the board look like they are from a physics project.”Sutter said the team’s connected play on defense was more a matter of emphasis than adjustment.“If you can’t play well in your own zone with and without the puck, then you’re not a playoff team,” said Sutter, who helped bring the Kings their first two Cups after more than four decades in the league.He added, “If you’re not prepared to play that way, then you’re like the old Kings.”On Monday, the team will continue its chase for a playoff berth while preparing for a game in Edmonton, while Voynov may sit in court, one keeping an eye on the other as they move down tracks that may or may not intersect.A version of this article appears in print on February 28, 2015, on Page D1 of the New York edition with the headline: Kings Are Surging Without Key Player Who Awaits a Trial.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.