By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSFEB. 28, 2015
The baseball players association president, Tony Clark, said in Goodyear, Ariz., that there were continuing discussions about playing major league exhibition games in Cuba, now that Havana and Washington have moved toward renewing diplomatic ties. Clark said that there had been conversations about games in Cuba this spring but that there was not enough time to complete details.Major league teams regularly held spring training camps in Cuba in the 1940s and ’50s, and the Cincinnati Reds had a Class AAA affiliate in Havana before Fidel Castro banned professional sports. The Baltimore Orioles played a two-game exhibition series against the Cuban national team in 1999.RODRIGUEZ MAY PLAY Alex Rodriguez might be in the Yankees’ lineup for Tuesday’s spring training opener against the Philadelphia Phillies in Clearwater, Fla.Yankees Manager Joe Girardi said a decision would come Monday.Rodriguez was suspended for the 2014 season because for violations of baseball’s drug agreement and labor contract.With the re-signing of Chase Headley to start at third base, Rodriguez is competing for at-bats as the designated hitter. He might receive limited playing time at third and first bases.INJURIES The Chicago White Sox ace left-hander Chris Sale has a fracture in his right foot and may miss opening day. The team said he was expected to be sidelined at least three weeks. Sale, who was injured in an accident at his home on Friday, had X-rays taken of his foot Saturday at a hospital in Glendale, Ariz. He was to have more tests after the swelling went down. ... Tampa Bay Rays reliever Ronald Belisario fractured his nonthrowing shoulder in a swimming pool accident and was not expected to be ready for the beginning of the season.A version of this article appears in print on March 1, 2015, on Page SP4 of the New York edition with the headline: Exhibition Games Seen as Possible for Cuba.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.