By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSFEB. 28, 2015
BOSTON —  Stealing a peek first over his right shoulder and then his left, Ryan Hill held off hard charges by Ben Blankenship and Evan Jager on Saturday to win the first two-mile run in the USA Indoor Track & Field Championships in 84 years.“It’s a steppingstone,” Hill, a 10-time all-American at North Carolina State, said after winning his first United States title in 8 minutes 26.72 seconds at the Reggie Lewis Track and Athletic Center. “I haven’t made an Olympic team yet, so these kinds of things are huge for me.”Chris Derrick, who won his third consecutive United States cross-country title this month, took the lead in the sixth lap, pulling a single-file pack through the mile in 4:17.40.With a half-mile to go, Taylor Gilland — a Boston mergers and acquisitions analyst running among the professionals — surged into the lead, breaking things open. Jager, the American record-holder in the steeplechase, quickly took over, but Hill took off at the bell.Advertisement“In the past, I made the mistake of just letting them get away,” Hill said. “I wanted to be on the leader with a lap to go.”AdvertisementIn the women’s mile, Shannon Rowbury took control just past the halfway point and won in 4:34.40. Rowbury, whose successful indoor season included winning the Wanamaker Mile at the Millrose Games, plans to come back Sunday in the two-mile.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Will Claye dominated the long jump with the six best jumps of the day, winning at 26 feet ¼ inch. He will also go for a double when he competes in the triple jump Sunday.In the women’s long jump, Funmi Jimoh, a 2008 Olympian, won at 20-10 ¾.Erik Kynard successfully defended his high jump title at 7-8. Despite competing in his first serious competition of the season, Kynard, the 2012 Olympic silver medalist, took three unsuccessful attempts at Hollis Conway’s 24-year-old American indoor record of 7-10 ½.Christian Cantwell won his fifth American indoor title in the shot put with a toss of 66-11 ½.Sam Kendricks, who turned pro after winning the 2014 N.C.A.A. and United States outdoor pole vault titles as a junior at Mississippi, cleared 18-10 ¾ for the victory.Also winning their first national titles were Jeremy Taiwo (heptathlon, 6,273 points), Felisha Johnson (weight throw, 76-11 ¼) and Manteo Mitchell at (300 meters, 32.86).A version of this article appears in print on March 1, 2015, on Page SP10 of the New York edition with the headline: Hill Holds on to Win First Two-Mile Run in 84 Years.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.