By ANDREW KEHFEB. 28, 2015
There was a somber undercurrent before the Knicks’ game against the Toronto Raptors on Saturday night as the organization paid tribute to Anthony Mason, a former player who died early Saturday after suffering congestive heart failure just over three weeks ago.Mason, who was 48, spent five seasons with the Knicks, from 1991 to 1996, and during those years personified the club’s gritty identity. Coach Derek Fisher said during his pregame news conference at Madison Square Garden that Mason had embodied the spirit the current Knicks were hoping to establish as they tried to rebuild their roster.“As you try to talk to players about how to play the game and how to have a role or be selfless within a team, he’s one of the guys that quickly comes to mind that you can always use as an example of how you can be extremely impactful on a team without necessarily scoring 20 points a game,” Fisher said.Mason, who grew up in Queens, was an important contributor during the Knicks’ 1994 run to the finals. He played for four other N.B.A. teams in his career before retiring after the 2002-3 season. Mason had legal troubles and other off-court problems, but Knicks fans remembered him fondly.About 15 minutes before tipoff, when the stands were still sparsely filled, Mason’s photograph was displayed on the Garden’s scoreboards while the public address announcer recited a short tribute. “A product of the city streets, he carried the hopes and dreams of his native city through one of the greatest periods in Knicks history,” the announcer said.AdvertisementFans were then asked to observe a moment of silence. During the game’s first timeout, the team showed highlights from Mason’s career on the video screen, drawing warm cheers and a partial standing ovation from the crowd.AdvertisementMason remained a presence around the team after his retirement, making occasional public appearances alongside current and former Knicks players.In the Knicks’ locker room before the game, Tim Hardaway Jr., 22, recalled when his father, Tim Hardaway, and Mason were teammates on the Miami Heat during the 2000-1 season. He laughed as he remembered Mason’s distinctive haircuts.“He just treated me like I was one of his,” Hardaway said. “All I know is, every time I was around him, he had great energy, great passion, great love.”A version of this article appears in print on March 1, 2015, on Page SP9 of the New York edition with the headline: After Tributes for Mason at Garden, the Knicks Topple the Raptors.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.