By HARVEY ARATONFEB. 28, 2015
They arrived four years ago, a small army of prize recruits that was supposedly Coach Steve Lavin’s message to the college basketball establishment that St. John’s was back, and perhaps soon to be better than ever.But college basketball is not the best place to make long-term plans, and Lavin’s players were not the caliber of the one-and-done stars whom John Calipari annually draws to Kentucky.“They came here in the midst of a total drought,” Lavin said after his seniors earned perhaps the signature victory of their careers, an 81-70 drubbing of Georgetown on Saturday at Madison Square Garden. “Everyone forgets these kids committed to us over schools like U.C.L.A., Syracuse, UConn and top programs that had it rolling. They committed on the faith and belief that we were going to build something special.”Growth surely occurred, from 13 victories when the recruits were freshmen, to 17, to 20 a year ago. But instead of N.C.A.A. tournament bids and March Madness, there were mainly painful defections, with Maurice Harkless leaving for the N.B.A. after his freshman year and JaKarr Sampson departing after last season.“Can you imagine two N.B.A. players running around with this group?” Lavin said.Even without Harkless and Sampson, St. John’s has managed, with almost no bench to speak of, to stage an impressive resurgence after disheartening defeats had put them on the proverbial N.C.A.A. bubble. With Saturday’s victory on Senior Day, led by Phil Greene IV (a career-high 26 points) and Sir’Dominic Pointer (24 points), Lavin’s team appeared to be closing in on that elusive N.C.A.A. bid.AdvertisementSt. John’s (20-9, 9-7 Big East) has two conference road games remaining, at Marquette and Villanova, before the Big East tournament. But beating Georgetown assured them 20 victories and at least a .500 conference record.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Making the N.C.A.A. tournament is one thing. Kicking up a Red Storm once there is another.“St. John’s is a very good team — they are senior level, and a team that has been in the trenches, and one that’s hungry,” said John Thompson III, the Hoyas’ coach. “They can go deep and not just pose a problem for a game or two. They have inside presence, they have perimeter guys, veterans, and they are well coached.”AdvertisementActually, St. John’s has a smallish front line, it is not by habit a great perimeter shooting team, and Lavin seldom goes deeper than seven players. But it does have those aforementioned seniors — mainly Greene, who hit 6 of 7 3-point attempts on Saturday, along with Pointer and D’Angelo Harrison, who missed his four field-goal attempts and scored only 1 point.That St. John’s was still able to beat the Hoyas (18-9, 10-6) handily should be that much more telling for the selection committee.Before that happens, there are more games to play, more convincing to do.“Selection Sunday is a long way away,” Pointer said. “Hopefully, this is a résumé builder.”A version of this article appears in print on March 1, 2015, on Page SP2 of the New York edition with the headline: Heralded Class Still Seeks a Capstone.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.