By KAREN CROUSEFEB. 28, 2015
PALM BEACH GARDENS, Fla. —  A few minutes from the spring training home of the Miami Marlins and the St. Louis Cardinals, several of the best players in the world have spent this week honing their swings. They have worked on moving the ball in different directions and set different goals for each day.Like their baseball brethren, golfers led by Phil Mickelson are polishing their games in preparation for their version of opening day: the Masters. They would never publicly refer to the four events that make up the PGA Tour’s Florida swing as exhibition events, not with FedEx Cup points and million-dollar winner’s checks at stake.But for veterans like the 44-year-old Mickelson, every swing they make this week at the weather-challenged Honda Classic is aimed at Augusta National in April. Thirteen winners of major tournaments, including the world No. 1 Rory McIlroy, failed to make the cut, a setback in their preparation for the Masters.“I care about my results week in, week out, regardless whether that’s leading up to a major or not,” McIlroy said.AdvertisementMickelson, for his part, is a 42-time tour winner and a five-time major champion who builds his schedule around the four majors. It is not an exact science. Unlike the major leaguers, who have a firm date on when their grind begins anew, golfers are left to gauge when their practice sessions end and the exigency of competitive rounds begins.AdvertisementAfter a three-month hiatus from competition after last September’s Ryder Cup, Mickelson missed two cuts in three starts on the West Coast, where he has prospered in the past. His slow start has been overshadowed by the travails of his longtime rival Tiger Woods, who recorded the highest score of his professional career at the Phoenix Open; withdrew during the first round of his next start, in San Diego; and is in the midst of an indefinite leave of absence.Every golfer who has been in the game long enough has lost his swing, or his confidence, or both.“It happens where we just don’t feel like our game is sharp and we take another week off and prepare,” Mickelson said. “That’s certainly happened in my case a number of times. But usually it’s just one week, and I’m ready to get out and test the work that I’ve put in to see what the score is.”Mickelson’s putting was his downfall in his first three starts. This week at PGA National’s Champion course, his performance on the greens has been his salvation. He moved into contention in the second round with a rain-delayed, three-under-par 67, spread out over an 18-hour period starting Friday afternoon, to grab a share of eighth place, at two-under 138. Mickelson is five strokes behind the 36-hole leader, Padraig Harrington, who came out Saturday morning to finish his second-round 66.The third round was suspended because of lightning, heavy rain and high winds before the leaders teed off. After a two-hour delay, play was called for the day, with 24 of the 71 players having completed at least one hole.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mickelson, who finished his pre-round range session 40 minutes before play was suspended, said: “I don’t know when it’s all going to come together, but I feel like, starting the year, I felt ready and was able to work on my game and practice uninhibited. I feel like I put in the time, so hopefully, the scores will start to reflect that.”Harrington, 43, has spent the past two years picking up the pieces of his shattered game. A three-time major winner from Ireland, Harrington has missed the cut in five of his eight starts this season and has one top-25 finish in his past 29 tour starts dating to July 2013. Neither the rain nor Harrington’s bogey-bogey finish could dampen his optimism.“It’s nice to be in contention,” Harrington said, adding, “I don’t know what’s going to happen the next 36 holes, but I have a good idea where I’m going.”How did he ever lose his way?“It’s hard to say,” Harrington said. “As you get older, you lose your innocence, and you have to remind yourself of a few things when you’re out there.”AdvertisementHe added: “At times, I get lost and get distracted from the process. Ultimately, that’s really what’s changed.”Harrington won the Asian Tour’s Indonesia Open in December for his first title on any pro circuit since 2010. His last official win in the United States was the 2008 P.G.A. Championship. Like the baseball veteran trying to secure a berth on the opening-day roster, Harrington does not have the luxury of living off his past. He needs a victory in the next few weeks to qualify for the Masters.“I think I’m in a good place that I can deliver more performances like this,” Harrington said.He added, “So I’m not panicked about going out and it all having to happen this weekend.”A version of this article appears in print on March 1, 2015, on Page SP10 of the New York edition with the headline: Golf’s Spring Training Comes With Balls, Gloves and Cleats, but no Batting Cage.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.