By SETH BERKMANFEB. 28, 2015
WORCESTER, Mass. —  Before a game on his team’s recent trip, Dany Heatley took his place in warm-ups next to players who had asked their parents to take them to see Heatley play with the Ottawa Senators almost a decade ago.As teammates laughed and flicked wrist shots on goal, Heatley frenetically stick-handled the puck as if he were navigating it through a maze before ripping a shot on net.Fans wandered down to the first row of seats and tried to get Heatley to pose in the background of selfies.In this pregame snapshot, Heatley, 34, resembled a four-time N.H.L. All-Star selection with 372 career goals.AdvertisementBut he was playing for the Norfolk Admirals of the American Hockey League. And after recording only one shot on goal in a 5-2 loss to the Worcester Sharks on Feb. 20, Heatley walked with his teammates from the arena over ice-covered sidewalks back to their hotel.AdvertisementHeatley, a two-time 50-goal scorer, had been with the Admirals since the Anaheim Ducks assigned him there on Dec. 30. On Saturday, it was announced that his rights had been traded to the Florida Panthers, and he is expected to report to their A.H.L. affiliate, the San Antonio Rampage. While playing in the A.H.L., Heatley retains the pedigree of a former rookie of the year, regaling younger teammates with experience from a 13-year career while adjusting to a humbler way of life in the minors as he attempts a final push to return to the N.H.L.After Heatley signed a one-year, $1 million contract with Anaheim last July, it was projected that he would play on the Ducks’ top line with Corey Perry and Ryan Getzlaf. But a preseason groin injury hampered Heatley through much of his tenure in Anaheim. He played six regular-season games and scored no points.On Dec. 11, Heatley was assigned to Norfolk on a conditioning loan and played a game in the minor leagues for the first time. The second overall pick, by Atlanta, in the 2000 N.H.L. draft, Heatley joined the Thrashers in 2001 after two seasons at the University of Wisconsin.Although he returned to the Ducks on Dec. 15, Heatley was placed on waivers by the end of the month. He went unclaimed and ultimately accepted an assignment back to Norfolk.“Anaheim was tough this year,” Heatley said. “I felt I had a good camp and then got hurt. I played a couple games, kind of reaggravated it, just never really got in a groove where I got to play games.“When you do get somewhat healthy and try to get your legs back and the team’s already 30, 40 games in, it’s real tough to jump in that lineup.”He is not the only former All-Star toiling in the A.H.L. In January, the Los Angeles Kings demoted center Mike Richards, who helped the team win the 2012 and 2014 Stanley Cups and has a $5.75 million salary cap hit this year, to their affiliate in Manchester, N.H. But Heatley had no intentions of retiring.Advertisement“I wanted to play,” he said. “I felt this is a good opportunity to try and get my game back.”Heatley moved into a small downtown apartment close to the Norfolk Scope, an arena short on hockey history that was once the home of the American Basketball Association’s Virginia Squires. The A.H.L. schedule has allowed Heatley time to recover fully from his groin injury, as a majority of the games have been played on weekends.“When the schedule’s like that, it makes it a lot easier actually to get your lifts in, get your practice time in,” Heatley said.He needed time to adjust to the travel schedule, though, as the Admirals take buses to away games.For the late February trip to Worcester, the Admirals left Norfolk at 10 p.m. Wednesday and arrived in Worcester on Thursday morning. Their planned practice at DCU Center, the Sharks’ home arena, was displaced by the setup for a concert that night. The team instead went to a rink 20 minutes outside the city to practice and eat breakfast. Afterward, Heatley said, he napped for most of the afternoon before having dinner at the team hotel.While the intricacies of A.H.L. travel leave less room for independence — goalie Jason LaBarbera, who was recalled to Anaheim on Monday, often made the team watch professional wrestling — it has allowed Heatley time to integrate with his younger teammates.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“You’re playing cards longer; you have more time to kill on the travel days,” Heatley said. “It’s been good getting to know these guys. You realize how young they are sometimes when they’re talking, and how old you are.”Admirals Coach Jarrod Skalde said veterans were not always as willing to embrace the A.H.L. experience.“You don’t come to the A.H.L. and coast through two to three weeks and think you’ll get called back up,” Skalde said. “You got to play the right way down here.”For Heatley, that includes adjusting to shifts where he is no longer surrounded by All-Star linemates with pinpoint passing skills.“In the A.H.L., you got to find different ways to work,” Skalde said. “Dany and I talked about that. He’s done a better job recently going to the net, protecting pucks offensively and getting in there to create scoring chances. Here, you’re going to have to fight for every inch out there.”AdvertisementHeatley has also become a team leader, almost by default.Forward Charles Sarault, a 23-year-old Ottawa native, saw Heatley play for the Senators in the 2007 Stanley Cup finals against the Ducks. Although he has played with Norfolk since 2013, Sarault will often talk with Heatley on the bench and ask him how to execute certain plays he is unsure about.Skalde, the coach, said: “Everything he does, he’s under a microscope here by our guys. The way he conducts himself off the ice, the way he walks around the room, the way he tapes his stick, to the way he prepares, everyone’s watching him.“We’ve got guys that are 20, 21, 22 that had posters of Dany Heatley in their room.”There were familiar faces in Norfolk that helped ease the transition to the A.H.L. Heatley played with forward Dave Steckel during training camp with the Minnesota Wild in 2013, and with defenseman Brendan Bell in Ottawa during the 2008-9 season. The Admirals’ equipment manager, Joe Guilmet, worked with the Thrashers during Heatley’s first years in the league.Skalde, who competed with Heatley during his first training camp with the Thrashers in 2001, said the A.H.L. could serve as a barometer for Heatley’s future hockey plans.“To get yourself up for a 3 o’clock game in Bridgeport on a Sunday after two battles, it’s a tough league, but if you can get through the grind of the American Hockey League, you’re well prepared,” Skalde said.Heatley said he had not had contact with the Ducks while in Norfolk.The team declined a request to speak with General Manager Bob Murray about Heatley’s status before Saturday’s trade.In January, Heatley quietly celebrated his birthday, playing in front of 3,150 fans in Norfolk before having dinner with his fiancée.AdvertisementHe acknowledged that he had become more reflective recently, but said he was intent on continuing his career, one that began amid enormous expectations and was sidetracked after his involvement in a 2003 auto accident that killed a teammate, Dan Snyder.While Heatley said he felt fully healthy, he has not posted statistics that would warrant much interest from N.H.L. clubs. Entering Saturday, he had two goals and five assists in 25 games. But with the trade to the Panthers, perhaps Heatley has earned one final shot at cracking an N.H.L. lineup.“I’m still hopeful something can happen in this next couple of months,” Heatley said earlier in February. “Hockey’s a funny game. It could turn out well. Or it could not. We’ll see what happens.”A version of this article appears in print on March 1, 2015, on Page SP7 of the New York edition with the headline: Former Star, Healthy Again, Adjusts to a Humbler Life in the Minors.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.