Compiled by THE NEW YORK TIMESFEB. 28, 2015
Ballplayers Who Gladly Made Sacrifices for Their CountryTo the Sports Editor:Re “In Town Where Pitcher’s 266 Wins Were Part of Fabric, One Big Loss,” Feb. 16: Bob Feller gave up three full seasons and most of a fourth to fight in World War II. His statements regarding his wartime service tell me that he didn’t simply mind giving them up, but was glad to do so. Taking the average of the two years before and two years after his lost seasons as a fair reckoning, he would have won 358 or 359 games had he had not served, placing him at No. 8 on the career list, behind only Warren Spahn among those who played any part of their career after World War II.Another thing to note: Feller’s catcher in his American Legion baseball days was Nile Kinnick, from the neighboring town of Adel, Iowa. Kinnick won both the Heisman Trophy and the Maxwell Award playing for Iowa. He also served in the Navy, making the ultimate sacrifice.In this day of multimillion-dollar stars demanding more, thinking only of themselves, while committing acts from the just selfish to the downright criminal, remembering the sacrifices of Feller and Kinnick truly is refreshing.ALLEN WALKER, Coralville, IowaDiffering Standards on DrugsTo the Sports Editor:Re “Lying, Lying, Gone? Fans Should Hope So,” Feb. 19: During the same week when there are calls for the Yankees to terminate their association with Alex Rodriguez, the team announced that it would retire Andy Pettitte’s number.AdvertisementPettitte has admitted using human growth hormone, illegal under federal law for certain uses. Although confessing to a crime is laudable, it is not synonymous with never having committed it, and Pettitte didn’t admit to his use of the substance until after he had been named in the Mitchell report.AdvertisementPettitte’s only excuse is that he used the hormone for injury recovery, not performance enhancement. What he has failed to note is that experts say that this is the primary reason cited by most of the users of performance-enhancing drugs.Apparently there are good drug users and bad drug users.STEVEN A. KING, New YorkYankees’ Financial PrioritiesPlease verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.To the Sports Editor:Re “Red Sox Place Big Bet on the Latest Prospect From Cuba,” Feb. 23: Lost in all the talk of financial austerity is the reality that the Yankees are an obscenely wealthy and profitable corporation. They had the money to sign Max Scherzer, and they had the money to sign Yoan Moncado, but they chose not to. Instead, they ask fans to keep shelling out exorbitant amounts of money for tickets and merchandise to support a substandard product because they would rather maximize their huge profits than provide the fans a competitive team. Please consider boycotting Yankee games, broadcasts and products until we restore ownership that respects the fans, and this storied franchise.BOB JACOBS, BrooklynUniversities Set the ExampleTo the Sports Editor:Re “Kansas State Apologizes for Postgame Chaos,” Feb. 25: Why should we be surprised when students at a major university celebrate a basketball victory as if it were the most important thing in their lives and in the daily life of the university? After all, with multimillion-dollar coaches’ salaries and field houses fit for royalty, isn’t that the message universities convey?STEVE ROBINSON, Palm Coast, Fla.Policy Fosters HumiliationTo the Sports Editor:Re “Reconsidering Notion of Mercy After a Basketball Rout in Brooklyn,” Feb. 25: The girls’ basketball team from Brooklyn Collegiate was 1-14 during the season and lost in the first round of the playoffs by 109 points. The Public Schools Athletic League’s rule requiring that all teams play in the postseason, while well-intended, is grossly misguided. The resulting humiliation on the court does not provide a valuable lesson to students, but simply exposes them to public embarrassment.The P.S.A.L. should amend its rules and send the valuable message that while participation is good and teaches valuable life lessons, success has additional rewards (i.e., postseason participation). Simply including a mercy rule tells everyone on the losing team that embarrassment will be limited to something less than humiliation.DANIEL SHAPIRO, Suffern, N.Y.A version of this letter appears in print on March 1, 2015, on Page SP9 of the New York edition.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.