AdvertisementSupported byBy Billy WitzTAMPA, Fla. — It is a rite of spring, as much a part of the training camp atmosphere as the palm trees in Florida and the cactuses in Arizona. It is known colloquially as P.F.P., pitchers’ fielding practice, and it takes place almost daily on the back fields of the sprawling major league complexes.For close to an hour, after pitchers have loosened up, they rotate among different stations and run through various drills: fielding comebackers and bunts, running pickoff plays, covering first base and starting or finishing double plays — almost any situation that requires a pitcher to become a fielder. For nearly seven weeks, pitchers in all training camps will perform these rituals over and over and over. Then the season will start in early April, and they may not go through the drills again until next spring training. Most days during the course of a major league season, batters take batting practice, fielders practice fielding and pitchers throw balls back and forth. But only on rare occasions do pitchers practice fielding.It is not as if this is suddenly unimportant. A pitcher’s ability to field his position — or not — has a way of determining October games.The only sign of vulnerability San Francisco pitcher Madison Bumgarner has ever shown in the playoffs came when he threw away a bunt last year against Washington, a misplay that resulted in his only loss in last year’s postseason. The turning point in the Giants’ National League Championship Series win over St. Louis came when Cardinals pitcher Randy Choate threw a bunt away in the bottom of the 10th inning.In the 2006 World Series, Detroit pitchers made fielding errors in the final three games — all losses to St. Louis.“We’d laugh about it, but when a pitcher screwed up, all of a sudden the next day there was a bulletin: pitchers’ fielding practice,” said Jim Kaat, a broadcaster for MLB Network who won a record 16 consecutive Gold Gloves. “It was like punishment, which always baffled me. It wouldn’t take a lot of time to go through every other day, but most teams forget about it.”Many college teams run the drills frequently, as do teams in Japan and in the minor leagues. There are myriad reasons coaches, managers and players cite for not practicing the drills more often during the regular season at the big league level: Spring training drills are sufficient, individual work is available when needed and pitchers shouldn’t tire out their arms doing drills. Some pitchers wondered: What was the point of spending time on something such as pickoff plays when they were hardly ever run?“You don’t tell a leopard to go hunt for an impala, you just watch him do it,” said Toronto Blue Jays pitcher R. A. Dickey, a former Gold Glove winner. “It’s the same. Once you’ve done it for so long, it’s ingrained. As much as infielders take ground balls, and they do it every day, they still make errors.”Philadelphia pitcher Cole Hamels said the Phillies ran pitchers’ fielding practice once every home stand last season under their rookie manager, Ryne Sandberg, which was far more often than he remembered running them any other season.“It’s not 1,000 reps, but if they know we’re in the right place, then we can do it and get out of there,” Hamels said. “It’s just making sure you’re having the awareness and the effort. There’s hundreds of thousands of fans watching you, and if you throw a passed ball and you’re just standing on the mound, that’s not going to appease too many people.”Some pitchers, like the Yankees veteran Chris Capuano, incorporate drills into their daily routines. Capuano will drop balls when he is playing catch to practice picking up bunts and making throws. Dickey said he always worked at being a good fielder because until he blossomed as a knuckleball pitcher, he thought it might help him survive as an average major league talent. Joe Espada, the Yankees’ new infield coach, believes that pressure causes most of the mistakes. A fast runner, a late-game situation or a crucial game can prompt a pitcher to panic, holding onto the ball too long or not positioning himself properly.“If you work on it in spring training and just rehearse it, you get reinforcement,” said Espada, who plans to run pitchers’ fielding practices once a homestand. “I think it becomes memory and you can get better at it.”One of the more unusual drills in spring training involves pitchers throwing an imaginary pitch off a mound and then fielding a hard grounder or line drive hit back at them by a coach. But the coaches don’t hit major league baseballs — they hit spongy ones that are sometimes used for children’s T-ball leagues or lower levels of Little League, and referred to as rag balls.But those balls are not easy to catch, often popping out of gloves. On a recent morning, three Yankees minor league pitchers in a row failed to catch a rag ball hit back at them.“You can practice throws, you can practice bunts, but a ball hit back at you is a reaction play,” Yankees reliever Adam Warren said. “You just have to trust your reactions. The coaches wouldn’t want to start firing balls back at us at 100 miles per hour.”This is probably true. But in Arizona and Florida, the coaches will continue to separate pitchers into groups each day, and continue to have them rotate from diamond to diamond. They will run, field, throw and catch, all within the confines of the infield’s green grass. The routine may feel like busy work, and tedium will begin to set in, but when the season starts in early April, the pitchers at least should be prepared for anything that comes their way. Later in the season, when the games matter most, they should feel so lucky.Advertisement