By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSFEB. 28, 2015
Wayne Rooney scored twice as Manchester United earned a 2-0 win against 10-man Sunderland on Saturday, but his performance was overshadowed by another refereeing controversy in England’s Premier League.One week after Chelsea Manager José Mourinho’s scathing criticism of the officiating in a draw with Burnley, the referee Roger East was at the center of what appeared to be a case of mistaken identity at Old Trafford.Rooney scored from a penalty kick in the 66th minute when John O’Shea seemed to foul Radamel Falcao. East, however, sent off Wes Brown instead of O’Shea.O’Shea, who clearly pulled Falcao back as he was about to shoot, pleaded with East to send him off instead.AdvertisementIn a statement issued by the referees’ governing body, East explained that he believed he had seen both players make contact with Falcao, but he added that none of the other officials at the match had offered any guidance.AdvertisementRooney scored his second goal with six minutes remaining, and United rose to third in the Premier League behind Chelsea, the leader, and Manchester City. Neither played on Saturday.United’s hopes of returning to the Champions League got a further lift as fifth-place Southampton was beaten, 1-0, by West Bromwich Albion.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.West Ham United fell, 3-1, at home to Crystal Palace, while Swansea won, 1-0, at Burnley.Newcastle won, 1-0, over struggling Aston Villa, and Stoke overcame Hull by the same score.SCORING BURST IN SPAIN Barcelona won, 3-1, at Granada, with goals by Luis Suárez and Lionel Messi, while Alberto Bueno scored four goals in 16 minutes in Rayo Vallecano’s 4-2 home victory over Levante.After Levante went ahead by 1-0 in the 13th minute, Bueno scored four times from the 23rd minute to the 38th. Barcelona pulled to within 1 point of Madrid, which hosts Villarreal on Sunday.Málaga won, 3-2, over visiting Getafe, and Deportivo drew, 0-0, at nine-man Almería.DORTMUND CONTINUES RISE Borussia Dortmund beat Schalke, 3-0, in the Ruhr Derby for its fourth consecutive Bundesliga victory.With the victory, Dortmund continued its climb from the bottom of the standings; Jürgen Klopp’s team is now 6 points from the relegation zone.OPPORTUNITY FOR P.S.G. Lyon, the French league leader, fell to a 2-1 defeat at Lille, leaving the door open for Paris St.-Germain to move to the top of the standings in the French league title race. P.S.G. is 2 points behind Lyon and can take first if it wins at Monaco on Sunday.A version of this article appears in print on March 1, 2015, on Page SP8 of the New York edition with the headline: Sunderland Player’s Foul Dooms His Team, and a Teammate, After Referee’s Error.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.