
On Baseball By                     
 TYLER KEPNER
 
FEB. 28, 2015
LAKE BUENA VISTA, Fla. — John Hart likes to use the word create. It is the essence of the job of general manager. You are shaping an organization, making sure that it stands for something. You want the impact of your leadership to last.In his first job as general manager, Hart felt the force of John Schuerholz’s creation. The Braves, under Schuerholz, were the model franchise in the major leagues. They won 14 division titles in a row and captured the 1995 World Series over Hart’s Cleveland Indians.Hart, 66, had created a powerhouse with the Indians, a team that had been so hapless it inspired a slapstick Hollywood comedy. He pioneered the strategy of giving long-term contracts to young players, locking in costs while avoiding salary arbitration. He also groomed a generation of young executives in Cleveland and, later, with the Texas Rangers.“He made you feel important,” said Neal Huntington, who worked under Hart in Cleveland and is now general manager of the Pittsburgh Pirates. “You wanted to do everything in your power to make sure you did your job to the best of your ability. It’s just his nature.Advertisement“He’s so charismatic, but it goes beyond that — his knowledge, his passion for the game, his passion for people. When you have a conversation with him — it may even be about his grandkids, but you walk away from that conversation fired up.”AdvertisementThis is how Hart is viewed around baseball, and after stepping down in Texas in 2005, he kept a presence in the game. He advised the Rangers, offered analysis on MLB Network and later advised the Braves. His legacy was secure, and his life was comfortable. Hart is a scratch golfer and lives near his two young grandchildren in Windermere, Fla. He and his wife, Sandy, have been married 45 years.So why did Hart upend all that to become the Braves’ general manager last October? He was part of a search committee, with Schuerholz (now the team president) and the Hall of Fame manager Bobby Cox. But Schuerholz said he had only one name on his wish list.“John was very persuasive,” said Hart, who signed a three-year contract. “When I sat with my family and made the decision, I think it was the desire to come in and create, to have the ability to create something. The brand needed some touches. John shared that with me.”Hart also lives close to the Braves’ spring training complex at Walt Disney World, which helped, and the team had two of his personal hallmarks in place: a rising star as an assistant general manager and a core of young players signed to long-term contracts.John Coppolella, the assistant G.M., is Hart’s presumed successor. First baseman Freddie Freeman, shortstop Andrelton Simmons, closer Craig Kimbrel and starter Julio Teheran are the centerpiece players signed through the Braves’ move to a new ballpark in Cobb County, Ga., in 2017.“The combination of John Hart and John Coppolella has been dynamic, absolutely dynamic,” Schuerholz said. “The work those two have done, in tandem, has been sensational.”Schuerholz called Hart a friend and said they shared important traits: a clear sense of purpose in trade talks, thorough preparation and the self-assurance to foster a front-office environment that empowered young executives. Dayton Moore, the Kansas City Royals’ G.M., learned under Schuerholz; Huntington, Texas’ Jon Daniels and others learned from Hart.AdvertisementCoppolella, 36, is next in line. He started in baseball as a Yankees intern in Tampa, Fla., in 2000, making so little money that he lived in a shady neighborhood and rented a second-floor apartment, to minimize the risk of being robbed. His duties included manning the phones at the minor league complex on Sunday mornings. George Steinbrenner would call for messages at 11:55; invariably, there would be none, and Coppolella would be dismissed for the day.Coppolella was first viewed as a candidate to be the Braves’ general manager, but said he understood it was better this way.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“It might sound counterintuitive, but I’m actually really happy with the way it turned out,” Coppolella said. “The more involved we can have John Hart and John Schuerholz, the better off the Braves are going to be, long term. I’ve got plenty of time. I’m not in any hurry to be this or that. I just want to make us better every day.”The Braves are working on that. They reached the playoffs in 2010, 2012 and 2013, but lavish contracts for several unproductive players helped lead to the firing of General Manager Frank Wren last September. The team staggered to a 27-40 record in the second half, and it ranked fourth in the majors in strikeouts and second to last in the majors in runs, ahead of only San Diego.Hart said he could have reloaded and made one more run with outfielders Justin Upton and Jason Heyward facing free agency. Instead, believing those players would leave anyway, he traded them, and outfielder Evan Gattis, to headline a series of moves that flooded the organization with prospects.“We sized up our competition around the league,” Hart said. “The Nationals are in their perfect window right now. The Marlins are getting better. If you’re going to take, if you will, sort of a regroup year, this would be a good one.”The Braves chafe at the word rebuild — “We’re restarting,” Hart said — and they may be right. The rotation is respectable, led by Teheran, Mike Minor, Shelby Miller and Alex Wood, and the Braves added veteran hitters like Nick Markakis and Alberto Callaspo, hoping to diversify a swing-and-miss offense.The lineup remains unimposing, but the old one was not working, either. And the Braves believe their farm system has gone from one of the worst to one of the best. Keith Law of ESPN.com ranked it sixth in the majors.“They’re all nebulous,” Hart said of prospect rankings, “but we definitely have impacted the system. How that all plays out, I don’t know, but we have options now. Every deal, we got back young pitching. We have a stable full of young players. I feel good about it, absolutely.”AdvertisementSchuerholz said that a recommitment to player development was the single most important factor in the Braves’ future success. All teams acknowledge that, of course, but the Braves, more than most, have lived it.Hart has too, in his past jobs, and he cited a revamped front-office infrastructure as critical to that goal. He has new scouts, new instructors and a new challenge late in a proud career.“If you walk in every day and you’ve got an inspired, empowered young group that’s in there working, you’re going to have a blast every day you come in,” Hart said. “You’re going to be doing the heavy lifting and the work — but you’re going to be enjoying it.”The On Baseball column last Sunday, about Atlanta Braves Manager John Hart, misspelled the surname of the team’s assistant general manager. He is John Coppolella, not Coppalella.A version of this article appears in print on March 1, 2015, on Page SP4 of the New York edition with the headline: Pioneering G.M. Is Eager to Mold Another Winner in Atlanta.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »