By MATT GILESFEB. 28, 2015
When Wagner forward Mike Aaman grabbed his first rebound 1 minute 42 seconds into the Seahawks’ game against Fairleigh Dickinson in mid-February, the moment did not seem that special.Aaman, a junior, has always been known as a rebounding phenom, a 6-foot-8 left-hander with an uncanny ability to judge a shot’s carom.“When Mike’s hands touch the ball, no one is getting it back,” Aaman’s high school coach, Denis Caruano, said.Two-plus hours and a Wagner victory later, though, Aaman had transformed his quotidian skill. He hauled in 23 rebounds — 14 of them offensive — a career high and the third best single-game total in Division I this season.Advertisement“I still don’t think it was that special a game,” Aaman said. “We really needed that win.”Aaman, who transferred to Wagner from Rhode Island last summer, has provided a spark for the Seahawks, a Staten Island team that many expected to finish last in the Northeast Conference. Averaging more than 20 minutes, entering the weekend Aaman had recorded five double-digit rebound games and propelled Wagner to at least the sixth seed in the NEC tournament.AdvertisementAt this point last season, Aaman had reportedly sustained his seventh concussion, and his retirement from college basketball seemed imminent.Even though Rhode Island declared him medically disqualified, Aaman still wanted to play, and he was certain that he was healthy enough to do so.“There are always people that will doubt you, but I know what I can do,” Aaman, 20, said.Aaman is not the first college basketball player to be sidelined by concussions, but his decision to keep playing after so many is somewhat unusual. This season, after transferring to Dayton as a graduate of Oakland with a year of eligibility remaining, guard Ryan Bass began to experience concussionlike symptoms and was shut down for the season, ending his career.“When I played in the late 1990s and early 2000s, I don’t remember anyone saying they had a concussion, but there is a lot more knowledge coming out in the past five years,” said Dayton Coach Archie Miller, who decided to sideline Bass even though he was a key reserve for a team on the verge of making its second consecutive N.C.A.A. tournament appearance.Aaman was tall and awkward as a child; his family frequently joked that his feet were untied. A growth spurt between junior high and high school did not improve his coordination, but by his sophomore year at Raritan High School in New Jersey, he had learned how to control his body. According to Wagner Coach Bashir Mason, who had recruited Aaman when he was still an assistant, “he had then become unstoppable.”Aaman always wanted to play for a member of the Hurley family, which has ruled the New Jersey hoops scene for decades. So when Danny Hurley, a son of the high school coach Bob Hurley and brother of Bobby, who played for Duke and was an assistant at Wagner and Rhode Island, was named Wagner’s coach, Aaman tossed out recruiting letters from La Salle and Florida and signed during his senior year.“The Hurleys have all that basketball history, and I was pretty excited when Coach Hurley started to recruit me,” Aaman said.AdvertisementBut Hurley left Wagner in 2012 to become Rhode Island’s coach, and Aaman followed him.“He had a close relationship with Danny and Bobby, and Rhode Island needed bodies,” said Mason, who succeeded Danny Hurley at Wagner.Aaman struggled to match up with more athletic frontcourts, and his confidence plummeted. His outlook did not change by the beginning of his sophomore year, which was marked by injuries: a high ankle sprain, appendix surgery and, according to Rhode Island, a series of concussions.Aaman has always been known as one of the toughest players on the court, sustaining more than a few bumps on the head while scrapping for rebounds, but Rhode Island said Aaman had sustained two concussions in high school and another five in college.“When we heard that, we were confused,” Aaman’s mother, Veronica, said. “He never had a documented concussion before college. Thinking back, he could have had maybe three or four, but certainly not seven.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.No one disagrees that Aaman sustained his last concussion, a result of a punch at an off-campus apartment in December 2013. Because of his appendix operation, Aaman had not played in six games, and the blow forced Aaman to miss several more.Having already missed several classes, Aaman recuperated in New Jersey with the goal of repeating a semester and, ultimately, returning to the team. However, in February 2014, he found out that his Rhode Island career was finished.Hurley gave Aaman two options: He would be granted his release and could transfer to another program, or he could remain on scholarship and be a part of the coaching staff. At first, he chose to stay.“The fact that they kept me on scholarship shows they cared about me,” Aaman said. “I was excited to still work with the team. But after a few months, I realized how much I missed the game, and I needed to find a different school.”With Aaman’s medical history, scholarships were not forthcoming. Only three coaches showed interest, one being Wagner’s Mason.Advertisement“I speak with Danny a few times a week, and he gave me an honest assessment,” Mason said of Hurley. “He thought it might be difficult for Mike to focus without basketball and believed that Mike could still play if we went through proper channels and got him cleared.”To show he could still play, Aaman joined the Jersey Shore Basketball League, a popular pro-am for Division I players from New Jersey.Three neurologists, including one who is affiliated with Wagner and one who consults with the Jets, evaluated and cleared Aaman, and he announced his transfer to Wagner in the summer.“When I started working out again, my body felt like it did in high school, and I had no issues in the J.S.B.L., so obviously my body was all right,” Aaman said. “The best doctors found no problems with my brain and cleared me, so when I take a charge or dive on the floor, that is how I am always going to play, even if I’ve suffered concussions.”Still, the adjustment was hard. Wagner at first made Aaman sit out contact drills and had him wear headgear in practice.The N.C.A.A. granted Aaman eligibility three Division I games into the season, but after being struck in the back of his neck against Cincinnati, he was held out nine more games for further evaluation.Wagner had only two wins at the time of the Cincinnati game, and it would have been easy to sit Aaman down for the remainder of the season, as Dayton did with Bass, who had sustained at least two concussions before transferring there.Mason prefers to focus on how far Aaman has come. He was already looking forward to possibly having Aaman on the roster next season.“We are going to petition for another year of eligibility for Mike, and I plan to tell him that he should lead the country in rebounding in 2016,” he said.AdvertisementFor now, though, Aaman is focused on the present, knowing how quickly things change.“Playing this season is vindication for me, and I am going to do what I have to in order to be the best right now,” he said.A version of this article appears in print on March 1, 2015, on Page SP3 of the New York edition with the headline: Top Rebounder Refuses to Surrender to His History of Concussions.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.