AdvertisementSupported byBy Tim RohanPORT ST. LUCIE, Fla. — Several characteristics distinguished Juan Lagares’s outfield glove last season. It was orange with blue trim — Mets colors — along with a patch of black on the back. His son’s name, “J Lagares Jr.,” was stitched into the side. And inside the pocket, on the palm, the leather was worn and scuffed as if permanently bruised. This was Lagares’s tool of trade, the one he used to catch baseballs better than almost anyone else in the major leagues. For him, his glove was what a paintbrush is to a renowned artist, what a pair of Nikes were to Michael Jordan. Lagares used his glove to win two prestigious awards — a Gold Glove and a Fielding Bible. He used his glove to establish himself as perhaps the best defensive center fielder in baseball. Once a year, around this time, Lagares starts over with two new gloves supplied by Wilson. One glove will primarily be used during games, the other for practice. On Friday, two Wilson representatives arrived at Mets camp with the new pair.Lagares has worn Wilson leather for as long as he can remember, and about a dozen of Lagares’s teammates on the Mets’ 40-man roster are Wilson loyalists, too. One is David Wright, a two-time Gold Glove winner at third base. Wright, an established star and the team’s captain, has gotten to the point where Wilson allows him to design his own glove, the DW5. Lagares, 25, is still building his reputation. The Mets signed him as a teenager out of the Dominican Republic. He is entering his third season with the team as a cornerstone, a young player whom they can build around. He is not designing his own glove, at least not yet. The glove he wore last year was the Wilson A2000 1799 SS. A version of it was first designed in the 1990s for Ryan Klesko, a major league outfielder who played for 16 years but did not win a Gold Glove. “It’s easy to break in,” Lagares said of the glove. “I feel comfortable with it.”Klesko’s legacy is that glove. It has become one of Wilson’s most popular models. No matter the glove, though, no matter the design or its weight, or color, it is what Lagares does with it that has propelled him to new heights in the game.Consider some metrics. Baseball Info Solutions, one of the sport’s most respected analytics outfits, evaluates outfielders on the number of plays they make in three areas — shallow, medium and deep. The company found that Lagares ranked among the top center fielders in all three categories. Perhaps more impressive, the company concluded that Lagares also saved 52 runs over the last two years, best among center fielders. As a rule of thumb, said John Dewan, the founder of Baseball Info, about 10 runs saved equal about one victory. Lagares’s defense alone, then, could be credited for about five Mets wins over the last two years, and he played center field for only about 68 percent of the Mets’ games in that period. Dewan said Lagares’s impact was comparable to 40 home runs in half a season. “He could go out there with no glove and still be pretty good,” Wright said. “You can’t teach the athleticism, the jumps and the reads that he gets. There’s not a glove out there that’s going to help him with that.”Lagares’s glove represents him well, though. The bright colors match his startling plays. His teammates say he is fearless, that he will go after any ball. So he often enough ends up on televised highlights, making a diving catch or turning a home run into an out — and doing it all with that orange glove. Lagares selected the glove’s colors himself. One of his closest friends on the team, Wilmer Flores, said that’s his style. Lagares, he said, usually dresses well and looks cool, and his glove is no exception. “He has this quiet confidence,” said Ronny Reyes, the Mets’ coordinator of international operations. “He knows what he can do on the field. It’ll show, but not too often. He has that colored glove to be a little showy, but not too much.”On Friday, when Lagares picked up his two new gloves, a few teammates gathered around to admire them. The new gloves were a similar model to last year’s. Lagares chose a different version of the glove — a heavier, all-leather model — so he could get the color schemes just right. One is gunmetal gray and orange, and the other, the one is he will very likely use during games, is orange and blue on the pocket. Lagares, it should be noted, can do more than field. He hit .281 last season, 39 points higher than his rookie year, and started showing promise as a base stealer. As a defender, though, he is probably at the height of his powers right now.Because outfielders rely so much on speed, they tend to decline defensively as they age. A player’s speed generally peaks around age 23 or 24, Dewan said. Lagares turns 26 this month. But it should be a while before he slows down, and until then, who knows how many more Gold Gloves he might win? “Let’s see,” Lagares said the other day, smiling. “Maybe I’ll win another one. Or a couple more.”With a glove that is hard to miss: orange and blue, and gold. Advertisement