AdvertisementSupported byBy Christopher ClareyOn a summer evening in Sydney in January, two former Grand Slam champions, John McEnroe and Patrick Rafter, played an abbreviated version of tennis.Rafter won the exhibition match by the strange and truncated score of 4-3, 4-1.“It’s whatever the crowd wants; whatever TV wants,” Rafter said of the new format, called Fast4. “I think the Grand Slams will always stay their way, but for the other events, if this is what the fans want, this is what we should be playing.”Tennis — be it professional or recreational — is not yet on the brink of abandoning its traditional scoring system. But the market-driven, youth-driven thinking that was behind that January experiment is part of a global trend that continues to accelerate.In a world where attention spans are under duress and where big-screen and small-screen entertainment options are proliferating by the hour, sports are increasingly focused on not only making their formats more compact but on making the most of literally every second.Consider the package of initiatives announced last week by Major League Baseball that is designed to pick up the pace of play by trying, among other line items, to keep dallying hitters in the batter’s box (a pitch clock could be next).Consider the N.B.A.’s preseason experiment in October with 11-minute quarters and a 44-minute game instead of its usual 12-minute quarters and a 48-minute game. Or golf’s ongoing fight against slow play. Or look at FIFA’s adoption of vanishing spray at last year’s World Cup; one of its biggest selling points was how quickly it did away with much of the interminable stalling and haggling before free kicks.“The longer the ball is in play, the more entertainment value for the fans,” said Jeff Agoos, the former United States national team player who is now vice president for competition for Major League Soccer. “So we’ve done some analysis on not only how often the ball is in play but how we can improve and increase the amount of time the ball is in play.”The league’s next objectives? Strict enforcement of the six-second limit on a goalkeeper’s handling the ball, and cutting down on the dead time before goal kicks and corner kicks.“I think all sports constantly have to be looking at format, particularly pace,” said John Kristick, the global chief executive of the sports consultancy GroupM ESP. “I think the reality is that there’s a lot of sports with tradition and history that limit what in fact they can do. I don’t see soccer ever going to a situation where suddenly the matches are no longer 90 minutes, but clearly pace is something easier to address. And I think when you look at what M.L.B. is doing, it’s certainly the right area to be focusing on.”Such measures look cosmetic compared with more radical changes such as cricket’s successful adoption of the Twenty20 format. A complementary 21st-century version of the game, it was begun in 2003 and allows matches to be completed in about three hours instead of multiple days. It has radically altered the perception of the slow-paced sport even as the longer, traditional versions of cricket continue to be contested.“They put their heads together and found a way,” Kristick said. “For me, that’s a step change, and that certainly is going to speak to a wider and newer audience and, by default, a younger audience. I honestly don’t know if baseball reducing a few minutes here or there will address youth issues without addressing the bigger challenges.”But then reaching youth is not just about streamlining the product. It is about breaking up the main meal into bite-size portions that can be easily shared on social media.“Really, the issue with youth is they consume sports differently and consume content differently,” Kristick said. “To address their needs, what we need to see more of, and what I think a lot of properties are doing, is looking at the different platforms, the second-screen experience, and looking at content in smaller bites that are ultimately going to drive people back to their core product.”That, at least, is the hope. While the digital world already seems overstocked with GIFs of touchdowns, dunks and goalkeeping gaffes, some sports and federations remain late to the approach and the technology.Volleyball is among them, even though it was once ahead of the curve. In 1998, it became one of the first of the global sports to adjust its format when it altered its scoring system to allow teams to score points after every exchange instead of only when serving. The change was an attempt to make match lengths shorter — and more predictable for television.Fernando Lima, a Brazilian and former TV Globo executive who recently became the first secretary general of the International Volleyball Federation, said more change was vital.“We have to adapt the way we break down the sport,” he said in a telephone interview from Lausanne, Switzerland. “In American football, you create a lot of value for touchdowns, or in baseball a lot of value for home runs. Volleyball has never really created this basic unit, because it’s a sport where on average the men’s game has 180 rallies per match.“But within those 180, we have four or six that are really exceptional that would correspond to a touchdown or a home run. So now we are going to try to bring this vision to the audience. The long rallies are really the great moments in volleyball, and we have been using them and promoting them on social media.”Lima said that volleyball was also focused on its pace of play, particularly the time between serves, which he said used to average about 10 seconds in men’s matches but had grown to 25 seconds because of the players’ increasing tendency to commune for celebration and commiseration between points. Over 180 rallies, those seconds add up.“We estimated that just with the embracing by the players, we are adding around half an hour to the duration of the match,” he said. “Half an hour without anything happening. Our problem is that unless the fans enjoy watching players embracing each other, that doesn’t help the game.”He said the goal was to cut the average time between serves to 15 seconds and thus reduce the average length of a match from about two hours to about one hour 45 minutes: an ideal window, in his view, for television broadcasts.“Right now, two hours of playing time does not allow for a broadcaster to do a proper intro and proper ending to the match in a two-hour window,” Lima said. “Today, lots of things are around two hours. Most films and movies are two hours. More than that, I think, and we are challenging people’s patience today, because with all the new media and all the content that exists right now, it’s very difficult to keep people’s attention.”Two hours certainly works well for the world’s most popular game: soccer. “I think that’s a huge advantage for us,” Agoos said.It also works for Formula One, the globe’s most popular racing series.But the paradox from a North American perspective is that the undisputed king of televised sports remains football, where games routinely exceed three hours and feature very little actual play during that window.What football does offer along with cultural heft is plenty of those bite-size bursts of action, along with ample time for replays, social media commentary and trips to the kitchen for more chips and dip.“The N.F.L. is three hours long, but when there is a play, it’s a quick pace,” said George Pyne, a former president of IMG Sports and Entertainment who now runs the investment firm Bruin Sports Capital. “But I think with the younger demographic in social media, the pace of play is probably weighted more than the length of game.”Baseball intends to address both despite initial resistance from stars like David Ortiz, the Red Sox slugger who told reporters last week that he would risk fines rather than alter his deliberate ways.Golf, faced with declining youth participation in many markets, has made pace of play a major focus, both for the weekend duffers and the professionals. Public courses and tour events all track players’ progress — either through officials or emerging technologies — and a Japanese player was even penalized a stroke at the 2013 British Open, infuriating his playing partner and other pros.The U.S.G.A. grew so concerned about the problem in 2013 that it mounted a “Caddyshack”-inspired ad campaign poking fun at it, hoping humor might drive home a point that on-course marshals could not.“Everything’s so instant now, and everyone doesn’t have as much time as they used to,” Rory McIlroy, the world No. 1, told the BBC last year when asked about the plummeting participation rates in England.Tennis, too, has tried to enforce time limits between points in the last two seasons even while it is faced with the inherent challenge that it is a sport with no set time limit: A men’s singles match at a Grand Slam can last little more than an hour or, in the record case of John Isner versus Nicolas Mahut at Wimbledon in 2010, extend to 11 hours and 5 minutes over three days.The Fast4 format, begun by Tennis Australia this year, is an attempt to provide a modern alternative: a potential way to stay relevant in a landscape featuring ever more diversions.“Even when I came up in the 70s, there were starting to be a lot of options,” McEnroe said. “Now it’s 10 or 20 times more.”Advertisement