AdvertisementSupported byBy John BranchMike Richter’s Hall of Fame career as goalie for the Rangers officially ended in 2003. He was inadvertently kneed in the head by an opposing forward nearly a year before that and never played again. The concussion came months after a rising slap shot hit Richter in the face mask and fractured his skull.Richter’s name has since been used as a cautionary tale about the toll of hits to the head, and his experience used to explain what it feels like to have a mind so invisibly clouded that it ends a career.“It’s almost embarrassing what my take on concussions was before experiencing them,” Richter said during an interview Thursday. “I had friends and teammates and opponents and lots of people I know go through it, but it’s indescribably difficult to convey unless you’ve been through it.”On Friday, Richter was a keynote speaker before hundreds of scientists and doctors at a conference sponsored by NYU Langone Medical Center’s Concussion Center, hoping to help them understand the issue through someone who has lived through the injuries.“When I got hurt, my immediate reaction was, ‘Of course I’m fine, of course I can come back, of course I can play through it,’ ” Richter, 48, said. “That’s what you know how to do, and you should know how to do, because playing through pain is a learned habit and those that learn it best perform best. But it’s not a healthy response when it comes to brain injuries. It’s a full stop — a different animal, and it has to be respected as such. And it’s starting to be. We are in a better place than we were 13 years ago when I was injured.”There is more education about and awareness of concussions than ever before. They are now viewed as potentially life-altering, even life-threatening injuries, to be treated with caution, not euphemized and dismissed as something minor. Knowledge of concussions is just beginning, but the culture “is going in the right direction,” Richter said.“A fundamental part of a contact sport like hockey or football is the contact that will result in, unfortunately, sometimes, brain injuries,” Richter said. “You cannot insulate yourself from a lot of these risks. But I think a key is having an understanding of what they are and making informed decisions. “I’ve heard people say, ‘Look, he’s a professional athlete, he knew what the deal was when he signed up.’ You don’t know what the deal is. You have no idea what the deal is.”Richter has not joined the growing class-action lawsuit against the N.H.L. over concussions. More than 70 former players have sued the league, arguing that it concealed the latest information about the dangers and long-term effects of brain injuries while profiting from the sport’s violence. The cases have been combined into one suit, now working through United States District Court in Minnesota.“To be honest, I don’t know an awful lot about it,” Richter said of the litigation. “I think it’s difficult because assigning culpability is a tricky question here. I try not to have too much of an opinion on that particular aspect. I can only answer for myself: I don’t feel let down by the N.H.L.”Richter considers the damaging injuries he sustained — a shot to the face, a knee to the head — as unpreventable flukes.Richter said that trying to come back after a concussion was difficult because of “the peer pressure, and the pressure you put on yourself.” Only the injured person knows how serious the injury is.But Sidney Crosby’s case a few years ago is proof of progress, Richter said. In January 2011, Crosby, the Pittsburgh Penguins star and a former N.H.L. most valuable player, sustained two concussions in five days. He did not return until November 2011, but then was out again from December to March 2012 after his symptoms returned.“They didn’t say we need this guy for the playoffs, or it would be nice to sell more tickets,” Richter said. “They said we don’t have all the answers, but we do know that he’s not feeling 100 percent, so we’re erring to the side of caution. They took a long-term view, the right view. What’s best for his health?”Crosby again won the Hart Memorial Trophy, given to the league’s most valuable player, last season.“We need to see more of that,” Richter said. “For God’s sake, if you can do that for Sidney Crosby, you can do that with Jimmy on the left wing on a Squirt ‘A’ team.”Richter is more ambivalent about fighting in hockey. While some concussions may be unpreventable, those that result from bare-knuckle fighting seem an easier fix.Fighting numbers have dropped in the N.H.L. in recent years, but there will still be more than 400 this season, and thousands more in minor leagues around the continent.“As a goalie who hid behind some very tough guys, I’m a fan, and I love the spontaneity of hockey and the passion and the fights that break out,” Richter said. “But those days — it is a different world now because of our understanding of the downside.”The best hockey, Richter said, is played in the Olympics (he played in three for the United States), where the game is still fast-paced and tough, yet practically devoid of fighting.“In the long run, I think the science behind brain injuries is going to demand that it’s diminished,” Richter said. “I do think that. And I do think the game will survive plenty well without it.”Richter, who lives in Greenwich, Conn., has three sons, ages 10, 12 and 14. All play hockey. It makes him nervous, he admitted, but he sees the rewards outweighing the risks.On one hand, Richter sees the numbers of concussions rising, as players get bigger and faster and the game’s speed continues to increase, leading to bigger collisions. On the other, the understanding of concussions that has evolved since he last played in the N.H.L. — he still plays recreationally in a men’s league, as a forward — is comforting.“We’re trying to understand things about the brain that we didn’t before, and this will inform our ability to prevent and treat,” said Richter, who is founder and managing partner of Healthy Planet Partners, which funds and installs renewable energy systems in existing commercial buildings. “I think that’s a really big deal. If we’re not asking these questions, if we’re saying he just got his bell rung but not it’s a brain trauma, you’re just accepting it, and that’s no place to be. I think we’ve moved beyond that, which is a really important step.”Richter added, “My only hope is that we get that thorough understanding and then, with it, have enough courage to do whatever needs to be done.”Advertisement