AdvertisementSupported byBy Marc TracyCOLLEGE PARK, Md. — Early on during Maryland’s 59-53 upset of No. 5 Wisconsin on Tuesday night, Terrapins forward Jake Layman received the ball outside the left post and backed down his defender, Wisconsin’s Sam Dekker. Layman then spun to his left and leapt, flying past not only Dekker but also Wisconsin’s 7-foot center Frank Kaminsky and tossing the ball up for 2 points.It was a play Layman almost certainly would not have been able to make a year ago, when he played for a Maryland team that most likely would not have been able to hand this Wisconsin team only its third loss of the season — not even with the home crowd at Xfinity Center generating constant noise, as it did Tuesday.“We’re still getting used to being good and being hunted,” the fourth-year Maryland coach Mark Turgeon said the day before the game.The play was the highlight of an otherwise quiet night for Layman. Still, Turgeon praised him afterward for the way he guarded Nigel Hayes, who outweighs Layman by 30 pounds. Hayes was limited to 10 points and 2 rebounds; going into the game he was averaging 12.1 and 6.5.“Jake was guarding Hayes and giving up so much strength and weight, and Jake was battling in there,” Turgeon said of the 6-foot-9, 205-pound Layman.The Maryland players generating the most buzz this season are Dez Wells, a senior who is averaging 15 points a game and scored 26 on Tuesday, and Melo Trimble, a freshman point guard who is averaging 16.2 points and has a team-high 91 assists.But Layman, a 20-year-old junior, is happy to cede the spotlight.“I’m definitely comfortable not being the guy that the media’s talking about,” he said.Layman, though, is worth talking about. Heading into Friday’s games, he was tied for seventh in the Big Ten in rebounds per game (6.4) and 18th in scoring (13.3), and he has amassed four double-doubles and two Big Ten Player of the Week Awards. While Wells was out with a broken wrist, Layman helped No. 14 Maryland (24-5, 12-4) to a 6-1 record. He had 21 points and 11 rebounds in a 73-64 victory at Oklahoma State. And he is renowned in the locker room as a leader — albeit a quiet one.“I wouldn’t say he’s the most vocal guy,” the senior forward Jon Graham said, “but at the same time he does a great job of leading by example.”Layman added, with a reference to the charismatic Wells: “I prefer to be that kind of a leader. We give all the talking to Dez.”One thing that had made Layman stand out was his long blond locks, which he grew out the summer before college. His hair gave him a resemblance to the superhero Thor, and his nickname around campus was Sunshine. A Twitter account called Jake Layman’s Hair popped up.But before his sophomore season, he cut it, prompting @JLaymansHair to post, “I think I shrunk.”“It was getting annoying out there,” Layman said of his hair.Maryland, in its first year in the Big Ten, is primed for a high seed in the N.C.A.A. tournament. While an invitation to the tournament might seem routine for the Terrapins, it would be their first trip in five seasons and their first during Turgeon’s tenure. Turgeon is well versed in the tournament, having played in four straight tournaments under Larry Brown at Kansas in the 1980s before returning as the head coach of Wichita State and Texas A&M.More notably, it would be Maryland’s first bid since 1988 to be achieved without the longtime coach Gary Williams, who left after the 2010 season. “He is Maryland basketball,” John Auslander, a former player who is now a graduate assistant for the Terps, said wistfully of Williams while standing just a few feet from the letters on the hardwood that read, “Gary Williams Court.”Williams took a program that had never advanced past the Round of 8 and turned it into a powerhouse consistently capable of going toe to toe with North Carolina and Duke during Maryland’s time in the Atlantic Coast Conference. Williams went 461-252 in 22 seasons with two Final Four appearances, and in 2002 he led Maryland to its sole men’s basketball national title.Though they never had the national profile of the Tar Heels or the Blue Devils, the Terrapins seemed to get the job done more frequently than not.“For as long as I can remember,” said Graham, who is from Baltimore, “Maryland’s always been that team that you expect to go to the N.C.A.A. tournament, you expect them to make a run, you expect them to perform well.”The program, in other words, is not unlike the self-effacing Layman, who is most frequently compared to Dallas Mavericks forward Chandler Parsons, as they share the size to grab rebounds in the lane but also a shooting range that extends to the 3-point line.“I feel like his game fits a little more in the N.B.A. than in the college game, and that’s what I feel like,” Layman said of Parsons. “I think I’m a guy that doesn’t have to have the ball in his hands all the time to really make an impact. I feel like I could be one of those guys that hangs out in the perimeter and just shoots 3s and slashes to the basket when he needs to.”In his first two seasons, Layman, who grew up in Wrentham, Mass., but whose father’s family is from Bel Air, Md., was primarily a shooter.But after a disappointing sophomore season, he worked with Auslander and David Adkins, a former Maryland women’s basketball assistant now with the Washington Wizards, to improve his post moves and his jump shot. Auslander said they spent a lot of time working on dribbling. “He had a tendency to take a lot of false steps and have a lot of wasted motion in his drives,” Auslander said. This year, Auslander added, Layman is “just extremely efficient with his pivots and footwork.”Efficient is the key word. This season, Layman is scoring more points and collecting more rebounds in fewer minutes per game than last season. He is on pace to attempt fewer 3s, even as he makes nearly 40 percent of them, and he has already attempted 29 more free throws than all of last season. He is playing like someone who shares the ball with two gifted scorers.Layman takes particular pride in his improved rebounding — grabbing an average of 1.3 more per game than last season. In one drill this summer, Layman would grab rebounds and put them back with his weak left hand.“And it wasn’t just rebounding casually,” Auslander said. “He had to attack the ball in everything he did. You can see it: in his defensive rebounding, he’s getting balls above the rim; he’s attacking, he’s relentless.”Though Trimble and Wells attract a majority of the attention now, Layman is the one who shows up most prominently on mock N.B.A. draft boards, as high as the late first round. Layman said he would not consider whether to declare for the draft until this season was complete.Nor are there plans to grow back his hair.“To me, this is a more mature look,” he said, referring to his new wavy blond hair.He added: “It was one of those things where I was maybe getting too much attention for it. So I just got rid of it, so no one really talks about me anymore with that.”Just the way he likes it.Advertisement