
MARCH 2, 2015

There's soccer everywhere you look this week. Unless you're not looking, in which case there's mostly basketball and, here in the Northeast, snow. Soccer Editor and shameless Ajax supporter Andrew Das tells you what to watch this week.
Plenty of midweek action in Europe as a crowded fixture list and domestic cups again help those looking for an excuse not to get work done. French Cup. Italian Cup. German Cup. Danish Cup. (Honest.) The problem? Work might actually be better than "Sophie's Choice" options like Tuesday's: Aston Villa-West Bromwich Albion in the Premier League (2:45 p.m. EST, NBCSN) or Boulogne-Saint-Etienne in the French Cup (2:45, beIN).And if you miss Villa-West Brom in the league, you can watch them inexplicably meet again in the sixth round of the F.A. Cup on Saturday. Or you could just stare at a wall. The Algarve Cup in Portugal this week deserves a peek. The Algarve is one of the best kept secrets in soccer — a sunny spot where the world's best women's teams gather to test themselves in what amounts to a mini-Women's World Cup, minus the crowds. Put the tournament on your bucket list (Sam Borden can take it off his; I sent him there this year.) The United States plays Norway on Wednesday (2 p.m. EST) and Switzerland (noon) on Friday. Both games are on Fox Sports 1.Major League Soccer's 20th season kicks off (strike-permitting) on Friday night, with Los Angeles-Chicago at 10 p.m. on Univision. There are six more games Saturday, but the marquee game of opening weekend is Orlando City-NYCFC (5 p.m. EST, ESPN2) to open a Sunday night tripleheader. Again, though, watch this space. If the players and the league don't reach a deal on a new collective bargaining agreement, all bets — and all games — are off.Ajax Amsterdam, the greatest club in the world and one you should consider supporting, will try to follow up last weekend's big win over first-place PSV with another against lowly Excelsior on Sunday. Sadly, the soccer gods continue to conspire against us; the game won't be broadcast in the United States. Sigh. Advertisement