AdvertisementSupported byBy Jonah Engel BromwichEvery week, The New York Times will choose one essential game to watch, highlighting hot teams, winning and losing streaks and statistical intrigue in the N.B.A.Houston at Atlanta, Tuesday, 7:30 p.m. Eastern, NBATVEntering February, the Atlanta Hawks had won 19 games in a row, part of a 33-2 stretch since Nov. 28. But last month was tougher for the Hawks: They started off on the wrong foot with a 15-point defeat against the New Orleans Pelicans and lost several other seemingly winnable games, one of them to the mediocre (if improving) Boston Celtics and another to the slumping Toronto Raptors.The Hawks still have the most wins in the N.B.A. and should be considered the class of the Eastern Conference, especially now, with the Raptors and the Washington Wizards playing poorly and the Chicago Bulls having lost Derrick Rose yet again. But even as the competition drops off, the specter of LeBron James and the rising Cleveland Cavaliers remains. Atlanta’s regular season has defied all reasonable expectations. But can this unorthodox, unproven team — one with plenty of All-Stars but no superstars — keep playing this well when it faces the league’s best in April?There were some ominous signs for the Hawks in their February losses. In three of their four defeats, the team shot poorly from beyond the 3-point line, including a woeful 8-for-38 performance against the Raptors. The Hawks were also often badly outrebounded, suggesting the team is overly reliant on its shooters and may have trouble competing inside when its 3-pointers are not falling.The Hawks are modeled in large part after San Antonio, and their passing and movement on offense are reminiscent of the Spurs, the defending champions. But the Hawks’ big men are not always as consistent as San Antonio’s Tim Duncan, who at 38 remains a top defender and a steady option in the post. Atlanta’s starting center, Al Horford, has played well this year — well enough to be chosen as one of the team’s four All-Stars. But Horford is not a reliable scorer when his team is struggling; in three of the four February losses, he scored fewer than 10 points. The Hawks’ other starting big man, Paul Millsap, is their leading scorer, but he averaged only a little more than 10 points per game in the four losses. While the Hawks’ offense looks great when it is working, the team lacks an alternate plan when it is not making many of its shots.Like the Hawks, the Houston Rockets rely on 3-pointers above all else. They take, and make, more 3s than any other team in the league. But unlike the Hawks, the Rockets do have a reliable scoring option inside. Or at least they usually do, in the form of center Dwight Howard, who has been out with knee problems since the end of January. It is not clear when he will return.Still, the Rockets are rolling without Howard. They have won five games in a row, including a barnburner against the Cavaliers on Sunday, and eight of their last 11. James Harden is having a season worthy of a most valuable player award, leading the league in scoring while averaging seven assists and almost six rebounds and two steals a game. He has become nearly unstoppable, with his ability to knock down shots from deep and beat defenders off the dribble. Harden’s penetration makes the Rockets an inside-outside threat even when Howard is not playing. Harden will put his head down and drive, forcing defenses to collapse on him, and then kick the ball out (often to Trevor Ariza) for a 3-pointer, or throw it deeper inside to a player like Josh Smith. Harden also goes to the free-throw line far more than any other player. He had taken 550 free throws entering Sunday’s game (nearly 150 more than Russell Westbrook, who had taken the second-most).The Rockets are also succeeding without Howard because of their bench’s depth: Eight players on the roster are averaging at least 10 points per game this season. Several bench and role players have been impressive, including the 7-footer Donatas Motiejunas and a fellow third-year player, Terrence Jones.Even with Howard in the lineup, the Rockets could not beat the Hawks when the teams met back in December, and Houston will be looking for revenge this time around. Last week, the Cavaliers beat the Golden State Warriors in a possible preview of the N.B.A. finals. The matchup between the Hawks and the Rockets this week may be less highly anticipated, but they could be just as likely to make the finals as their more glamorous conference counterparts.Advertisement