AdvertisementSupported byN.H.L. RoundupBy Allan KredaThe Rangers made a significant trade a day before the deadline, acquiring defenseman Keith Yandle from the Arizona Coyotes on Sunday. In return, the Coyotes received defenseman John Moore, the teenage forward Anthony Duclair, a first-round pick in 2016 and a second-round choice this June. Arizona will also pay half of Yandle’s remaining salary on his five-year contract, with a $5.25 million cap hit next season.The Rangers also got defenseman Chris Summers, who has mostly played in the American Hockey League, and a fourth-round draft pick this year. Yandle, 28, joins a Rangers defense corps, including Dan Girardi, Ryan McDonagh and Marc Staal, that led the team to the Stanley Cup finals last spring. The offense-minded Yandle has spent his entire career with the Coyotes, who drafted him in the fourth round in 2005. The durable Yandle was leading the Coyotes this season with 41 points (four goals and 37 assists) in 63 games. He also leads all defensemen in power-play assists (102) and power-play points (120) since the start of the 2009-10 season. He has played every game of the last six seasons and could become a power-play quarterback for the Rangers, as the 38-year-old defenseman Dan Boyle has been a major disappointment this season.Duclair, 19, was a sensation last fall, making the Rangers out of training camp. He had a goal and six assists in 18 games. Moore, 24, joined the Rangers in a deal with Columbus two years ago for Marian Gaborik.“Anthony Duclair is a dynamic, skilled forward who has size, speed and offensive talent,” Coyotes General Manager Don Maloney said in a statement.The Rangers are now without a first-round draft pick this year or next. They traded their 2014 and 2015 first-round picks to Tampa Bay last March with Ryan Callahan for Martin St. Louis. The Rangers also traded forward Lee Stempniak to the Winnipeg Jets for forward Carl Klingberg. Stempniak, 32, had nine goals and nine assists in 53 games for the Rangers. Klingberg, 24, has 15 goals in 51 games for St. John’s of the A.H.L. this season.The Rangers made a third deal, acquiring center James Sheppard from San Jose for a fourth-round draft pick in 2016. Sheppard, 26, is a defensive forward who can also play left wing. He had five goals and 11 assists in 57 games for the Sharks this season. PANTHERS 4, LIGHTNING 3 Jaromir Jagr had a goal and an assist, and host Florida edged Tampa Bay. Jagr, who was acquired in a trade with the Devils on Thursday, moved into a tie with Phil Esposito for fifth on the career goals list with 717. (AP)PENGUINS 5, BLUE JACKETS 3 Evgeni Malkin scored twice and added an assist, and Pittsburgh’s power play dominated visiting Columbus. Pittsburgh went 3 of 6 with the man advantage. (AP)JETS 5, KINGS 2 Andrew Ladd scored twice, and the host Jets lifted their playoff hopes with a victory over Los Angeles. The Jets also got goals from two recent acquisitions, Drew Stafford and Tyler Myers.Jeff Carter scored twice for Los Angeles. (AP)CAPITALS 4, MAPLE LEAFS 0 Alex Ovechkin scored his league-leading 40th and 41st goals of the season and added an assist, Braden Holtby had 32 saves, and host Washington subdued Toronto.Ovechkin scored his first goal 33 seconds into the game.The Capitals acquired forward Curtis Glencross earlier in the day from Calgary. (AP)DUCKS 3, STARS 1 Clayton Stoner, who had not scored in his first 54 games, put a slap shot past Jhonas Enroth for the go-ahead goal in the third period as visiting Anaheim topped Dallas. (AP)Advertisement