AdvertisementSupported byN.B.A. RoundupBy The Associated PressJames Harden scored 33 points for Houston, and the Cleveland star LeBron James missed two free throws with 4.2 seconds left in overtime as the Rockets held on for a 105-103 victory over the visiting Cavaliers on Sunday.James hit a 3-pointer with 43.5 seconds left to put the Cavaliers a point behind. Harden and James got tangled up on the Rockets’ next possession, but no foul was called, and the shot clock expired.James drove into the lane and was fouled by Josh Smith, but he missed both free throws to finish 3 for 11 at the line. Harden added a free throw, and Cleveland missed a 3-point attempt at the buzzer.“There is no excuse; I missed free throws,” James said. “I missed the two biggest ones of the game to put us up with seconds on the clock, and I didn’t come through. I failed my teammates.”James, who rested during Friday’s 93-86 loss at Indiana, finished with 37 points in the game, which had multiple technical fouls and a flagrant foul by Harden on James.A long jumper by J. R. Smith put the Cavaliers in front in overtime, but the Rockets scored the next 5 points. Patrick Beverley made a go-ahead 3-pointer, and Josh Smith hit two foul shots to make it 104-100 with 2 minutes 21 seconds remaining.The Cavaliers had a chance for the victory in regulation, but James held the ball until right before the buzzer, and his jump shot bounced off the rim.Kevin Love had 21 points for the Cavaliers, who played their second game without point guard Kyrie Irving (left shoulder strain).The loss ended Cleveland’s 10-game winning streak against Western Conference teams and prevented the Cavaliers from moving into first in the Eastern Conference’s Central Division. Cleveland has won 18 of 22 but has dropped two straight.An 8-2 run by the Rockets, with 4 points from Harden, gave them a 98-95 lead with less than two minutes left in the fourth.James made one of two free throws before Tristan Thompson added two more to tie the score about a minute later.James and Beverley got into a brief skirmish in the second half after Beverley fouled James on a shot. With both players on the ground, James pushed Beverley down as he tried to get up, and Beverley pushed him back. The players were separated, and both were given technical fouls.Harden got a flagrant foul when he kicked in the direction of James’s crotch as he fell while James tried to grab the ball from him late in the third. James was pulled away from Harden as he screamed at him, and Corey Brewer and Cleveland’s Thompson received technical fouls from the ensuing argument.CLIPPERS 96, BULLS 86 DeAndre Jordan had 26 rebounds, and Chris Paul scored 28 points for Los Angeles in a victory at Chicago.The Clippers were behind by 76-75 before Jamal Crawford made a 3-pointer with 8:02 left. The Clippers never trailed the rest of the way.The Bulls rookie reserve Nikola Mirotic scored a season-high 29 points. WARRIORS 106, CELTICS 101 Stephen Curry scored 37 points, making four straight free throws to clinch a victory in the final seconds, and Golden State erased a 26-point deficit at Boston.Isaiah Thomas scored 20 points off the bench for the Celtics. PACERS 94, 76ERS 74 Roy Hibbert had 14 points, 15 rebounds and 5 blocked shots to lift Indiana to a home victory. The victory moved the Pacers (25-34) three percentage points ahead of the Nets and the Charlotte Hornets in the crowded race for the final Eastern Conference playoff spot.Robert Covington led Philadelphia with 12 points despite leaving in the third quarter with an injury.HORNETS 98, MAGIC 83 Mo Williams had 23 points and 11 assists as Charlotte beat host Orlando.Charlotte carried an 11-point lead into the fourth quarter but had to fight off a Magic surge that got them as close as 4 points in the final period.Victor Oladipo led the Magic with 21 points.TRAIL BLAZERS 110, KINGS 99 Damian Lillard scored 9 of his 31 points in the fourth quarter, and LaMarcus Aldridge had 26 points and 15 rebounds as visiting Portland earned its third straight victory.Rudy Gay scored 24 points, and Derrick Williams had 13 of his 18 in the fourth quarter for Sacramento.THUNDER 108, LAKERS 101 Serge Ibaka had 18 points and 14 rebounds, D. J. Augustin added 18 points and 9 rebounds, and visiting Oklahoma City won without the injured Kevin Durant and Russell Westbrook.Jeremy Lin had 20 points, 8 assists and 6 rebounds for Los Angeles, which got at least 8 points from eight players.PELICANS 99, NUGGETS 92 Tyreke Evans scored 22 points, and Dante Cunningham drew a key charge late in the fourth quarter as New Orleans extended its winning streak to five games by holding off host Denver. Danilo Gallinari scored 21 points for the Nuggets. Advertisement