AdvertisementSupported byRoundupBy The Associated PressWith a commanding defensive display and his first goal in a cup final, the captain John Terry ensured that Chelsea would not endure another season without a trophy.Terry lifted the League Cup after a 2-0 victory over Tottenham on Sunday at Wembley Stadium in London, almost two years after Chelsea collected its last prize, in the Europa League. The win also gave José Mourinho the first trophy of his second stint as Chelsea’s manager.Terry, 34, and goalkeeper Petr Cech, 32, were the only players on the field who also started in the League Cup final a decade ago, when Mourinho won his first title in England.“It’s difficult for me to live without titles,” Mourinho said. “I need to feed myself with titles.”In the first final of the English season, Terry helped Mourinho satisfy his hunger. Terry, a center back, contained Tottenham throughout the first half and made a scoring breakthrough in the 45th minute when his strike took a slight deflection off defender Eric Dier.“We handled the game well and the pressure well,” said Terry, whose contract will expire at the end of the season.Chelsea tightened its grip on the game when Tottenham defender Kyle Walker deflected striker Diego Costa’s shot into the net in the 56th minute.The triumph ended the longest trophy drought in Mourinho’s managerial career. His last title, in the top Spanish league, had come with Real Madrid in 2012. He rejoined Chelsea in 2013.Mourinho, who won the League Cup twice during his Chelsea tenure from 2004 to 2007, has his team in contention this season in the Champions League and the Premier League. “This is the first one, and we have to build on it,” Terry said. Tottenham fell to its second cup disappointment in three days, having been eliminated from the Europa League by Fiorentina on Thursday. Mauricio Pochettino’s first season in charge of Tottenham will be a trophyless one, but his young team is still developing.“We played much better in the first half, and we respected our style and philosophy,” Pochettino said. “We were better than Chelsea and unlucky to concede the goal we did. It was hard for us.”LIVERPOOL EDGES MAN CITY Philippe Coutinho scored a late winner at home against Manchester City for the second straight season, lifting Liverpool to a 2-1 victory that dented City’s chances of catching Chelsea, the Premier League leader. Coutinho curled in a shot from about 80 feet in the 75th minute, adding to his list of recent impressive goals.“He’s a joy to watch,” Liverpool Manager Brendan Rodgers said of Coutinho, 22, one of the league’s best players in 2015. “He’s a kid who has so much ahead of him.”Liverpool, which is unbeaten in the league since Dec. 14, climbed above Southampton to fifth and is 2 points behind Manchester United in the race for Champions League qualification.Second-place City is 5 points behind Chelsea and 4 ahead of Arsenal, which beat visiting Everton, 2-0, on goals from Olivier Giroud and Tomas Rosicky.MADRID SQUANDERS CHANCES Real Madrid stumbled to a costly 1-1 draw with Villarreal at home to tighten the title race in the top Spanish league.Cristiano Ronaldo gave Madrid the lead in the 52nd minute with a penalty he earned and converted. But Madrid squandered Ronaldo’s league-leading 30th goal of the season when it conceded a goal to Villarreal striker Gerard Moreno.Madrid still had 25 minutes left to push for a winner, and even though Ronaldo had three quality chances for a second goal, Madrid also could have lost if not for goalkeeper Iker Casillas’s late save to deny Luciano Vietto.Madrid inched 2 points ahead of Barcelona with the fierce rivals approaching their clash at Camp Nou in three weeks.One beneficiary of Madrid’s slip was the defending champion, Atlético Madrid, which remained 7 points behind in third despite drawing, 0-0, at fifth-place Sevilla.DISAPPOINTMENT FOR P.S.G. Paris St.-Germain missed a chance to move to the top of the French league, wasting several good chances in a 0-0 draw with host Monaco.P.S.G. was without its top scorer, Zlatan Ibrahimovic, because of a suspension. Striker Edinson Cavani, the winger Ezequiel Lavezzi and the attacking midfielder Javier Pastore failed to convert scoring opportunities.P.S.G. is 1 point behind Lyon, which lost to Lorient on Saturday.Advertisement