By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSMARCH 1, 2015
The Texas Rangers’ ace, Yu Darvish, threw 14 pitches without discomfort during a scrimmage in Surprise, Ariz., on Sunday. It was his most extensive work since he was shut down last August with elbow inflammation.Darvish, a right-hander from Japan, struck out two of the three batters he faced as curious Rangers fans, a large Japanese news media contingent and a college team from Japan watched his every move.Afterward, Darvish, a three-time All-Star, described his outing as “great,” saying he was pleased with his fastball — which reached 94 miles per hour — as well as his changeup. Darvish spoke to reporters in English more than at any previous time in his career.Darvish said that he was trying to be more of a leader this season and that he was more comfortable than he had been since joining the Rangers in 2012.AdvertisementDarvish also disputed comments that he quit on the Rangers last season.“I love this ball club; that’s not true,” he said.AdvertisementCOLLEGE TEAM TRIUMPHS Phillies starter Paul Clemens pitched two perfect innings, but Philadelphia lost to the University of Tampa, 6-2, in Clearwater, Fla., during the first spring training game for a major league team this year.The Detroit Tigers and the Miami Marlins will play college teams Monday, and the regular schedule of Grapefruit League and Cactus League exhibitions will begin Tuesday.Russ Canzler, Aaron Altherr and Tommy Joseph strung together three straight one-out hits to put the Phillies ahead, 2-0, in the second inning.Tampa rallied against the Phillies’ bullpen. After the right-hander Nefi Ogando issued a bases-loaded walk to tie the score in the seventh, Giovanny Alfonzo hit a grand slam.KEEPING IT REAL Max Scherzer was warming up in the bullpen, getting ready to head onto the field to throw his first batting practice session for the Washington Nationals.But first came the national anthem.“You’ve got to simulate it like it’s a real game,” Scherzer said. “It’s always about the little things.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.So before Scherzer left the bullpen, he turned to Manager Matt Williams.Williams hummed “The Star-Spangled Banner” for him.“It’s Max’s thing,” Williams said. “He always takes that break for the national anthem when he prepares to go start a game. He wanted to take the break, so we hummed it for him and made him feel comfortable in that regard so he could go out and do his live B.P.”AdvertisementANGELS PITCHER PROGRESSING The Angels right-hander Garrett Richards was expected to begin fielding drills in about a week as he made progress after a knee operation in August, and the club remained hopeful he would pitch two to three weeks into the regular season for Los Angeles, the reigning American League West champion.“It’s not going to be opening day; let’s put it that way,” Manager Mike Scioscia said. “He knows it, and it’s great that he’s not going to be able to rush it, because our medical staff’s not going to let him. There’s a progression. He has to pass every plateau.”ROCKIES ADD RELIEVER Colorado selected John Axford’s contract, adding a veteran reliever with late-inning experience to their bullpen.Axford, who agreed to a minor league deal last month, gets a $2.6 million, one-year contract with a chance to earn more in performance bonuses. The right-hander Axford, 31, was 2-4 with a 3.95 E.R.A. in 62 games with Cleveland and Pittsburgh last year.In six major league seasons, Axford is 24-23 with a 3.40 E.R.A. and 116 saves, including 10 for the Indians last year.BLUE JAYS SIGN OUTFIELDER Toronto gave its outfield depth a boost, signing Dayan Viciedo to a minor league contract.Last week, Blue Jays outfielder Michael Saunders tore cartilage in his knee when he stepped on a sprinkler while chasing a ball during training camp in Dunedin, Fla. He had surgery and was expected to be out five to six weeks.Viciedo, 25, hit 21 home runs for the Chicago White Sox last season, batting .231 with 58 R.B.I.A version of this article appears in print on March 2, 2015, on Page D2 of the New York edition with the headline: Darvish, Returning From Injury, Looks Sharp.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.