By KAREN CROUSEMARCH 1, 2015
PALM BEACH GARDENS, Fla. —  Ian Poulter cruised to his first 54-hole lead in a PGA Tour event on Sunday — not that he had much time to dwell on it. Less than an hour after signing for his third-round, four-under-par 66, Poulter returned to PGA National’s Champion course for his fourth round in the weather-delayed Honda Classic.By the time darkness ended the half-completed final round, Poulter’s three-stroke lead was gone. After seven holes, he shared the lead, at seven under, with Paul Casey, a fellow Englishman who chased his third-round 68 with a four-under 31 on the first nine of his final round.Patrick Reed, who will defend his World Golf Championship title at Doral this week, had been tied for the lead before making a bogey on his final hole, the par-3 seventh.Also lurking near the lead was Phil Mickelson, who shared fourth with Daniel Berger (71), Jeff Overton (69) and Brendan Steele (71) after 54 holes.Advertisement“It’s fun to feel the pressure and be in it,” said Mickelson, who played 26 holes Sunday in two-under. “It was a fun day today.”Asked if he liked where he was sitting on the leaderboard heading into Monday’s finish, Mickelson said, “The best position is leading, but there’s a lot of golf left.”AdvertisementMickelson, whose last tour victory was at the 2013 British Open, was among the players who had less than 40 minutes between the end of their third round and the start of their fourth. The fatigue, as much mental as physical, showed in the last half-hour of play. Poulter played the fifth and sixth holes in three over, and Padraig Harrington was three over on Nos. 4 through 6.Poulter, whose only victory in the United States was in the 2010 World Golf Championships match-play event outside Tucson, Ariz., moved back into a tie for the lead on the seventh by hitting a tee shot to 3 feet and making the putt.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Upset at himself after finding water on the fifth and sixth, Poulter said he used the extra adrenaline for a near-perfect swing with his 6-iron. “I was internally very, very angry,” he said.He declined to share what he had been muttering to himself as he made his way to the seventh tee box. “You don’t really want to know,” he said. “It’s not newspaper- or Internet-worthy.”Poulter, an enthusiastic car collector, used an automotive analogy to explain his two-hole wobble: “I was on cruise control, shall we say,” he said, adding, “You take your foot off the accelerator for one second, all of a sudden you find yourself completely out of position.”A version of this article appears in print on March 2, 2015, on Page D7 of the New York edition with the headline: First for Poulter Fades Quickly at Delayed Honda Classic.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.