AdvertisementSupported byBy David WaldsteinDUNEDIN, Fla. — Russell Martin sat on a bench outside the Toronto Blue Jays’ spring training clubhouse one recent afternoon, his gaze distracted by a pickup soccer game on the outfield grass involving Jose Bautista, Munenori Kawasaki and a few other players. An agile, all-around athlete, Martin was eager to try out his footwork with his newest teammates. But first he wanted to reflect on one of his old Yankees buddies, a player who he felt had unknowingly pushed him to another level as a major league catcher at a point in his career when that no longer seemed realistic.Martin, 32, last played in the Bronx in 2012. But images of his two years in pinstripes still flicker through his mind, even as he wears a royal blue jersey with a red maple leaf logo on his chest.For Martin, the Yankees memories include big home runs, playoff games in October and, most of all, the impact of playing with Derek Jeter.Here is what Martin best remembers: Jeter arriving at the clubhouse each day, a cup of Starbucks coffee in hand and a wisecrack on his lips. Jeter going through his pregame routines and batting practice, patterns that almost never wavered. Jeter eating a peanut butter and jelly sandwich before each game.And finally, Jeter sitting down in the dugout, after a hit, a groundout or maybe even a strikeout, and delivering his response to the eternal hitter’s question: What kind of stuff does that guy on the mound have?He stinks, Jeter would invariably sneer, although in slightly saltier language. No matter how good the pitcher was, whether he was a Cy Young Award winner or an emergency spot starter just extracted from the minor leagues, Jeter was not going to concede anything to his adversary. “I loved that,” Martin said. “It didn’t matter if the guy was on his way to a no-hitter. He stunk. Nobody was ever more respectful than Jeet, but in the game, he refused to give the guy any credit. Ever.”For two seasons, Martin played alongside Jeter and observed everything he did. Looking back, Martin thinks that he did not pick up right away on the messages Jeter was offering, that they took a while to sink in.But over the next two years, as Martin started at catcher for the Pittsburgh Pirates and helped the team end its long run of futility, he did the things that Jeter had done — becoming devoted to a routine and doggedly refusing to yield.He might never possess Jeter’s overall skills and flair for the dramatic, but Martin reasoned that he could emulate the rigorously consistent manner in which Jeter approached his work.“If he could do it, then I could, too,” Martin said. “If one guy does something the right way, that means I can, too.”In his two years with the Pirates, Martin said, his game flourished. His power numbers went down, but his overall productivity, including his batting average and on-base percentage, went up. And his work behind the plate, particularly with Pittsburgh’s young pitchers, was impeccable. Andrew McCutchen, the Pirates’ center fielder, was emerging as one of baseball’s biggest stars during that period, but people who followed the Pirates closely knew that Martin was at least as valuable as anyone else on the club. Martin’s performance led to questions of why the Yankees had let him go. After the 2012 season, in which Martin hit 21 home runs for the Yankees while playing in 133 games, the team did not make him an offer. He signed with the Pirates for $17 million over two years. For some, the Yankees’ lack of interest in Martin was a mistake, eventually paved over when they signed catcher Brian McCann to a five-year, $85 million contract after the 2013 season. But the Yankees, who failed to make the playoffs in 2013, when they used a hodgepodge of catchers after Martin’s departure, did not reach the postseason in 2014, either, with McCann behind the plate. In 2013, Martin helped the Pirates reach the postseason for the first time in 21 years, and they returned to the playoffs last year.Martin does not fault the Yankees for letting him walk away. “I wasn’t the player I am now,” he said. “It’s that simple. There’s a lot of things I figured out in the last couple of years.”Not all of it had to do with Jeter. Early last season, during a game against Cincinnati, Martin watched from his crouch as Reds first baseman Joey Votto exasperated the Pirates by fouling off one good pitch after another.As annoyed as Martin was, he figured that if Votto could do it, so could he. (You might say that was the Jeter in him.) He went back to the Pirates’ bench and declared, “I’m going to do the Joey Votto.” His teammates laughed, but Martin was serious. When it was his turn to hit, he choked up on the bat, spread his legs wider and took a two-strike approach beginning with the first pitch. “I remember thinking, I’m feeling comfortable right here,” he said. “My hands are quicker, I feel like I can hit just about any pitch right now, and I’m just being annoying. Every tough pitch, I’m fouling off.”Martin’s desire to hit with power in New York came at a cost. He hit just .211 in 2012 with a .311 on-base percentage, both career lows. But now, doing the Votto, he remembered what had made him successful during his five years with the Los Angeles Dodgers, from 2006 to 2010, when he batted .272.“Last year he was finally back to being that guy he was in L.A.,” said Alex Anthopoulos, Toronto’s general manager, who helped lure Martin to his native Canada with a five-year, $82 million deal. “He used the whole field instead of trying to put the ball in the seats every time.”In 2014, Martin’s home run total dipped to 11, but his .402 on-base percentage was a career high. He batted .290 with an .832 on-base plus slugging percentage, and his mark of 5.5 wins above replacement (as compiled by Baseball-Reference.com) was the 18th highest in the majors.The Blue Jays did not show interest in Martin when he left the Yankees in 2012, but this off-season they saw a rare opportunity to pounce on the most coveted catcher on the market — a player who happened to be born in East York, Ontario, barely 10 miles from Rogers Centre, the Jays’ ballpark. A Canadian address appealed to Martin, who spent most of his childhood in Montreal.At a November meeting at Première Moisson, a bakery near Martin’s home in Laval, Quebec, Anthopoulos and the Blue Jays’ president, Paul Beeston, made their pitch to Martin. After the meeting, a woman in the shop, a former season-ticket holder of the Montreal Expos, recognized Martin.In French, she made a request: Could he please sign with the Blue Jays and come home to Canada? Beeston, who does not speak French, asked Martin what she had said. Martin explained, and Beeston beamed.A few weeks later, Martin fulfilled the woman’s request. His first regular-season game as a Blue Jay is scheduled for April 6, at Yankee Stadium. It will be an interesting reunion, with one thing missing: Jeter, who is now retired. But Martin will keep all those lessons from Jeter, the longtime Yankees captain, in mind: Be consistent, stick to a routine, and do not let any pitcher intimidate you. For now, though, Martin just wanted to play soccer with his new teammates. He finished his interview, got up and joined in.Advertisement