AdvertisementSupported byBy Billy WitzTAMPA, Fla. — When Garrett Jones was traded to the Yankees in December, he was hoping to bring with him his good-luck charm of a number, 46. When the Yankees acquired shortstop Brendan Ryan, he knew he would be denied his favorite childhood number, 7. And when Jacoby Ellsbury signed a free-agent contract with the Yankees, he realized that even though the team was giving him $153 million, the Yankees would not give him a jersey with 2 on the back.When players join the Yankees, they are afforded all manners of privilege to play for one of sports’ marquee franchises, one with a tradition of winning and of sparing few expenses to do so.But wearing their favorite number is often not one of them.If the Yankees like to imagine they do things bigger and better than anyone else, they approach retiring numbers with the same gusto.They have retired 18 numbers, and by the end of this summer, another three will be decommissioned: the No. 20 belonging to catcher Jorge Posada, pitcher Andy Pettitte’s 46 and the 51 worn by center fielder Bernie Williams. And it will not be long before Derek Jeter’s 2 joins them.In addition, 21, which belonged to right fielder Paul O’Neill, seems to have been given an off-the-books retirement. In the 14 years since O’Neill retired, it has been awarded only briefly, in 2008, to LaTroy Hawkins and Morgan Ensberg, according to Baseball-Reference.com.Throw in No. 0, which has never been worn by a Yankee, and that makes 23 numbers that are unavailable.“They’re going to have to go to triple digits pretty soon,” said Ryan, a backup shortstop. “I don’t think they want to have to go to negative numbers.”Nobody else comes close to the Yankees in their zest to retire numbers: The St. Louis Cardinals have retired 12 numbers, including Jackie Robinson’s 42, which has been retired throughout baseball. (The Yankees had their own reason to retire 42 — it belonged to Mariano Rivera.) The Atlanta Braves are next, having retired 11 numbers. Five other teams, including the two former New York teams — the Los Angeles Dodgers and the San Francisco Giants — have retired 10. The Mets have retired four, only one of them belonging to a Mets player, Tom Seaver’s 41.Jersey numbers, like the way a player wears his stirrups or stands in the batter’s box, can become part of a player’s identity. In some cases, athletes joining a new team offer to pay handsome rewards for a number. (When John Lackey joined the Cardinals last year, he gave Pat Neshek a Babe Ruth-autographed baseball for No. 41.)A player’s uniform number is more fluid in baseball than in other sports. In the N.B.A. and N.F.L., a player must petition to change his number. The N.F.L. requires players at certain positions to wear numbers in a certain range.In baseball, rookies and minor leaguers are traditionally accorded the highest uniform numbers in spring training. If they make the team, they are often rewarded with a lower number. Jeter was given 70 in his first training camp, then switched to 2 when he made the team.Austin Romine, a backup catcher, wears 55, his fifth uniform number.“It’s my eighth year, and I’m in the 50s,” Romine said. “If you get in the 50s in New York, that’s saying something.”Having a high number in spring training is also a way of making sure that younger players who have yet to reach the major leagues understand they are plebes.“The last thing you want to be is a diva,” said Ryan, who was given 63 in his first training camp with St. Louis. “You’re kind of told ears open, mouth shut.”The Yankees’ equipment manager, Rob Cucuzza, keeps a color-coded spreadsheet listing in numerical order which player is assigned to each number. Retired numbers are highlighted in black, and ones that are already taken are in blue. The only numbers currently available are 38, 50, 57 and 69.Options are also scarce when a player is acquired during the season. Second baseman Stephen Drew had only worn single digits in Boston, Oakland and Arizona. He wore 33 when he joined the Yankees in the middle of last season, then switched to 14.“Some guys are blown away that so many numbers aren’t available,” said Cucuzza, who tries to keep low numbers available in case the team acquires a veteran during spring training. “But once they see the list, they understand.”Sometimes players are given numbers that would seem to have a connection to them. Nathan Eovaldi, who joined the Yankees from Miami in a December trade, was given 30, the number worn by Nolan Ryan — who came from Eovaldi’s hometown, Alvin, Tex. — when he broke in with the Mets. Andrew Miller was given 48, which seems to have been reserved for left-handed relievers, with Matt Thornton, Josh Outman, Boone Logan and Phil Coke having worn it in recent seasons, though Cucuzza said it was a coincidence.Most players have a story that goes with their number. Dellin Betances, the Yankees’ towering relief pitcher, kept the No. 68 he was given in spring training last year because it represented his height, 6 feet 8 inches. Another reliever, Adam Warren, said the best thing about having 43 was that he stood next to Rivera when the opening day roster was announced in Rivera’s last season.The Yankees are the sixth team Chris Capuano has pitched for. He wore 57 in Arizona, 39 in Milwaukee, 38 with the Mets, 35 with the Dodgers and 55 in Boston. He is wearing 26 with the Yankees, allowing for some symmetry — it is the number he wore at Duke, which is tattooed along with a D on his thigh.For some, the attachment is less about sentiment than about superstition. Jones was given 46 when he finally established himself in Pittsburgh after a decade in the minors. But with that number being retired in honor of Pettitte, he settled for 33.Ryan has an affinity for 7 because his favorite player growing up was Mickey Mantle. It is an odd attachment: Ryan is from Los Angeles and was born more than a decade after Mantle retired.“I always heard about the Mick,” Ryan said. “He hit the farthest ball ever and he ran the fastest, so it was like he’s super human — I want to be that guy.”Ryan has not worn Mantle’s number since high school. Jim Edmonds, a teammate in St. Louis, told the clubhouse manager to give Ryan 13 because he was tired of looking at 63. Ryan took 26 in Seattle because his birthday is March 26. When he arrived in New York in the middle of 2013, he was given 39, but he quickly asked Cucuzza for another number, settling on 35. He switched to 17 last season.“I don’t know who’s wearing 39 now,” Ryan said (it’s pitcher Chase Whitley). “But I was like, Come on, you expect me to hit in that number? I need something a little easier on the eye. I feel like 17 is a nice, clean number.”It also has a digit Mantle wore. But most important, with the Yankees, it was available.Advertisement