

 Ken Belson
 

ON PRO FOOTBALL
MARCH 1, 2015
For years, the N.F.L. played cat and mouse with the city of Los Angeles. Every so often a team in, say, Minnesota, would threaten to move to L.A. in an effort to crowbar concessions out of its government leaders back home. Once the team got public financing, it stayed put.To move the ball, AEG, the sports and entertainment group, and Majestic Realty Group, a big real estate developer, promised to build stadiums in Los Angeles County if a team would commit to moving. For years, none did.But the roulette wheel has spun a lot faster this year. In January, the owner of the St. Louis Rams, Stan Kroenke, said he planned to build an 80,000-seat stadium in Inglewood, 10 miles south of downtown Los Angeles. Last week, the Inglewood City Council voted unanimously to give the project the green light. The Rams switched to a year-to-year lease at the Edward Jones Dome in St. Louis, giving them the flexibility to move.Alarmed by the possibility that the Rams could move back to Los Angeles, the San Diego Chargers and the Oakland Raiders last month said they would build their own stadium in Carson, about 15 miles farther south. The move was viewed as a way for the teams to maintain leverage in stadium negotiations with their home cities and potentially forestall the Rams.AdvertisementIn the blink of an eye, the N.F.L. went from shadow boxing to boxing in Los Angeles. Faced with the possibility of three teams rushing to the city at once, the N.F.L. established an owners committee to oversee the process.AdvertisementBut the process appears to be a work in a progress. AEG, which secured environmental approvals and sold naming rights for its proposed stadium next to Staples Center in downtown Los Angeles, and which perhaps fears being shut out of the N.F.L. stadium sweepstakes, re-entered the fray.The company commissioned a report by Tom Ridge, a former secretary of the Department of Homeland Security, who outlined several safety and operational risks of locating a stadium in Inglewood just a few miles from the runways at Los Angeles International Airport.“In the post 9/11 world, the threat of terrorism is a permanent condition,” Ridge wrote. “As both a former governor and secretary of homeland security, it is my opinion that the peril of placing a National Football League stadium in the direct flight path of LAX — layering risk — outweigh any benefits over the decades-long life span of the facility.”Ridge urged a public debate on the “interconnected security, safety and economic risks well before a shovel touches the ground.”Ridge’s report, though, neglected to note that other N.F.L. stadiums are near airports, including MetLife Stadium, the home of the Jets and the Giants, which is a few miles from Teterboro Airport and Newark Liberty International Airport. (Planes have also banked around Citi Field on their final approach to La Guardia Airport.)Nevertheless, AEG paid Mark Rosenker, a former chairman of the National Transportation Safety Board, to write another report on the potential of accidental threats from laser pointers, drones, stadium lights and even equipment falling off planes. The blimps and small planes pulling banners around stadiums on game days could also be affected by the wake from wide-body planes heading in and out of the airport, he said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Why potentially site an 80,000-person stadium right near the third- or fourth-busiest airport and not expect there to be some risks?” Rosenker said in an interview. “Is it the only place in the Los Angeles metropolitan area where you could build such a building?”Eric Grubman, who has worked closely on developing the Los Angeles market for the N.F.L., said that the league had a lot of experience with overflight risk, ingress and egress, and design and construction of stadiums, but that it would most likely rely on outside experts if the project in Inglewood progressed.AdvertisementThe Rams, as well as the Raiders and the Chargers, have been in contact with the league about their plans, but the league will begin a formal review of their proposals only if one or more of the teams applies to relocate.“We’re spending time on any site which could conceivably host a team, but we spend more time as the probability increases,” Grubman said. “Now that the Inglewood site is entitled and Carson is along that process, we’re spending more time looking at them.”Russ Stanton, a spokesman for Kroenke and Stockbridge Capital Group, which proposed the stadium in Inglewood, declined to comment on the findings of the reports. Michael Roth, a spokesman for AEG, declined to comment on why the company commissioned the reports.With potentially billions of dollars at stake, it is no surprise that developers are using sharp elbows to nudge out rivals.“All’s fair in love and war, and this is war when you’re dealing with a stadium that could cost upwards of a $1 billion and generate billions of dollars over many years,” said Jordan Kobritz, who teaches sports management at the State University of New York at Cortland. “I think they’re desperate, and in my view they should be, given what’s going on lately.”David Carter, who teaches sports business at the University of Southern California, said the reaction from AEG was part of a larger and somewhat inevitable process. When stadium proposals are first announced, their advocates have the first say. Then critics mobilize in opposition and try to derail the progress.“For many years, the Southern California market was a carrot,” said Carter, who previously advised a developer as well as Los Angeles and several other cities that tried to lure an N.F.L. team. “These days, there are a bunch of people running around with sticks.”A version of this article appears in print on March 2, 2015, on Page D7 of the New York edition with the headline: In Los Angeles, Stadiums Battle Heats Up.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »