By BILLY WITZMARCH 1, 2015
TAMPA, Fla. —  Move over, Marshawn (“I’m just here so I don’t get fined”) Lynch and Rasheed (“Both teams played hard”) Wallace. Alex (“I’ll talk to Joe first”) Rodriguez may be prepared to join you on the Mount Rushmore of pat answers.In an abbreviated 85-second meeting with reporters Sunday, Rodriguez brushed off several questions about when he might take the field in a game for the first time — either the intrasquad scrimmage Monday or the exhibition season that begins Tuesday — with “I’ll talk to Joe first” or a variation of it.After Saturday’s workouts were cut short or moved indoors because of heavy rain, Rodriguez took batting practice on the main field Sunday and received an ovation from a small crowd that watched the workout.Asked if he felt ready to play in a game, Rodriguez said, “I’ll talk to Joe first.”Rodriguez also did fielding work on a back field.AdvertisementBut for the second consecutive outdoor workout, Rodriguez played first base without his new first baseman’s glove, which Manager Joe Girardi said was not broken in yet. Asked how long it would take to break in the glove, Rodriguez said, “A couple more days,” and then turned and excused himself from reporters.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But if Rodriguez is able to help the Yankees, it will probably be at designated hitter. Girardi said it was important to get Rodriguez as many at-bats as he could handle this spring because his age (39) and suspension for all of last season would challenge his ability to return to form. Batting practice does not tell Girardi much, a point Rodrgiuez also made.“We see guys at Old-Timers’ Day, and they hit the ball out of the ballpark,” Girardi said. “The real test comes in the games. That’s what we’ve got to see.”AdvertisementINSIDE PITCHJoe Girardi announced his starting pitchers for the first three exhibition games: Adam Warren on Tuesday (Philadelphia), Nathan Eovaldi on Wednesday (Philadelphia) and Esmil Rogers on Thursday (Pittsburgh). Each will throw two innings or 30 to 35 pitches, Girardi said. He declined to say who else would pitch on those days. The Yankees have not discussed a season innings limit for starter Michael Pineda, who missed the 2012 and 2013 seasons with shoulder surgery and missed nearly three months last year with a back muscle injury. After Sunday’s workout, many of the Yankees spent about an hour visiting with local military families. Shortstop Didi Gregorius pitched Wiffle ball batting practice to the young children.A version of this article appears in print on March 2, 2015, on Page D3 of the New York edition with the headline: To Questions, Rodriguez Has but One Real Reply.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.