AdvertisementSupported byOn SoccerBy Rob HughesLONDON — Put the No. 10 jersey on the back of a gifted Brazilian, build the team around him, and he can play anywhere, even in England.For the second Sunday in a row, Philippe Coutinho struck a memorable goal from an angle few would have contemplated scoring. For the second year in a row, Coutinho proved the match winner for Liverpool against the Premier League champion Manchester City.And for the second time in seven days, one is left wondering what might have been had this player been chosen alongside Neymar at the World Cup on his home turf.Maybe you could argue that the event came a year too soon in the development of a player who, though comparatively small and slight, had barely turned 21 years of age. But those who think the creative talent might suffer in the hustle and bustle of English league soccer might ponder on the fact that Pelé stood no taller, though he was built up into sustainable muscle.Is Coutinho that good? Not yet. But as Liverpool has risen up the Premier League table on a run of 12 unbeaten games since before Christmas, he has been intrinsic to its style and to its momentum.Put it another way: On Sunday he outshone Sergio Agüero and David Silva and Yaya Touré, three players who helped make City last year’s title winner, and who are trying to hunt Chelsea down in top spot this season.That trio would get into most starting lineups anywhere on earth. On Sunday, as Liverpool eclipsed the light blues, 2-1, at Anfield, the game was as thrilling and as traditional as England’s league has always been.Thrilling because when the roar of the crowd grows loudest, defensive security is apt to be run out of the equation by opponents going for broke. Traditional because for all its physicality, England’s clubs are looking oh so vulnerable again in European competitions.On Tuesday, Man City was given a lesson in art and movement at its own stadium by Barcelona in the Champions League. On Thursday, Liverpool was eased out of the Europa League on a penalty shoot out by Besiktas. The Reds’ visit to Istanbul entailed a 4,000-mile round trip, and ended back at the John Lennon airport at Liverpool at 4.30 a.m. on Friday. City lay in wait for a noon kickoff Sunday.And we thought this would handicap Liverpool? It might have done had the team manager Brendan Rodgers not taken precautions. He excused from that tiring game four players — Adam Lallana, Jordan Henderson, Lazar Markovic and Coutinho.Some had slight knocks, but all were rested with Manchester City in mind.Henderson, who these days is the stand-in skipper for the injured Steven Gerrard, scored a tremendous goal on Sunday. Coutinho scored a better one. In between a marvelous team goal, carved out by Touré and Silva and Agüero, was finished off by Edin Dzeko.All those talents, and more, arrive in the English game from the global network of playing potential. Somehow they measure up to the intensity and the extreme pace of the Premier League, but lose out to the ability of teams like Barcelona, Bayern Munich and Real Madrid to change the pace even in mid flow.City’s coach, Manuel Pellegrini, comes from Chile and has cut his managerial teeth in Spain. Liverpool’s younger coach, Rodgers, made himself a student of the overseas’ game by spending months in Spain, watching the moves and learning the language.Last season, when Liverpool had Luis Suárez, it almost won the Premiership. Then Suárez left for Barcelona, and Rodgers recycled the money as best he could. The struggle to knit together a new side after the loss of one incredible striker took half a season, and many wondered if Liverpool could even make the top four in England this season.It might now. Sunday’s victory not only dampened City’s hopes, it pushed Liverpool up to fifth, and within striking distance of Champions League qualification.The goal by Henderson on 11 minutes came after Coutinho caught Vincent Kompany dwelling on the ball, after which Raheem Sterling made the pass for Henderson to shoot from outside the penalty box. “I thought have a go,” said the Englishman, “and luckily it went in.”Nothing lucky about the goal that made it 1-1 midway through that half. Touré began it with a long, searching ball out of his own half, Silva and Agüero, with their sharp, intuitive zip along the ground worked through the red lines, and Dzeko then put the finishing hammer to Agüero’s cunning reverse pass.Then, as we waited for Liverpool to tire and City to impose its strength, Coutinho and Lallana confounded such expectation. They just kept on finding pockets of space between City’s midfield and its back line.Even though Pellegrini changed his tactic in the second half, switching from a 4-4-2 formation based on two strikers to bulk up the midfield where Liverpool had the extra man, it was Coutinho who won the game in the 74th minute.A week ago, at Southampton in the rain, the Brazilian had conjured up a huge goal from 35 yards, making the ball dip beneath the crossbar at his whim. Now, from a mere 20 yards, he slipped three lurking defenders on the left edge of the penalty area, looked up, and measured a slanting right-foot shot beyond the reach of goalkeeper Joe Hart, landing it just inside the far upright.An extraordinary mind, a Brazilian talent, and the tenacity to grow into the English way of doing things. We are seeing Coutinho mature and the people who appreciate it most are his colleagues.“We’ve got momentum as a team now,” said Lallana on TV on Sunday. “They are the champions, but our lads have fighting spirit.” He paused, then added:“And we’ve got the little magician, Filippe Coutinho. With goals like that, and with the spirit in our side, we’ll go far.”Advertisement