By ROB HUGHESMARCH 1, 2015
LONDON —  Nothing beats the experience of being in the stadium for a big game.On Saturday, 79,500 people filled the Westfalenstadion, the biggest arena in Germany, for a derby match that has sold out every available ticket since 1987. On this occasion, Borussia Dortmund battered Schalke for 90 minutes before eventually winning the Ruhr derby, 3-0.Dortmund wanted, and needed, it more because it is has had to claw its way back from the bottom of the Bundesliga after a horrible first half of the season. Dortmund is safer now after four successive league wins, but it took 31 shots (against Schalke’s three) to crack the visiting team’s resistance.At the same time, the 75,000 people who pack Old Trafford whenever Manchester United is at home also saw a win.The 2-0 result over lowly Sunderland had its controversies. Not the least of those was the way that the first goal — a penalty scored by Wayne Rooney — came about. The penalty kick was clearly merited after two Sunderland defenders — Wes Brown and John O’Shea — converged on Radamel Falcao.AdvertisementThe Colombian had outfoxed both with a quick turn on the ball. As he spun between the pair, both were close enough to touch him, and as they reached out to stop him from scoring, it was nearly impossible to instantly determine which Sunderland player caused him to stumble.AdvertisementWas it Brown, whose knee possibly brushed the thigh of Falcao? Or was it O’Shea, who grasped Falcao by the arm with one hand and tugged on his shirt with the other?The referee Roger East got the essential part of his decision right. He pointed to the penalty spot. Whether he showed the red card to the right culprit, though, was up for debate.The referee, remember, has no video replay. So in this instance, just over an hour into the Old Trafford game, the referee had to decide in the blink of an eye whether he had seen a penalty. And if he had, the rules required him to dismiss the responsible player.East pointed to Brown and brandished the red card.Uproar.O’Shea, who like Brown was a Manchester United player a few years ago, spoke at length to the referee, gesticulating that the foul and the blame was his.East didn’t believe him. He indicated that, in his opinion, Brown had taken down Falcao as the Colombian was about to shoot.Nobody in the stadium had a closer view or a better angle than the man in charge, except for the broadcasters. They could see the instant replay, and word quickly spread through the stadium that East had mistakenly sent off the wrong man.Coincidentally, the people who make or amend the rules of soccer happened to be at their annual meeting Saturday in Holywood, Northern Ireland.AdvertisementOn this year’s agenda were two decisions involving penalty situations like the one at Old Trafford.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.They debated whether it was now time to allow referees to look at replays on the sideline before making a decision, and whether it was fair to punish defenders twice, by awarding a penalty and automatically ejecting the offender, when a foul prevents a clear scoring opportunity.The rule makers deferred a decision on either for at least another year.If only a referee had such leeway. If only the man charged with running the game were allowed — as used to be the case — to use his own judgment as to whether a penalty was sufficient punishment, without being compelled to send off the defender.The English Football Association could, if it deemed this a case of mistaken identity, rescind the card and transfer the one-game ban from Brown to O’Shea.But that still would not change Saturday’s outcome because, with Rooney poaching a second goal, the game was rightfully won by United. Either way, Sunderland suffered a game-changing penalty and lost a defender.The result keeps United in the top four, the minimum required for its expensive team to qualify for next season’s Champions League. Its coach, Louis van Gaal, is routinely accused of pragmatism and of lacking the verve that United’s history commands.“I think you are in a better position to see than I from the dugout,” he said after the game when asked by reporters if the wrong Sunderland player had been ejected. “You can make a mistake, I also, so maybe it’s a mistake of the referee.”He shrugged. He smiled. And he left the impression that human error is intrinsic to a sport that has never moved faster than it does today.Van Gaal did say that United was on its way to a top-four finish.In Germany, Schalke and Dortmund might struggle to finish that high. Schalke started the weekend fourth in the league standings, and Dortmund was in 12th. But for the first time this season, Schalke has more injured players than Dortmund, whose core has been decimated by injuries, and lately, a stomach bug.AdvertisementYet Dortmund is still alive in the Champions League, and it is at last climbing in the Bundesliga. Jürgen Klopp, its coach, and the nearly 80,000 fans who have never forsaken the team got a derby to relish Saturday.The triumph over Schalke didn’t come easily, thanks in large part to the hands, feet and torso of Schalke goalie Timon Wellenreuther. He made save after save until, in the 77th, 80th and 86th minutes, Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang, Henrikh Mkhitaryan and Marco Reus finally got the goals that their hard work deserved.Justice in the Ruhr, and justice of a kind in Manchester.A version of this article appears in print on March 2, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.