By ANDREW KEHMARCH 2, 2015
It was in mid-December that Mirza Teletovic of the Nets first began feeling, in his words, “weak, weird and kind of dizzy.” Initially, though, there was no discernible reason.He found himself losing his breath after just one or two trips down the court. His family noticed that he was exhausted and was going straight to sleep after games and practices. Surprised that he might be out of shape, Teletovic began doing extra conditioning work on the treadmill. But nothing seemed to help.The mystery was solved on Jan. 22. During a game that night at the Los Angeles Clippers, Teletovic experienced shortness of breath that was worrying enough that he stopped playing and was taken to a hospital. Tests revealed blood clots in the arteries of his lungs, a potentially fatal condition. He was placed on a blood-thinning medication program, and his season came to a sudden end.“You feel terrible, scared,” Teletovic said Monday before the Nets earned a 110-108 home win over the Golden State Warriors. “What’s going on? Why do you have it? Why’s it happening?”AdvertisementSuch questions have reverberated around the N.B.A. this season because of Teletovic’s experience and a succession of similarly disconcerting situations. On Feb. 18, Jerome Kersey, who played in the league from 1984 to 2001, died unexpectedly at 52, and a medical examiner discovered afterward that he had a blood clot in his left lung. On Feb. 21, the Miami Heat announced that Chris Bosh, their All-Star big man, would miss the remainder of the season because blood clots had been found in his lungs.AdvertisementHundreds of thousands of cases of blood clots, or deep vein thrombosis, are diagnosed every year in the United States. The cases become most dangerous when the clots cause blockages in the lungs, a condition known as a pulmonary embolism.In interviews, doctors said it was unlikely that N.B.A. players as a group were at a significantly increased risk for the clots. But they pointed out that certain common aspects of professional athletes’ daily lives — like frequent travel and bodily injury — were well-known risk factors.Experts generally refer to three general factors, together known as Virchow’s triad, as primarily contributing to blood clot formation: circumstances like immobility that cause blood flow to be halted or less than desirable; damage or trauma to the blood vessels themselves; and an unusually high tendency of a person’s blood to coagulate.Dr. Alan Benvenisty, a professor of vascular and transplant surgery at the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai in New York, said the work and travel routines of N.B.A. players could create environments in which the players were at a slightly higher risk.“You play a game, and you’re repeatedly hit, get massively dehydrated and beat tired, and then you fall asleep on a plane,” said Benvenisty, who added that having an alcoholic beverage or two on the flight could intensify dehydration.Dr. James McKinsey, a surgeon at Mount Sinai Roosevelt, said dehydration, in a minor way, could increase the thickness of a person’s blood, making it more susceptible to clotting. He suggested that improper wrapping of joints could stop blood flow, too.Teletovic’s doctors told him they believed the most likely situation in his case was that a deep bruise he sustained on his hip during a Dec. 8 game against Cleveland caused a blood clot. Over time, the clot traveled down to his left leg. (Teletovic said he had felt discomfort in his calf around that time, too, and he can now pinpoint why.) Eventually, the mass traveled back to his lungs, causing the symptoms that eventually led him to be examined.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Teletovic, who resumed workouts three weeks ago, was in good spirits before the Nets’ game Monday. He said that he planned to be back at full speed around July — as soon as he is taken off his blood-thinning medication — and that he would have no problems moving forward.Advertisement“I’ve been running, dunking, jumping, whatever,” he said. “But I can’t play basketball. I can’t have contact.”Mason Plumlee said he and the Nets’ other players were shocked last month when they heard about Teletovic’s condition.“We were just hoping for the best for him and his family because it’s more important than basketball at that point,” Plumlee said.Plumlee said players often slept or remained stationary while trying to pass the time on long flights after games. During the Nets’ flight to China in October for two preseason games, the team’s trainers instructed players to get up and move around at various times.Moving around, doctors noted, is one of the simplest and best ways to prevent blood clots.Dr. David Forsh, chief of orthopedic trauma at Icahn, guessed that N.B.A. players, given their good physical condition, were at a lower risk for blood clots over all. But he noted that injuries and operations in the lower body — with which N.B.A. players are all too familiar — were known to put patients at a higher risk for deep vein thrombosis.After even minor leg procedures, Forsh’s patients are treated with a sequential compression device — essentially a massage boot that promotes blood circulation — and chemical blood thinners as precautionary measures.Teletovic said that he knew nothing about blood clots a few months ago but that he was well versed now. He passed along his good wishes to Bosh, guessing that he would be back on the court soon.Teletovic has been telling people to be vigilant about avoiding risk factors, and he stressed that it was important to catch blood clots at an early stage and to be positive when fighting them.“You’ve got to be lucky sometimes, too,” Teletovic said. “I’m pretty lucky.”REBOUNDSJarrett Jack sank a pull-up jumper over Stephen Curry from the top of the key with 1.1 seconds left to give the Nets a 110-108 victory over the Warriors at Barclays Center, one of their most impressive performances of the season. Curry, who finished with 26 points, received the ball on the ensuing inbounds play, but time ran out before he could put up a shot. Brook Lopez led the Nets with 26 points off the bench.A version of this article appears in print on March 3, 2015, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: From a Net’s Bruised Hip to Blood Clot Awareness.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.