AdvertisementSupported byRangers 4, Predators 1By Allan KredaAn important player made his Rangers debut on Monday, but the team relied on an established, popular commodity to defeat the N.H.L.-best Nashville Predators, 4-1, at Madison Square Garden.The Rangers veteran Mats Zuccarello, a crafty wing with a new four-year, $18 million contract, went out and played the type of game his teammates had come to expect. Zuccarello assisted on Marc Staal’s opening goal 6 minutes 36 seconds into the first period and then whipped a picturesque centering pass from the right boards to Chris Kreider, who made the score 2-0 early in the second with his 17th goal.“A player is only as good as his teammates, and I have a lot of help here,” Zuccarello said after his linemates Rick Nash and Derick Brassard turned in a strong performance. “This feels like home. It feels nice to be able to win with this team. I’m really excited.”Nash and Dominic Moore scored third-period goals for the Rangers (39-17-6), who won for the 13th time in their last 17 games at the Garden. Nash’s goal, his 38th, was an empty-netter. Cam Talbot continued his strong play starting in place of the injured Henrik Lundqvist, making 25 saves against the highflying Predators as the Rangers moved back into a first-place tie with the Islanders in the Eastern Conference’s Metropolitan Division. The former Ranger Matt Cullen scored for Nashville (41-16-7) late in the second. The Predators have a three-game losing streak for the first time this season.Rangers General Manager Glen Sather made a rare appearance after the team’s newest member, defenseman Keith Yandle, met with reporters while wearing a No. 93 Rangers sweater.After commending Yandle’s prowess at both ends of the ice, Sather joked that Zuccarello’s contract was done except for the “blood or ink” to make it official.“Agents are always trying to get all the blood that you have,” Sather added with a grin.The addition of the offensively gifted Yandle to a corps of defensemen that includes the playoff-tested Dan Girardi, Staal, Ryan McDonagh, Kevin Klein and Dan Boyle should give the Rangers a boost as the playoffs approach.“I’m just here to play,” Yandle, a 28-year-old Boston native, said, adding that he was delighted to be reunited with the former Coyotes assistant coach Ulf Samuelsson, now a Rangers assistant. “It’s special, a real honor.”Yandle, who started and was mostly paired with Klein, said he was “ecstatic” to learn he had been traded from the bottom-feeding Coyotes to the Rangers, Stanley Cup finalists a season ago. He figures to improve the team’s power play, having recorded more man-advantage points since the start of the 2009-10 season than any other N.H.L. defenseman.The smooth-skating Yandle had a quiet debut, though, contributing three shots on goal in 19:41 of ice time.“I had a little bit of butterflies, and I was nervous a little bit just being on a new team,” he said. “The coaches did a great job helping me out in the little time we had before the game, getting me familiar with the system. It’s going to be become more and more fluid.”Zuccarello, who had given every impression that he wanted to remain a Ranger despite the allure of the open market, was greeted with cheers from a crowd relieved that one of its favorites had not been traded. He is 5 feet 7 inches and exhibits a mix of speed, smarts and skill that has cemented his popularity, especially among younger fans. He led the Rangers last season with 59 points.Any notion that he would have been traded was dismissed by Sather, who has been at the Rangers’ helm since 2000 after winning five Stanley Cups with the Edmonton Oilers.“I like everything about him — his tenacity, his hard work, the way he sees the ice and the chemistry he brings to the dressing room,” Sather said. “He’s been a terrific player for us.”Zuccarello, who could have been a free agent this summer, helps generate results for Nash and Brassard, a playmaking center who had two assists against the Predators to increase his team-best total to 37. Now all three have long-term contracts on a Rangers squad that could further improve once Lundqvist, who turned 33 on Monday, returns from a vascular injury in the throat area that has forced him to miss the past month.“We’re like a family here,” said Zuccarello, 27. “And this was a strong game for us. Get the 2 points and stay four more years — this day can’t be much better.”Sather conceded that the price for Yandle, who helped the Coyotes reach the Western Conference finals in 2012, was steep. The Rangers parted with the prized teenage forward Anthony Duclair.“You have to give to get,” Sather said. “It was a calculated risk we felt was well worth it.”SLAP SHOTSThe Rangers are 14-3-5 against Western Conference opponents this season. ... Rangers defenseman Dan Boyle, 38, played the 999th game of his N.H.L. career.Advertisement