By BILL PENNINGTONMARCH 2, 2015
In a move that was expected, the Giants on Monday designated defensive end Jason Pierre-Paul as their franchise player, a maneuver that virtually ensures that he will remain with the team at least one more season.The Giants still have until mid-July to negotiate a long-term contract with Pierre-Paul, who was to become a free agent March 10, but if the sides fail to come to an agreement, Pierre-Paul’s 2015 salary will be more than 10 percent of the team’s salary cap limit for the season.If Pierre-Paul plays this season, his sixth, under the franchise tag, he will be set to become an unrestricted free agent in 2016.To clear nearly $3 million in salary cap obligations, the Giants also released center J. D. Walton, who started every game last year. Walton’s exit clears the way for Weston Richburg, the team’s second-round draft pick last year, to take over the center position.AdvertisementPierre-Paul can still negotiate as a free agent with other teams this spring, but the Giants are allowed to match any offer he receives to retain him. And, if the Giants choose not to match an opposing team’s offer, they would receive two first round draft picks from the team, an onerous penalty that has not been exercised this century.AdvertisementThough once a fearsome pass rusher, Pierre-Paul has had a series of injuries and back surgery in recent seasons.NO FRANCHISE TAG FOR SUH Defensive tackle Ndamukong Suh can test the open market when free agency begins March 10 because the Detroit Lions did not use the franchise tag on him.The deadline for teams to designate franchise or transition players came and went, and the Lions did not say anything publicly about their decision. There was only a report early in the day on the team’s website saying that the franchise tag’s price for Suh was too daunting.Last month, General Manager Martin Mayhew said he was optimistic about completing a deal with Suh, but the franchise tag might have been the team’s best source of leverage.Players who were given the franchise tag included Dallas Cowboys wide receiver Dez Bryant, New England Patriots kicker Stephen Gostkowski, Denver Broncos receiver Demaryius Thomas and the Kansas City Chiefs pass rusher Justin Houston.Bryant will get four more months to work on a long-term deal with the Cowboys, but he is at least set to make $12.8 million next season because the team used its franchise tag on him. Bryant, 26, led the N.F.L. with a club-record 16 touchdown receptions in the final year of a rookie contract that paid him $11.8 million over five years.The Cowboys also have to decide whether to re-sign running back DeMarco Murray, who had a league-leading 1,845 rushing yards last season, the final year of his contract. He is set to become a free agent this month.AdvertisementThe Patriots said in an unattributed statement that their placing the tag on Gostkowski, a three-time Pro Bowler, gave the sides more time to negotiate an agreement. If no deal is reached by July 15, the Patriots will pay Gostkowski, the leading scorer in franchise history, $4.126 million in 2015.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Broncos guaranteed Thomas roughly $12.8 million next season while buying themselves more time to work out a long-term deal.The Chiefs moved swiftly in placing the tag on Houston, a 26-year-old All-Pro, who set a franchise sacks record last season — the final year of his rookie deal — and finished a half-sack short of the N.F.L. record, with 22. (AP)CAP TO RISE BY $10 MILLION The N.F.L.’s salary cap is going up to $143.28 million for the 2015 season, an increase of $10 million.The salary cap is determined by a series of N.F.L. revenue streams, with the players receiving 46 percent to 48 percent of that revenue.Several teams are carrying over large amounts of money that they did not spend in 2014, giving them higher adjusted cap numbers. The highest such total is Jacksonville’s $168.4 million; the Jaguars are carrying over $21.7 million in unspent money.Other teams with substantially more to spend in 2015 include Cleveland ($161.7 million), Philadelphia ($159.8 million) and the Jets ($156.1 million).The league and the union also released franchise tag values for 2015. The highest franchise tag is at quarterback, $18.544 million, and next is defensive end at $14.813 million, followed by cornerback at $13.075 million. Then come linebacker ($13.195 million), offensive lineman ($12.943 million), wide receiver ($12.823 million), defensive tackle ($11.193 million), running back ($10.951 million), safety ($9.618 million), tight end ($8.347 million) and kicker and punter ($4.126 million).(AP)A version of this article appears in print on March 3, 2015, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Pierre-Paul Gets Franchise Tag; Lions’ Suh Does Not.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.