AdvertisementSupported byBy Tim RohanPORT ST. LUCIE, Fla. — Around 11 a.m. Monday, on one of the main fields at the Mets’ spring training complex, Matt Harvey toed the rubber for his latest bullpen session. A horde of fans watched his every move. General Manager Sandy Alderson, Manager Terry Collins and several other members of the team’s hierarchy made sure to be there, too.Across the complex, around the same time, Scott Rice, another pitcher working his way back from elbow surgery, practiced his fielding and bunting.“There were about three fans watching,” Rice said. “But they were probably lost. They were probably looking for Harvey.”And why not? Harvey’s comeback is by far the most intriguing story of the spring for the Mets. They have no major position battles going on, and they have a starting rotation that seems pretty set and a bench that appears easy enough to figure out. Sure, they need to decide on a leadoff hitter and whether to play Michael Cuddyer in right field or left. But that’s about it — unless you count the no-frills competition being staged by Rice and several other relievers, all of them angling for the last spot in the bullpen.The job description for that spot is not particularly glamorous, and it includes plenty of mop-up work in one-sided games. Still, it beats the alternative, which is playing in Class AAA Las Vegas. Given the uncertainty surrounding the roster spot, every random inning of spring training work, every bullpen session, could be a chance for Rice and the other candidates to impress Alderson or Collins or a coach, or maybe even a veteran player who might put in a good word.The Mets would prefer to fill the spot with another left-handed pitcher. (Josh Edgin already appears to be penciled in as the first left-handed reliever.) But the team is not opposed to putting a right-hander there, either. So for now, the competition seems to be among Rice, Sean Gilmartin, Jack Leathersich and Buddy Carlyle. That is three lefties and a right-hander (Carlyle), or two veterans and two rookies (Leathersich and Gilmartin). Collins said Monday that he was looking for “somebody, no matter who it is, right- or left-handed, who has quality-enough stuff to give you one or two innings.” Rice, for one, wants to be that somebody. Just two years ago, in 2013, he was the feel-good story of the team. After wading through the minor leagues for nearly a decade and a half, he made his major league debut with the Mets at 31. He was so happy to realize his dream that he did not say anything when two of his fingers — the pinkie and the ring finger on his pitching hand — started to go numb at times in the second half of the season. Rice pitched through it and finished the year with good numbers — a 3.71 E.R.A. in 73 games, the 12th-most appearances by a National League reliever. Left-handed hitters batted just .174 against him. Everything had worked out pretty well, except for the numbness, which Rice attributed to fatigue.But the lack of feeling in his hand continued into the 2014 season and eventually grew worse. That led to surgery to remove a bone spur from his elbow in July, which ended his season. Now he is back, but only on a minor league deal. “It’s taken so long for me to get here, I’m not going to let anything stop me,” Rice said of his bid to be on the 2015 club. “They know what I can do when I’m healthy, so I just need to show that I’m healthy.”But can he outpitch his competition? The Mets picked the 24-year-old Gilmartin in the Rule 5 draft last December, thinking he had the potential to be more than just a left-handed specialist. He has posted a lifetime 4.05 E.R.A. in the minors, working mostly as a starter. He is also a former first-round pick, for the Atlanta Braves in 2011.Because Gilmartin is a Rule 5 pick, the Mets are in a tricky spot. If he does not make the opening day roster, the Mets would have to offer him back to his most recent parent club, the Minnesota Twins. For that reason alone, Gilmartin might have an edge in the competition.“You have to give him an opportunity to pitch,” Collins said of Gilmartin last week, adding that it would not make sense to just “send him out there once or twice” before deciding whether to let the Twins have him back.The other prospect in this battle, the 24-year-old Leathersich, is a bit of an enigma at this point in his career. Taken by the Mets in the fifth round of the 2011 draft, he has evolved into a left-handed reliever who has struggled against left-handed hitters. He might be best known for allowing a monster home run to Giancarlo Stanton in spring training a year ago. Finally, there is Carlyle, a 37-year-old journeyman. He has bounced among the minors, the majors and Japan since 1996. Until he caught on with the Mets last year, he had appeared in just eight major league games over the previous four seasons. But with the Mets, he suddenly flourished. He did not change his mechanics or develop a new pitch. His fastball did not speed up. He said he was just in a good state of mind and had been able to locate his pitches. He posted a 1.27 E.R.A. in 27 games, the lowest of his career by more than two runs.Can he do it again? Can he win this competition? “People are either going to take who you are, or they’re not,” he said. “You go with the flow, and go where you go. I’m not stressed out. What can you do, you know?”Advertisement