By BILLY WITZMARCH 2, 2015
TAMPA, Fla. —  The Yankees, who this season will be counting on a starting rotation that appears to be held together by duct tape and baling wire, on Monday employed a pitcher who could throw all day (and all night, too) without wearing out knee cartilage, elbow ligaments or shoulder sockets.Meet Iron Mike, a strike-throwing machine and, in the eyes of Joe Girardi, a manager’s dream.Teams may almost universally use live pitching during scrimmages — and the Yankees have 34 pitchers in camp at their disposal — but Girardi chose not to for the Yankees’ first intrasquad game, a day before they were to play their first real game of spring training, against the Philadelphia Phillies in nearby Clearwater.Instead, the Yankees rolled Iron Mike, a pitching machine, out to the mound to fire one 90-mile-per-hour fastball after another, a move that one team official could not recall having happened in the annual scrimmage, held by tradition before the exhibition opener.Girardi said he used the machine because he was more focused on fundamentals — how players reacted on the basepaths and defensively on cutoffs and relays — than on face-offs between pitchers and hitters.Advertisement“It’s hard in a sense to get the situations you want with a pitcher on the mound,” Girardi said, adding of using the machine: “We can throw the ball in the dirt when we want; we’re throwing strikes; guys are making contact. We just get a lot more out of it.”AdvertisementThe intrasquad game lasted an hour and pitted Team Goose against Team Gator, in honor of two former Yankees in camp as instructors — Goose Gossage and Ron Guidry, nicknamed Gator. The innings began with a runner on base, usually on first, and were played with three outs.The scrimmage offered Alex Rodriguez the chance to take swings in a more realistic game setting than he had encountered since arriving here a week earlier. He bounced a high chopper to third and hit a soft fly to shallow right field and did not play in the field. Rodriguez, who drew applause from the dozens of fans in attendance when he came to the plate, did not speak with reporters afterward.“We’ll look at the progress he’s making from day to day, week to week, that sort of thing, and how does his bat look on Day 10 as opposed to Day 1,” Girardi said. “Some guys come out swinging really great, but it’s usually the really young guys. So I think you look at the progress more than anything.”Mostly, the exercise was a chance for veterans to get in their swings and for prospects, like outfielder Aaron Judge and first baseman Greg Bird, to perform under Girardi’s eye.Shortstop Didi Gregorius and second baseman Stephen Drew — the Yankees’ new double-play combination, each acquired in the last eight months — also got a chance to work together. And the defense set up shifts against the left-handed pull hitters Brian McCann and Garrett Jones, alignments they are sure to see in the regular season.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.However, the central figure was stationed at the center of the diamond, a three-wheeled, three-pronged, 135-pound, gunmetal-gray machine called the Hack Attack. It sells at retail for $3,299 and can spit out left-handed and right-handed curveballs and sliders, as well as split-fingered fastballs and knuckleballs.Still, the Yankees’ bullpen coach, Gary Tuck, standing behind a screen, had the machine toss nothing but fastballs, occasionally making sure to bounce one in front of home plate to give the catchers work blocking balls and encourage the runners to take an extra base.For several innings, Girardi stood next to Tuck, shagging baseballs and calling balls and strikes.“I got yelled at for not covering first,” Girardi said.AdvertisementThird baseman Chase Headley, who batted once, said that it was unusual to hit off a machine during a scrimmage but that pitchers were often so far ahead of hitters at this point in training camp that he did not mind. And because baseball has become a lower-scoring game in recent years, the little things the Yankees were working on Monday might carry greater weight during the season.That is especially true for a team that was 13th in the American League in runs scored last season.“Baseball in general has shifted in that direction,” Headley said. “The pitching is so much better, and all the analytics that are being stressed with shifts — those things are more magnified in today’s game than they were even two or three years ago.”INSIDE PITCHAlex Rodriguez will play in his first exhibition game Wednesday against the Phillies at Steinbrenner Field and will probably get two or three at-bats at designated hitter, Joe Girardi said. Rodriguez will not travel to Clearwater on Tuesday for the Yankees’ spring training opener, nor will four other expected starters: Mark Teixeira, Chase Headley, Didi Gregorius and Carlos Beltran. Among the pitchers expected to throw Tuesday against the Phillies are Adam Warren, who is set to start, and the promising minor leaguers Luis Severino and Jacob Lindgren. Beltran, who is coming off an operation to remove bone chips from his right (throwing) elbow, will not make his debut until Friday as a precaution. ... Girardi said C. C. Sabathia would most likely make his exhibition season debut next week.A version of this article appears in print on March 3, 2015, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: A Yankee Hurler Shows Great Mechanics.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.