By BRENDAN PRUNTYMARCH 2, 2015
PISCATAWAY, N.J. —  Favorite day? The senior guard Myles Mack did not hesitate on that one. It was Dec. 29, 2011, when Rutgers upset No. 10 Florida in a double-overtime thriller during his first season. A heralded class of talented freshmen led the way. Fans stormed the court and celebrated well after workers began to clean up.“That was one of my best memories,” Mack said.He trailed off for a second after answering that question Monday afternoon. He had to pause and think about another moment in his Scarlet Knights career that could possibly have measured up to that night. After the pause, his answer was hitting a game-winning shot in December against Monmouth. That was it.Tuesday night’s game against No. 10 Maryland will be the 126th game of Mack’s Rutgers career.He has been on the losing end 74 times. College is supposed to be the level where touted players go to become more successful. In high school — first at Paterson Catholic and then at St. Anthony High School in Jersey City — Mack knew nothing but winning. In four years before Rutgers, the teams he played for went 108-11. His senior season at St. Anthony, the Friars went 33-0 and won the New Jersey state championship.He committed to Rutgers and its coach, Mike Rice, who was in his first year and trying to turn around a program that had not been to the N.C.A.A. tournament since 1991.Advertisement“You want to be positive about it,” St. Anthony Coach Bob Hurley said. “That he could be a part of something that could build into something that was going to be successful. I really thought that, over the course of four years, that could happen. Unfortunately, it hasn’t gone that way.”AdvertisementAfter Mack’s first two seasons at Rutgers, the program was hit with a bombshell. Rice became the center of a national story after videotapes surfaced of him using homophobic slurs and throwing basketballs at players. Rice was fired, and Rutgers players began transferring as the university struggled to fix its image and hire a new coach.While others from his highly ranked recruiting class left the program, Mack — along with his teammates Kadeem Jack and Malick Kone — stayed.“I must’ve had 50 or 60 people,” Mack said of those who tried to persuade him to transfer. “People were trying to get into my ear about that I had to. But I’m a strong person. If I say that I’m going to do something, I’m going to do it, and I stayed.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.When the former Rutgers star and N.B.A. head coach Eddie Jordan took over before last season, many around the program believed he would be the perfect influence on Mack and help propel the team as it transitioned to the Big Ten.Instead, the losing has only grown worse in Mack’s final two seasons. Rutgers lost its final game in the American Athletic Conference last season to Louisville by 61 points. And with the exception of an upset over No. 4 Wisconsin in January, in which Mack scored 21 points, the Scarlet Knights are on pace to have their worst season in eight years — and are in a 12-game losing streak in the Big Ten.“He just competes at a high level,” Jordan said. “We see some fatigue, but he fights through it. He never wants to come out of games. He’s almost like Allen Iverson — you take him out, and he’s complaining that he’s out for 30 seconds. But I love him.”Mack insists that he is fine with how his career has turned out. He acknowledged that in the aftermath of his decision to stay at Rutgers, he had lost some friends and confidants who believed he was making the wrong choice.Those are losses he can easily shrug off. He would have liked to have won a Big East, or A.A.C., or Big Ten title and played in a N.C.A.A. tournament game like some classmates who transferred out did. Those would have been memories to place alongside that night against Florida more than three years ago.Even though the events surrounding Rice’s firing two years ago contributed to the way the final two years of Mack’s collegiate career played out, he still counts his former coach as someone close. They text occasionally after wins and losses, good performances and bad. Rice will be watching from his Little Silver, N.J., home as Mack plays at home for the final time in his career.AdvertisementHe knows that Mack was the key ingredient four years ago, when he was attempting to rebuild Rutgers.“It breaks my heart that he won’t go out a winner,” Rice said. “He deserves so much more. But he’ll take so much of what happened to him here in life and become stronger and more prepared for it. It definitely does break my heart. If anybody deserves it — in the history of players in that program — he deserves it. He deserves to go out on top. A winner.”A version of this article appears in print on March 3, 2015, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: Despite Bumpy Road, a Rutgers Senior Is Grateful.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.