AdvertisementSupported byN.H.L. RoundupBy Allan KredaThe playoff-bound Islanders made several deals on the N.H.L.’s trade deadline Monday.Most notably, they swapped goaltenders with Buffalo, sending Chad Johnson and a conditional third-round pick in 2016 to the Sabres for Michal Neuvirth.Neuwirth, 26, gives the Islanders a stronger backup for Jaroslav Halak. Neuvirth, a former starter for the Washington Capitals, was 6-17-3 with a 2.99 goals-against average for the last-place Sabres this season. He was Buffalo’s No. 1 goalie for the past two weeks after the Sabres dealt Jhonas Enroth to Dallas.Neuwirth and Halak were traded for each other last March, when Halak went to Washington from Buffalo.Johnson, 28, who may start for the Sabres, was 8-8-1 with a 3.08 goals-against average for the Islanders.The Islanders also acquired forward Tyler Kennedy, 28, from San Jose for a conditional draft pick. It will be a seventh-round selection in 2015 unless the Islanders win the Stanley Cup this year and Kennedy plays in half of the games in the finals. In that case, it will be a third-round selection for the Sharks in 2016.Kennedy has 76 games of playoff experience and was part of Pittsburgh’s Stanley Cup-winning team in 2009.The Islanders entered Monday leading the second-place Rangers by 2 points in the Metropolitan Division, with 18 games remaining. They are without the injured forwards Casey Cizikas, Kyle Okposo and Mikhail Grabovski. Okposo and Cizikas are expected back soon.In a swap of minor-league forwards, the Islanders also sent Cory Conacher to Vancouver for Dustin Jeffrey and shipped the American Hockey League goaltender David Leggio to Arizona for defenseman Mark Louis.The Devils, who traded Jaromir Jagr to Florida on Thursday, made one other move, sending the veteran defenseman Marek Zidlicky to the Detroit Red Wings for a third-round pick in 2016.Many of the big names moved in the days leading up to the deadline, so Monday saw a flurry of smaller deals.Anaheim acquired defenseman James Wisniewski from the Columbus Blue Jackets for forwards Rene Bourque and William Karlsson and a second-round draft pick in June. The Ducks also sent the former Penguins defenseman Ben Lovejoy back to Pittsburgh for defenseman Simon Despres.The Penguins added defenseman Ian Cole from the St. Louis Blues for defenseman Robert Bortuzzo and a seventh-round pick in 2016.St. Louis picked up another veteran defenseman in Zbynek Michalek from Arizona, which continued to dismantle its roster a day after trading the top defenseman Keith Yandle to the Rangers. The Blues also acquired the much-traveled forward Olli Jokinen from the Toronto Maple Leafs. St. Louis is Jokinen’s third team this season and the 10th team of his career, which began in 1997.The Tampa Bay Lightning received defenseman Braydon Coburn from the Philadelphia Flyers for defenseman Radko Gudas and first- and third-round picks in this June’s draft.The Lightning traded forward Brett Connolly to the Boston Bruins, who also got forwards Max Talbot and Paul Carey from Colorado.The Montreal Canadiens, who lead the Eastern Conference in points, were active, acquiring defenseman Jeff Petry from Edmonton and forwards Torrey Mitchell and Bryan Flynn in separate trades with Buffalo.The Sabres then dealt forward Chris Stewart to the Wild, who also acquired defenseman Jordan Leopold, a Minnesota native and a former college star there.Giordano Out for Season Brad Treliving’s first N.H.L. trade deadline as general manager of the Calgary Flames was unique: His team was in a playoff spot, but he was also dealing with the news of a season-ending injury to defenseman Mark Giordano.In the end, admitting it was difficult to replace a player of Giordano’s caliber — he is the team’s captain and a Norris Trophy candidate — Treliving opted to mostly stay the course with his rebuilding team, other than two expected deals.Giordano sustained a torn biceps in a fall near the end of the Flames’ 3-1 win against the host Devils on Wednesday.At the time of the injury, Giordano led all defensemen with a career-high 48 points (11 goals, 37 assists).Calgary’s only trade on Monday was dealing 2011 first-round draft pick Sven Baertschi to the Vancouver Canucks for a second-round pick in 2015. (AP)Blackhawks 5, Hurricanes 2 Jonathan Toews had two goals and assisted on Marian Hossa’s score as host Chicago rolled over Carolina. Brandon Saad scored his 20th to reach that mark for the first time. (AP)Advertisement