

 Karen Crouse
 

ON GOLF
MARCH 2, 2015
PALM BEACH GARDENS, Fla. —  Rory McIlroy was not going head-to-head against Rickie Fowler for the Honda Classic crown in a duel of young, photogenic players that no doubt would have piqued the casual sports fan’s interest in golf. The top-ranked McIlroy missed the cut in the weather-plagued event, and Fowler finished outside the top 40.What the PGA Tour got instead was perhaps better for the long-term health of the game: Daniel Berger versus Padraig Harrington in a duel of the ageless. Harrington’s victory over Berger on Monday on the second playoff hole at the P.G.A. National Champion course could be a boon to the game’s participation numbers.What better advertisement for golf as a lifelong pursuit than the 43-year-old Harrington vanquishing a 21-year-old competitor on the sport’s main stage? Harrington made a par on the 17th, which he had double-bogeyed less than an hour earlier, to win his first tour event since the 2008 P.G.A. Championship.“The great thing about golf is it doesn’t matter how old you are,” Berger said. “It’s just getting the ball in the hole.”AdvertisementHarrington, who entered the final round trailing Ian Poulter by three strokes, birdied the 72nd hole by sinking a 15-foot putt for an even-par 70 to share the lead at six-under 274 with Berger, who erased a nine-stroke deficit with a final-round 64.AdvertisementBerger, a rookie who grew up in the area and lives a few miles from the course, moved into the lead for the first time all week roughly an hour after signing his scorecard. His rise came in concert with the late-round stumbles of Poulter (74), who hit three balls into the water and tied for third with Paul Casey and Russell Knox at five-under 275, and Patrick Reed (73), who held a share of seventh at three-under 277.Harrington, a three-time major winner who was ranked 297th entering the tournament, won this event 10 years ago for his first PGA Tour title. At the time, a golf career was not on the radar of a 10-year-old Berger. “I wasn’t really much into watching golf,” said Berger, who followed his father, Jay, a former Davis Cup player and captain, into tennis.He played golf on the side until deciding as a teenager that he liked it better because, as he explained, “I like the individuality of it; I like having all the blame put on me and all the success.”Harrington’s sixth tour title came in his 239th start. It was Berger’s best finish in 12 tour starts. Harrington’s considerable advantage in experience negated the advantage the long-hitting Berger enjoyed off the tee. Harrington said he knew his key to winning the playoff was finding a way to survive the first extra hole, the 548-yard, par-5 18th, and then going for broke on the second, the 179-yard, par-3 17th.Berger had a good look at a birdie on the 18th but stroked it past the cup. Given new life, Harrington hit first on No. 17 and stuck a three-quarter 5-iron to inside four feet.“I definitely felt like I got a second chance coming to the 17th,” Harrington said, “and being first up, I knew I had to hit the shot. I couldn’t afford to bail out.”Berger played too fine a shot, and his ball landed in the water. He described Harrington’s tee shot on 17 as “kind of a dagger in the heart” because he did not expect him to miss the putt. Berger may be too young to remember that in 2012, Harrington endured such a terrible case of the yips that the shortest putts became knee-knocking testers.Advertisement“When you get things like that, it’s really frustrating, it’s really hard,” Harrington said. “You don’t know what to do. You grind your way through it, and it is a tough thing to get through.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Harrington was 117th in total putting in 2012. The rest of his game was great, he said, but his putting did not click into place until last week’s tournament in Los Angeles. Harrington received a sponsor’s exemption into this tournament and became the first player to take such a gift and spin it into winner’s gold since Lee Westwood at the 2010 FedEx St. Jude Classic.Before Monday, the only time Harrington had exchanged words with Berger was on the practice green at Pebble Beach last month. Berger was singing to a country song that was playing on the loudspeakers when Harrington walked by and joked, “You can’t be singing out here.”Berger laughed as he told the story. He thinks Harrington was still joking when he added, “After 20 years, you won’t be singing on the putting green.”Harrington, who birdied holes 11 through 14, credited a pep talk from his wife, Caroline, before Monday’s finish with his positive frame of mind on the Champion greens. Every time he stood over a putt, she told him, his mantra should be that there was no one better suited to take it or make it.“I wasn’t confident, but, you know, I wasn’t getting in my way,” Harrington said.His return to the winner’s circle could also be healthy for the game in the long term if it provides a ray of hope for another top player enduring a tough stretch. Tiger Woods has had the chipping yips since returning from back surgery.Woods certainly knows what Harrington meant when he said: “As much as people make assumptions, they see me doing stuff out there and think I’m doing one thing, and I’m usually doing the opposite most of the time. I’m doing the correct stuff. I’m just struggling to do it.”Harrington added, “I was putting so much pressure on myself to get it right and to live up to my mental focus, say, of 2008, that, you know, I couldn’t live up to it.”Harrington interrupted this year’s youth parade to remind everybody that there is fun after the yips and victories after 40. It could be just the dose of perspective the sport needed.An article last Tuesday about Padraig Harrington’s victory at the Honda Classic golf tournament misstated, in some editions, his score on the second hole of the playoff, No. 17. He made par, not birdie.A version of this article appears in print on March 3, 2015, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: Harrington, 43, Beats the Yips and, in a Playoff, a Rival Half His Age.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »