AdvertisementSupported byKeeping ScoreBy Benjamin HoffmanIt has been an incredible season for James Harden. The Houston Rockets guard is leading the N.B.A. in scoring, dominated the All-Star Game and has found himself in the conversation for the Most Valuable Player Award. But the Rockets made quite a statement Sunday after an overtime win over the Cleveland Cavaliers when their Twitter account declared Harden the new King James.The post said, “Long live the new King,” and it had a picture of Harden with “King James” in bold across the top, a reference to LeBron James’s nickname. It included a quotation from Harden saying, “Games like this we find a way to win and that’s been our motto the entire season.”There is no doubt that Harden has stepped up his game and that the hard-fought win was confirmation that the Rockets are a serious contender. But any royal ascension would seem to require that the old king be dead. And even after a game below his rarefied standards, any reports of James’s demise are premature.Just three days before the loss to the Rockets, James was at his best, scoring 42 points in a dominant performance against the Western Conference-leading Golden State Warriors. Playing with a playoff-level intensity, James was a one-man show on offense while his team’s rebuilt defense, relying on three former Knicks — Timofey Mozgov, Iman Shumpert and J. R. Smith — shut down the Warriors’ famed Splash Brothers, Stephen Curry and Klay Thompson.The game against the Warriors was Cleveland’s 18th win in 20 games and had people talking about its chances at an N.B.A. championship. The next game brought Cleveland’s expectations back to earth, as James sat out for what Coach David Blatt called maintenance, leading to a loss to the lowly Indiana Pacers. James’s uneven performance Sunday raised the question of how often he could bring the intensity and efficiency he had showed against the Warriors.James’s basic statistical line against Houston looked sound, as he had 37 points and 8 rebounds. But his 15-for-35 performance from the field was atypical, and he missed a shot at the end of regulation that could have won the game. His 3-for-11 performance from the free-throw line included two misses near the end of overtime that helped cost the team the game.His frustration seemed to build throughout the game as he had an altercation with Patrick Beverley, a Houston guard, whom he shoved back to the court as he tried to get up after a foul. In a third-quarter skirmish with Harden, James appeared to have been kicked in the groin, and Harden earned a flagrant foul. But unlike in past games, in which James was able to channel that frustration into a laserlike focus, he instead seemed out of place and unmotivated.Critics who question James’s killer instinct despite his multiple N.B.A. titles and Olympic gold medals were also provided with fodder when the Cavaliers were given one last possession in overtime to try to tie the game and James inbounded the ball rather than setting up for the winning shot himself.Without a doubt, it was a rough two-game stretch, but it is probably not time to panic in Cleveland. James should be able to find a middle point between his intensity against Golden State and his frustration against Houston. Since his return on Jan. 13 from a self-imposed hiatus, he is averaging 27.6 points, 6.7 assists and 6.5 rebounds a game. His workload, at 34.8 minutes a game is reasonable, and his team has won 17 of the 21 games he played in.Should he keep that up, especially as his team enters a rough portion of the schedule in which it has to play Toronto, Atlanta, Phoenix, Dallas and San Antonio in a nine-day period, he would join Curry and Harden among the M.V.P. favorites, and this frustrating loss to Houston would be quickly forgotten.But regardless of whether the Rockets reached a bit too far in praising Harden and dismissing James, Sunday night belonged to the bearded guard with the killer crossover and the uncanny ability to get to the free-throw line.Asked after the game if he was trying to make a statement about his credentials for M.V.P., Harden did not shy away from the suggestion, appearing just as confident off the court as he is on it.“Every game is a statement for me,” Harden told the assembled reporters. “I’m just out here trying to prove myself — trying to win games.”Advertisement