By HUW RICHARDSMARCH 2, 2015
England is running out of chances as the Cricket World Cup’s qualifying games wind down.When play resumes Tuesday after a day off, 19 of the 42 pool matches will be left. Only one team has qualified for the playoffs so far: New Zealand, a co-host.England has two matches left, against Bangladesh and Afghanistan. It would usually expect to win both — which should be enough for qualification — but after starting 1-3, nothing is certain.Veteran England fans may be used to the occasional humiliation, but nothing like what happened Sunday against Sri Lanka.Previous matches in the 2015 World Cup had followed a simple pattern. If the team batting first scored 300 runs in its 50 six-ball overs, it won, save for one match. If it fell below 300, it lost.AdvertisementEngland batted well, scoring 309. Its captain, Eoin Morgan, reckoned that was “25 runs above par.” Yet Sri Lanka (3-1) won with almost contemptuous ease. It scored 312 runs for the loss of only one wicket and with 16 deliveries to spare.Advertisement“There have probably been times when England have bowled worse,” Nasser Hussain, a former England captain, said on Sky Television. “But I can’t remember a time when an England bowling attack — or any bowling attack — looked so toothless.”Morgan acknowledged: “We were way off the mark today. When we are bowling well, it is a good attack, but you can pick it apart when we are not bowling well.”Players might want to listen to Lahiru Thirimanne, the Sri Lanka opening batsman, after he scored 139 not out Sunday. His team has beaten both Afghanistan and England at the World Cup, and he was asked to compare the teams’ bowlers.“To be honest, that day the Afghanistan bowlers did very well, even if there was a little in the wicket,” he said about Sri Lanka’s win Feb. 22. “Today was easy for me.”England is not the only established nation in jeopardy of not advancing. West Indies (2-2) and Pakistan (1-2) could miss out because of the surprising success of Ireland, which has won both its matches so far. Pakistan lost its first two matches and had to battle to win the third Sunday, when it defended a total of 235 against Zimbabwe (1-3).Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“We need to work hard to improve our batting,” said Pakistan’s captain, Misbah ul-Haq. “All the teams are getting to 280, 290 or 300, so we need to start well to capitalize.”Some teams are getting much more than that. South Africa (2-1) topped 400 against West Indies, with its captain, A. B. de Villiers, striking 166 runs from 62 deliveries. Jason Holder, West Indies’ young captain, conceded 64 runs from his last two overs.Chris Gayle of West Indies scored the first-ever double century at a World Cup, striking 215 against Zimbabwe. Sri Lanka has scored 644 runs for two wickets in its last two matches, with its veteran batsman Kumar Sangakkara going past 100 on both occasions.AdvertisementOnly one group of bowlers is enjoying itself: New Zealand (4-0), whose opponents have averaged only 162 in their innings. Its two quick bowlers, Tim Southee and Trent Boult, are the leading wicket-takers in the tournament. Each has had one remarkable day so far — Southee took seven wickets against England and Boult five in a win over Australia, the other co-host.The veteran spin-bowler Daniel Vettori, who played his first international match in 1997, has been a vital backup. Conceding only 3.33 runs per over, Vettori has been by far the most economical bowler in a fast-scoring tournament.“He controlled his length, just got the drift, occasionally got one to turn and got out two high-quality players,” New Zealand Coach Mike Hesson said of Vettori after the narrow victory over Australia. “He would probably be the unsung hero.”After 10 days of high-scoring blowouts, there lately have been several close finishes, a key attraction of one-day cricket. That trend started in matches between the non-Test nations, with Ireland barely beating United Arab Emirates and Afghanistan squeezing past Scotland.Alongside the brilliance of established stars like de Villiers and Sangakkara, cricket fans have been introduced to new players like the United Arab Emirates duo of Shaiman Anwar and Amjad Javed, both of whom played superbly against Ireland. Their performances have provided another argument against shrinking the next World Cup, in 2019, from 14 teams to 10.A version of this article appears in print on March 3, 2015, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: England and Other Established Teams Are Struggling.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.