By BRIAN SCIARETTAOCT. 14, 2015
HARRISON, N.J. —  In the wake of Saturday’s bitter loss to the archrival Mexico in the Concacaf Cup playoff, the United States national team lost to Costa Rica, 1-0, on Tuesday night in the final game before the start of World Cup qualifying. It was the United States’ fourth straight loss to a Concacaf opponent.Before the game, the embattled head coach Jurgen Klinsmann said he wanted to see heart and character in his team, but he got neither in a dull and lethargic loss at Red Bull Arena.The small announced crowd of 9,214 heavily supported Costa Rica, which created far more offensive opportunities and played like the better team.After a disappointing Gold Cup campaign, in which the United States finished in fourth place without even facing Mexico, the regional power, the Americans continued their skid in the following months with losses to Brazil, Mexico and now Costa Rica.AdvertisementThe loss was particularly troubling because Klinsmann was facing intense criticism from the news media and fans that will now intensify. Against Costa Rica, the United States was never really dangerous or creative. The defense looked out of sync, and the midfield looked out of ideas.AdvertisementNow Klinsmann and the team, which has no momentum, will have to regroup.Next up will be the opening of World Cup qualifying on Nov. 13 against St. Vincent and the Grenadines in St. Louis.Starting LineupTim Howard: Making his first start with the United States team since the 2014 World Cup, where he earned international accolades, Howard had a strong game, making nice saves on Marco Ureña in the fifth minute and on Joel Campbell in the 59th. His best save came again on Ureña in stoppage time to keep the Americans in the game. Rating: 6.0Tim Ream: The St. Louis native nearly scored in the 30th minute when he got on the end of Brek Shea’s free kick. With Ream playing at left back, Costa Rica tried to exploit his side of the field and was often dangerous. Ream was rarely able to get involved offensively but still left the game in the 63rd with the score 0-0. Rating: 5.0Geoff Cameron: The Stoke City defender had a decent half, making no major mistakes, and his distribution out of the back was effective. While only playing 45 minutes after a full 120 on Saturday, Cameron probably did well enough to re-establish himself as an important part of the team. Rating: 6.0Michael Orozco: After a quiet first half, Orozco was beaten badly by Ureña after he misjudged a long ball. Fortunately for Orozco, a Club Tijuana central defender, Ureña’s shot went wide. In the second half, his partnership with Ventura Alvarado was lacking, and Costa Rica had the best chances on the night. He needlessly conceded a dangerous free kick in the 79th minute. Rating: 4.5Brad Evans: Filling in for Fabian Johnson, who was kicked out of camp, Evans was not in sync with his team for most of the night but had a very nice defensive stop in the 43rd minute, then stopped another sure goal in the 77th. Offensively, he did little to help build possession out of the back, but he did play with noticeable heart. 5.0Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Brek Shea: The Orlando City attacker got the start in the midfield and had a few nice runs, but his final ball was lacking. In what was one of the team’s few offensive chances, Shea hit a nice free kick in the 30th minute that found Ream in the box to force a save on the near post from Keylor Navas. Shea was subbed out in the 72nd having added little. Rating: 4.0AdvertisementJermaine Jones: Partnered with Danny Williams in central midfield, Jones was given a more free-ranging role. He had a few nice passes but over all was not the creative force the team needed in the midfield and was taken out at halftime. Rating: 4.5Danny Williams: It was a rough night for Williams, who is having a strong season for Reading in England. After a first half when he contributed little, the second half was bad. Williams lost Campbell in the box in the 70th minute for Costa Rica’s goal. Then, in the 72nd, he picked up a yellow card and conceded a dangerous free kick just minutes later. Rating: 4.0DeAndre Yedlin: The Sunderland winger and right back got the start at right midfield as Klinsmann was hoping he would provide some needed speed. Despite Yedlin’s best efforts, Costa Rica took him out of the game. He had one chance in the 60th minute on a great counterattack but lost the ball as he moved into the box. Rating: 4.0Gyasi Zardes: After playing primarily on the wing for the Americans, the Galaxy attacker was moved to forward, where he partnered with Jozy Altidore in a 4-4-2 formation. He was among the team’s more energetic players in his 72 minutes, but that is not saying much. Rating: 5.0Jozy Altidore: Returning to his native New Jersey, Atidore had an uneventful half and looked tired. He had a few nice moments of holdup play but was not part of any meaningful opportunities before leaving the game in the 45th minute. Rating: 4.5SubstitutesVentura Alvarado: The Club American central defender replaced Geoff Cameron at halftime and had an off night as Costa Rica’s offense had many chances in the second half. Most noticeably in the 69th minute, he was caught ball watching, and Costa Rica very nearly scored. Rating: 4.0Bobby Wood: The Union Berlin forward has been known for his late-game dramatics, but he was unable to deliver for this team. He did his best and showed a lot of effort. His linkup play with Zardes in the 55th minute was one of the few times the Americans managed to get into a dangerous position. Rating: 5.5Mix Diskerud: The New York City F.C. midfielder replaced Jones at halftime and added little to the team’s possession or attack in the midfield. Rating: 4.0AdvertisementJonathan Spector: The Chicago native replaced Ream at left back in the 63rd minute and had a poor outing. Costa Rica continually went down his side, and he was out of position on the winning assist. Rating: 4.0Lee Nguyen: The New England Revolution playmaker played the final 18 minutes and was always looking to provide a spark, but to limited effect. Rating: 5.0Andrew Wooten: As one of the best forwards this season in the 2.Bundesliga, Wooten made his national team debut when he came on in the 72nd minute. However, , Costa Rica was controlling the game, and he never really was involved. Rating: No Rating.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.