By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSMARCH 4, 2015
Cory Schneider made 33 saves, and the playoff-hopeful Devils used a quick start to top visiting Nashville, 3-1, on Tuesday night, sending the Predators to their season-worst fourth straight loss.Adam Larsson and Eric Gelinas scored first-period goals in front of a sparse crowd on a snowy night. Mike Cammalleri was awarded a goal with 1 minute 14 seconds remaining in the game.Mike Fisher had the lone goal for Nashville (41-17-7), which entered the night with an N.H.L.-leading 89 points. The loss made the Predators’ skid their worst since last March. The backup goalie Carter Hutton made 21 saves for Nashville, which lost at the Rangers on Monday.The Devils started the night 9 points behind the Boston Bruins, who are in position for the second wild-card spot in the Eastern Conference.AdvertisementSTARS 3, ISLANDERS 2 Cody Eakin scored 2:18 into overtime, and Dallas ended a six-game winless streak by beating the visiting Islanders.AdvertisementEakin received a pass from Jamie Benn on a two-on-one break and beat goaltender Jaroslav Halak. The goal gave the Stars their first overtime victory in eight games this season.Anders Lee tied the score for the Islanders with two seconds left in regulation when his shot from the boards hit the skate of defender Jordie Benn and eluded goalie Kari Lehtonen.Josh Bailey scored for the Islanders in the first period.Brett Ritchie and Vernon Fiddler scored on third-period rebounds as Dallas rallied for a 2-1 lead. Lehtonen made 35 saves for the Stars, who were 0-4-2 in their previous six games.Halak stopped 32 shots, but the Islanders lost their second consecutive game. They lead the Metropolitan Division by 1 point over the Rangers.CAPITALS 5, BLUE JACKETS 3 Alex Ovechkin added to his league-leading total with two goals as visiting Washington sent Columbus to its seventh loss in a row. Eric Fehr and Tom Wilson also scored for the Capitals, and Marcus Johansson added an empty-net goal.Nicklas Backstrom and Jason Chimera each had two assists for Washington, which solidified its hold on the first wild-card playoff spot in the Eastern Conference before starting a five-game homestand. Braden Holtby had 27 saves.Ovechkin, who has won the Richard Trophy as the league’s top goal scorer the last two years and four times over all, now has 43 goals.AdvertisementScott Hartnell had two goals and an assist and was stopped on a penalty shot. David Savard also scored for the Blue Jackets, 0-6-1 in their last seven.MAPLE LEAFS 3, PANTHERS 2 Toronto took advantage after both Florida goalies were injured and edged Florida to end a franchise-worst road-loss streak at 16 games (0-14-2).Peter Holland netted the winning goal 5:28 into the third period against Al Montoya, who had replaced the injured starter Roberto Luongo after the first period. The win was the Maple Leafs’ first on the road since they beat Boston on Dec. 31.The Panthers changed goalies twice and even had the goalie coach Robb Tallas get dressed on an emergency basis, but Tallas, 41, never entered the game. He has not played in an N.H.L. game since 2001.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Montoya was injured early in the third but managed to stay in the game. He was eventually replaced by Luongo, who put his uniform on again after he had changed into street clothes.FLAMES 3, FLYERS 2 Jiri Hudler scored 1:23 into overtime to lift Calgary over host Philadelphia.Johnny Gaudreau, a 21-year-old rookie and New Jersey native who had hundreds of fans in attendance, assisted on the winning goal, helping the Flames rebound after blowing a 2-0 lead.Sean Monahan and Mikael Backlund scored for the Flames.Sean Couturier and Mark Streit both scored in the third period for the Flyers.LIGHTNING 3, SABRES 0 Ryan Callahan and Victor Hedman scored less than two minutes apart on second-period power plays, and Andrei Vasilevskiy stopped 28 shots as Tampa Bay shut out visiting Buffalo.WILD 3, SENATORS 2 Charlie Coyle scored the winner in a shootout, Matt Dumba had two goals in regulation, and host Minnesota stopped Ottawa’s five-game winning streak.AdvertisementDUCKS 4, AVALANCHE 1 Andrew Cogliano scored twice, Frederik Andersen stopped 29 shots in his return from an injury, and visiting Anaheim defeated reeling Arizona.COLORADO PLAYERS FINED The Colorado Avalanche’s captain, Gabriel Landeskog, and forward Cody McLeod were fined by the N.H.L. for their actions in the waning seconds of a 3-1 loss to Minnesota on Saturday.Landeskog, a forward, was fined $5,000 for a punch he threw at Wild forward Mikko Koivu as they headed to their benches with 3.3 seconds to play. Landeskog was given a misconduct penalty.McLeod was docked $3,091.40 because he entered the game with 8.1 seconds left for the purpose of starting an altercation, the league said. He body-checked Wild center Mikael Granlund and got into a skirmish with forward Charlie Coyle. McLeod drew a minor penalty for unsportsmanlike conduct, a major for fighting and a misconduct penalty.TWO LEAFS RECEIVE APOLOGY The Canadian sports network TSN issued a public apology to the Toronto Maple Leafs’ captain, Dion Phaneuf; his wife, the actress Elisha Cuthbert; and forward Joffrey Lupul after it aired a fan’s inflammatory Twitter post about Cuthbert and Lupul.The apology was read by the “Sportscentre” host James Duthie and was posted prominently on the network’s website after Phaneuf, Cuthbert and Lupul sent a letter threatening legal action.The insinuating post was included in a continuing social media crawl at the bottom of the screen Monday.“In spite of TSN’s protocols to prevent unfounded and inappropriate tweets from making it to air, a false and inappropriate tweet was allowed to run,” TSN said. “There was no basis for the false allegation made in this tweet.“TSN unreservedly apologizes to Joffrey Lupul, Dion Phaneuf and Elisha Cuthbert and regrets any embarrassment this unfortunate incident has caused to them.”A version of this article appears in print on March 4, 2015, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: Devils’ Quick Goals Upend Predators.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.