By BENJAMIN HOFFMAN and VICTOR MATHERMARCH 3, 2015
In losing to the Sacramento Kings, 124-86, on Tuesday night, the Knicks were terrible as a team. But that shouldn’t disguise the fact that individually, they were also terrible.One measure of individual performance is the plus-minus statistic, which measures how a team performs when a particular player is on the court.When Knicks forward Lou Amundson was playing on Tuesday — for a total of 13 minutes — the Kings outscored the Knicks by 26.That’s pretty bad. But not as bad as the figure for point guard Langston Galloway. He wound up at minus-40 in only 23 minutes of play.Galloway shot 2 for 8 and had just one assist, fewer than you would ordinarily seek from your starting point guard. And when he was on the floor, the Kings seemed to have little trouble scoring points of their own.AdvertisementBut Galloway’s game was only the second worst of this season so far by the plus-minus metric.On Nov. 16, the Los Angeles Lakers lost, 136-115, to the Golden State Warriors and fell to 1-9. The game was not as close as the final score indicated: After three quarters, the Lakers trailed by 36.AdvertisementAnd their starters’ plus-minus ratings make for ugly reading: Carlos Boozer, minus-27; Kobe Bryant, minus-34; Jeremy Lin, minus-37; and Jordan Hill, minus-39.But winning first prize for the game, and the season so far, was swingman Wesley Johnson, who shot 3 for 11, collected three rebounds and one assist, and put up a staggering minus-42.After Johnson and Galloway, rounding out the season’s worst efforts are Hill’s minus-39 from the same Lakers game, two minus-38s from Philadelphia’s Nerlens Noel and Michael Carter-Williams in a Nov. 13 loss to Dallas, and a minus-38 from the Nets’ Jarrett Jack in a Jan. 22 loss to the Clippers.Most terrible plus-minus ratings, of course, come when a player’s team is blown out. But the statistic is quirky enough that a player on the wrong end of a walloping can sometimes post a respectable total.On Tuesday night, the Knicks’ Alexey Shved came off the bench for a pretty good night with 15 points and 7 rebounds. He seemed to always be on the court when the Knicks kept it close, and somehow, playing a team-high 33 minutes in a 40-point loss, wound up with only a minus-1. Jason Smith, in 22 minutes, was an improbable plus-3, making him the only Knicks player with a positive plus-minus.The plus-minus stat is a zero-sum game. So when the minuses are big on one team, the pluses tend to be big on the other. Sure enough, Jason Thompson put up a gaudy plus-36 for the Kings on Tuesday. The best mark of the season, though, is Klay Thompson’s plus-46 in Golden State’s Feb. 27 pasting of Toronto.Basketball–Reference.com has plus-minus data back to 2000-1. The worst figure in that time frame goes to Manny Harris, who, playing for Cleveland in a game in January 2011 that the Cavaliers lost to the Lakers, 112-57, posted a minus-57.Harris, who had a positive plus-minus in just 23 of his 89 N.B.A. games, is currently plying his chosen trade in Turkey.A version of this article appears in print on March 4, 2015, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: For Knicks, There Is One Plus: Game’s Over.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.