By TIM ROHANMARCH 3, 2015
Billy Bean, Major League Baseball’s first inclusion ambassador, made an appearance at the Mets’ camp to spread his message of acceptance. He found a welcome audience, and a particularly supportive voice in General Manager Sandy Alderson, but he also drew some respectful but pointed words from second baseman Daniel Murphy.Bean played in the majors for six seasons but did not publicly disclose he was gay until several years after his career ended in 1995. Alderson heard him speak last November to a room full of baseball executives, was inspired by what he had to say, and approached him afterward.If it all felt a little personal for Alderson, in a way it was. He had been affected by the death of Glenn Burke, another gay major leaguer who died in 1995 from the effects of AIDS. Burke ended his career with the Oakland A’s, his last game coming in 1979. Two years later, Alderson joined the A’s as their general counsel, and two years after that, he became the team’s general manager.Alderson told reporters on Tuesday that it was during his long tenure in Oakland that Burke had become homeless in San Francisco and that while the A’s had reached out to him from time to time to try to help, “it wasn’t enough” to turn around a life that had deteriorated.Advertisement“From my standpoint, that can’t happen,” Alderson said. “It never should have happened.”Bean is now touring spring training camps, and on Tuesday, dressed in team apparel, he went through workouts alongside the players. Alderson wanted him to play in a game, too, but Bean declined, not wanting the extra attention.For the players to see Bean in uniform was important, Alderson said, because it made the issue of diversity more tangible, especially once they talked with him.Advertisement“He’s about baseball first, and it’s a shame that he just couldn’t survive in the game longer, given what he was feeling,” Alderson said of Bean. “That’s not right. That’s not fair. That’s not something, in this day and age, that a player should have to face.”Asked for his opinion on whether a player could now be openly gay in the major leagues, Alderson said: “I think yes. But I think it has a lot to do with the immediate environment, the 25 players.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.One of those 25 players is Murphy, who is outspoken about his Christian beliefs. After Bean’s appearance, he told The Star-Ledger of Newark that he was ready to play alongside an openly gay teammate and that he welcomed Bean’s presence at the Mets camp, calling it an example of “forward thinking.” Still, he said he disagreed “100 percent” with Bean’s homosexuality.“That doesn’t mean I still can’t invest in him and get to know him,” he told The Star-Ledger.“We love the people. We disagree with the lifestyle,” Murphy added. “That’s the way I would describe it for me.”Murphy, a solid hitter whose defense is not always reliable, is going into his free-agency year, and there has been constant speculation that the Mets might look to trade him. Whether his remarks about Bean will create any lingering problems for him in New York remains to be seen.A version of this article appears in print on March 4, 2015, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Murphy Voices Dissent.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.