By BRENDAN PRUNTYMARCH 3, 2015
PISCATAWAY, N.J. —  Rutgers had lost a dozen consecutive games, but there was a sense, for a few moments, on Tuesday night that the Scarlet Knights could upset 10th-ranked Maryland.Undermanned Rutgers had squeezed everything it had for 34 minutes to draw even at 45 with six minutes remaining, but Maryland needed all of 2 minutes 23 seconds to push the lead back to 8 points and extinguish any hope of a miracle.“From a talent level, we have to get better,” Rutgers Coach Eddie Jordan said. “We’re playing great teams in this conference. And great teams make you look like you don’t know what you’re doing sometimes.”It has been a recurring theme this season, one underscored by the 60-50 loss to Maryland.The Big Ten Conference’s two newest members have gone in different directions in their inaugural season.AdvertisementMaryland (25-5, 13-4 Big Ten) was picked to finish 10th in the preseason poll in October; the team is now assured of at least a tie for second in the standings.AdvertisementRutgers (10-24, 2-15) was picked to finish last. The move to the Big Ten was supposed to herald a new era for the program’s athletic teams. Men’s basketball, however, has endured nothing short of another season mired in mounting losses and more questions as to whether the program can recover.“We’re at the bottom of the barrel in the league,” Jordan said after the loss. “When we look up, every team looks pretty good to me. This is a great league. Good players is what you need, and you have to have chemistry. They have to be smart and they have to give good effort.”The patience for Rutgers, a program that has not been to the N.C.A.A. tournament since 1991, is beginning to thin. State Senator Raymond J. Lesniak — a Rutgers graduate — has begun a public campaign to elicit public and financial support for a new basketball practice facility.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I wouldn’t say it’s beyond repair, but this is the closest I’ve felt in a long time to being hopeless,” said Dave White, a season-ticket holder since 2002. “When the vibe is, ‘It’s going to be 10 years before they really start to invest in the program,’ that’s a really hopeless feeling.”And that is off the court. On it, the team seems to be deteriorating at an accelerated rate. After the loss to Maryland, in which the Terrapins’ three standout players combined for 44 points, while Rutgers’s top three players combined for 19, Jordan acknowledged that he was not happy with where the program is.He said he hoped that the talent gap that was evident against Maryland would be narrowed in next year’s roster.But in a state dripping with high school talent, some feel Rutgers is not taking advantage of what is at its fingertips.“Basketball can turn so quickly if you get two good recruiting classes with two good players,” said the longtime St. Anthony High School coach Bob Hurley.In only 143 seconds of a game that was not expected to be competitive, it served as the latest reminder of just how far Rutgers has to improve.Advertisement“I’ve never thrown my hands up, but there have been times where it has gotten tough,” White said. “It’s been frustrating as a fan. It’s almost a badge of honor. Like being a Chicago Cubs fan.”A version of this article appears in print on March 4, 2015, on Page B16 of the New York edition with the headline: Slim Hopes Are Dashed as Rutgers Peters Out.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.