AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressBUFFALO — LeSean McCoy appears set to lead Rex Ryan’s ground-and-pound running attack for the Buffalo Bills next season.The Philadelphia Eagles have agreed to trade McCoy, their star running back, to the Bills for linebacker Kiko Alonso. The current Bills running back C. J. Spiller confirmed the deal Tuesday. ESPN first reported the trade.The deal cannot be completed until the calendar for the 2015 N.F.L. season formally begins next Tuesday.McCoy was inconsistent last season after leading the N.F.L. with 1,607 rushing yards in 2013. At his best, McCoy is an elite running back who is a threat as a runner and a receiver.In 2013, his best season, he had nine rushing touchdowns, 539 receiving yards and one touchdown reception.McCoy had 1,319 yards rushing last season and 155 receiving. He also scored five rushing touchdowns. One reason for his drop in production was a banged-up offensive line; the five projected starters never played a game together.McCoy’s addition will leave Spiller in search of a new team. He is eligible to become a free agent next week.Spiller, Buffalo’s 2010 first-round draft pick, told the N.F.L. Network that the Bills informed him of the trade and told him “they were going in that direction, pretty much giving me a ‘thank you for your service.’ ”“Nothing has changed,” Spiller said about his off-season approach. “The game plan is still the same. The only thing is that I won’t be returning to Buffalo.”Alonso will be reunited with Chip Kelly, who coached him at Oregon. Alonso made an immediate impact in Buffalo after being selected in the second round of the 2013 draft, emerging as a top contender for defensive rookie of the year while leading Buffalo with 159 tackles and tying for the team lead with four interceptions. He played all 16 games and barely missed a snap.Alonso’s career was derailed in July when he sustained a season-ending left knee injury during a pre-training-camp workout at Oregon. He spent all of last season recovering and is expected to be healthy for the start of spring minicamps.In Buffalo, McCoy, 26, will be reunited with another former Eagles running back, Bryce Brown, who was acquired by the Bills in a trade in May.With questions at quarterback, the Bills are intending to introduce a run-heavy offense under Ryan and his new offensive coordinator, Greg Roman.The Bills’ running attack sputtered last season under Doug Marrone, then their coach, who opted out of his contract on Dec. 31. Buffalo finished 25th in rushing, managing 1,482 yards and setting a 16-game-season franchise low.That was regarded as a huge disappointment for a team that entered the season with an established one-two running back tandem of Spiller and Fred Jackson.Injuries did not help. Spiller missed seven games with a broken collarbone, and Jackson was slowed by knee and groin injuries.Alonso quickly emerged as a fan favorite in Buffalo for his durability and his on-field intensity.With two interceptions in a 23-20 win over Baltimore on Sept. 29, 2013, Alonso became the league’s first rookie linebacker since Al Richardson in 1980 to have an interception in three straight games.After playing middle linebacker as a rookie, Alonso was set to move to an outside position before he hurt his knee.Advertisement