AdvertisementSupported byBy Tim RohanPORT ST. LUCIE, Fla. — Early in the Mets’ intrasquad game Tuesday, David Wright made a backhand play on a ground ball and then threw smoothly to first for the out. Wright has made that play hundreds of times. But this time, it was a small reminder that Wright’s left shoulder was healthy again after a season of discomfort and that he was at full strength for a 2015 campaign that he has said he hopes will end the Mets’ long run of futility.But Tuesday’s game was not the only event of the day for Wright, who has been the team captain since March 2013. After he left the game and went to the clubhouse, he spotted Noah Syndergaard, the Mets’ top prospect, eating lunch while the game was still going on. According to several published reports from members of the news media who were there, Wright admonished Syndergaard for not being on the bench watching the game, even if he was not scheduled to pitch.One report, in Newsday, said another veteran player, Bobby Parnell, had emphasized Wright’s message by dumping Syndergaard’s food in a trash can. At that point, Syndergaard went outside to watch the game.Wright is 32; Syndergaard is 10 years younger and has yet to play a game in the major leagues. Although Wright has long been the face of the Mets’ franchise, and has by far the longest tenure on the club, he has never come across as a particularly tough, vocal leader inclined to confront teammates. But he did confront Syndergaard on Tuesday, and the question is whether Wright is ready and willing to do more of the same with a team that now has numerous players who are talented but young.There is no question that Wright is intent on seeing the Mets finally become competitive again after nearly a decade of futility. He is the only current Met to have suffered through the back-to-back September collapses in 2007 and 2008 and the six consecutive losing seasons that followed. In his 11 years with the Mets, he has been in the postseason exactly once. He wants things to change, now, and perhaps that means he will increasingly try to set a determined tone for his teammates, even if he ends up bruising some feelings along the way.As for Syndergaard, he is likely to start the season in Class AAA Las Vegas, where he had a bumpy 2014 campaign. Questions about his maturity arose last year, when he admitted being too absorbed in the possibility that he might be called up to the majors. At one point, he deleted the Twitter application from his phone because he was reading too much about himself.Still, he is tall and imposing, and he still looms as a potentially intimidating member of the Mets’ starting rotation. He is scheduled to make his spring training debut on Friday, pitching in relief of none other than Matt Harvey. No doubt, he will not be caught eating during the game.Advertisement