AdvertisementSupported byBy Billy WitzCLEARWATER, Fla. — It has been nearly 15 years, but C. C. Sabathia had no trouble recalling his first spring training game in a major league camp. The first batter he faced was his boyhood idol, Ken Griffey Jr. Sabathia hit him in the back with a fastball. “I was just going out there to throw the ball as hard as I can, and I didn’t care where it went,” said Sabathia, who came up with the Cleveland Indians. “I just wanted to let them know I had a good arm. It was a little bit of nerves.”When the Yankees began their exhibition season Tuesday with a 5-5 tie against the Philadelphia Phillies, it was an opportunity for some of their young players to make a lasting impression. Nobody left a bigger one than one of the biggest players in camp, outfielder Aaron Judge, whose three-run homer with two outs in the ninth tied the score. Judge, who is 6 feet 7 inches and 255 pounds, was one of several players not on the 40-man roster who made a case for himself. Luis Severino, considered the Yankees’ top pitching prospect, threw with poise, and first baseman Greg Bird and outfielder Slade Heathcott, an oft-injured former first-round pick, each singled and doubled.“You want to learn as much as you can about these guys because we haven’t seen them a lot — see what their abilities are, see what some of their strengths are,” Manager Joe Girardi said. “You hope that you don’t have injuries, but at some point you know that it usually happens and these kids are going to get a call-up and a chance.”Outfielders Jacoby Ellsbury and Brett Gardner were the only expected starters who made the 20-mile trip here from the Yankees’ complex in Tampa. Among those who remained behind to work out was Alex Rodriguez, who spent part of his morning taking batting practice and fielding ground balls at third base.Rodriguez plans to make his exhibition season debut Wednesday in Tampa against the Phillies as the Yankees’ designated hitter. It will be his first game in 18 months after he was suspended last season for using performance-enhancing drugs. “I’ll be a little nervous for sure,” Rodriguez said before his workout Tuesday. “I haven’t been around our fans for a long time. I’m excited about that. I have some challenges ahead.”If Rodriguez represents the Yankees’ past — one they’re trying to shed as they try to restock their roster with younger players — their future may have been on display across the causeway.Severino, who turned 21 on Feb. 20, was superb in his first inning. He struck out Cesar Hernandez looking at a changeup, fanned Cameron Rupp with a fastball and broke the bat of Ben Revere, who grounded out softly to third base. Severino was pulled after giving up four singles in his next inning, although none of the balls were hit hard. Severino also got his wish in facing Ryan Howard, who hit a run-scoring single to right field. “It was a good challenge,” Severino said. “I tried to strike him out or get an out, but I didn’t get it. It was exciting.”Severino, a 6-foot right-hander who reached Class AA Trenton last summer after starting 2013 at the rookie league level, said he hoped he would be in the major leagues this season. Given the Yankees’ fragile rotation, his hopes could become a reality.Judge is another player with big hopes. A first-round draft pick in 2013, he is far from a lumbering slugger, even though, as Girardi noted earlier this week, he is built like an N.F.L. defensive end. Judge moves fluidly in right field and has a relatively compact and disciplined swing. After grounding out in his initial at-bat, Judge fell behind in the count and then worked a walk.In the ninth, he hit a towering fly ball to left that just cleared the wall and the glove of the leaping left fielder Aaron Altherr. “I thought he robbed it,” Judge said. “I didn’t know whether to turn around or keep going, so I just kept going.”Splitting time between the Yankees’ two Class A affiliates last year, Judge batted .308 with 17 home runs and 78 runs batted in and displayed a discerning eye with a .419 on-base percentage. It may not be easy for nonroster invitees to crack the opening day roster. But it may not be easy for an aging everyday lineup and the starting rotation to stay healthy. “I’m trying to make it as hard as I can for them to send me back across the street to the minor leagues,” Judge said. INSIDE PITCHADAM WARREN has established himself as a key figure in the bullpen, but JOE GIRARDI is considering him as a starter in case any of the Yankees’ starters can’t remain healthy. Warren allowed one hit in two scoreless innings as a starter. Advertisement