By JOHN BRANCHMARCH 3, 2015
Until a three-person panel overturned a decision Tuesday, only one thing could keep the Narbonne High School girls’ basketball team in Los Angeles out of this weekend’s city championship game: the color of its uniforms.With a stirring come-from-behind victory over View Park on Saturday, the Gauchos improved to 23-5, gained a shot at the city title and earned an almost-certain berth in the state tournament.Then Narbonne was forced to forfeit all that because it had worn the wrong color uniforms without permission.The Gauchos, whose school colors are green and gold, wore white uniforms with green piping but pink numbers and letters to raise cancer awareness.AdvertisementOn Monday, regional officials took away Narbonne’s 57-52 semifinal victory over View Park and kicked the Gauchos out of the postseason for violating Article 1305 of the rule book. It states that uniform colors must be a combination of the official school colors.AdvertisementBut Tuesday, as the story reached the national news media and surged through social media, the decision was overturned on appeal. Narbonne will play in Saturday’s championship game against Palisades. View Park’s temporary slot in the title game was taken, and that team will play in a consolation semifinal.“In the spirit of the game and for the kids, the appeals committee has decided to grant Narbonne’s request for reinstatement,” John Aguirre, commissioner of the Los Angeles City Section, said in a statement.As punishment, Coach Victoria Sanders was suspended for the remainder of the season, and Narbonne will not be permitted to hold any home playoff games in 2016. Anthony Hilliard, who coaches the boys’ team at Narbonne, will coach the girls for the rest of the playoffs.Narbonne Athletic Director Kyla Berman said that the school took responsibility for not understanding the rule and accepted the amended punishment. “If she can’t coach, she’ll take that, as long as the kids can play,” Berman said of Sanders.  Sanders told The Daily Breeze of Torrance, Calif., on Monday that her team was taking part in the “Play 4Kay” campaign to raise awareness for the Kay Yow Cancer Fund. Yow, the longtime North Carolina State women’s basketball coach, died of breast cancer in 2009.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Coach Yow understood the need for rules but would really appreciate these young women and their desire to be a part of finding the answer,” said Susan Donohoe, the Kay Yow Cancer Fund’s executive director. The fund, she said, has contributed $4.18 million toward women’s cancer research.Aguirre made the original decision to disqualify Narbonne from the postseason.“It had nothing to do with the color pink as far as the regulation,” he said in an interview before the appeals hearing. “What it had to do with was that they did not submit a request for wearing uniforms other than school colors. They just did it. And at the same time, they’re on a probationary status for violation of rules for this past year.”AdvertisementIn last season’s playoffs, Narbonne, in the Harbor City neighborhood of southern Los Angeles, reportedly used a player who had received two technical fouls the previous game and should have been ineligible.Being penalized for improper uniforms is not unprecedented. Aguirre said that three volleyball teams this season had forfeited matches for wearing unapproved uniform colors. None of them had to do with pink, he said.Before the appeal, when it looked as if the basketball team’s championship hopes had ended over a uniform violation, Narbonne’s principal, Gerald Kobata, released a statement.“This is a huge disappointment for the girls’ basketball team, a team that worked so hard to achieve success on the court and in the classroom,” the principal wrote. “We were unaware that honoring cancer victims with uniforms was against California Interscholastic Federation rules. I feel badly for the students — especially the seniors — their families and the Narbonne community. Though bound by the decision, I want to make sure this never happens again here.”A version of this article appears in print on March 4, 2015, on Page B16 of the New York edition with the headline: Barred for Wearing Pink, Team Is Reinstated to Playoffs.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.