By ROB HUGHESMARCH 3, 2015
LONDON —  Once upon a time, Italian soccer set the template for high-cost transfers whenever a world-class player caught the attention of owners like the Agnellis of Juventus, the Morattis of Internazionale or the Berlusconis of A.C. Milan.Serie A was king of the big spenders, as it sent out formidable and splendid teams to conquer Europe.Today, only Juventus, whose checks are still signed by the Agnelli family, is in that league. There are billionaires funding clubs in England, Spain and Germany, but, as Sunday and Monday have shown, standards and solvency are not what they once were in Italy.On Sunday, for the second week running, Parma F.C. failed to take the field. It is sliding, it seems, toward bankruptcy, with no money to pay the laundry bill, never mind the players or staff.AdvertisementThen on Monday, the two sides leading the standings, Juventus and A.S. Roma, met at the Stadio Olimpico in Rome. It was almost a moribund match. Juventus, defending a nine-point lead in the standings, simply blocked off every move that the home team attempted in the first hour. Roma, these days under American ownership, relied too much upon Francesco Totti and Daniele de Rossi.AdvertisementTotti, at 38, no longer has the legs or the lungs to go with his imagination, while de Rossi, though seven years younger, also looks past his prime.The Old Lady, Juventus, toyed with what Roma could throw forward. Both teams put spite into their tackles in a way that obliged the referee to throw yellow cards like confetti. Five cautions to the home team, five to the visitors, and barely a worthy shot between them.Only in Italy can this be regarded as art. Everyone knew that it was a waiting game, that Juve — with playmaker Andrea Pirlo and the midfield strongman Paul Pogba out because of injuries — was happy to play for a point.So while Juventus would not force the pace, and Roma could not do it, a stalemate ensued.The inevitable intervened after 63 minutes when yellow turned to red after Vasileios Torosidis, Roma’s Greek defender, clipped the heel of Arturo Vidal. That was a mild offense compared with a two-footed lunge that had brought the first yellow of the night to Torosidis.While Torosidis was expelled, Carlos Tévez did the sweetest thing of the game by curling the free kick from just outside the penalty box into the Roma goal.Roma Coach Rudi Garcia did what he might have done earlier. He withdrew the fading Totti and de Rossi, and their replacements, particularly Juan Iturbe, changed the contest with their energy. Iturbe was too swift for Giorgio Chiellini, who fouled him rather than let him pass. On the resulting free kick, Seydou Keita rose to level the game with a header.The 1-1 result makes it unlikely that Juventus, the defending champion, will fail to retain its title. But at least the followers of both teams have Europe to look forward to — Juventus in the Champions League and Roma in the secondary Europa League.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Parma has maybe only weeks to survive as a professional club. The famous old club from the Emilia-Romagna region in northern Italy has failed to play its last two league games because its spirit, as well as its money, is running out.AdvertisementOn Sunday, the Parma players who have not been paid since the start of the season finally said that if their game at Genoa were not called off, they would consider going on strike. Their team bus and even medical equipment from their training base have been seized. Parma, with debts of well over $100 million, is facing the same fate as Parmalat, the giant dairy company that once owned the club before collapsing into insolvency in 2004.The club survived that fall, and as soccer teams sometimes remarkably do, it clawed its way back to once again become a presence in Serie A. However, a succession of recent owners turned the club into a farce that has churned hundreds of players through its doors over the past few years.It has exploited loose FIFA rules that allow clubs to employ players on temporary contracts as loan players. Parma could field a number of teams with the players it has loaned out to clubs like the Italian-owned Watford Town, which operates in the second tier of English soccer.The thought was that Parma could profit by nurturing youth players, then lend them out to gain experience and either sell them when the price was right or take back the best of them as improved players.Italy’s La Repubblica paper suggested in 2013 that Parma had more than 300 players in transit that year. Its system had previously been called “a cattle market.”Owners came and went, most notably an Albanian businessman named Rezart Taci, who paid one euro for the club and, apparently without ever meeting the players, sold it for the same notional sum to the current owner, Giampietro Manenti.The team captain, Alessandro Lucarelli, said that Manenti did meet the players. “He showed us a bank document,” Lucarelli told reporters, “and stated that there was a hundred million euros available to invest in Parma.”The players had some doubt, and have not received payments since.Two weeks ago, disillusioned fans pinned a notice on the padlocked gates around Parma’s stadium. “Chiuso per rapina,” it read. “Closed for robbery.”As much as anything, it is the memories of what Parma once was that are stolen. The team won the UEFA Cup twice in the ’90s, as well as three Copa Italia titles. Its lineup included men whose marvelous style would have given any team a run for its money: Gianluigi Buffon, Fabio Cannavaro, Lilian Thuram, Ariel Ortega, Juan Sebastian Veron, Faustino Asprilla, Hernán Crespo.AdvertisementIf, as seems likely, Parma is shut down, it will take decades for the club to rise again, starting over as an amateur club, to be anything like what it was.A version of this article appears in print on March 4, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.