AdvertisementSupported byHornets 115, Nets 91By Andrew KehWhen the Charlotte Hornets returned to practice after the N.B.A.’s All-Star break, their coach, Steve Clifford, put the league standings up on a bulletin board for his players and his staff to see.Athletes and coaches often claim that they do not pay attention to the standings, that they do not care how other teams are doing. Clifford had no such pretense.Less than two months remain in the regular season, and as Clifford sees it, six teams will be vying for the last two postseason berths in the Eastern Conference. The daily standings, then, are quite important.“You can’t be giving games away anymore, especially as tight as it is,” Clifford said Wednesday before his team routed the Nets, 115-91, at Barclays Center. “In three games, you could absolutely go from being in a good place to a tough spot.”By the time the N.B.A.’s slate of games Wednesday night was finished, the 12th-place Detroit Pistons (23-37) were just four games behind the seventh-place Miami Heat (27-33). The Hornets (26-33), who started the day tied with the Nets, moved a game ahead of them and into position for the eighth, and final, playoff spot. The Indiana Pacers (26-34) and the Boston Celtics (24-35) remained in the mix.As the teams’ records show, mediocrity has gone unpunished in the Eastern Conference this season, but that has also set the stage for an oddly compelling playoff race down the stretch.The Nets (25-34) might best symbolize the circumstances. They have struggled for most of this season, but the weakness of their conference allowed them to remain in the race while they straightened themselves out. Before Wednesday’s game, Clifford said he thought they were the most formidable squad of the six he was focused on.“They have the most answers, they have the most experience, and they’re hard to play against,” he said.Such a statement would have sounded absurd a month ago — and perhaps it did , after the Hornets built a 35-15 first-quarter lead and cruised to a win.“They came out and hit us over the head,” said Nets guard Deron Williams, who scored a team-high 12 points.Like Clifford, the Nets on Wednesday asserted that every game from here on mattered greatly. They were aware of where their competitors stacked up in the standings, and they knew the specifics of various tiebreakers. But, as their coach, Lionel Hollins, said, “If we win enough games, none of that will matter.”Wednesday’s result was a step backward, but the blowout will not change the fact that the Nets have looked like a different team since the All-Star break. After a victory over the Golden State Warriors on Monday night, the team’s public relations officials supplied a stream of telling statistics about the Nets’ 4-2 stretch. They had the second-best field-goal percentage (.469) in the league through those six games after ranking 17th (.447) before the break. They were seventh in the league in both shooting 3-pointers (at 36.3 percent) and defending 3-pointers (at 30.9 percent) after ranking near the bottom of the league before the break. And in the brief sampling, they were leading the league in points scored in the paint (51.7 a game) and points scored in second-chance opportunities (15.5).On Jan. 12, when the Nets were in the middle of a seven-game skid, Hollins was asked whether his team had an established identity. “We have established an identity: We don’t make shots,” he replied. “That’s an identity.”But several factors have spurred big changes.After the Nets traded Kevin Garnett to the Minnesota Timberwolves for forward Thaddeus Young, Hollins elected to go with a small lineup, employing Joe Johnson as a stretch power forward. The move, Hollins said, has allowed the Nets to play faster and spread out opposing defenses, which has helped both their outside shooting and their post scoring.Young, who has shot 7 for 11 from 3-point range in his first seven games with the Nets, has given the team much more flexibility, and the rookie guard Markel Brown has responded to an increase in playing time by playing unrelenting defense.Clifford said that it all echoed the Nets’ situation last year, when an injury to center Brook Lopez forced Jason Kidd, then the coach, to use a small lineup — with Paul Pierce at power forward — that ended up thriving.The Nets have also benefited from improved health, particularly with Williams, who was relegated to the bench in December and then fractured a rib in January. Williams has looked recharged of late, averaging 15.7 points and 6.9 assists in seven games since the break.“I feel healthy and used that time to just kind of clear my mind and get refocused,” Williams said of the break.He and other Nets players have said that, now that the league’s trading deadline has passed, having their roster set has allowed them to feel more comfortable as a group. When the team was scuffling, it seemed each of its stars was hearing his name in trade rumors. Now the players know who their teammates will be as they enter the regular season’s final stretch.Advertisement