AdvertisementSupported byN.H.L. RoundupBy The Associated PressMarek Zidlicky’s power-play goal 1 minute 9 seconds into overtime Wednesday lifted the host Detroit Red Wings to a 2-1 victory over the Rangers.Zidlicky, making his Red Wings debut after being acquired at the N.H.L. trade deadline from the Devils, punched the puck past goalie Cam Talbot in a crowd to give the Red Wings their second straight win. Justin Abdelkader also scored, Henrik Zetterberg added two assists, and Jimmy Howard made 39 saves for Detroit.Talbot made 29 saves for the Rangers, whose lone goal was scored by defenseman Dan Girardi.The Red Wings played the final 46 seconds of regulation on a power play after Derek Stepan held Gustav Nyquist. The advantage carried into overtime, and Zidlicky cashed in on Detroit’s third shot.SENATORS 3, JETS 1 The rookie Andrew Hammond made 35 saves, and Kyle Turris had a goal and an assist as Ottawa won at Winnipeg.Bobby Ryan and Erik Condra also scored for the Senators, who are 6-0-1 in their last seven games. With 67 points, Ottawa is 4 points out of a wild-card spot in the Eastern Conference playoff race.Michael Hutchinson made his fifth straight start for Winnipeg, but he was replaced by Ondrej Pavelec with 8:06 left in the second period after Condra made the score 3-0.ISLANDERS’ MARTIN SUSPENDED Islanders forward Matt Martin was suspended for one game by the N.H.L. for kneeing Dallas Stars defenseman Trevor Daley.Martin, who was given a major penalty and was ejected from Tuesday night’s 3-2 overtime loss at Dallas, struck Daley 1:48 into the game.Martin, one of the N.H.L.’s hardest hitters, will sit out the Islanders’ game at Nashville on Thursday night and will forfeit $5,376.34 in salary that will go to the Players’ Emergency Assistance Fund.He has eight goals and six assists, having played in the Islanders’ first 65 games.ANOTHER INJURY FOR BLUE JACKETS  Columbus Blue Jackets right wing David Clarkson will miss four to six weeks with a torn oblique muscle sustained Tuesday against the Washington Capitals.The injured-ravaged Blue Jackets have lost 406 man-games to injury with 19 games remaining. Last season’s total was 292.Clarkson, 30, was acquired Feb. 26 from Toronto for the injured right wing Nathan Horton. He was scoreless in three games.PANTHERS REPLACE TWO GOALIES The Florida Panthers will be without the injured goalies Roberto Luongo and Al Montoya for Thursday night’s game against Dallas and possibly longer.To replace them, the Panthers recalled Dan Ellis from San Antonio of the American Hockey League and Sam Brittain from Cincinnati of the ECHL.Ellis will start Thursday against the Stars, his former team. Brittain has never played an N.H.L. game. Luongo and Montoya were hurt in Tuesday’s loss to Toronto.Florida is 2 points behind Boston for the No. 8 spot in the Eastern Conference.Advertisement