AdvertisementSupported byBy Richard SandomirMajor League Soccer agreed to a five-year collective bargaining agreement with its players union Wednesday that gives veteran players a measure of free agency for the first time. The agreement in principle, reached two days before the start of the league’s 20th season, prevented the first work stoppage in M.L.S. history.Free agency is a victory for the players, who had pledged to reject any agreement that did not include it, but it will come with significant caveats: Players will need to be at least 28 and have eight years of experience in the league to be eligible, and there will be a cap on their raises if they move on, according to an executive familiar with the terms of the deal.As a limited form of free agency, the system will let players move without multiple teams bidding for them.But the league protected itself from salary inflation with age limits that seriously limit the number of players who qualify for free agency, and with the caps on free agents’ raises. In some cases, those will max out at 20 percent of a player’s previous salary.The league’s minimum salary, another point of contention, will be increased more than 60 percent, to $60,000 from $36,500, and the league’s salary cap is expected to rise modestly. The current system bound players to their clubs even after their contracts expired or they left the league.“The players were very focused on having more freedom of movement and we’ve been able to provide that,” Commissioner Don Garber said. “Everyone wins. Our owners are able to protect their system and players are able to achieve more movement.”The deal suggests that the league and its owner-investors decided that substantial changes were necessary to save, at the very least, the start of the new season. Two new expansion teams, Orlando City S.C. and New York City F.C., will make their league debuts Sunday night in a nationally televised game on ESPN2 in front of more than 60,000 fans at the sold-out Citrus Bowl.Under the old system, players with expired contracts were allowed to be redrafted by other M.L.S. teams, but only at their current salaries and with no say about which team they would be assigned to. The league, which says it is losing $100 million a year, has argued that it needed to control player movement, and salaries, to keep costs down.But players were aware that more money is flowing into the league from new television deals with Fox, ESPN and Univision that are worth $90 million a year (a portion of which will go to U.S. Soccer). The league also is expected to announce several new corporate sponsorships; one of the new deals, with Audi, leaked out Wednesday during the final stages of talks, surely an uncomfortable moment for league negotiators.Advertisement