AdvertisementSupported byOn BaseballBy Tyler KepnerPEORIA, Ariz. — The San Diego Padres scored the fewest runs in the major leagues last season, and their fewest in a full schedule since 1972. So you could understand Bud Black’s enthusiasm for filling out his lineup card Wednesday, when the Padres opened their exhibition season. He put Matt Kemp in the third spot, and Justin Upton cleanup.“The first game is always great in spring training, but when I wrote down the names this morning, it’s a little different,” said Black, the Padres’ manager. “I think all of us sort of feel that. Players, coaches, we’ve talked about this.”The process of turning talk into actual names spinning from the clubhouse printer unfolded in a series of bold strikes. A. J. Preller, hired last summer as the Padres’ general manager, acquired Kemp, Upton, center fielder Wil Myers and catcher Derek Norris within 24 hours in December. Just before spring training, Preller signed James Shields for the top of the rotation.Preller had been a top scouting executive with the Texas Rangers, cultivating an air of mystery. He was like a ghost, colleagues said — somewhere out in the world, in the skies or on the ground, hunting for talent. He flew so often, and slept so awkwardly on planes, that he needed cervical fusion surgery on his neck.“I think Mike Dee said he doesn’t sleep,” starter Ian Kennedy said, referring to a comment by the Padres’ president. “I forgot how many days he was on the road in a year, but it was a crazy amount, just going around scouting with the Rangers.“We knew that something was going to happen, but, to be honest, I had no idea what to expect. I think it impressed all of us by what he was able to do in one off-season.”After four losing seasons in a row, the Padres need to think big to compete in the National League West. The Los Angeles Dodgers have won the last two division titles, and the San Francisco Giants have won three of the last five World Series. The Padres have not won a playoff series since 1998.Preller preserved three top prospects, but unloaded many of the rest. In their place, he said, is a core that can contend for a while. Upton and Kennedy can be free agents after the season, but nearly every other impact player is under team control for years.“You have a million different ideas you throw around, and a million different things you put on the whiteboard, hoping just one will come to fruition,” Preller said. “To see it line up and kind of look at it and say, ‘We have a chance to pull off a few of these things, in sequence, that we think fit and work,’ that was a lot of fun.”Black, who pitched 15 seasons in the majors, said he sometimes woke this winter to find a text message sent by Preller at 4:30 a.m. The work ethic impressed him, but he was struck even more by Preller’s feel for the game — for players and for competition. Preller graduated from Cornell in 1999 and did not play professionally, but showed a hunger to win now, rather than wait on prospects for a distant payoff.“He was looking to rebuild the offense’s identity and the organization’s identity,” said Upton, who launched a homer off the center-field backdrop on Wednesday. “He wanted to build a contender and he thought that I was a piece of that. When he called and told me it was going to be a good year and we weren’t done making moves, and we wanted to still make the team better, I was on board.”Upton will play left field and Kemp will play right. Myers, the 2013 American League Rookie of the Year for Tampa Bay, will play center. He has started just six games there in the majors, but he played 100 games in center in the minors and called it his best position.The motivations of the new outfielders are clear. Upton will be just 28 when he becomes a free agent for the first time, after a solid career for Arizona and Atlanta. Kemp, once a cornerstone of the Dodgers, was shipped to a rival to make room for a rookie, Joc Pederson.Then there is Myers, who learned of his trade from a Rays pitcher, Jake Odorizzi, who saw a rumor in a news report. Myers had hit just .222 with six homers in 87 games, but never felt strong after jamming his left wrist in the first week of the season. Then he broke his right one, sidelining him for months. He went from a building block to the trading block, and said he could hardly believe it.“It was the first bad year of my career — with injuries,” Myers said. “I’m not worried about the fact people say, ‘Well, he’s washed up.’ I’m 24. I didn’t lose talent. I didn’t lose my baseball skills. I still know how to play; I still know how to hit. I’m finally healthy again, and I’m excited to rebound and prove everybody wrong.”Myers has never played at Petco Park, a notorious place for power hitters at night, but Kemp and Upton have succeeded there. Kemp has a .495 career slugging percentage in San Diego, and no visitor has hit more home runs at Petco than Upton, who has 10.“These guys have got all-field power,” Black said. “But we’ve moved the fences in twice. There’s an opposite-field homer for the right-handed hitter. We’re moving the fences in again in left, about two feet, and left field’s really doable. Any pull hitter with power can get the ball airborne; it’s short to left. I think the days of Petco being known as cavernous are over.”The Padres are ready for a change, and the fans are responding. By mid-February, the team said, season ticket sales were up 600 percent from the same time the previous year. The Padres ranked 12th in the N.L. in attendance last season, but now they should put on a better show.“It’s pretty cool to have a fan base, and I knew it was bigger than it looked like when we were playing there the last couple of years,” Kennedy said. “Hopefully this is a good reason for them to show up, and we can start playing better.”Advertisement