AdvertisementSupported byUnited States 2, Norway 1By Sam BordenVILA REAL DE SANTO ANTÓNIO, Portugal — About four minutes into Wednesday’s Algarve Cup game between the United States and Norway, a Norwegian player lofted a cross toward the area in front of the Americans’ goal.Hope Solo, the United States goalkeeper, came charging forward. Solo, who was playing in her first game since returning from a 30-day suspension for what U.S. Soccer had termed an off-field “poor decision,” wanted to leap and claim the ball cleanly; instead, she barreled into a mash of players, fumbled the ball and ended up sprawled on the turf.Ultimately, there was no harm done. Solo’s teammates swarmed behind her and blocked Norway’s ensuing shot out for a corner kick. Still, the sequence wasn’t exactly the opening act Solo had imagined.“Welcome back,” Solo said afterward with a tiny smile. “I thought I came out pretty hard, but I ended up on the ground.”Solo’s fortunes, as well as those of her team, did improve. With two second-half goals from Carli Lloyd and some improved fluidity, the United States came back to beat Norway, 2-1.The game was not always pretty, but that was not necessarily unexpected. Jill Ellis, the coach of the American team, has been tinkering with tactics and formations in preparation for this summer’s Women’s World Cup while also juggling a number of injuries — as well as Solo’s suspension.“We are in the midst of an evolution, a process,” forward Abby Wambach said. “We’re working on a lot of new things.”Old standbys are important, too, and Solo’s return was critical. The United States will play four games at this tournament — group matches against Switzerland and Iceland as well as a placement game — and then will have only four other matches scattered over April and May before its World Cup opener June 8.Solo, 33, has played every minute of every World Cup or Olympics game for the United States since 2008, so the concern about her recent disciplining by U.S. Soccer was significant. So, too, is the possibility that another incident could lead the federation to leave Solo off the World Cup roster entirely.Solo has had a variety of issues in the past, ranging from clashes with a coach to social-media battles with former players to her arrest on domestic-assault charges last year. (Those charges were later dropped.) A more serious incident occurred in January, when Solo was suspended after she and her husband, the former N.F.L. player Jerramy Stevens, were stopped by the police while driving one of the team’s vans and Stevens was arrested on a charge on suspicion of driving under the influence.Solo said she addressed her teammates just before leaving camp to begin her suspension and, since rejoining the team, has done her best to slip back into the fold.“It’s not easy for Hope to talk about her feelings, and for me, that’s a step in the right direction,” Wambach said. “It’s not an easy road that she’s been on.”Wambach added: “I think once something like this happens you can see a genuineness in someone.”For the moment, it seems that everyone — teammates, coaches and officials — is supporting Solo, a stance that is surely bolstered by the fact that she is still regarded by many as the best women’s goalkeeper. There is no question that the United States team is far better with her than without her. Now that she is back, she must help solidify a defense that has had problems with consistency in recent games.“The sooner I can get her in with her back line, the better,” Ellis said.Christie Rampone, the veteran defender and captain, is out because of an injury. Her presence would surely help settle the unit, but the United States was victimized by poor marking in its loss to France last month and was again on Wednesday. Norway’s goal came just before halftime when Ada Hegerberg was left alone for a sharp header from a few yards out. The goal was frustrating for the United States, which had controlled the game’s pace to that point. The second half was better, and the United States tied the score on Lloyd’s laser from outside the penalty area. The goal was eye-popping; after a quick turn, Lloyd let fly with a left-footed blast that the Norwegian goalkeeper watched helplessly.Her second was more straightforward, with Lloyd coolly slotting her penalty kick into the top corner after Esther Staubli, the Swiss referee, called Norway for handling the ball in the penalty area.Solo, who is Lloyd’s roommate on the road, watched Lloyd’s penalty from near the top of her own area, pumping her fist as the ball hit the net. Asked if returning to the field was emotional for her, Solo shook her head.“I’ve dealt with my emotions for the last 30 days,” she said. “This was just a happy day.”Advertisement