AdvertisementSupported byBy Tim CaseyMarc Mitchell was born and raised in Newark. Now 46, he has coached New Jersey basketball teams — recreation league, middle school, high school and college — for more than 20 years.Still, he had never heard of Fairleigh Dickinson University, Florham, before applying for the position of women’s basketball coach there in 2009. A few days before interviewing, he called the admissions office and set up a campus tour. He wanted to learn about the college, which is in Madison, about 15 miles west of Newark.Six years later, Mitchell has helped make F.D.U.-Florham a recognizable name in Division III athletics. The Devils were 33-0 last season and became the first team from New Jersey to win an N.C.A.A. women’s basketball title. This season, their only loss came on Feb. 7, in overtime, when Eastern University ended their 53-game winning streak, the longest in the nation at the time for a men’s or women’s team, regardless of division.The Devils (26-1) enter Friday night’s opening-round N.C.A.A. tournament game at home against Johnson & Wales as a favorite to repeat as champion.F.D.U.-Florham is often confused with Fairleigh Dickinson’s larger campus in Teaneck, N.J., which has men’s and women’s Division I basketball teams that play in the Northeast Conference. The Devils compete in the Freedom Conference, which operates under the umbrella of the Middle Atlantic Conferences, and cannot offer athletic scholarships, under Division III rules.Before Mitchell arrived, F.D.U.-Florham had never won a conference title or advanced to the N.C.A.A. tournament, but that did not discourage him. After accepting the job, he told the athletic director, Bill Klika, and another university official that the team’s fortunes would soon change.“I told them two things,” Mitchell said. “I said, ‘No. 1, I’m going to be the hardest-working coach in our conference and, No. 2, we’re going to win a national title here.’ They kind of looked at me and laughed at me and said, ‘Hey, let’s just win some games.’ I said, ‘O.K., but we’re going to win a national title.’ ”The Devils seemed a long way from any championships when they won 11 games and 9 games in Mitchell’s first two seasons. In that second season, though, Mitchell and an assistant, Jessica Cavaco, recruited Kyra and Kara Dayon, twins at Trenton Central High School.Mitchell was determined to visit the Dayons as often as possible.“He used to come down and watch the kids play and sit in the gym and watch our practices,” said Reggie Murray, who is in his 33rd season as Trenton Central’s coach. “He just said, ‘Wow, I’ve never seen a program like that.’ ”The Dayons ended up committing to F.D.U.-Florham, as did three of their high school teammates. Two of those players are no longer on the Devils’ roster, but the Dayons are seniors and four-year starters, and Quaneshia Harris is a reserve forward.In the 2012-13 season, F.D.U.-Florham won its first conference title and made the N.C.A.A. tournament for the first time. But it lost its opening game, 56-52, to Widener to finish with a program-best 24-4 record.“It was disappointing,” said Kyra Dayon, the Freedom Conference player of the year as a sophomore and a junior and the most outstanding player in the 2014 Final Four. “We thought that we were going to go a little further. We had some learning to do.”Despite having all five starters returning and adding the Montclair State transfer Shalette Brown, F.D.U.-Florham was not considered a national title contender heading into last season. But the Devils went undefeated in the regular season and won their first four N.C.A.A. tournament games by at least 15 points to advance to the Final Four in Stevens Point, Wis.Two busloads of fans made the drive to the Midwest and watched as F.D.U.-Florham defeated Tufts in the national semifinals and Whitman in the title game to capture the first N.C.A.A. championship in university history. Afterward, the team received commendations from the university’s board of trustees and the New Jersey Senate.“We got a lot of feedback from alums who all of a sudden started following and now could turn and talk to their colleagues and say, ‘Look, my alma mater’s a national champion,’ ” said Klika, the athletic director since 1988. “And then the institution got exposure to people who heard about us through the basketball program and then began to look at what else we did.”As a private university, F.D.U.-Florham is at a disadvantage when recruiting against public Division III colleges in the state like Montclair State, Kean, Rutgers-Newark and the College of New Jersey. For the 2014-15 school year, tuition at F.D.U.-Florham is more than $37,000, at least $10,000 more than New Jersey’s public colleges charge out-of-state residents. The discrepancy is even larger for students from New Jersey.Still, F.D.U.-Florham can offer academic and need-based scholarships based on family income, although Mitchell said most students take out loans. The high price tag has not dissuaded talented players from enrolling.During the Devils’ one loss this season, their top scorers, Brown and Alyssa McDonough, sat out the first half for violating unspecified team rules. But they returned to start the second half.The Devils are third in the USA Today coaches’ poll and are outscoring opponents by an average of 25 points a game, even though none of the players are taller than 5-foot-10. Rachel Groom, last season’s starting center, tore her anterior cruciate ligament in the summer and has not returned.Regardless of whether they win another N.C.A.A. tournament title, the Devils have achieved a legacy few could have imagined.“When we first got here, I want to say our only fans were our parents and maybe some of the faculty of the school and the athletics department,” Kyra Dayon said. “And then as we began to win, more and more people came up and supported us.”Mitchell is preparing to replace the Dayons, Harris and two other seniors. He said he recently received commitments from high school players from Maryland and Virginia as well as a few from New Jersey. He said he was determined to become a perennial national contender.“We see no reason why we won’t continue winning,” Mitchell said.Advertisement