By BILLY WITZMARCH 4, 2015
TAMPA, Fla. —  A fly ball had barely settled into the glove of Yankees left fielder Ramon Flores — the final out of the top of the first inning — when Alex Rodriguez popped out of the dugout and into the on-deck circle. He was taking practice swings with a weighted bat before all of his teammates had made it off the field.Nearly a year and a half had passed since Rodriguez, who missed all of last season while serving a suspension after a performance-enhancing drug scandal, had played in a game, so it was easy to understand how eager he was for his first plate appearance of spring training.Rodriguez, who had acknowledged that he was jittery, soothed his nerves by lining a two-strike single to left field in his first at-bat Wednesday afternoon. Rodriguez, in the Yankees’ lineup as the designated hitter, also grounded out and drew a walk in the 3-1 loss to the Philadelphia Phillies before he was removed for a pinch-runner.“It’s going to be a spring of firsts,” Rodriguez said. “Everything feels a little odd right now.”AdvertisementRodriguez’s return from suspension has overshadowed everything else during the early days of spring training for the Yankees. Each time he steps on a field to take batting practice or field ground balls, his steps are tracked and interpreted by members of the news media.AdvertisementManager Joe Girardi said of Rodriguez’s appearance Wednesday, “It’s probably the first spring training game in a long time where he’s been a little anxious.”When Rodriguez, who batted second, strode to the plate in the first inning, he was greeted loudly — mostly with cheers but also with some noticeable jeers by the announced crowd of 9,673 at Steinbrenner Field.Rodriguez swung at the first pitch he faced, a 91-mile-per-hour fastball from the right-hander Kevin Slowey, and missed badly.“I felt like I was swinging underwater,” Rodriguez said. “Man, it’s been a long time.”He swung through another fastball to find himself in a quick hole. But after he stepped out of the batter’s box with one foot to regroup, he laced a line drive into left field off another fastball.Rodriguez loped to first base and exchanged fist bumps with the Yankees’ first-base coach, Tony Pena. He also received congratulations from Phillies first baseman Darin Ruf.“I told him, ‘Welcome back,’ ” Ruf said. “And he said, ‘Thanks,’ and told me to say hi to Chase,” referring to the Phillies’ longtime second baseman, Chase Utley.It was those interactions, the kind he was deprived of last year, that Rodriguez seemed to relish Wednesday. He said he told the home-plate umpire, Tom Hallion, and Phillies catcher Tommy Joseph “to take it easy on the old man” when he first came to the plate. Later, Rodriguez sat on a folding chair outside the dugout near the on-deck circle and chatted with the Yankees’ third-base coach, Joe Espada, and Reggie Jackson, who is in camp as an instructor.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In his second at-bat, Rodriguez again made solid contact, grounding a first-pitch fastball from Paul Clemens to shortstop for a forceout that ended the third inning. He came to the plate in the sixth inning with runners at the corners and the Yankees trailing, 2-0. After he took a 3-2 curveball for a walk, he was replaced by pinch-runner Kyle Higashioka.AdvertisementGirardi said Rodriguez would remain at the Yankees’ complex Thursday and work out rather than travel to Bradenton, Fla., for an exhibition game against Pittsburgh. Rodriguez is scheduled to play, possibly in the field, in Tampa on Friday night against Pittsburgh.“I don’t make too much of players’ at-bats the first couple of weeks because they’re just getting back to it,” Girardi said. “As I’ve said all along, we’re going to wait to judge Alex. It’s not fair — he hasn’t played in two years, really, and we’re going to wait.”Although Rodriguez is expected to be a bit player for the Yankees even if he can stay healthy — playing mostly as a designated hitter and batting toward the bottom of the lineup — he has continued to be a magnet for attention.Rodriguez surprised Yankees officials by reporting to training camp two days before he was expected. In his first drills at first base — a position he is being asked to learn for the first time in his career — Rodriguez has used a fielder’s glove instead of a first baseman’s mitt. Each of those stories created a greater stir than anything else in training camp, allowing the team’s new shortstop, Didi Gregorius, to go about replacing Derek Jeter in relative quiet.In the opposite dugout Wednesday, Larry Bowa, who was with the Yankees in Rodriguez’s first two seasons with the team, said he was uncertain it could be any other way.“Is he going to hit 50 home runs?” said Bowa, now a Phillies coach. “No, but I think he’s going to contribute to the offense. He’s always had good hands. He’s got a good arm. I think he’s going to be a plus over there. But the distractions are going to be hard. He’s got to be able to stay under the radar, and that’s always been a hard thing for Alex to do.”A version of this article appears in print on March 5, 2015, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: In First Game Back, Some Jitters and a Single.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.