AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressChip Kelly’s latest bold move is another example of his coaching philosophy: “Culture beats scheme.”Two people familiar with the deal told The Associated Press the Philadelphia Eagles have agreed to trade the star running back LeSean McCoy to the Buffalo Bills for linebacker Kiko Alonso. Both people spoke on condition of anonymity Tuesday because the teams had not announced the deal.Kelly has not won a playoff game in two seasons in the N.F.L., but he is not afraid to make unpopular decisions.Last year, he cut the three-time Pro Bowl wide receiver DeSean Jackson after a career season. Now, he is trading away a two-time All-Pro for a talented but injury-prone player.ESPN first reported the trade. The current Bills running back C. J. Spiller confirmed the deal Tuesday. It cannot be completed until the 2015 league season begins next Tuesday. McCoy, who played high school, college and pro football in Pennsylvania, could refuse to go to Buffalo.Since taking full control of all personnel moves from the former general manager Howie Roseman in the off-season, Kelly has been busy reshaping a team that won 10 games in each of his first two seasons. He released the longtime starting offensive lineman Todd Herremans and the third-string tight end James Casey last week. He cut the starting cornerback Cary Williams hours before the McCoy trade.Trading McCoy is a big risk for Kelly, who firmly believes players in his system are replaceable. McCoy thrived in Kelly’s up-tempo offense in 2013, leading the N.F.L. with a franchise-record 1,607 yards rushing. His production, along with the rest of the offense, slipped in 2014 and he finished with 1,319 yards. Inconsistency and injuries on the offensive line were a major factor.It was never clear how much the 26-year-old McCoy and Kelly got along. McCoy said Kelly pushed him harder than any coach he had. “Chip is constantly on me,” McCoy said in August. Kelly later created a stir when he said McCoy sometimes practices “not so great.”It is clear, however, that Kelly wants guys who buy everything he is selling. He has a unique approach that includes practice on Tuesdays — an off day for every other team in the league — and tougher practices instead of walk-throughs the day before the game.Whatever the relationship with Kelly, McCoy is gone. Kelly gets another player he is quite familiar with in Alonso. The 24-year-old played for Kelly at Oregon. He had an outstanding rookie year after Buffalo selected him in the second round in 2013. But he tore the anterior cruciate ligament in his left knee and missed the 2014 season. Alonso tore the A.C.L. in his right knee at Oregon in 2010. He also had hip surgery last off-season.Kelly could be gearing up to make a run at another one of his former players. Talk about the Heisman Trophy winner Marcus Mariota coming to the Eagles has dominated conversations in Philadelphia. The Eagles would have to trade up from No. 20 in the first round of the draft to get the Oregon quarterback, who is projected to go as high as No. 1 or 2.A blockbuster deal to get Mariota was highly unlikely when Roseman was the general manager because he values draft picks. But with Kelly calling the shots, anything is possible.The Eagles currently have about $41 million available under the adjusted 2015 salary cap, so expect them to be active when free agency begins next week. They now need a new running back, two starting cornerbacks and plenty of defensive help.Over all, they saved nearly $21 million under the salary cap on four moves: $7.5 million for McCoy, $6.5 million for Williams, $4 million for Casey and $2.8 million for Herremans. More money-saving cuts are expected. Releasing linebackers DeMeco Ryans ($6.9 million) and Trent Cole ($8.4 million) would save an additional $15.3 million.Advertisement