By TIM ROHANMARCH 4, 2015
PORT ST. LUCIE, Fla. —  Noah Syndergaard lowered his head and sheepishly walked out of the Mets’ clubhouse toward the dugout Wednesday morning, trailed by reporters.Syndergaard was having an impromptu news media session because the day before, David Wright, the Mets’ captain, had given him an impromptu lesson about being a professional ballplayer.Having encountered Syndergaard eating lunch in the clubhouse during an intrasquad game, Wright told him in no uncertain terms that he should be out at the field. While Syndergaard, who was not scheduled to pitch in the game, was still processing Wright’s message, another veteran Met, pitcher Bobby Parnell, strolled in and dumped Syndergaard’s food in the trash.“It was just really a mistake on my part,” Syndergaard said Wednesday. “Straight-up ignorance on my part, just thinking I could go in there during a game, grab a quick bite to eat. It was just a learning experience for me. Should have been on the bench.”AdvertisementSitting in the dugout, bent over with his elbows on his knees, Syndergaard looked and sounded like a child who had just been given a timeout, except he happens to be 22 years old, looks older, stands 6 feet 6 inches, weighs about 240 pounds, and has long hair and a beard.Advertisement“I didn’t think they were picking on me,” he said to reporters at one point.“I’m glad they include me in team activities,” he said at another.If Wright had confronted a lesser player Tuesday, one who was not a prospect of Syndergaard’s caliber, perhaps what happened would not have garnered as much attention. But Syndergaard is expected to eventually join Matt Harvey, Jacob deGrom and Zack Wheeler in an imposing rotation. So if he is scolded, it is news.As for Wright, he told reporters Wednesday morning that he had not realized reporters were within earshot when he admonished Syndergaard.“This is a nonissue,” Wright said with a smile. “Not just me, but anybody in here — you see something that could help a player out, and you say it. It’s the way we kind of get on each other that some people don’t get or understand. I’ve got three younger brothers, and it’s the way I get on them.”With the Mets relying on so many young players, Wright wants them to soak up as much information as possible, to be on the bench, observing, and not in the clubhouse, eating. He also thinks it is important for the young players to support their teammates and help the team develop camaraderie.With the Mets considered a potential contender for the first time in years, it is possible that Wright feels more urgency than he once did in getting such messages across. In any case, he said he told Syndergaard there were no hard feelings.“He just wanted to make it clear, like, they care about me; they want me to be part of the team,” Syndergaard said. “Because they think I can contribute in the future.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Wright and Syndergaard were not the only topics of conversation in the Mets’ clubhouse in the hours before the team’s exhibition opener against the Atlanta Braves. On Tuesday, after a visit to the Mets’ camp by Billy Bean, an openly gay former major leaguer who is now baseball’s inclusion ambassador, Daniel Murphy told reporters that he welcomed Bean’s presence and was ready to play with a gay teammate, but could not condone Bean’s homosexuality.AdvertisementAsked Wednesday for further comment, Murphy said, “All my stuff’s in print right now.”Murphy is known around the organization for his religious devotion. He regularly attends the team’s chapel services. Asked which denomination he belongs to, he simply replies, “Jesus.”“It’s the easiest way I can describe it,” he said. “Anything else — it doesn’t get confusing; it just gets muddied. So, Jesus.”Last year, Murphy missed the first two games of the season for the birth of his son. He was criticized on sports talk radio, but others came to his defense. Murphy later spoke at a White House meeting on working families.Sandy Alderson, the Mets’ general manager, who had personally invited Bean to visit the Mets, said Wednesday that he had no problem with Murphy expressing his feelings.“I thought he made an effort to reconcile his own religious beliefs with Billy’s presence here yesterday and in the clubhouse,” Alderson said. “Not everybody’s going to be as open to that kind of situation as others. But if we have 23 or 24 guys who are open-minded — I’m happy he was honest.“I thought it was a step in the right direction,” Alderson added. “I told him so this morning. I thought he handled it the right way. He has strongly held beliefs and, at the same time, expressed a willingness to embrace someone as a teammate.”Bean weighed in with a column he wrote for MLB.com. In it, he said that he had “tremendous admiration and respect for Daniel Murphy as a family man” and that he appreciated that Murphy had spoken truthfully.“He was brave to share his feelings, and it made me want to work harder and be a better example that someday might allow him to view things from my perspective, if only for just a moment,” Bean wrote.He added: “I respect him, and I want everyone to know he was respectful of me. We have baseball in common, and for now, that might be the only thing. But it’s a start.”A version of this article appears in print on March 5, 2015, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: Young Pitcher Apologizes as Mets Try to Put Day of Conflict Behind Them.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.