By ALLAN KREDAOCT. 1, 2015
After its debut was immediately and broadly criticized following just one Islanders goal, the subway horn experiment at Barclays Center is over.When the Islanders open their first season in Brooklyn on Oct. 9 against the Stanley Cup champion Chicago Blackhawks, fans will hear the celebratory sounds familiar from Nassau Coliseum: a fog horn blast followed by the “Yes! Yes! Yes!” chant.“We’re not afraid to change course if it makes sense and if the fans feel very strongly about something,” the Barclays Center chief executive Brett Yormark said. “We are all about the fans. We want the fans to feel welcome.”The subway horns — two groups of three trumpetlike horns mounted above opposite sides of the arena facing center ice — were the product of a partnership between Barclays Center and the Metropolitan Transportation Authority. Three blasts were heard by a sparse crowd on Monday night after Kirill Petrov scored with less than two minutes left in a dull 3-1 preseason loss to the Washington Capitals.AdvertisementIslanders followers instantly flocked to social media and various blogs with waves of vitriolic posts. A petition was started on Change.org, and the hashtag #KeepOurGoalHorn gained traction on Twitter.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“One thing Islanders fans love is our goal horn, and we do not want it to change,” the petition introduction said. “It is a part of our tradition, and we do not want to lose it.”AdvertisementYormark said: “If there was that much outcry, we decided, ‘Let’s continue to listen to the fans and make the change.’ The horn became a distraction.”The subway sound devices were from the R160 class of trains, which are among the types that serve routes running to Barclays.Yormark wanted to include a subway element as part of the hockey experience at Barclays to help give games a city flavor.A version of this article appears in print on October 2, 2015, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: Isles Put Subway Horn Out of Service .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.