AdvertisementSupported byBy Tim RohanVIERA, Fla. — Mets Manager Terry Collins was on a golf course in January when the news broke that the Washington Nationals had signed Max Scherzer. Recalling that moment, Collins joked that he shanked his next putt 10 feet past the hole. The Nationals became World Series favorites when they signed Scherzer, the former Detroit Tiger who was the off-season’s leading free-agent pitcher. Washington was already the National League East favorite, and no team knew that better than the Mets. The Nationals won 96 games last season, including 15 of 19 against the Mets. It was the Nationals’ highest win total against any team. For the Mets to become contenders, they will have to play better against the Nationals. They have a chance to do so early, in the first series of the regular season. For now, they settled for a Grapefruit League game Thursday, in what might have been an opening day preview: Scherzer versus Bartolo Colon. The result was a pleasant surprise for the Mets. Colon pitched two perfect innings, and Scherzer, in his unofficial Nationals debut, allowed two hits and one run in two innings. John Mayberry Jr. crushed a solo home run to left field to spoil Scherzer’s outing.It was Colon’s first start of the spring, but he looked the same as he did last July, putting his fastball wherever he wanted it. He retired Bryce Harper easily and struck out Wilson Ramos and Ian Desmond. Despite Colon’s performance, the Mets lost, 5-4.Colon’s situation with the Mets is precarious. He has a chance to be the opening day starter, but he could also be gone by the trade deadline. Noah Syndergaard, the team’s top pitching prospect, might be ready by then.The Mets have tried to trade Colon but have found no takers. His contract and his age have dissuaded other teams, but he is in the second year of a two-year contract, and some teams might be willing to take a flier on him. Still, he will turn 42 in May.“He’s not sure if it’s 42 or 41,” an interpreter said for Colon. “But he says he’s going to go until — God willing — he can play, and his body lets him do it.”Advertisement