By BILLY WITZMARCH 5, 2015
TAMPA, Fla. —  Didi Gregorius will replace Derek Jeter at shortstop for the Yankees this season because, well, somebody has to.Replacing Jeter as the team’s captain is another matter.General Manager Brian Cashman reiterated on Thursday what he said on at least two occasions last season: that he would like to have the title of captain retired along with Jeter.“I don’t think it’s a necessary appointment,” Cashman said in a telephone interview. “Leadership takes many forms and fashions. I thought Derek wore the mantle so well, and it’s not my decision, it would be ownership’s, but I wouldn’t recommend naming anybody.”Cashman pointed out that some of Jeter’s former teammates, like Mariano Rivera, Andy Pettitte, Roger Clemens, Scott Brosius, Tino Martinez and David Cone, had all been strong leaders without being the team’s captain.AdvertisementCashman expressed similar views on Aug. 10 at a charity function at Yankee Stadium and to a pool of reporters on the field at Fenway Park on Sept. 28, when Jeter played his last game. But the subject had a broad audience Thursday when Cashman again spoke about the topic in an ESPN radio interview.AdvertisementCashman said he had not discussed the matter with Hal Steinbrenner, the team’s managing general partner, but the Yankees’ captaincy has a rich history. There have been 13 captains, dating to 1903, according to Baseball Almanac.Babe Ruth was the most short-lived, lasting less than a week in 1922 before he was ejected and fined for throwing dirt on an umpire and attacking a fan at the Polo Grounds.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Lou Gehrig was in many ways the standard-bearer for the position. At the time of his retirement, which was forced by a diagnosis of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, Yankees Manager Joe McCarthy said the team would never again have a captain — and for nearly 35 years it did not. In 1976, in the early years of his ownership of the franchise, George Steinbrenner decided he wanted to bring back a captain and he anointed Thurman Munson, who did not think he fit the mold.“I’ll be a terrible captain,” Munson said. “I’m too belligerent. I cuss and swear at people. I yell at umpires, and maybe I’m a little too tough at home. I don’t sign autographs like I should and I haven’t always been very good with writers.”Munson died in a plane crash in 1979, and Graig Nettles was given the captaincy the next season. It was shared after that by Willie Randolph and Ron Guidry. Don Mattingly held it for his final four seasons, and the position was vacant for another eight before it was bestowed upon Jeter in 2003 by Steinbrenner, who did so without informing Manager Joe Torre. Jeter became the Yankees’ longest-serving captain, and there is no obvious choice for the role on the team’s current roster.“That’s what a team’s all about,” Cashman said. “You find your leadership in different ways. I don’t think having a captain is a focus for us in any way, shape or form.”INSIDE PITCHOutfielder TYLER AUSTIN hit an eighth-inning home run to lift the Yankees to a 2-1 exhibition victory over the Pittsburgh Pirates in Bradenton, Fla.A version of this article appears in print on March 6, 2015, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: Yankees’ Captaincy Is Open, and It May Stay That Way.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.