By KAREN CROUSEMARCH 5, 2015
DORAL, Fla. —  Adam Scott looked as if he were paying tribute to the recently departed Leonard Nimoy on Thursday on the greens of Doral’s Blue Monster. Holding his putter in his left hand, Scott rested his right hand, palm down, lightly on the grip and gave his golf ball a modified Vulcan salute.He was greeting a new old friend. For the first time in four years and 83 worldwide starts, Scott used a short putter in his round of two-under-par 70 at the World Golf Championships event. Making his 2015 debut, Scott had 27 putts, two more than J. B. Holmes, who set the pace with a tournament record-tying 62.“Tough golf course except for a couple of guys who shot really low,” Scott said, referring to Holmes and Ryan Moore, who carded a six-under 66 with a double bogey on the last hole.Scott, who missed only one putt inside 15 feet, described himself as “very happy” with his performance on the greens.Advertisement“I’m trying not to clutter my head with too much thought,” he said.The last time Scott used a conventional putter in competition was at the Sony Open in Hawaii in January 2011. He posted rounds of 72 and 70 to miss the cut. At the time, he was so discouraged by his performance on the greens, he said, “You could have given me a hockey stick and I would have used that.”After consulting with his brother-in-law, Brad Malone, who is also his swing coach, Scott unveiled his broomstick model a month later at the World Golf Championship match play event outside Tucson. With it, he won the 2013 Masters and ascended to No. 1 last year.The long putter will be banned starting next year, and Scott decided there was no time like the present to make the switch.“I thought because I do have to make an adjustment by the end of this year, if I’m going to spend some time doing it, I should try and start now and maybe find the best solution,” Scott said.After experimenting with a couple of models in his practice sessions, Scott settled on one and forged ahead, treating it as if he were taking a test using a No. 2 pencil. He felt prepared, so he did not expect any discernible difference.Advertisement“My stroke and everything feels as good as it ever has,” Scott said, adding: “It really isn’t that big a deal. It just takes a little while to adjust and change a couple of muscle-memory things.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Scott’s feel on the longer putts was tested early in his round. On the first seven holes, his closest approach was 14 feet. Scott had a 33-footer for birdie on the first that he came within 14 inches of holing.He drained a 14-foot putt on the eighth for the first of four birdies in a five-hole stretch. His stay at four-under was brief. He played the next two holes in three-over. “I played a really good round of golf other than that,” he said.Scott did not throw out the process with the long putter. He kept the modified claw grip he used with the broomstick. He also continues to use the AimPoint Express method of reading greens, in which he reads the slope with his feet and raises fingers on his right hand to correspond with the amount of break.He did not even discard his long putter. Scott brought it with him from his native Australia to use as a training tool. He felt no need, he said, to snap the old putter over his knee so he would not be tempted to go back to it.“It treated me pretty well,” Scott said, “so I don’t think it deserves a snapping.”The switch has invigorated Scott’s putting, which was very good, in stretches, earlier in his career.“It felt a bit like when I switched to the longer putter,” Scott said. “It was a really different, fresh feel, and so is this. I’m not doing things exactly the same as I did them before. It’s been feeling really good.”A change in putters was the least of the adjustments Scott has made since his last trip to the States. After the Tour Championship he replaced his longtime caddie, Steve Williams, with Mike Kerr. On Feb. 15, he became a first-time father when his wife, Marie, gave birth to a daughter, Bo Vera. After nine days of diaper duty, Scott, 34, left Australia and settled in for a six-week stay in the United States that will take him through the Masters.“Yeah, everything was getting a little boring,” Scott said with a laugh, “so I thought just change everything.”Asked about his daughter, Scott said, “I’m missing out on heaps, but even just thinking about her makes me happy. It’s been really good.”A version of this article appears in print on March 6, 2015, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: Back to Using a Short Putter, and Happy With the Results.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.