
On Baseball By                     
 TYLER KEPNER
 
MARCH 5, 2015
GOODYEAR, Ariz. — You hear it from just about every major league hitter: Strikeouts are rising because pitchers throw really, really fast. Relievers trot in from the bullpen, one after another, and overpower the hitters.But the original postmodern bullpen ace is still the most extraordinary. Aroldis Chapman continues to stretch the limits of plausible pitching.“I’m humble,” Chapman said on Thursday, in the Cincinnati Reds’ clubhouse here, as interpreted by catcher Brayan Pena. “I’m humble to be able to be, if not the guy who throws the hardest, one of those guys. But I don’t think you’re going to see that in spring training. You better save that report for after the season starts.”Then Chapman went out and whiffed three Cleveland Indians in one inning of work in his spring training debut. He may not have thrown 105.1 miles an hour, as the tattoo on the inside of his left wrist commemorates, but he has not lost any zip from his usual fastballs since he arrived in the majors in 2010. In fact, he’s even better.AdvertisementChapman’s 2014 season was unlike anything baseball had ever seen. It was easy to miss, because the Reds had a losing record and the rest of the bullpen struggled. But Chapman did things no other pitcher had done, and accomplished it all after a harrowing spring injury that could have killed him.“I was the first one to get to the mound, and he started bleeding from his nose and his eyes,” Pena said. “I got super scared. My first thought was, ‘We lost him.’ ”This was last March 19, at Surprise Stadium against the Kansas City Royals, when Chapman took a Salvador Perez line drive off his face. At the mound, Pena said, Chapman called out his daughter’s name, over and over. Chapman’s father rushed to him from the stands, promising his son he would not let him go.“It was one of those unforgettable moments that you hope to forget,” said Bryan Price, the Reds’ manager. “It was surreal.”Chapman sustained eye and nose fractures and a concussion. He needed a three-inch titanium plate, and 12 screws inserted in his head, to stabilize the bones around his left eye. After the operation, Chapman shared a photo on Instagram that showed dozens of staples stretching from his right ear to the left side of his head.AdvertisementNow there are no visible scars. Chapman said, smiling, that he did not set off metal detectors at airports. Recovery, he insisted, was not difficult.“I believe in myself,” Chapman said. “I always did. It wasn’t so hard for me because I believe in myself and I trust myself and I was confident enough to come back stronger than the way I was. I have positive thoughts, and I took that with me.”Pena sensed in Chapman a determination to prove that the injury would not slow him down. Literally, it did not. Chapman returned on May 11 and hit 100 miles an hour with 15 of 21 pitches. For the season, his average fastball was 100.3 m.p.h., the highest in FanGraphs’ 13-year database.Yet he threw the pitch less often than ever. Chapman used his fastball 68.8 percent of the time (his career average is 81.8 percent), mixing more sliders and adding a changeup after working on it last winter with Pedro Martinez, the newly elected Hall of Famer.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“When I came from Cuba, I was a different guy because I was relying a lot on my fastball,” said Chapman, who defected in July 2009. “But now I can go out there and have my second and third pitches.”Pena said he and the Reds’ starting catcher, Devin Mesoraco, had dug into Chapman’s statistics and been amazed. How many hits did Chapman allow with the 58 changeups he threw last season? Zero. Batters can barely handle the other stuff, either.These are the single-season opponents’ averages off Chapman, in order, since his 2010 debut: .196, .147, .141, .164 and .121. Last season, he fanned 5.05 batters for every hit allowed. From August 2013 to August 2014, he set a major league record by recording a strikeout in 49 consecutive relief appearances.Another record last season: 17.67 strikeouts per nine innings, the best in major league history, minimum 50 innings. That was a full strikeout more than the closest figure, by Atlanta’s Craig Kimbrel in 2012.Mesoraco said Chapman was such a well-rounded athlete that he could probably beat the Reds’ speedster, Billy Hamilton, in a footrace. Mesoraco said Chapman’s skills were more suited to the N.F.L. or the N.B.A.Advertisement“He’s just a freak of nature, basically,” Mesoraco said. “The rest of us are just kind of normal guys.”General Manager Walt Jocketty signed Chapman to a six-year, $30.25 million contract in January 2010, a deal that looked risky then but seems shrewd now. Jocketty said he still wondered how Chapman would have pitched as a starter, but the Reds had a strong rotation and were a playoff team when Chapman arrived. They knew he could thrive in relief, and Chapman embraced the role.Now there is no going back. Chapman, 27, is a three-time All-Star and can be a free agent after 2016. He stands to win a lavish reward in salary arbitration next winter, which puts the Reds in a quandary.Cincinnati has made nine-figure commitments to first baseman Joey Votto and starter Homer Bailey, but this winter the team traded two starters, Mat Latos and Alfredo Simon. The Reds’ ace, Johnny Cueto, is unsigned past this season, and while they will try to work out a new deal this spring, Cueto seems unlikely to stay.That issue hovers over the Reds now, but Chapman’s future is close behind.“The problem is the money that’s being paid to closers, and in our situation, whether we can do it or not,” Jocketty said. “Obviously, if we had a bucket full of money, we’d sign all these guys. It’s not that easy.”Perhaps the answer is Raisel Iglesias, another Cuban pitcher, whom the Reds signed in June for seven years and $27 million. Iglesias’s best chance to make the team would probably be in relief, but he profiles better, for the long term, as a starter. In any case, Jocketty conceded, he is not as dominant as Chapman.Then again, nobody is, and nobody ever has been.A version of this article appears in print on March 6, 2015, on Page B8 of the New York edition with the headline: Pushing Limits of a Sport, and a Budget.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »