AdvertisementSupported byBy Richard GoldsteinEd Modzelewski, the fullback known as Big Mo, who starred with his brother Dick, the defensive tackle called Little Mo, on an undefeated University of Maryland team, then collided with him in the N.F.L. of the 1950s when his Cleveland Browns faced Dick’s Giants, died on Saturday in West Sedona, Ariz. He was 86.His wife, Joanne, said the cause was congestive heart failure.Ed and Dick were given their nicknames when they were high school teammates in western Pennsylvania. Ed was two years older, but he was known as Big Mo because, at 195 pounds, he outweighed Dick by 20 pounds.Ed was an all-American senior fullback for the Maryland team that completed an unbeaten season by upsetting previously undefeated Tennessee, 28-13, on Jan. 1, 1952, in the Sugar Bowl. He ran for 153 yards in the game and was named its most valuable player.Dick, a junior on that Maryland team, won the Outland Trophy as the nation’s leading collegiate lineman as a senior.Ed spent most of his pro career at fullback with the Browns. Weighing about 215 pounds, he faced Dick, who had become the true Big Mo as a 260-pounder on a brilliant defensive line, when his Cleveland Browns were rivals of Dick’s Giants.Ed’s best pro year came in 1955, when he ran for 619 yards in the regular season and helped take the Browns to a victory over the Los Angeles Rams in the N.F.L. championship game.When Jim Brown joined the Browns in 1957, Ed’s days as a starter were over.Edward Walter Modzelewski (pronounced moe-juh-LESS-kee) was born on Jan. 13, 1929, in West Natrona, Pa., where his father, Joseph, a Polish immigrant, worked in the coal mines.He was selected by the Pittsburgh Steelers in the first round of the 1952 N.F.L. draft, played one season for them, spent two years in military service, then was traded to the Browns.He retired after the 1959 season, having gained 1,292 career yards with 11 rushing touchdowns.Besides his wife and his brother Dick, Ed Modzelewski is survived by his sons, Michael, Scott and Bruce; a daughter, Nancy Giacobbe; his sisters Betty Logan and Florence Nowicki; and three grandchildren.Ed and Dick reunited when they ran a Cleveland restaurant and a Midwest restaurant chain together.Their brother Gene played tackle at New Mexico State and was drafted by the Browns in 1966, but entered the Army after that, served in the Vietnam War and never played pro football. He died in 2004.Dick reflected in an interview Thursday how he and Ed were fierce if friendly rivals when the Giants met the Browns.“Cleveland, they had the ball on the 1- or 2-yard line and I tackled him for a loss,” Dick recalled. “He threw the football and hit me in the back of the helmet. After the game, we hugged each other.”Advertisement