By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSOCT. 13, 2015
Bryan Little scored twice and Michael Hutchinson made 40 saves to lead the Winnipeg Jets to a 4-1 victory over the host Rangers on Tuesday night.Nikolaj Ehlers and Mark Stuart each added a goal for Winnipeg, which improved to 3-1-0 in the early season. The victory ended a four-game road trip to begin the season for the Jets.Despite being outshot, 20-8, in the period, the Jets went into the second intermission with a 2-1 lead thanks to Little’s short-handed goal at 18 minutes 49 seconds. Little, whose 52 points were third most on the Jets last season, one-timed a feed from Jacob Trouba.His power play goal at 10:35 of the third period sealed the game for the Jets, who handed the Rangers their first loss of the season.AdvertisementHenrik Lundqvist made 24 saves.Mats Zuccarello scored the Rangers’ lone goal.CANADIENS 3, PENGUINS 2 Tomas Fleischmann finished off an odd-man rush with his first goal of the season early in the third period to lift visiting Montreal to a win over Pittsburgh.AdvertisementFleischmann scored off a feed from David Desharnais, and Carey Price made it stand up as Montreal improved to 4-0. Max Pacioretty scored twice for the Canadiens. Price finished with 31 saves.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Beau Bennett and Kris Letang scored for Pittsburgh, which dropped to 0-3.PREDATORS 3, DEVILS 1  Pekka Rinne made 22 saves, and visiting Nashville ran its season-opening winning streak to three games with a victory over the struggling Devils.Roman Josi scored in the first period on a power play, and Gabriel Bourque and Eric Nystrom added an empty-netter in the closing minutes to help the Predators get off to their best start since 2010-11.The Devils have lost all three if their games, leaving the tandem of General Manager Ray Shero and Coach John Hynes looking for their first wins since taking over in the off-season.SHARKS 5, CAPITALS 0  Martin Jones made 31 saves for his second straight shutout, and visiting San Jose took advantage of Alex Ovechkin’s absence from Washington’s lineup for the win.The Sharks improved to 3-0-0 and have outscored their opponents by 12-1. Jones allowed a goal on the first shot he faced this season, but has blanked opponents for the following 178 minutes 11 seconds.RED WINGS 3, LIGHTNING 1  Henrik Zetterberg had a goal and an assist and Jimmy Howard made 20 saves to help host Detroit beat Tampa Bay.Detroit is now 3-0, while the Lightning fell to 3-1.Ben Bishop made 21 saves for the Lightning.PANTHERS 4, HURRICANES 1  Connor Brickley scored his first N.H.L. goal, Alexsander Barkov gave Florida a two-goal lead 50 seconds later in the third period, and the Panthers beat host Carolina.AdvertisementNick Bjugstad opened the scoring in the first period, the former Hurricanes forward Jussi Jokinen added an empty-net goal with 1:47 left, and Al Montoya made 25 saves to help Florida improve to 2-1-0.A version of this article appears in print on October 14, 2015, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: Rangers Fall to Jets at Home, Losing First of the Season .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.