By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSMARCH 5, 2015
Defensive tackle Vince Wilfork said Thursday that he would not return to the New England Patriots next season, ending an 11-year stay in which he won two Super Bowls and established himself as the cornerstone of the team’s defense.In a statement posted on Twitter, Wilfork said the team had told him that it would not pick up his option for 2015, making him eligible for free agency.“I’m in a good place,” Wilfork said in the statement, adding: “I will take my time, think things through, take into consideration many things but mainly my family and see where life goes from there. But regardless, remember I will always remain a New Englander, a Patriot, forever.”A 6-foot-2, 325-pound gap-stuffer who was drafted in the first round out of Miami in 2004, Wilfork helped the Patriots win the Super Bowl when he was a rookie. He returned to the title game in two losing efforts, and last month he helped the franchise win its fourth championship.AdvertisementHe was due to receive a $4 million roster bonus by Monday and would have gotten $14 million over the next two seasons if his option had been picked up. The money the Patriots saved could help them bring back cornerback Darrelle Revis.AdvertisementWilfork, 33, missed 14 games in 2013 with a torn Achilles’ tendon. But he returned to play in every game last season, including three in the postseason.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.OLSEN RECEIVES EXTENSION The Panthers said they had signed the Pro Bowl tight end Greg Olsen to a three-year contract extension that would keep him with the team through the 2018 season. Terms of the deal were not immediately announced.Olsen, 26, went to his first Pro Bowl in 2014 after catching 84 passes for 1,008 yards, both franchise records for a tight end.JONES-DREW RETIRES Raiders running back Maurice Jones-Drew announced his retirement after nine N.F.L. seasons. Defensive end LaMarr Woodley, another of Oakland’s big free-agent acquisitions from last season, was released.The two were brought in last March as General Manager Reggie McKenzie targeted veterans to help rebuild the team.Woodley, who was paid more than $4.8 million last season, had no sacks in six games before being sidelined by a biceps injury. Jones-Drew, who spent his best years with Jacksonville, was paid $2.5 million last season, rushing for only 96 yards on 43 carries in 12 games.A version of this article appears in print on March 6, 2015, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: Patriots Say Farewell to Wilfork, a Mainstay.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.