By DAVID WALDSTEINOCT. 13, 2015
TORONTO — Marcus Stroman was warming up vigorously for the Toronto Blue Jays in the visitors’ bullpen during Game 4 of their American League division series on Monday, and it was enough to make some wonder why.John Gibbons, Toronto’s manager, had made an unconventional decision to use David Price, the ace starting pitcher, in relief a few innings earlier against the Texas Rangers. Would he do the same with another starter, Stroman?Stroman, who missed most of the season with a torn anterior cruciate ligament, threw his final pitch, walked up to the bullpen catcher to give him a hug, placed a towel around his neck and sat down. He was not going to pitch Monday, after all. He was getting ready for something bigger.Stroman was throwing his side session, preparing to start Game 5 on Wednesday against Cole Hamels of the Rangers. The winning team will advance to the American League Championship Series.AdvertisementThe honor did not just simply fall to Stroman, a brassy 24-year-old right-hander with the scintillating repertoire, whom the Blue Jays want on the mound for a decisive game and Gibbons called, “cocky,” as an attribute.Advertisement“He’s got a great arm,” Gibbons said of Stroman. “He’s got great stuff, whatever you want to call it. But there’s something different about him, too, and I expect that if anyone can rise to the occasion, it would be him.”By using Price in relief, Gibbons had clearly decided on his Game 5 starter, signaling that the Blue Jays preferred Stroman, who has only 24 major league starts on his résumé, over Price, the 2012 American League Cy Young Award winner and a top candidate for this year’s award.The Blue Jays acquired Price just before the trade deadline because they lacked an ace. Stroman might have been an ace, but he was rehabilitating his knee injury at Duke University and working to get his bachelor’s degree.Price did very well for the Blue Jays so, naturally, was picked to start Game 1, with the implication that he would also start Game 5 on an extra day’s rest.But Gibbons and the Blue Jays apparently made plans to go with Stroman on regular rest in Game 5, a decision that may have been made shortly after Price lost Game 1.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.For as good as Price is, he has been terrible in the postseason. In six starts, he is 0-6 with a 5.23 earned run average. He did not pitch much better in relief on Monday but was awarded the win. It was his first win in the postseason since he won a game in relief in a 2008 division series as a rookie with the Tampa Bay Rays.Gibbons could have elected to use Stroman instead of Price in relief of Game 4, if he really needed one of his best pitchers to bridge the gap to the back end of the bullpen.AdvertisementBy using Price when Toronto had a six-run lead, Gibbons eliminated the awkwardness of having both Price and Stroman available to start Game 5.Gibbons’s rationale after Game 4 made sense. He had just seen the Kansas City Royals overcome a four-run deficit in the eighth inning of their Game 4 against the Houston Astros, and go on to win. Gibbons said he believed it was wise to snuff out a comeback before it could start, which is why he called on Price.Price threw three innings, allowing three runs, and fired 50 pitches. After the game, Gibbons said Price would not pitch again in the series. Price said he would be ready if needed, and that forced Gibbons to back off slightly when he spoke to reporters on Tuesday.“David was very instrumental in getting us here, but he’s not here to be abused, either,” Gibbons said. “So we’ll see, but don’t count on it.”The hope for the Blue Jays is that no such emergency relief will be necessary. Stroman pitched well in Game 2, allowing three earned runs in seven innings in his postseason debut. The Rangers won that game in 14 innings.In the regular season, Stroman was 4-0 with a 1.67 earned run average after returning from his injury far earlier than anyone except him expected.Asked on Tuesday to gauge his excitement level on a scale from 1 to 10, the number he chose was not surprising.“I’m pretty excited,” Stroman said. “Probably say it’s around a 10 right now, and I can only imagine tomorrow. It’s going to be a lot of deep breaths out there on the mound, do everything I can just to keep my emotions in check while still being myself.”Stroman being himself is exactly what the Blue Jays want for Game 5.A version of this article appears in print on October 14, 2015, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Blue Jays Hand Fate to a Brash Starter .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.