AdvertisementSupported byBy Brad SpurgeonTen teams with two drivers each will compete in the 2015 Formula One season. Below, in their order of finish in the series last year, is a look at the teams that will start on the grid at the first race of the year, the Australian Grand Prix in Melbourne on March 15.MercedesBase Brackley, EnglandDrivers Lewis Hamilton, Nico RosbergEngine MercedesFirst Season  2010Constructors’ titles  1Drivers’ titles  1Few expected that Mercedes would suddenly dominate Formula One to the degree that this team and its two drivers did in 2014. The clear winner of the race last season to conform to new hybrid engine rules, the German company built by far the most powerful engine in the series, changing the series from an aerodynamics-dominated to an engine-dominated game. While few people like to see one team completely control an entire season, Mercedes also helped maintain interest and suspense by allowing its two drivers to battle each other for the title to the final showdown in Abu Dhabi, in the United Arab Emirates, in November, when Lewis Hamilton ended up champion. There was such a large margin of difference in engine power between Mercedes and the rest of the grid that further domination is widely expected this year. But not by as much. The coming season will be a test of the team’s ability to manage its dominance, as well as that of its two drivers, who were at each other’s throats for much of last year. The team should continue to win, but the near-total dominance it enjoyed last season is no longer likely to be part of the scenario.Red BullBase Milton Keynes, EnglandDrivers Daniil Kvyat, Daniel RicciardoEngine RenaultFirst Season  2005Constructors’ titles  4Drivers’ titles  4After four seasons of supremacy, Red Bull was finally stopped last year by the stronger Mercedes engine of its main competitor. But whenever Mercedes faltered, Red Bull — Daniel Ricciardo, that is — was there to take the victory. Three victories for this team out of 19 races was not much, but it showed that had the Renault engine been the equal to the Mercedes, it would have been a completely different story. Adrian Newey, who designed the car and is Formula One’s leading aerodynamicist, has lost some enthusiasm as the series has become so engine-centric. But with the engine-rules changes allowing for development throughout the season this year, there is a good chance that Renault will close much of the gap with Mercedes. Ricciardo will no doubt be ready again, but this year he is no longer the team underdog: The departure of Red Bull’s star driver, Sebastian Vettel, who has joined Ferrari, leaves the Australian as the team leader, with the hot young Russian Daniil Kvyat as his new teammate. But Kvyat has had only one full season in the series, and his performance in 2015 will prove crucial to his future career.WilliamsBase Grove, EnglandDrivers Valtteri Bottas, Felipe MassaEngine MercedesFirst Season  1978Constructors’ titles  9Drivers’ titles  7After a decade of descending lower and lower from its highs of the 1990s and its close calls of the early 2000s, the Williams team was the revelation of 2014, having begun a comprehensive restructuring that bore fruit immediately. It also made the felicitous and wise change to a Mercedes engine at just the right moment. Williams may not have finished second in the series, but for the second half of the season it was the second-strongest team. This year will show whether the strength is really there or whether it was just one of those flashes of occasional power. The combination of the drivers Felipe Massa and Valtteri Bottas proved to be another inspired strong point of the team, and should again be one of its strengths this year. There is every reason to believe the team could be, if not quite the winner, a wild card for second place in the championship.FerrariBase Maranello, ItalyDrivers Kimi Raikkonen, Sebastian VettelEngine FerrariFirst Season  1950Constructors’ titles  16Drivers’ titles  15Last season was one of the worst in the team’s history as it continued its descent from the glory days with Michael Schumacher and the dream team that dominated the early part of last decade. The lack of results relative to expectations brought the biggest cleansing of the team’s management in decades. Many observers have remained skeptical about the changes — including the loss of two sporting directors, a shake-up at the top with the departure of the longtime Ferrari chairman Luca Cordero di Montezemolo, as well as that of a star driver and several leading engineers. But the team nevertheless pulled off a coup by hiring the four-time world champion Sebastian Vettel away from Red Bull. At the same time, Ferrari lost the double world champion Fernando Alonso, who was the team’s anchor since 2010 but who never managed to win a third title. For many observers, the string of apparently haphazard changes at the legendary team in the last year might seem to augur nothing but a continuing spiral downhill. But that would be to underestimate the capacity of a team that has been a perennial winner and force at the top of the Formula One hierarchy for more than 60 years. During winter testing, the team pulled off surprises that indicated that some of its design and engine problems had been solved.McLarenBase Woking, EnglandDrivers Fernando Alonso, Jenson ButtonEngine HondaFirst Season  1966Constructors’ titles  8Drivers’ titles  12The second most successful team in Formula One and one of the powers of the last three decades, McLaren has hit hard times recently. Last season, despite having the Mercedes engine, it never appeared anywhere near the level of the dominant Mercedes team or the second- and third-place Red Bull and Ferrari teams. But it had the excuse of a year of transition before entering a new engine partnership with Honda, with which it wrote so much Formula One history in the late 1980s and early 1990s. But with the Japanese engine manufacturer joining the series a year after the new hybrid engine regulations came into effect, there are fears that Honda will have to play catch-up. The tests this winter were a disaster, with constant technical breakdowns and a car that lacked speed. Worse, Fernando Alonso was involved in an accident during the second test session that left him with a brief concussion, which caused him not only to skip the final test session at the end of February, but also to miss the race in Melbourne (where he is replaced by Kevin Magnussen.) It is an inauspicious start to the reuniting of McLaren with both Honda and Alonso, with whom the team already had a difficult relationship in 2007, when the Spaniard spent a single stormy year there before returning to Renault. Ron Dennis, the historic team leader and part-owner who returned to running the team last year, has praised the designers of the chassis as having created a masterpiece, especially in its perfectly seamless construction around the Honda engine. But only results count in racing, and many people wonder where the renewed relationship will lead.Force IndiaBase Silverstone, EnglandDrivers Nico Hulkenberg, Sergio PérezEngine MercedesFirst Season  2008Once again, the team that no one can quite fathom — how can it continue to do so well? — continues to race, advance and develop. It never comes quite close enough to winning, though — except last year, when its driver Sergio Pérez, who had been dropped by McLaren and ended up at the supposedly lesser Force India team, took a podium in Bahrain, something he had never done at McLaren. Pérez is teamed with Nico Hulkenberg, one of the strongest drivers in the series. But even with two extremely talented drivers and a team that seems more than many to exist for racing, Force India has nevertheless had financial problems, with its Indian owners having problems with their businesses at home. But the team continues against all the odds, and with the Mercedes engine, it has a major trump card.Toro RossoBase Faenza, ItalyDrivers Carlos Sainz Jr., Max VerstappenEngine RenaultFirst Season  2006Last season was steady but less impressive than usual for this junior team in the Red Bull empire. Conceived as a training ground for future Red Bull team drivers, it may better be called a “try-out” team. And of the many who have tried out since its founding in 2006, only three drivers have graduated to the parent team: Sebastian Vettel, now a four-time world champion; Daniel Ricciardo, the only driver to win a race last year who wasn’t in the Mercedes team; and now Daniil Kvyat, the more or less untried driver who was rushed to the parent team after the sudden, unexpected departure of Vettel. This season, Toro Rosso has taken a risk by hiring two new drivers, rather than following its usual practice of keeping one and hiring a new one. But what makes the 2015 team one of the most intriguing is its decision to hire the 17-year-old driver Max Verstappen, as well as another young rookie, Carlos Sainz Jr., the son of the former world rally champion. The team itself is one of the most solid and well run on the grid, and this year it will also be one of the most interesting to watch: Will the two rookie drivers make a fiasco of their opportunity or write history, or manage something in between?Lotus F1 TeamBase Enstone, EnglandDrivers Romain Grosjean, Pastor MaldonadoEngine MercedesFirst Season  2011After finishing fourth in the series in 2013, Lotus took a dive last year, finishing eighth. This was only partly the result of the dip in performance of the Renault engine and the loss of its leading driver of the previous year, Kimi Raikkonen, the 2007 world champion. It also had to do with chronic financial problems and a steady leak of brainpower from the team that had won so many championships over the previous two decades under various guises — as Benetton and Renault, after starting life as Toleman — while maintaining many of the leading engineers. In short, the brain drain — which included the loss of the team director, Éric Boullier — took a toll, as did financial problems. But the Enstone team can never be underestimated, and with the change to the Mercedes engine, the winter testing results showed immediate promise. While it has maintained the same two drivers from last season, with the race-winning but erratic Pastor Maldonado and the promising Romain Grosjean, the coming season is likely to be a make-or-break one for this traditionally strong team.Manor Marussia F1 TeamBase Dinnington, EnglandDrivers Will StevensEngine FerrariFirst Season  2010Last year was Marussia’s best season since it entered the series. The team scored points for the first time last season with its French driver Jules Bianchi, who finished ninth at the Monaco Grand Prix. But then at the rain-drenched Japanese Grand Prix, Bianchi crashed and was seriously injured, and he remains unconscious. Then, three races from the end of the season, the team was one of two that filed for bankruptcy. The other team, Caterham, made it to the final race of the series thanks to crowdfunding but then folded over the winter. Marussia, meanwhile, kept fighting for a way to return and survive in 2015, under the new name of Manor Marussia F1 Team. It managed to get a spot on the F.I.A.’s official entry list of teams only after the federation extended the deadline to the end of February. But Manor Marussia is still struggling to finish its 2015 car and to make it to the first races — though teams have the right to miss up to three races in a season under certain conditions. The team will receive about $70 million in prize money for finishing in the top nine last season if it succeeds in racing this season.SauberBase Hinwil, SwitzerlandDrivers Marcus Ericsson, Felipe NasrEngine FerrariFirst Season  1993Last season seemed a nearly inexplicable anomaly in the history of one of the most solid mid-grid, relatively low-budget teams in the history of the series. But it was difficult not to assume that the dip in results could be largely attributed to the relative lack of performance from the Ferrari engine that powered the car. This was in some way confirmed during testing this winter, when suddenly Sauber’s results rose along with those of the Ferrari team with the new and improved engine. Unfortunately for last year’s Sauber drivers — Adrian Sutil and Esteban Gutiérrez — it was too late, as both drivers were dropped in favor of the two less-expensive and less-experienced drivers who have replaced them this season and who will now profit from the new Ferrari power. Sauber is often cited as one of the teams most deeply in financial trouble, but as the team has proved throughout its more than two decades in the series — it is in fact the fourth-oldest team currently racing, behind Ferrari, McLaren and Williams — it has both staying power and racing savvy. The 2015 season could bring a return to top form and the introduction of one or two new talents in their young drivers, though Ericsson failed to convince during his rookie season at Caterham last year.Advertisement