By BRAD SPURGEONMARCH 5, 2015
PARIS — From his table in a trattoria in the posh 8th Arrondissement here, Jean Todt, president of the International Automobile Federation and former head of the Ferrari Formula One team, had a strategic vantage point: Although his back was to the dining room, in a mirror on the wall in front of him he could keep a discreet eye on the restaurant clientele’s comings and goings.Near Todt’s home next to the Champs-Élysées, the Italian restaurant is known as a favorite among celebrities, politicians and business people, where clients such as Johnny Depp, John McEnroe, Jackie Chan, Woody Allen and Nicolas Sarkozy can feel safe from prowling eyes.Discretion has been a hallmark of Todt’s successful career in motor racing, from his days of directing rally and sports car teams to his tenure at Ferrari, when he led the team during its most dominant period in Formula One, from 2000 to 2004, with Michael Schumacher driving. Todt took over the iconic Italian team in 1993 after it had gone through years of infighting and failure and much public display of dirty laundry. He hammered discipline and discretion into the team as never before, keeping any employee discord within the factory walls in Maranello.Todt, with his genius for organization and management, would not let anything slip to the media.Now, Todt, 69, is a year into his second four-year term as the president of the F.I.A., the governing body of world motor sport and an umbrella organization for drivers’ clubs around the world. But some critics wonder whether his renowned discretion, private nature and low profile are the best approach for a man whose role is more politician than businessman.AdvertisementFounded 110 years ago in Paris, the F.I.A. is a global umbrella organization now based in both Paris and Geneva, with more than 235 motoring and motor sport club members in more than 140 countries. It deals with everything from sporting regulations, legislation and policing, to highway safety and car development.AdvertisementTodt took over the body’s leadership in 2009, following the departure of his controversial predecessor, Max Mosley, whose nearly two decades of strife-filled rule had been peppered with scandals until the end. With Todt’s arrival, there was hope that the organization would finally enter a new era, but few could have imagined just how quiet and scandal-shorn it would indeed become.In fact, Todt’s private manner has occasionally led to other criticism: That he and the F.I.A. are perhaps not doing enough for the sport, especially in a world of political and power struggles in which image is everything and one’s enemies and rivals may have no scruples about attracting public attention.Last year was one of the most trying both personally and professionally for Todt and the coming year could prove to be one of the biggest tests of his efficacy as the F.I.A. head.He is on the verge of lifting the federation to another level in its role in the area of everyday highway matters, particularly safety, as well as being deeply involved in the effort to keep Formula One popular, affordable, safe and environmentally relevant as it enters the second year of its hybrid-engine era.It was Todt who ushered in the environmentally friendly regulations, which have been criticized by some within Formula One and by some fans for losing sight of what they see as the series’s loud, powerful, macho, gas-guzzling essence.Since he was elected president of the F.I.A. — an unpaid position — Todt has been on a personal mission that he is not likely to abandon easily. Through several meetings, interviews and news conferences with him since last fall, a leitmotif emerged: Todt is trying to give back to racing and the road car something of what the two brought him in his life.“I have arrived at a time in my life where I have decided to make into priorities certain things that maybe one would not expect, but that are society-related and are more global than just one discipline in the area of motor racing,” he said in a recent interview.AdvertisementDespite his high-profile position, Jean Todt’s story is one of the least talked about in Formula One. Yet it might provide just the kind of “people interest” that the series has seemed to lack in recent years as it became the world’s most professional form of motor racing.Behind Todt’s dry public image is a colorful story involving not just a life devoted to fast cars, but also, more recently, an actress partner, anti-alcohol advertising, the United Nations, Ferrari, Michael Schumacher, a brain and spine research lab in Paris, international politics and behind-the-scenes back-stabbing in the battle for road safety.Todt is the son of a Polish Jewish immigrant who came to France in the 1930s and became a doctor, raising his family in the sleepy Paris suburb of Bezons. Todt studied at a business management school but quickly became a co-driver in rally racing, going on to race for 15 years and win the world rally title.Then in the 1980s, he ran Peugeot’s racing department. Under his direction, the French car manufacturer won world rally titles and the Dakar rally, where Todt became famous for tossing a coin to see which of his equally placed drivers should win the title, and the 24 Hours of Le Mans.In 1993, Ferrari hired Todt to run its Formula One team, which had been wallowing in failure for two decades. He would go on to lead the legendary Italian team to its most dominant period; from 2000 to 2004, it won all the world titles, a period of domination that surpassed anything achieved by the team’s founder, Enzo Ferrari. Todt went on to become the Ferrari chief executive until 2008.Last year, when it emerged that he was seeking to become a special road-safety envoy to the United Nations, he encountered opposition from a powerful anti-alcohol lobby group that condemns his link to a racing series — Formula One — in which some teams have alcohol companies as sponsors.“Considering the continued destructive prevalence of drink-driving, permitting the mixed messages presented in alcohol sponsorship of Formula One seems ever more inappropriate given the total viewing audience of 500 million,” Mariann Skar, secretary general of the European Alcohol Policy Alliance, or Eurocare, said in a letter to Todt in November.“Moreover, the current association between alcohol and driving does not seem to fall in the category of ‘the widespread promotion of responsible drinking messages,’ part of the mission supported by the alcohol industry itself,” Skar added.The F.I.A., however, has no control over Formula One’s commercial decisions. “Long before I arrived, in 2001, in answer to the European Commission, it was decided to divide the commercial part and the sporting part,” Todt said. “So we have nothing to do with the commercial side.”AdvertisementThe Commission had indeed called for a clear-cut division of the powers between the F.I.A. and Formula One’s commercial promoter, Bernie Ecclestone and Formula One Management.In 2013, when Todt was running for re-election, he was challenged by David Ward, a former F.I.A. official. During his campaign, Ward cited a study by I Trust Sport, an agency that aims to improve governance in international sports, claiming there was a lack of transparency around F.I.A. accounting.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“It is disappointing that the F.I.A. is rated below the I.O.C. and FIFA given its responsibility for Formula One, which together with the Olympics and the World Cup are the most popular sports in the world,” Ward said at the time, referring to the study’s findings. “Publishing annual financial accounts and the application of international accounting standards would, for example, bring the F.I.A. much closer to the I.O.C. and FIFA.”After he was re-elected, Todt said he regretted what he called Ward’s use of “unfounded insinuations cast on the F.I.A.’s governance, the transparency of its accounts, and the integrity of its members.”He also noted that Ward, in his 20 years at the F.I.A., had not instituted any changes around the issues he was now highlighting.Todt, meanwhile, has tried to help reign in costs for Formula One teams. But it hasn’t been easy.An example is the new hybrid engines, which reduced fuel consumption by a third last year and use both kinetic and heat energy for extra power. They have been both a technological and business success — making the series attractive to car manufacturers. But Ferrari, Mercedes and Renault, who provide the engines to other Formula One teams, last year raised the price of their engines to about $30 million from about $18 million in an effort to cover the extra costs related to development.“That is one of the things that is being addressed to find a solution,” Todt said.Several teams said paying for the engines was nearly putting them out of business, and two of the least wealthy teams in the series, Marussia and Caterham, filed for bankruptcy three races before the end of last season.“I am not happy for Marussia and Caterham and I sympathize for them, but it has always happened,” Todt said.Advertisement“But in 2016 we have a new team coming,” he added, referring to the arrival of the Gene Haas team from the United States. “And we may make a tender again for one or two teams to encourage teams. And try to reduce the costs.”He refuses to back down on the technical regulations. Despite criticism of the absence of the traditional engine noise and the complete domination by one team — Mercedes — last year, Todt remains adamant that the new engine formula is vital to the future of the series.“I feel it is one of the few sensible decisions which has been taken over the last period,” he said. “Formula One is the pinnacle of motor sport, so we must be an example to society. It is not all happening in a kind of closed golden-gated community where nothing is happening on the other side of the world.”Todt said that while he would try to address appeals to make the cars more difficult to drive and give them more powerful engines and more noise, he reiterated that the basic goals and rules of the engine format must not change.When Todt took over as F.I.A. president, a British newspaper suggested that he would play the glamour card, with at his side his longtime partner, the Malaysian actress Michelle Yeoh, who is sometimes called the female Jackie Chan for her roles in Asian action films and who also starred in the 1997 James Bond film “Tomorrow Never Dies.”Yeoh often accompanies Todt at events related to highway safety, and both of them are on the board of directors of the Suu Foundation, founded by Daw Aung San Suu Kyi to help promote health and education in Myanmar.Concerning road safety, Todt points out that with 1.3 million deaths each year, road accidents cause twice as many deaths as malaria, as many as tuberculosis and almost as many as AIDS. He believes that his federation is where road-safety issues should be addressed, rather than, say, at the World Health Organization. He is now planning a large project to bring together several groups and international organizations to push for automobile safety.“It is something that has never existed and should be a big step forward to talk about highway safety around the world,” he said. “We are making contact with different international organizations — not just the U.N. — to create a group to address the pandemic of highway accidents around the world.”AdvertisementOne of Todt’s biggest achievements, however, has also been indirectly related to one of the greatest tragedies in his life over the past year. Several years ago, he helped found a brain and spine research center in a Paris hospital, the Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle Epinière, along with Schumacher; the French filmmaker Luc Besson; and a French orthopedic surgeon, Gérard Saillant, among others. It was designed to do research into brain and spine accidents, and it turned into a tragic irony after Schumacher’s skiing accident in December 2013 in France left him with a serious brain injury.Todt has visited Schumacher every week since his accident, first in France and then in Switzerland.Another Formula One driver, Jules Bianchi, suffered serious brain injuries in an accident at the Japanese Grand Prix in October.As president of the F.I.A., Todt faced criticism that the federation had not taken every precaution to prevent Bianchi’s accident and for publishing a commission report on the accident in December that concluded that the French driver, who is managed by Todt’s son, Nicolas, “did not slow sufficiently” in the wet conditions.But in an interview in February, Todt declined to discuss the conditions of Schumacher and Bianchi, saying, “There are things that must remain personal.”A version of this special report appears in print on March 6, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.