AdvertisementSupported bySpecial Report: Formula One PreviewBy Brad SpurgeonAs Formula One prepares for its new season, which starts at the Australian Grand Prix in Melbourne next week, the broad outlines of the championship have rarely looked brighter and more exciting.For only the second time in its 65-year history, the series will run 20 races on five continents over nine months in 2015. Also for only the second time, it will race the fastest, quietest and most fuel-efficient engines ever created. And for only the second time in Formula One history, a major road car manufacturer will defend its constructors’ title: Mercedes, which dominated in the technology stakes of the biggest overhaul of rules in the sport’s history last year.But as Mercedes tries to join Renault as the only other road car manufacturer to add a second title, behind closed doors in the world’s wealthiest paddock there have rarely been as many soul-searching questions about the future.The battle for the drivers’ title between the Mercedes teammates Lewis Hamilton and Nico Rosberg in 2014 may have been one of the best, most tense competitions in years. But fans and the teams are acutely aware that had it not been for the Mercedes decision to let its drivers fight each other on the track — at the risk of losing points through accidents — the racing would have had little interest, as Mercedes dominated from the start.And yet the evidence of overall success for the series is there. Formula One rose to one of its biggest challenges in 2014, creating hybrid cars that use only a third of the fuel of the previous year’s cars and building heat- and kinetic-energy devices to power to speeds faster than those of the year before. At the same time, the series put on an exceptional sporting show, moving forward in a world that wants not only entertainment but environmental responsibility, too.The sport broke into the Russian market — with a Grand Prix in Sochi — after decades of trying, and this year it returns to Mexico after decades of absence. Honda, another major road car manufacturer, rejoins the series this season to feed the constructors’ title stakes. And despite the loss of one, and possibly two, teams last year because of financial difficulties, the season starts with 10 teams — or nine, if one of the financially strapped teams doesn’t make it — each employing hundreds of people in what remains the world’s richest, most advanced and exciting global racing series.“It’s still the biggest show in town,” said Jackie Stewart, a three-time world champion. “It’s a great example to other industries and other businesses. It’s a very healthy sport.”“It’s global, and Nascar and stock car racing in America are very popular — but almost entirely domestic, America,” he added. “We are a global industry.”As a business, Formula One continues to make hundreds of millions of dollars annually for its owner, CVC Capital, but it continues to be criticized by the teams for not sharing enough of the earnings in an ever-rising budget war. The minimum cost of running a team has doubled in the past decade, to more than $120 million per season.It was too much for the Marussia and Caterham teams last year, and each filed for bankruptcy with three races left. That highlighted the paradoxical image of an auto racing series that is earning more than any other in the world, but that has a survival rate for teams that remains shockingly low.So attractive is the pinnacle of world motor racing that the British team behind Marussia, a group called Manor, has paid its entry fee for the 2015 season and exited bankruptcy, hoping to resurrect its place in the series this year. The claim that Formula One lies only behind World Cup soccer and the Olympics in popularity and yet runs every two weeks remains valid today.Two weeks ago, a study performed for the F.I.A. by the New York-based consulting firm McKinsey and Company found that Formula One’s costs could be cut by a quarter to a half through application of simple, calculated reductions in several areas, including design, production, engine cost and testing costs. If the costs were halved, the teams would be able to survive on the commercial rights money alone, according to the study.There has been a drop in television audiences in recent years in markets where Formula One has moved to pay-TV broadcasts, which, while lucrative, limit the number of viewers. But soccer and other sports are also moving to pay television. And in the United States, since NBC took over Formula One broadcasts in 2013 and an Austin Grand Prix was started in Texas in 2012, television ratings have skyrocketed.So what’s at the heart of the soul-searching at the beginning of the new season? Look no further than the domination of the Mercedes engine manufacturer. The series promoter, Bernie Ecclestone, and some of the biggest losers last year, such as Ferrari, complained that the new formula of quiet, fuel-preserving hybrid engines was stealing loud dazzle from the show. It’s likely, however, that had Ferrari rather than Mercedes made the best engine Formula One would have taken a different turn.Having reached a nadir in 2014 in its gradual drop from dominance in the early 2000s, Ferrari called for a revamp of the rules. And Ferrari, the only team to have taken part continuously in the series since it began in 1950, remains the sport’s iconic brand, so when it complains, its voice is heard.Yet just as the environmentally friendly hybrid engines were creating a division within the series, the new technology was also responsible for the return of Honda, another major car manufacturer, for the 2015 season. Honda was attracted by the chance to showcase its environmentally friendly technology.“We’re about to commence a long season, with numerous challenges, but Honda is determined to face them head-on,” said Yasuhisa Arai of the Honda racing program. “After all, we’re here to drive Formula One’s technology forward and give our fans a thrilling ride.”Above all, with the moves of Sebastian Vettel from Red Bull to Ferrari and Fernando Alonso from Ferrari to McLaren, those three teams will be scrutinized, even as Mercedes is expected to cruise to a second straight world title. But which driver will take that honor this time, Hamilton or Rosberg — or someone else?Advertisement