By JACK BELLMARCH 5, 2015
There is much that is new about Major League Soccer as it begins its 20th season this weekend, with one team shuttered and two new ones joining, but the best news for the league and its players could be that there will be soccer at all. The new collective bargaining agreement hammered out Wednesday night clears the way for Friday night’s opening game (the defending champion, Los Angeles, will host Chicago) and a full weekend schedule highlighted by a meeting Sunday between the league’s two expansion teams, New York City F.C. and Orlando City. Surely no one was happier than they were to welcome labor peace and a chance to get started.Here’s a look at what else fans can expect:Eastern ConferenceChicago Fire The Fire set a single-season record for ties in 2014 with 18, so they overhauled their roster in search of anything that might turn a few more of those draws into wins. The early returns are not auspicious: Chicago was 1-0-4 in the preseason, and scored only three goals. The biggest addition is the Scottish midfielder Shaun Maloney, signed from Wigan Athletic of England’s second-tier Championship, though midfielder Harry Shipp will look to build on a stellar rookie season.Columbus Crew Gregg Berhalter took the Crew to the playoffs in his first season as coach, and he should have added power up front with last fall’s acquisition of the Sierra Leone striker Kei Kamara, who returns hungry — for goals, and for his beloved burritos — after a disappointing 18-month sojourn to England. This is not a star-driven team, but that is probably the way Berhalter likes it.D.C. United Last season’s worst-to-first transformation cemented Ben Olsen’s hold on the coaching job, even though D.C. United endured a bitter playoff ouster by the Red Bulls. United has a veteran spine, and the additions of Jairo Arrieta (from Columbus), Michael Farfan (Cruz Azul/Mexico) and Markus Halsti (Malmo/Sweden) should give Olsen more flexibility within his 4-4-2 framework, but Fabian Espindola’s six-game suspension to start the season will not help. The key question is whether Eddie Johnson, signed to a hefty designated-player deal, can recover from a mystery injury.Montreal Impact The biggest news from the Impact was the recent outburst of the owner Joey Saputo, who took shots at his Canadian rival Toronto F.C. for its latest round of off-season spending. But Saputo has his own problems: Montreal finished last in the East in 2014, its ticket sales are down and striker Marco Di Vaio, who scored 34 goals over two and a half seasons, has retired. Maybe the arrivals of the workmanlike Eric Alexander and the intriguing Ambroise Oyongo through a trade with the Red Bulls will help.AdvertisementNew England Revolution New England became a title contender when it added Jermaine Jones midway through last season, as he helped players like Lee Nguyen and Teal Bunbury raise their games. Will the same happen for Juan Agudelo, who is back with the club after an unsuccessful European tour? If it does, and if Andrew Farrell shows some improvement at center back, New England might at long last claim its first title.New York City F.C. A troubled launch has overshadowed some positives. Coach Jason Kreis has a proven track record building a championship team (nearly) from scratch at Real Salt Lake. Striker David Villa has star quality. Mix Diskerud is a solid pro, and Kwadwo Poku, a midfielder acquired from Atlanta of the N.A.S.L., has been called the next Yaya Touré by his biggest supporters. If the team gets off to a good start, few will remember its stumbles at the gate.Red Bulls The more things change, the more things change. Out are the sporting director Andy Roxburgh and the popular coach Mike Petke; in are their replacements, Ali Curtis and Jesse Marsch. The club’s two designated players, Thierry Henry (retired) and Tim Cahill (furloughed to China), led an on-field exodus, but Bradley Wright-Phillips returns with a big raise after his 27-goal season, and if United States national team midfielder Sacha Kljestan can provide him with solid service, the Red Bulls may quiet their latest fan revolt.AdvertisementOrlando City With approval for a new stadium downtown in hand and a crowd of more than 60,000 expected to fill the Citrus Bowl for its inaugural match, a team staked to the Brazilian star Kaká seems to have a blueprint for expansion success. But Orlando City is not as new as one would think; Coach Adrian Heath kept together a core of the club’s previous iteration as a U.S.L. team, and that continuity — plus acquisitions like Brek Shea and defender Aurelien Collin and, of course, Kaká — could be a winning mix.Philadelphia Union A trip to the U.S. Open Cup final and the removal of the interim tag for Coach Jim Curtin did little to assuage the pain of missing the postseason for the third straight season. Bringing in the Dutchman Rene Meulensteen as technical director will not have as much of an impact as the additions of Steven Vitoria (Portugal) at the back and Fernando Aristeguieta (Venezuela) up front.Toronto F.C. Still chasing its first postseason berth since joining the league eight years ago, Toronto has decided to go big again. First, BMO Field has been expanded to hold about 30,000. Then the team spent big for the second straight off-season to add striker Jozy Altidore, who returns to North America at age 25 after several up and down seasons in Europe, and Sebastian Giovinco, who joins from Juventus to team with the club’s midfield quarterback, Michael Bradley.Western ConferenceColorado Rapids The billionaire owner Stan Kroenke may have Arsenal and the N.F.L.’s St. Louis Rams in his hefty sports portfolio, but he has shown little inclination to splurge on the Rapids when it comes to players. Colorado improved in the midfield, especially with the additions of Marcelo Sarvas, in a trade with Los Angeles, and the 21-year-old Argentine Juan Ramirez, who joined last month. But Coach Pablo Mastroeni, who in January unveiled the best mustache in M.L.S. history, could really use a strong start to the season if he wants to be around for the end of it.F.C. Dallas The good news in Dallas is the solid attacking core of the Argentine playmaker Mauro Diaz, the Panamanian striker Blas Perez and the rookie of the year Tesho Akindele. The challenge is that Coach Oscar Pareja, who took the club to the postseason in 2014 after a two-year absence, will need to find complementary players behind them quickly after several departures on his back line.AdvertisementHouston Dynamo Houston’s biggest off-season departure was its longtime coach, Dominic Kinnear, but the Dynamo brought in the Premier League veteran Owen Coyle to replace him and scooped up Erick Torres when Chivas USA folded. (He is playing for Chivas Guadalajara for the next few months.) Only two teams gave up more goals last season than Houston’s leaky defense, but it should get a boost from Raul Rodriguez, who joins from Spain’s Espanyol.Los Angeles Galaxy Landon Donovan is out and Steven Gerrard is in — eventually. Until then, the Galaxy are lucky to have the best coach in league history, Bruce Arena, manipulating the puppet strings. One of his most notable projects has been the care and nurturing of Gyasi Zardes, who scored 17 goals in 2014 and could be poised for an even bigger season alongside last year’s league M.V.P., Robbie Keane.Portland Timbers The Timbers went from having one of the stingiest defenses in 2013 (33 goals against) to one of the worst in 2014 (52). After narrowly missing the playoffs, Coach Caleb Porter went to work fixing his back line. He added Nat Borchers in a trade and gave goalkeeper Donovan Ricketts, 37, his walking papers. Ricketts will be replaced by Adam Larsen Kwarasey, 26, a dual citizen of Norway and Ghana who started for the Black Stars against the United States in last summer’s World Cup.Real Salt Lake Despite losing two players (Ned Grabavoy and Chris Wingert) to the former coach Jason Kreis in the expansion draft, Real Salt Lake has put together a nice mix of experience (Alvaro Saborio, Jamison Olave, Kyle Beckerman and Nick Rimando) and youth (Luis Gil, Joao Plata and Elias Vasquez) to build on last season’s playoff trip.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.San Jose Earthquakes New stadium, new coach (Dominic Kinnear), new designated player (the Swiss striker Innocent Emeghara) and new hope. Kinnear worked magic for eight years in Houston, but had a lot more material to work with in his new post. The hope is that Emeghara will form a productive partnership up front with Chris Wondolowski, and that Kinnear’s eye for castoff M.L.S. talent will turn things around.Seattle Sounders By most yardsticks, the Sounders’ two-trophy season (U.S. Open Cup and Supporters’ Shield for best record in the regular season) would be seen as an accomplishment. But an M.L.S. title continues to elude Coach Sigi Schmid and a Sounders team led by Clint Dempsey (15 goals) and Obafemi Martins (17). The speedy defender DeAndre Yedlin has moved on, but midfielder Lamar Neagle remains one of the most underrated players in the league.Sporting Kansas City The return of the Honduran international Roger Espinoza from England should add heft to a skillful midfield that includes Graham Zusi and Benny Feilhaber, but striker Dom Dwyer will need to follow up on a breakout season that produced 22 goals. With N.Y.C.F.C. and Orlando City’s arrival, Sporting K.C. joined Houston in shifting to the more competitive Western Conference.Vancouver Whitecaps The Whitecaps, who slipped into the playoffs on the last day of the regular season in 2014, addressed an anemic offense with the signing of the Uruguayan striker Octavio Rivero and bolstered their back line by adding the 24-year-old central defender Diego Rodriguez, Rivero’s countryman, on a season-long loan. The Western Conference is stronger after realignment, but so are the Whitecaps.A version of this article appears in print on March 7, 2015, on Page D5 of the New York edition with the headline: M.L.S. Has New Lineup as It Begins 20th Season.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.