By ZACH SCHONBRUNMARCH 5, 2015
Sometimes it takes a deaf man to fully appreciate what someone is saying. And so it is with Geoff Herbert and Syracuse Coach Jim Boeheim.Herbert is a Syracuse alumnus, a basketball die-hard and an ardent engager of social media. It seemed natural, then, that he might tweet about some of the things he saw during a Syracuse game against Villanova on a Wednesday night in January 2012.“Hey!” Herbert wrote. “Look at the clock! Pay attention, COME ON!”He included the hashtag #Lipreading because that was what he was doing. Herbert, who was born with 90 percent hearing loss in both ears, was reading, to the best of his ability — and then reproducing — Boeheim’s words from the sideline, and his posts soon caught on.Herbert, a 31-year-old who is an entertainment reporter for Syracuse.com, has since become something of a Twitter luminary in Central New York. He estimated that half his 4,000 followers arrived because of his lip-reading feeds during Syracuse basketball games. From his couch in Liverpool, N.Y., he tries to offer a slice of real-time insight into Boeheim’s thoughts or emotions.AdvertisementBoeheim, a Hall of Fame coach whose professorial mien and combustible temper have made him one of college basketball’s most compelling characters, has presented a relatively easy subject for Herbert to observe.AdvertisementHerbert’s posts have ranged from the predictable referee haranguing to colorful exchanges between the coach and his players. Though Herbert tries to censor his tweets, he said, he also knows what fans want to read.■ Boeheim to center Baye Moussa Keita after he fouled with six seconds left, Nov. 26, 2013: “You understand me?!? NEVER DO THAT.”■ Boeheim to his team during a timeout, Feb. 19, 2014: “Rebound. Rebound.”■ Boeheim to Tyler Roberson, Monday: “You gotta put the ball back, Roby. Right? Fight for it.”“Lip reading was something that stands out,” Herbert said when asked why he thought his tweets had garnered such a following. “It gives people a unique second-screen experience while they’re watching the games.”A Syracuse spokesman, Pete Moore, said he doubted that Boeheim (who created his own Twitter account recently) knew anything about what Herbert was doing, despite Herbert’s popularity among Syracuse fans. A message left with Boeheim was not returned.Herbert’s posts underscore the potential conflict among coaches, players, fans and social media, particularly in a sport like basketball: The intimacy of the court has often been an obstacle that teams have needed to circumvent, and nothing is sacrosanct.Most coaches push their timeout huddles far onto the court, away from the benches, where fans can eavesdrop. They position assistants or managers as human buffers and change the code names of their plays routinely.AdvertisementBut television cameras and microphones can still find ways to encroach upon the action, and unlike baseball pitchers or football coaches, basketball coaches have been less mindful about shielding their mouths.That television feeds are clear and steady enough to provide Herbert, on average, dozens of opportunities to read Boeheim’s lips — giving him material he can disseminate to the world instantly — illustrates some of that vulnerability.“Things are so different now than they were just five years ago,” said Darrin Horn, a former coach at South Carolina. “You’ve got to just understand that really everything you do now is public — even things within the confines of your own locker room.”Coaches should be astute enough by now to know they are being observed more closely every day, said Jeff Hathaway, a former chairman of the N.C.A.A. Division I men’s basketball committee.“The bottom line is this is the environment in which coaches work today,” said Hathaway, now the athletic director at Hofstra. The situation with Herbert, whose Twitter handle, email signature and voice mail greeting refer to him as Deaf Geoff, is somewhat extraordinary. For one, he is an especially skilled lip reader, learning through speech therapists between ages 2 and 12 how to interpret the formation of words through nuances like the shape of a person’s mouth, the placement of the tongue and the facial expressions that correlate with tone.And it so happens that Boeheim can be an engaging and expressive sideline presence, without much apparent inhibition. Many times, it does not take an expert on body language to judge what the coach is emoting.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Brent Axe, a sports radio host in Syracuse who also works for Syracuse.com, wrote in an email that Herbert’s musings added context to the traditional game-watching experience.“It’s so unique,” Axe said. “Think about it. We are all watching the same game. Geoff peels back a layer we all don’t get to experience.”Alice Holmes, a professor of audiology at the University of Florida, said 30 to 40 percent of English was considered distinguishable by lip reading. Herbert, though, said he took care to tweet only those comments he felt he read accurately and those he thought added value to the game, often using a DVR to replay what Boeheim had said.AdvertisementAfter closely watching almost 150 games over the past four years, Herbert said he could recognize Boeheim’s patterns, simply through his on-court interactions with players and assistants.“I’ll notice over a season, he’ll yell at one or two players, either because they’re not living up to the potential they might have, or they’re not listening to what he’s telling them to do,” Herbert said. “Every year it’s someone different. It’s always interesting to see who he’s got the biggest problem with.”Coaches are certainly more cognizant today about their comments on the sidelines, said Steve Lappas, a former Villanova and Massachusetts coach and a current SiriusXM host. But they are susceptible to scrutiny.Last week, Vanderbilt Coach Kevin Stallings was disciplined after ESPN cameras caught his profane rant toward a player while proceeding through a postgame handshake line. Stallings later apologized.Horn said it was naïve of coaches to think their plays were not going to be seen by other teams, but he lamented the loss of privacy regarding interactions with players, which he related to family.“The principle of it is really good — the honesty and openness about it,” Horn said. “But at the same time, there are some things that need to happen behind closed doors, and don’t need to get out, for teams to function at their best. I think the part of that that’s being lost is not good.”Mo Cassara, a former Hofstra coach, said that lip reading would be concerning because information could change hands so quickly with technology. Teams will use any small piece of information against their opponents.“In college basketball, a win or a loss, a play here or a play there, one little thing can impact your season so, so greatly,” Cassara said. He added, “Are we going to get to the point in college basketball where you’re holding play sheets up to your mouth?”AdvertisementHerbert recalled that he once told Boeheim about his lip-reading pastime at the retirement party of a Syracuse radio professor, Rick Wright, in 2013. Herbert said Boeheim smiled about it, then cautioned along the lines of, “Just don’t give away the plays that I’m calling.”“I assured him that’s not a problem,” Herbert said. “I’m careful that I’m not spoiling anything.”He got the idea during the 2010 World Cup, when he read that a German blogger, Julia Probst, would lip-read the Germany coach on the sideline. He found the concept entertaining and started following her on Twitter, then realized her posts were in German.Teams caught on. By the next World Cup, in 2014, players from Brazil, for instance, took to covering their mouths when speaking during games. It might not be long before basketball teams follow suit.Because Syracuse self-imposed a postseason ban in response to a continuing N.C.A.A. investigation, its season will end Saturday. So watch your mouths, America. Herbert will be looking for a new team to follow this month.“I watch the Boston Celtics a lot,” he said. “Maybe I’ll do some tweets of their games to fill the void.”A version of this article appears in print on March 6, 2015, on Page B8 of the New York edition with the headline: Watch Your Mouth, Coach (A Lip-Reading Fan Does).  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.