By TIM ROHANOCT. 13, 2015
When the Dodgers were introduced before Game 3 of their National League division series against the Mets, the camera lingered on Chase Utley longer than his Los Angeles teammates, as a loud, furious chorus of boos washed over him. Utley, the former Philadelphia Phillie and longtime Mets nemesis, stood there, wearing a blank expression.“He played in Philly,” Manager Don Mattingly said Tuesday. “You play in Philly, I mean, this is the same. Right? I think he was fine.”Utley became a villain after he broke Ruben Tejada’s right leg with a violent slide in Game 2 on Saturday. Major League Baseball suspended Utley for two games, but Utley appealed the ruling and he was allowed to play. He will be available to play the rest of the series because his appeal hearing is not scheduled until Monday, according to two people with knowledge of the situation.Utley did not play in Game 2, but Mattingly did not rule out using him in Game 4 or a possible Game 5. The Mets alternatively did not seem fazed by the news that Utley would be available. Instead of retaliating for Tejada’s injury, they seemed to have been unified by it, and they won Game 3, 13-7, sending an emphatic message.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“The fact that they felt the play was unnecessary and they did what they did was enough,” Manager Terry Collins said Tuesday, referring to the league’s ruling that Utley’s slide was illegal. “It was enough for us. And now we’ve moved past it and you’ve got to get ready to play.”AdvertisementFIGHT INJURES FAN A fight at Dodger Stadium after Game 1 on Friday night left one fan in critical condition, the Los Angeles police confirmed.Advertisement“An argument between two fans escalated to the point of a physical confrontation, and it left one injured,” said Officer Ricardo Hernandez, a spokesman for the Los Angeles Police Department, which is investigating the fight.The victim, who was not named, was identified as a Mets fan on social media and taken to a hospital. He was in serious but stable condition Tuesday.The fight comes four years after the brutal beating of another opposing fan, Bryan Stow, in the parking lot outside Dodger Stadium on opening day of 2011. Stow, a San Francisco Giants fan and father of two, was beaten in a coma and sustained permanent brain damage.Since then, security of the stadium has undergone a major overhaul, with many more Los Angeles police officers on duty. No weapons were used in the altercation on Friday, and a mother and son were suspected, Hernandez said. Detectives were expecting to speak to the victim. IAN LOVETTA version of this article appears in print on October 14, 2015, on Page B15 of the New York edition with the headline: Boos for Utley Bring Shrugs From His Manager.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.