

      By BENJAMIN HOFFMAN

MARCH 7, 2015

Russell Westbrook of the Oklahoma City Thunder has joined a long list of masked men roaming the courts of the N.B.A.
Russell Westbrook of the Oklahoma City Thunder scored 49 and 43 points in consecutive games last week while wearing a protective mask after having an operation to fix the broken zygomatic arch bone in his cheek. Westbrook is known for sporting loud print shirts and brightly colored glasses, but his protective attire was a decidedly ordinary sheet of clear plastic. As far as competing stylistically in that category with stars of the past, Westbrook was an also-ran.It is possible that Westbrook looked into the experiences of his peers and decided it simply was not worth it to challenge the system, since even a player as prominent as LeBron James was told to come back with something more normal when he wore a black carbon-fiber mask last season. The N.B.A.’s rules stipulate that any specialized gear must be approved by the league’s basketball operations department, and masks must have no sharp or protruding edges. With those constraints, Westbrook very likely saw little room for customization.While the mask certainly did not interfere with Westbrook’s offense, it may have compromised his defensive ability. In Wednesday’s overtime victory against Philadelphia, Westbrook watched as the 76ers’ underwhelming backcourt of Isaiah Canaan and Jason Richardson combined for 60 points. Then, in Thursday’s loss to Chicago, Westbrook was defending the journeyman guard E’Twaun Moore when Moore hit a winning 3-pointer.After his nose was broken by the flailing arm of Serge Ibaka of the Oklahoma City Thunder last season, LeBron James donned a black mask that turned the goofy James into a comic book supervillain. As with other black masks, the N.B.A. asked James to switch to a clear one, but James protested, saying that the mask made him comfortable and that it looked great with the Miami Heat’s uniforms. The league was apparently not impressed with his argument.A member of the all-nickname team, Andrei Kirilenko, or AK-47, had a pop-star wife and an uncanny ability to fill a box score. But in the preseason of 2005, a small piece of plastic downgraded him from dashing Russian athlete to cartoon owl.A. C. Green played in an N.B.A. record 1,192 consecutive games from November 1986 to April 2001. The streak nearly ended in 1996 when a J. R. Reid elbow to the face knocked out two of Green’s teeth. A protective mask kept Green active, but it sacrificed his good looks.Horace Grant nearly abandoned his signature goggles, which he used to correct an astigmatism, because Charles Oakley of the Knicks repeatedly knocked them off during the 1991 playoffs. He brought them back in time for the N.B.A. finals.Advertisement