AdvertisementSupported byBy Billy WitzTAMPA, Fla. — What Carlos Beltran did Friday night against the Pittsburgh Pirates did not show up in the box score. Making his spring training debut, Beltran struck out twice, walked on four pitches and made one meaningful throw, corralling Neil Walker’s double and getting the ball back in cleanly. The most important development for Beltran was that everything he did — running, throwing, swinging a bat — was without discomfort.“The thing is pain free,” Beltran said of his right elbow, which required surgery to remove bone chips and shave a bone spur. “Now it’s time to continue to get better and put together good at-bats during all of spring training.”Beltran is one of many Yankees who are hoping for a happier, healthier year. Pitchers C. C. Sabathia, Masahiro Tanaka, Michael Pineda and Ivan Nova had their seasons affected by injuries last year. Injuries to Mark Teixeira and Beltran, and the absence of Alex Rodriguez, left the Yankees with a toothless middle of the order for much of the season.“We lost a lot of guys that I thought were important,” Beltran said. Whether those players can avoid injury and stay productive will go a long way to determining whether the Yankees can return to the playoffs after a two-year absence. What they hope to get from Beltran is a return to form of a middle-of-the-order switch-hitter who can hit with power and consistently get on base. After signing a three-year, $45 million contract, Beltran, who was coming off back-to-back All-Star selections for St. Louis, was productive last April. But on a checked swing against the Mets’ Bartolo Colon on May 12, bone chips in his right elbow broke loose. The rest of the season was a case study in diminished production and pain management. Beltran batted a career-low .233 and hit only 10 home runs after April. “It bothered me to the point where every day I show up to the ballpark, it’s how can I play, how can I swing the bat and I don’t feel pain?” Beltran said. “Because every time I swing at the ball or chase a pitch or swing and miss, there was big-time pain in my elbow. I tried to play through it. It was either play through it or finish my season.”Beltran chose to play through. He had surgery after the season. He took his first swings in December and was elated to wake up the next day with his elbow feeling fine. “He could be a huge boost to our lineup,” Manager Joe Girardi said. “We could do some different things in the lineup because he’s a switch-hitter. We really missed him. We missed his production last year. It’s important to get it back.” The middle of the Yankees’ lineup could include Teixeira, who turns 35 next month and is coming off two injury-plagued seasons; Beltran, who turns 38 next month; and the 39-year-old Rodriguez, who was suspended last season. “Keeping them fresh is the biggest challenge,” Girardi said. “Usually when you have an older roster like we have, it’s not guys that were platoon guys. It’s guys that played every day. It’s my job to make sure we have them available every day, but they don’t necessarily play every day like they used to.”While Beltran played in his first game Friday night, Rodriguez, who singled and walked in three at-bats in his spring training debut on Wednesday, played in his second game Friday. As the designated hitter in a 3-1 loss, he walked, lined out on a broken-bat flare to shortstop and struck out. Girardi had earlier hinted that Rodriguez would soon play in the field, probably at third base. He is not scheduled to play against the Houston Astros on Saturday in Kissimmee, Fla., so his next appearance could be Sunday at home against Washington. “All I’m looking to do right now is just square the ball, just start hitting the ball with good contact,” Rodriguez said. “You don’t want to be locked in March 6.” INSIDE PITCHThe Yankees, in a split-squad game, beat the Phillies, 4-1, in Clearwater, Fla., earlier Friday. The winning pitcher was JARON LONG, the son of the former Yankees hitting coach KEVIN LONG. Advertisement