By ANDREW KEHOCT. 13, 2015
Bartolo Colon has played 18 seasons in major league baseball as one of the game’s most uncannily durable and consistent starting pitchers. He has made 475 regular-season appearances on the mound, and of those, only eight have come in relief.Yet if the folk tale of Colon — a fan favorite for his indifferent physique and imperturbable mien — is to continue and grow this fall, it will do so out of the bullpen, where the Mets are seeking every ounce of help they can get.“He doesn’t care,” Manager Terry Collins said of Colon’s relative inexperience as a reliever. “It doesn’t bother him a lick.”This month the Mets have tied their fortunes to a quartet of electrifyingly precocious starting pitchers. Colon, at 42, happens not to be one of them, and he was moved to the bullpen for the playoffs after starting 31 games for the team during the regular season. At the same time, the Mets’ relief pitchers, aside from closer Jeurys Familia, have struggled of late. Some of them seem worn down.AdvertisementThat has unexpectedly enlarged Colon’s role in recent days and made him something of an unforeseen X factor for the Mets, a pitcher who might bridge the gap between the power arms who start and close games for the team.AdvertisementConsider that Collins called on Colon to relieve Noah Syndergaard in a crucial moment on Saturday in Game 2 of the Mets’ division series with the Los Angeles Dodgers. There was one out in the bottom of the seventh inning, with the Mets holding a one-run lead while the Dodgers had runners on first and third. Colon induced a potential double-play ball, precipitating the takeout slide from Chase Utley that resulted in a broken leg for Mets shortstop Ruben Tejada.With a little better luck, Colon would have gotten the Mets out of the inning with their lead intact.In Game 3 on Monday night at Citi Field, Colon lumbered out of the bullpen to pitch two solid innings in relief of Matt Harvey, striking out three and giving up a meaningless solo home run.In Game 4, Colon was called on again.On Tuesday afternoon, before Game 4, Collins was asked if he could send Colon out every night.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Looking serious, Collins said, “Probably.”As promised, Colon entered Game 4 in the fifth. He struck out Yasiel Puig with a high, 92-mile-per-hour fastball, coaxed a meek pop-up from A. J. Ellis, and got Andre Ethier to strike out on an awkward checked swing. In the sixth, he induced a soft fly from Clayton Kershaw, and after giving up a weak single, induced a double-play grounder that had him happily clapping his hand into his mitt as he walked off the field.Collins used Colon in relief twice in the final two months of the season. The manager said on Tuesday that Colon approached the Mets’ bullpen coach, Ricky Bones, around that time and said, “I hope Terry knows I don’t mind pitching out of the bullpen.”To observers, whether they are watching on television or from the Mets’ bench, there does not seem to be all that much in the game that Colon is unwilling to do. Fans have taken extra delight in watching him gamely swing for the fences after years of playing in the American League, and in making nifty fielding plays that belie his age and build.Advertisement“He’s about as relaxed as you can get on a baseball field, and I really think that’s the main reason he’s still playing right now,” said Addison Reed, a right-handed reliever who was traded to the Mets in August. “If he gave up 10 runs in an inning or threw a complete-game shutout, you’d never know. He’s that even-keeled.”Colon’s steady demeanor instills the same calm in his manager and teammates, who always know what to expect from this most unusual of athletes.“Have you seen him?” Collins said Tuesday afternoon in reference to Colon’s two playoff outings. “Both games, he’s come in with a big smile on his face, walking to the mound. I mean, he likes to pitch. He loves to pitch.”Colon’s general reticence around the news media has somewhat concealed his emergence as a mentor to the Mets’ young pitchers. Familia, who was called into action in Game 3 Monday night because the Mets’ bullpen was having trouble closing out the blowout victory, said that Colon and Bones were the two people in the clubhouse whom he most consistently sought out for advice and baseball wisdom.In an interview this season, Familia recalled a moment early in the 2014 season that exemplified the way Colon, behind the scenes, could motivate and encourage him. Familia had toiled through a few mediocre outings in a row when Colon approached him out of the blue.“He came to me and he said, ‘Are you scared to pitch?’ ” Familia said. “I said, ‘No, I’m not scared to pitch.’ He said, ‘If you’re scared, take your bat and go home.’ The way he said it motivated me to do my job.”Familia added, “That’s something I’m never going to forget.”Tim Rohan contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on October 14, 2015, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: Outsize Pitcher’s Role Grows Even Bigger.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.