AdvertisementSupported byBy Seth BerkmanCAMBRIDGE, Mass. — The basketball rivalry between Harvard and Yale dates to the 1900-1 season, when John Kirkland Clark, a former Bulldog, introduced the sport to the Crimson athletic department while attending law school at Harvard.Yale dominated the first game, winning, 41-16. At the time, most of the Harvard team was composed of baseball and football players who competed “as a means for keeping in condition for rougher outdoor sports,” The New York Times reported in 1901.On Friday, with the talent on both rosters having increased significantly, the teams played one of the most highly anticipated games in their long rivalry as they entered the final weekend of the Ivy League season tied for first place.Javier Duren scored a game-high 22 points, and Yale won, 62-52, clinching at least a share of the regular-season title.“It was our time to get it done,” said Coach James Jones, who, in his 16th season at Yale, is the longest-tenured coach in the league.The victory gave Yale a one-game lead over Harvard. On Saturday, Harvard (20-7, 10-3) hosts Brown, while Yale (22-8, 11-2) travels to Dartmouth.If Yale loses and Harvard wins on Saturday, the teams will be co-champions and will have a one-game playoff next week to determine the league’s automatic bid to the N.C.A.A. tournament.But one more Yale win would send the Bulldogs to the N.C.A.A. tournament for the first time since 1962.“We’ve been hearing it for years,” Duren said of the 1962 team. “It’s all coming together, but we still got one more game left.” Harvard entered the night trying to win at least a share of its fifth straight Ivy League title, a feat no team has accomplished since Pennsylvania’s streak from 1978 to 1982. Basketball has long been played in the shadow of the football rivalry between Harvard and Yale, but in recent years, the men’s basketball teams have been among the best in the Ivy League, leading to newfound interest from their student bodies. Tickets for Friday’s game had been sold out since November.“You can’t believe the conversations I’ve had with people about stuff leading up to this day,” Jones said of the pregame hype. “I’ve gotten advice from everybody and my grandmother, and I don’t try to listen to any of it.”Jones had his team focused early, and the Bulldogs held a 22-19 halftime lead. Harvard missed all eight of its 3-point attempts and shot 28 percent over all from the field in the first half. In their first meeting, on Feb. 7, both teams started slowly, and the Crimson led at halftime, 16-11, before eventually defeating the Bulldogs, 52-50.Justin Sears, Yale’s leading scorer, was in foul trouble for most of Friday’s game and was limited to 10 points. Duren stepped up and was particularly effective from the free-throw line, where he finished 8 for 8.“In years past, I would’ve kind of gotten away from the offense,” Duren said, “but being a veteran and being in spots like this before, where we kind of got our backs against the wall, we just have to trust our team, trust our offense.” Yale led by 12 points in the second half, but Harvard cut the Bulldogs’ lead to 43-41 with less than four minutes remaining. The Crimson, though, were hurt by their 2-for-17 shooting from 3-point range.    Advertisement