By KAREN CROUSEMARCH 6, 2015
DORAL, Fla. —  Rory McIlroy fleetingly considered giving the 3-iron in his right hand a reprieve. Then frustration got the better of him, and he flung it into the same water hazard on the Blue Monster course that seconds earlier had swallowed his golf ball.It was that kind of day at the World Golf Championships event for McIlroy, the No. 1 player in the world. But he overcame the lost ball, his lost temper and a lost stroke on the par-5 eighth to card a two-under 70 for a 36-hole score of one-under 143 that left him eight strokes off the lead.“It wasn’t the easiest two under par in the world, but somehow I managed to get it around,” said McIlroy, who was two under over his last 10 holes.At least his sense of humor remained dry. Asked about the distance on the eighth hole, McIlroy answered, “The second shot or the throw?”AdvertisementLaughing, McIlroy added: “I just let the frustration get the better of me. It was heat of the moment, and I mean, if it had been any other club I probably wouldn’t have, but I didn’t need a 3-iron for the rest of the round, so I thought, Why not?”AdvertisementIn four competitive rounds in the United States in 2015, McIlroy has yet to break 70. His stroke average is 72.5, which is not where he expects his game to be five weeks before he tries to complete a career Grand Slam with a victory at the Masters.  “It’s just frustrating when you feel like it’s quite close and you’re hitting balls in the water and doing things you don’t usually do,” he said. “It’s been funny. When I’ve been trying to hit a cut, I hit a draw, and when I try to hit a draw, I hit a cut. It’s just not quite there.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.He added, “I’ve got two more days to try and find something out there and shoot a couple of decent numbers and see where that leaves me at the end of the week.”McIlroy is eight strokes behind the leader, J .B. Holmes, who shot a 73 after an opening 62. Holmes is two strokes ahead of Ryan Moore (71) and three in front of Adam Scott (68), who is making his first start of the calendar year.No matter their handicaps, all golfers have felt the exasperation that sent McIlroy’s composure over the edge. Out of solidarity, Bubba Watson, who was grouped with McIlroy, turned a question about the club toss into a joke. Watson, tied for fourth with Henrik Stenson at four under after a 69, said, “I thought it was a practice swing and the grip was wet.”McIlroy made no excuses. “What happened after the second shot on eight, I wouldn’t encourage anyone to do, especially if there’s kids watching at home,” he said. “First of all, it’s expensive, and second of all, you shouldn’t do it.”It was suggested to him that the action was out of character. “If you would have asked me this 10 years ago as a moody teenager, it wouldn’t have been out of character,” McIlroy said, “but I think I’ve mellowed since then.”A version of this article appears in print on March 7, 2015, on Page D3 of the New York edition with the headline: Ball Travels Into Water; 3-Iron Suffers Same Fate.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.