By SARAH LYALLMARCH 6, 2015
Josue Stephens, one of the organizers of the Caballo Blanco ultramarathon last week in Urique, Mexico, realized something was amiss when he was warned not to drive along the coastal route because so many people had been killed there recently. When he finally got to Urique, he saw armed men in bulletproof vests swarm into the local police station, take everyone’s guns and throw two officers into the back of a truck before barreling away.“The craziest part was that there was a woman huddled outside the police station yelling: ‘Don’t take him! He’s my son! He didn’t do anything!’ ” Stephens recalled.The threat of violence had always simmered in the background of the race, held every March in the Copper Canyon region in northwestern Mexico, known for its great natural beauty, its fields of poppies and marijuana plants, and the drug cartels that hold the local population in thrall. This year the violence finally came to town.Last Saturday, after increasingly alarming episodes involving gunshots, grenades, terrified and often AWOL local officials, angry drug gangs, heavily armed government troops and an incident in which a town official was pulled from his truck and made to walk for hours back to town, Stephens and the other organizers made an extreme decision: They canceled the race the night before it was scheduled to start.Advertisement“We didn’t know what was safe,” Stephens said. “If there is any gunfighting, if runners see people getting stopped on the side of the road and abducted, if the military is outside having a huge gunfight — we’ll have 700 runners spread out over this huge section, and it’s very likely someone will get hurt.”AdvertisementBy Sunday, the organizers had evacuated most of the foreign runners and themselves. Emboldened by the presence of government troops, several hundred people, most of them locals, stayed and ran a shortened version of the course, taking care to avoid places that had apparently been declared no-go areas. But the future of the race, one of the high spots on the yearly calendar for ultrarunners, is in doubt.“Things are up in the air,” Stephens said. “We don’t know.”The race was begun in 2003 by the ultrarunner Micah True, taking its name from his nickname, Caballo Blanco, or White Horse. He saw it as a way to draw attention to the plight of the Tarahumara, impoverished subsistence farmers in and around the Copper Canyon, in the Sierra Madre Occidental. Long-distance running is a way of life for the Tarahumara, and they are renowned for their prowess.Ultrarunners are an unusual breed of extreme athletes, competing in races that can go 100 miles or longer, often in deserts and other unlikely places. True died in 2012 while running in New Mexico, but the 50-mile Caballo Blanco race has become legendary in the rarefied world of superlong-distance runners, who are drawn to it because of the exotic location and the pure joy they say they feel from running alongside the Tarahumara.Foreigners have taken part since 2006. This year, Stephens said, the race drew about 100 international runners, about 200 people from around Mexico and 400 or so Tarahumara, who compete in homemade sandals fashioned from tire treads. The race serves in part as a fund-raiser that provides many of the Tarahumara with money and food for months.“The race has come into its own — it’s a kind of phenomenon, like Burning Man,” said Chris McDougall, whose book “Born to Run,” about True and the Caballo Blanco race, helped draw international attention to the event and turned True into something of a celebrity.Participants have certainly had misgivings before. Among other things, the marathon route takes them through marijuana and poppy fields controlled by local drug lords (they are told to ignore the crops and keep running).“This has always been a concern,” said Will Harlan, who won the race in 2009 and who helps organize nonprofit work in the region. “Every time I go down there, there’s military checkpoints or rumors of violence or previous violence or violence that occurs just after we leave.”AdvertisementThe stories he has heard illustrate how little power local officials have in the face of the drug cartels in the region. “It’s gotten progressively worse — police being kidnapped and beheaded,” Harlan said. “At one point in a cadre of police, the leader was killed and the rest were stripped naked and forced to walk back to town.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.It never got that bad in Urique. But with rumors swirling of gunfire and grenades, of would-be racers being stopped on the road by armed gangs and of local officials who claimed nothing was going on when it clearly was, the organizers canceled the race. Even that led to trouble, though, as Urique’s mayor declared that a truncated, unofficial version would go on after all, foreigners or not.“Everybody was saying it will definitely happen next year,” said Israel Archuletta, an ultrarunner who stayed to race that Sunday. “The government was so upset because of what this negative publicity will do as far as tourism and the local economy, and I’m pretty sure they’d ensure that it will never happen again.”Things do not seem to have quieted down altogether. Cecilia Villalobos, Urique’s head of tourism, said by phone that the town had gone into “a psychosis situation” on Feb. 27, when widespread gun violence was reported in a nearby village.She agreed with the organizers that the race needed to be canceled, she said. But she added that she had been overruled by Urique’s mayor, who told her that since the violence had happened not in Urique but in a place four miles away and no one had been killed, the runners would be safe now that government troops had arrived.“We have great love for this event, which means a lot more than just a race,” Villalobos said. “It is the single most important and biggest event in the Sierra Tarahumara, and a lot of people benefit from it every year — transport people, merchants, restaurants, hotels, even street vendors.”Everyone agrees that the situation has brought disastrous publicity to an enterprise that has been mostly characterized by idealism and good intentions. It has also caused runners to re-evaluate previous episodes they had discounted. A couple of years ago, for instance, officials told Stephens that the then-mayor and his deputy had been killed in a car accident.“But then I talked to people who found the bodies, and they were missing their heads,” Stephens said. “I said, ‘Hey, they were not in a car accident; it sounds like it was made to look like a car accident.’ But the official line was that there was no danger.”That has generally been the official line, and for good reason.“It was always Caballo Blanco’s fear,” Harlan, the former winner, said, referring to True. “The year I won, the reporters asked about violence, and he said, ‘Don’t tell them that it’s scary here because then no one will come, and the Tarahumara will be left for dead in a war zone.’ ”Paulina Villegas contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on March 7, 2015, on Page D1 of the New York edition with the headline: In Mexico, Extreme Danger Shadows an Extreme Race.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.