AdvertisementSupported byBy Ben ShpigelIt will take far more than one bold move, one major trade and one critical re-signing for the Jets to contend again. But after an off-season of sweeping change throughout the organization, the Jets’ march toward respectability continued Friday with the biggest personnel decisions made so far by the team’s new general manager, Mike Maccagnan.In an aggressive move, the Jets agreed to acquire Brandon Marshall from the Chicago Bears in a trade that has ramifications beyond their adding one of the N.F.L.’s superlative receivers to their roster.The trade, first reported by ESPN and confirmed by a person with direct knowledge of the team’s intentions, cannot be announced until 4 p.m. Tuesday, when free agency begins. It is also contingent upon Marshall’s passing a physical exam. In return, the Bears will receive a midround draft pick, said by NFL Network to be a fifth-rounder.Also Friday, the Jets re-signed their most important free agent, keeping middle linebacker David Harris with a three-year deal that, according to a person with direct knowledge of the contract, is worth $21.5 million with $15 million guaranteed. That is a hefty sum for a 31-year-old inside linebacker, but Harris is the on-field conduit for the coaching staff — communicating the team’s defensive signals — and his leadership is valued by the Jets. By re-signing Harris, the Jets prevented their former coach, Rex Ryan, from trying to lure him to the Buffalo Bills.When Ryan coached the Jets, he raved about Marshall’s talents. The Jets’ new coach, Todd Bowles, has seen those talents up close in practice; he was on the Dolphins’ staff when Marshall spent two seasons with Miami. Marshall is tall and physical and a dynamo in the red zone — capable of alleviating pressure on the Jets’ other outside threat, Eric Decker, while presenting a 6-foot-4, 230-pound target for the Jets’ quarterback. Marshall will strengthen and diversify a passing offense that ranked last in the league last season.Trading for Marshall is the clearest indication yet that the Jets will part with receiver Percy Harvin, who added speed and versatility to the team when he was acquired in a trade with the Seattle Seahawks last season but who is owed a prohibitive $10.5 million in 2015. If the Jets cut Harvin before March 19, they can send a sixth-round draft pick to Seattle. If they retain him, they will have to give the Seahawks a fourth-round pick.Marshall has had a tempestuous nine-year tenure in the N.F.L. that includes three trades in five seasons and a slew of legal troubles, most of which came before he was traded to Chicago in March 2012. Marshall learned in 2011 that he had borderline personality disorder, and he has become a staunch advocate for mental health awareness.Marshall, who turns 31 on March 23, had seven straight 1,000-yard seasons before an injury-plagued 2014 in which he was hampered by ankle problems and, later, by broken ribs that caused him to miss the Bears’ final three games. But he still caught 61 passes for 721 yards and 8 touchdowns.By trading for Marshall, the Jets, in essence, decided that he and his contract, which is guaranteed through the 2015 season, were a better match than any of the top receivers available in free agency: Jeremy Maclin, Randall Cobb and Torrey Smith.The Jets can instead allocate their money — which stood at about $55 million in salary-cap space before Friday’s moves — in other areas. The Jets are looking to improve at cornerback, bolster their offensive line, find a pass-rusher, add a running back and, of course, try to resolve their quarterback quandary, which is in its fourth decade.The Jets could sign a veteran free agent to compete with Geno Smith, or select a quarterback high (or low) in the draft, or procure one with another audacious stroke. Whoever that quarterback is, he will be throwing to one of the best receivers the Jets have had in some time.Advertisement