By DANIEL E. SLOTNIKOCT. 13, 2015
Sandra Spuzich, a golfer whose first professional victory was at the 1966 United States Women’s Open and who at 45 became the oldest player in the L.P.G.A. to win two tournaments in one season — a record that stands — died on Oct. 6 at her home in Indianapolis. She was 78.The cause was leukemia, said her partner, the former golfer Joyce Kazmierski.A promising amateur, Spuzich struggled after joining the tour in 1962. Over the next four years, she competed in more than 100 tournaments without winning one. MacGregor Golf, her corporate sponsor, dropped her midway through the 1966 season.“I was beginning to think I’d never win anything,” she told The New York Times later that year.That July, she beat Carol Mann by one stroke and Mickey Wright by two to win the United States Women’s Open, the Ladies Professional Golf Association’s most prestigious tournament, with an aggregate score of 297 at the Hazeltine National Golf Club course in Chaska, Minn.“I was in the basement too long,” Spuzich told Time magazine that year. “It’s nice to get upstairs and see how the other half lives.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Spuzich won six more tournaments, including the Corning Classic and the Mary Kay Golf Classic in 1982, when she was 45. She left competitive play in the 1990s.Sandra Ann Spuzich was born in Indianapolis on April 3, 1937. She graduated from what is now George Washington Community High School and received a bachelor’s degree from Indiana University, then worked as a physical education teacher before joining the pro tour.Spuzich (pronounced SPOOZ-itch) met Kazmierski on the tour. Kazmierski said they had been together for 42 years. She is also survived by a sister, Mary Lou Spaulding.Spuzich had a knack for hitting holes in one, especially at the Lady Keystone Open, an event she won by one stroke in 1977. She made three, on three different par-3 holes, during three Opens at the Hershey Country Club in Pennsylvania.A version of this article appears in print on October 14, 2015, on Page A23 of the New York edition with the headline: Sandra Spuzich, 78, L.P.G.A. Record-Setter.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.