AdvertisementSupported byBy Tim RohanPORT ST. LUCIE, Fla. — Mets fans started applauding Matt Harvey as he left the bullpen Friday afternoon, before he threw a single pitch. The whole way, as Harvey made his way toward the dugout, fans stood and cheered him as he passed. Tradition Field, the Mets’ spring training home, was packed with fans wearing Harvey jerseys and hoping to see something special. They had waited more than 18 months to watch him in a competitive game, and Harvey did not disappoint. He pitched two perfect innings against the Detroit Tigers in his spring training debut, his first game back from Tommy John surgery, and looked like his old, electric self. He struck out three batters, two on 98-mile-per-hour fastballs and the other on a nasty curveball. He threw 25 pitches, and all 25 were must-see pitches. “Well, I’ve said that I feel like I never left,” Harvey said. His manager, Terry Collins, started the day with modest goals. He wanted Harvey to throw strikes, work both sides of the plate, and get used to the speed of the game. He wanted Harvey to treat this as nothing more than an intrasquad game. And Collins knew that was all unrealistic to expect, considering the circumstances. Collins still tells this story. Two years ago, as the Mets slogged through a spring training game against the St. Louis Cardinals, Harvey, for no apparent reason, suddenly unleashed a 100-mile-per-hour fastball that woke up the whole ballpark. When Harvey got back to the dugout, Collins asked: What was that? For Harvey, he was just reminding everyone about what he was capable of. This spring, as he goes about his recovery process, everyone is paying attention to him. ESPN is shooting a special, and hordes of cameras follow his every move, even when he goes to the water cooler. Every time he steps on the mound, it warrants a news conference. His teammates are asked about his progress every time they watch him pitch. Anticipation had been building for this game all week. On Friday morning, the Mets’ Twitter account wished everyone a “Happy #HarveyDay.” In the clubhouse, there were more members of the news media than players. The Mets’ lineup included every regular starter, except Lucas Duda, who was out with an intercostal muscle injury. “I felt the buzz right when I pulled up in the parking lot,” said Travis d’Arnaud, the catcher. “It was the first spring training game I’ve been nervous for in a while.”He sheepishly explained, “It’s Harvey Day.”Fans gathered along the third-base line to watch Harvey warm up in the bullpen. They could not get enough. Two fans, one of whom held a cutout of Harvey’s head, took a picture with a selfie stick with Harvey in the background. At one point, at least a dozen Mets players, coaches and team employees were watching him.When Harvey took the field, the fans serenaded him with cheers. He later said it was his favorite part of the day — taking the field and hearing those cheers again. It reminded him of when he started the 2013 All-Star Game at Citi Field.“That will be something I remember for a long time,” Harvey said.After taking the mound, he put on a show. His first pitch was 96 m.p.h. His second pitch went 104 m.p.h., according to the scoreboard. It was not completely obvious that it was wrong, because his fastball regularly hit the upper 90s. His pitching coach, Dan Warthen, said Harvey was already locating his fastball as if he were in midseason form. Harvey said he felt so good he had forgotten that he ever had surgery. Eventually, there will be discussions about pitch counts and innings limits and ways the Mets can keep Harvey healthy. For now, the Mets could enjoy the moment. “My God, that was 98,” the bench coach Bob Geren said at one point, turning to Collins. Harvey’s return overshadowed all other aspects of the game. The Mets eventually won, 5-4, on a game-ending homer by the shortstop prospect Matt Reynolds. Noah Syndergaard, the must-see Mets pitcher from spring training 2014, allowed two runs in two innings. A stray pitch bruised Daniel Murphy’s right hand. David Price, the Tigers’ ace, also made his spring debut. Price told reporters afterward that Harvey once sent him an autographed jersey with a nice message; it’s one of the few autographed jerseys he owns. The two of them are friends. “I’m a big fan,” Price said. “It’s good for baseball that he’s back.”The Tigers had only a handful of regulars in their lineup, but that did not dampen the mood of the day. When Harvey struck out Bryan Holaday, a backup catcher, on a curveball on a 3-2 count to end the second inning, he skipped off the mound. He looked as if he wanted to pump his fist. Instead, he walked to the dugout, to more cheers. Harvey must wait until March 11 for his next start, the next Harvey Day. As he came off the field Friday, Collins shook his hand, for a job well done. Then Harvey jokingly asked if he could pitch a few more innings.Advertisement