AdvertisementSupported byBy Tom PedullaWhen Amber Thompson arrived at St. John’s four years ago as the recipient of a basketball scholarship, her body language was not promising. She would hold her hand in front of her face when she spoke. She would look away from others to avoid eye contact. She was so painfully reserved it raised questions about her ability to assert herself on the court.But then practice began and Thompson unveiled a strikingly different persona, that of a fierce, no-holds-barred competitor intent on succeeding.“When I’m on the court, I’m a totally different person,” she said. “I’m really aggressive. I feel I will do whatever my team needs me to do to help us win the game. I have to be a leader vocally to help everybody stay focused.”Thompson’s ability to make such a transformation — Danaejah Grant, a junior guard, described the personality change as “day and night” — has served her and St. John’s well. A 6-foot-2 forward, she stands as the team’s career leader with 1,036 rebounds, 168 more than Dianne Pugh, who had held the record since 1984.Thompson, the only senior starter and a team captain, has been invaluable as a steadying influence on a St. John’s team that is 20-9 and seeded fourth in the Big East tournament. The Red Storm, who cooled after sweeping their first 10 games, begin play against Creighton (17-12) on Sunday afternoon at Allstate Arena in Rosemont, Ill., knowing they may well need to win the championship if they are to earn a sixth consecutive N.C.A.A. tournament bid.St. John’s, emphasizing defense and rebounding, reached 20 victories for the second consecutive season and the fifth time in the last six years. It held Connecticut, the defending national champion, to a season low in points in a 70-54 loss on Jan. 4. The Red Storm limited opponents to 52 points or fewer in 17 of 29 games.At times, Thompson almost single-handedly took care of the rebounding part. She became the team’s career leader on Jan. 2, when she pulled down 20 rebounds, the third highest single-game total in St. John’s history, in a 59-50 victory over Seton Hall, then ranked No. 23. After breaking the Red Storm’s single-season record with 313 rebounds in 2013-14, she topped herself with 322 rebounds this season. Of the 322, 123 were on the offensive end.Even as Thompson describes herself as a “to myself person,” her résumé indicates she is one of the most aggressive rebounders in the college game. She ranks 17th in N.C.A.A. Division I, averaging 11.1 a game.According to Thompson, her success starts with her ability to read how the ball might come off the rim before she relies on footwork, strength and her wide wingspan to reach missed shots. “It’s just real intense,” she said.April Thompson points to desire as the most important element in her daughter’s success. “She made the comment one time, ‘If I can’t have it, they can’t have it,’ ” April Thompson said. “She has to get that ball. It’s her No. 1 priority.”April, a single parent with four children, attended most games this season and recorded every rebound. At halftime, her daughter would run past and call out, “How many is that?”Thompson’s board-crashing — she also averaged 6.6 points a game and had 64 blocks — is all the more impressive because she did not start playing basketball until she was a freshman at University High School in Newark. She initially resisted the appeals of Felicia Oliver, the varsity coach, to join the team.But Oliver would ask her to extend her long arms and tell her she was “reaching for the stars.” She explained to her the college opportunities basketball might create and how a scholarship might provide a way out of the crime-ridden neighborhoods she and her family lived in. “I told her a scholarship could be her way out of the struggle,” said Oliver, who remains close to Thompson.Joe Tartamella, an assistant at St. John’s before he became the head coach three years ago, was recruiting another player at University when he spotted Thompson. “We really saw what I felt was some hidden talent with what she could do with her athletic ability,” he said. “I think she’s probably exceeded most people’s expectations for what she was going to be when she got to college.”As much as the victories, the string of N.C.A.A. tournament appearances and all of those rebounds mean to Thompson, she abandoned her soft-spoken ways during an interview only when she discussed what her college experience meant to her. She looks forward to playing professionally, probably overseas, and is on course to graduate with a degree in accounting.“Coming from where I came from, not many people had the opportunity to go to college,” she said. “I had the opportunity and wanted to take full advantage of it and do what I want to do with my life and be a successful person. This was the way to get there.”Tartamella said: “I watched her grow and make a huge transformation from freshman to senior year. She didn’t come from a lot, and she’s going to be able to provide for herself and her family. These are the stories you love to tell. I’m really happy with where she is as a person even more so than as a player.”Advertisement