AdvertisementSupported byBy Zach SchonbrunMembers of the athletic staff forged classwork. Players were handed cash for appearances as volunteers. Others were allowed to skirt the university’s drug policy without consequence.Those infractions and dozens more involving a storied program and a Hall of Fame coach were laid out on Friday in a 94-page report by the N.C.A.A., exposing some of the most widespread and damning transgressions in college basketball in years.The credentials of Syracuse University’s coach, Jim Boeheim, whose 966 career victories to date ranked second only to Duke’s Mike Krzyzewski, are suddenly being scrutinized after the N.C.A.A., in a series of investigations that lasted close to eight years, found a pattern of severe violations that stretch back more than a decade.“As I expressed at the Committee on Infractions hearing, I acknowledge that violations occurred within the men’s basketball program, and as the head coach of the program, I take those violations very seriously,” Mr. Boeheim said Friday in a statement. “That being said, I am disappointed with many of the findings and conclusions as stated in the infractions report. The committee chose to ignore the efforts which I have undertaken over the past 37 years to promote an atmosphere of compliance.”The N.C.A.A. accused Syracuse of a lack of institutional control over its teams — a stunning rebuke that was aimed mostly at the men’s basketball team, a bedrock program in Central New York that fills the largest on-campus basketball arena in the country, the Carrier Dome.More than 100 men’s basketball victories under Mr. Boeheim are expected to be vacated, and the team, which already had a university-imposed postseason ban this season in anticipation of the N.C.A.A.’s ruling, will lose 12 scholarships over the next four years.“Over the course of a decade, Syracuse University did not control and monitor its athletics programs,” the Division I Committee on Infractions wrote in announcing the report, “and its head men’s basketball coach failed to monitor his program, according to a decision issued by a Division I Committee on Infractions panel.”Other sanctions included a reduction of permissible off-campus recruiters to two from four; a return of all funds received through revenue sharing from participation in the N.C.A.A. tournament in 2011, 2012 and 2013; and a suspension of Mr. Boeheim for the first nine games of the 2015-16 Atlantic Coast Conference schedule.“Syracuse University did not and does not agree with all the conclusions reached by the N.C.A.A., including some of the findings and penalties included in today’s report,” the university’s chancellor, Kent Syverud, said in a letter to members of the university community. “However, we take the report and the issues it identifies very seriously, particularly those that involve academic integrity and the overall well-being of student-athletes.” Syracuse (18-12) wraps up its regular season on Saturday at North Carolina State.Mr. Boeheim, 70, was elected to the Basketball Hall of Fame in 2005, two years after he guided Syracuse to its first national championship. His streak of 35 consecutive 20-win seasons is an N.C.A.A. Division I record.The committee determined that Mr. Boeheim had failed to promote an atmosphere of compliance or monitor the activities of those who reported to him regarding academics and boosters.Those activities included the violations committed by the team’s former director of basketball operations, Stan Kissel, as well as a team receptionist in their attempt to restore the eligibility of a men’s basketball player. From 2010 to 2012, a support services mentor and a support services tutor also made revisions, created or wrote assignments for three basketball players, the report charged.“Improper institutional involvement and influence in a student’s academic work in order to gain or maintain eligibility is a violation of N.C.A.A. rules and a violation of the most fundamental core values of the N.C.A.A. and higher education,” the committee wrote. “The behavior in this case, which placed the desire to achieve success on the basketball court over academic integrity, demonstrated clearly misplaced institutional priorities.”Further, the committee found that two men with close ties to the Syracuse basketball program, both affiliated with the Tri-Valley Y.M.C.A. in Oneida, N.Y., provided impermissible benefits like meals, transportation and 21 checks totaling $8,335 to three football players and two basketball players over the course of 14 months in 2004 and 2005. The payments were provided for the players’ appearances at clinics, camps, tournaments or Y.M.C.A. projects, work that was intended to be on a volunteer basis.Syracuse’s adherence to its drug policy was also faulted. The committee said Mr. Boeheim and the athletic director, Daryl Gross, acknowledged in a hearing that they had not followed their own procedures for handling players who tested positive for banned substances.The N.C.A.A. issued a 94-page report Friday on violations committed by the Syracuse athletic department.Tim Welsh, an assistant under Mr. Boeheim from 1988 to 1991, said he did not expect Mr. Boeheim to retire as a result of the report.“Jim’s a battler; he’s not going to just wilt because of this,” said Mr. Welsh, now an analyst for ESPN and SportsNet New York. “He’s one of the most competitive, toughest guys I know. As long as he’s got the support of everybody around him, he’ll fight through it.”Seth Greenberg, a longtime coach who is also an analyst for ESPN, said he had not read the full report yet but he could sympathize with Mr. Boeheim.“I understand coaches have to sign an N.C.A.A. compliance form, but it’s hard to be held accountable for things that are out of your control,” he said, adding that he thought the team could still be one of the best programs in the A.C.C. next year. “As a coach, when I look at the drug test policy at an institution, that was never under my jurisdiction, same thing with academic issues.”The Syracuse football program was also placed on probation for five years and required to vacate wins earned from 2004 to 2006 as a result of three players’ association with the Y.M.C.A. and academic misconduct. A women’s basketball player was also found to have violated a rule on participating in basketball activities outside intercollegiate competition.The university initiated the case in 2007, when it self-reported violations related to the Y.M.C.A. to the N.C.A.A. and submitted a written report in 2010. The N.C.A.A. responded with a Notice of Allegations in 2011, and, while Syracuse was in the process of responding, a subsequent violation prompted a joint investigation beginning in February 2012. Syracuse issued a second self-report of violations in December 2013. A second Notice of Allegations was issued in May 2014. The N.C.A.A. conducted a hearing and closed its investigation in October.Britton Banowsky, commissioner of Conference USA and the chief hearing officer in the case, said during a teleconference that Syracuse’s behavior went “to the core values of the N.C.A.A. and higher education.”Mr. Banowsky argued that N.C.A.A. policy was clear that head coaches bear responsibility for violations in their programs.“A head coach has a duty to monitor those in the program and is also presumed to be accountable for their violations, and the presumption in the case was not effectively rebutted at all,” he said.Mr. Syverud, the chancellor, said that the university was weighing whether to appeal parts of the decision, and that Mr. Boeheim might choose to appeal the portions that apply to him personally.Still, Banowsky said it was clear that Syracuse had failed to police itself.“Ultimately if you have a situation where desire to achieve success on the basketball court overrided academics, it demonstrated misplaced priorities, and that’s where the N.C.A.A. comes in,” he said.Tyrone Thomas, a lawyer at Mintz Levin in Washington who advises universities in N.C.A.A. cases, said the sanctions against Syracuse could have been more substantial, partly because the N.C.A.A. is in the process of reviewing its bylaws regarding the regulation of academic misconduct.In January, the N.C.A.A.’s head of enforcement, Jon Duncan, said his department had 20 active cases involving allegations of violations concerning academics. That presumably included a reopened investigation into North Carolina, where a university-commissioned report found years of fabricated classes with significant athlete participants, and a degree of complicity by the athletic department.Mr. Thomas said the N.C.A.A.’s haziness on academic misconduct violations, and Syracuse’s vigilance in reporting on its own transgressions, saved it from even harsher penalties. “This was not the worst result,” he said. “You’re talking allegations over a 10-year period, numerous of which fall under punishable by major sanctions. I think that’s what helped Syracuse here to a degree; they did a good effort of trying to make a good investigation of their own and came up with some findings of their own.”Basketball has long been part of the fabric of life in Central New York, where cold temperatures and lake-effect snow drive residents indoors during the winter, and the Carrier Dome often serves as a refuge. Mr. Boeheim, who played for Syracuse from 1962 to 1966 and was an assistant there before he took over as head coach in 1976, is arguably as closely identified with his campus as any coach in the country. But he has been dealt sanctions before.In 1992, Syracuse was placed on probation and banned from postseason play in 1993 for violations related to recruiting. The penalties were reduced in that case by the university’s cooperation with the N.C.A.A. And in November 2011, Syracuse fired the longtime assistant coach, Bernie Fine, amid allegations that he had sexually abused two former ballboys; those claimed acts had happened too long before to be prosecuted. The investigation by the United States attorney’s office into a third allegation was later dropped. Mr, Fine denied all the allegations.Mr. Boeheim’s reputation as the architect of one of college basketball’s most successful programs was certified in 2003 when the freshman forward Carmelo Anthony led Syracuse to its first national championship. Mr. Boeheim’s salary in 2014 was $1.8 million. The Carrier Dome court was named in his honor in 2002.Marc Tracy contributed reporting.Advertisement