AdvertisementSupported byBy Scott CacciolaWEST POINT, N.Y. — On the Knicks’ third day of training camp, Kristaps Porzingis watched the second half of practice from a scorer’s table with an ice pack on his left knee. He later folded his 7-foot-3 frame onto a stool and prepared himself.Porzingis, 20, is new to life in the N.B.A., but he knew enough to expect what was coming.“A little pinch in the knee, but it’s fine,” he said in response to one question.“Tomorrow, I’ll be going 100 percent,” he replied to another.“Not really a big deal,” he said as his impromptu news conference dawdled along.On Thursday, the Knicks revealed that Porzingis injured his left knee Wednesday night in a noncontact drill. Coach Derek Fisher said Porzingis had tweaked his iliotibial band, a ligament that runs down the outside of the thigh from the hip to the knee. As a result, the coaching staff limited Porzingis’s participation in Thursday’s practice.“He felt a lot better this morning,” Fisher said. “But it’s just not really worth the risk when you think about long term and what we’re trying to do.”Injuries in training camp are always cause for some concern, especially when they involve the presumptive future of the organization. Porzingis, whom the Knicks drafted fourth over all in June, appeared to enter camp in good shape, having added about 11 pounds to his lanky frame. But Fisher said he wanted to be cautious. Porzingis, Fisher said, is still growing into his body and adapting to a physical game.“There are things you have to be conscious of and aware of,” Fisher said. “Even though we’re a team, we have individualized programs of development. A big part of it is keeping him healthy, and that means there will be times when we have to make decisions to kind of protect him.”The Knicks are scheduled to play their first preseason game next Wednesday night against Bauru, a team in Brazil’s top league, at Madison Square Garden.Porzingis, who played deep into May with Cajasol Sevilla of Spain’s ACB League, sustained a hip injury in his predraft workout with the Knicks, who were so enamored of him that they selected him anyway. Despite having limited time to prepare, Porzingis showcased his skills in four games with the Knicks’ summer league team, averaging 10.5 points and 3.3 rebounds a game while shooting 48 percent from the field.Fisher said he had seen progress from Porzingis through the first few days of training camp.“He just seems more settled in terms of what to expect in the N.B.A. — the size and strength of guys he’s going to play against,” Fisher said. “He’s more fit, he’s stronger and he’s in better shape. I think he just feels more comfortable about what he’s doing.”Porzingis seems to be getting an education daily. For example, he has tried to acclimate himself to the rigors of defending the likes of the 278-pound Kevin Seraphin, who is a bulldozer is basketball shorts.“He’s a huge dude,” Porzingis said. “He’s one of the biggest dudes there is. So that’s a good test.”Porzingis said he was not concerned about his knee, describing it as little more than a minor setback. On Thursday, he participated in several drills before the coaching staff pulled him off the court when the team began to scrimmage. Porzingis observed from a safe distance.“They’re telling me to look at the long run,” he said.Advertisement