By SAM BORDENMARCH 6, 2015
LONDON — Sepp Blatter has been elected to four consecutive terms as president of FIFA, a run that dates to 1998. In his first election — the process gives every FIFA-affiliated country a vote — Blatter defeated a former head of the European soccer confederation. In the second, he defeated the leader of the African soccer confederation. In the third and fourth, he ran unopposed.In other words, it has been more than 12 years since Blatter — whose public reputation among fans has descended so low that it has affected his public speechmaking schedule — had to beat out a challenger to keep his position. This spring, Blatter, who previously promised that his fourth term would be his last, is running again. But this time, as FIFA’s global standing continues to plummet, he will face a serious opponent, and possibly several.For those in search of a change at the top of FIFA — even the tiniest sign of one — that alone is a form of victory. This may sound strange, particularly because Blatter’s stranglehold on the game makes him a commanding favorite to win another term as president. But after years of corruption allegations, obvious shenanigans and inexplicable bureaucracy, this election, at a minimum, will be the closest thing to a public airing of FIFA’s problems we have seen in a generation.“As popular as football is around the world, the impression of FIFA is the exact opposite,” Prince Ali bin al-Hussein of Jordan, who is running against Blatter, said in a recent interview. Asked specifically about Blatter, the prince hesitated, then said: “I think anybody should stick to words and promises that they made. And he promised that it was time to stop, and he didn’t live up to it. I think it’s a pity he didn’t live up to his word. Because the reputation of FIFA has taken a huge spiral downwards, and it has to be time for a change.”AdvertisementThis is hardly a unique platform for Prince Ali to embrace. All the people who have even considered running against Blatter over the past few months have emphasized that they are not Sepp Blatter — a point that seems to have considerable currency among fans and many in the soccer news media.AdvertisementBeing the anti-Blatter is basic campaign boilerplate in soccer. Even David Ginola, a former French national team star who mounted a short-lived and shambolic campaign financed by a sports betting company, said, right at the beginning, “We all know that FIFA isn’t working.”Blatter’s long and varied list of sins includes questionable ethical practices and more-than-occasional inappropriate innuendo. His biggest knock, though, may be the bizarre autonomy, and complete lack of accountability or transparency, that FIFA has perfected under his stewardship. With Blatter, things just sort of happen. One FIFA official, who spoke on the condition of anonymity because of fears of retribution, said that the recent FIFA task force assigned to make a recommendation on when the 2022 World Cup in Qatar should be held was a perfect example of how Blatter operated.The task force, which made several visits to Qatar for examinations, recently recommended that the 2022 tournament be played in November and December instead of the typical summer window. But that recommendation did not carry any weight. Even if the committee had suggested a window in January and February, or the window in April and May that many European clubs wanted, Blatter “would simply raise the November-December window as an option on his own at the executive committee meeting where the decision is made,” the official said.The official added that Blatter would “just push the one he wants” and that the executive committee, “which he leads, then makes the decision.”The English Football Association chairman, the president of the German Football Federation, the Russian sports minister and the UEFA president weighed in on Sepp Blatter and FIFA’s coming election.Prince Ali’s platform is based on changing that dynamic. “We don’t want an executive president,” he said.He continued: “We want to get to a day when people don’t even know who the president of FIFA is. When that happens, we will know that the organization is being run the right way and with the right priorities.”Mostly, Prince Ali wants more openness. He has called for a debate among the approved presidential candidates — including Blatter, the Dutch official Michael van Praag and the former Portugal star Luís Figo — so fans and soccer federation officials around the world can see where each candidate stands on important issues. The prince wants the Garcia report, which documented the investigation into the controversial awarding of the 2018 and 2022 World Cup bids, to be published publicly. He wants to drastically increase how much of FIFA’s revenue is returned to its member nations for development; from 1998 to 2014, if one compares FIFA’s income to its development commitments globally, the organization took in revenue of about $12.5 billion but doled out less than 20 percent of that — just $2.5 billion.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I come from a country that doesn’t have the resources that others do,” he said. “I understand those challenges well.”AdvertisementPresumably, Blatter’s challengers will come together at some point before the May election and consolidate their efforts behind one candidate to prevent splitting votes. It is too early to tell whether that contender will be Prince Ali, but he has some inherent advantages: He is young and savvy, and he is not from Europe, which is often seen as the aristocracy of world soccer by the smaller FIFA countries, which largely support Blatter even though he is Swiss. Prince Ali has also been working from the inside, having spent the past four years as one of the few advocates for reform on FIFA’s governing executive committee.He has gravitas, too. A brother of King Abdullah II of Jordan, Prince Ali left some of his FIFA colleagues after an event last month and returned home to meet with the family of Moaz al-Kasasbeh, the Jordanian military pilot who was tortured and killed by members of the Islamic State.The meeting was particularly emotional for the prince, who has a military background, because he had led the ceremony when the pilot graduated from flight school. “I gave him his wings,” Prince Ali said.Given situations like that one, it is not hard to see why Prince Ali takes a grounded approach to his global soccer existence. He loves the game and has been a champion for it in his country. He has pushed for development and growth, on the women’s side and at the grass-roots level. He said he wanted to see FIFA finally get the sea change it needed.He is also pragmatic. If he is not successful in this campaign, he said, he has no plans to try to keep his place on the executive committee or to try to nab some other high-powered soccer job. Perhaps more important, though, Prince Ali said that if he somehow pulled off the upset and won, he had no plans to follow Blatter’s lead and seek to hold the job for a generation or two.“One term,” he said as he patted the table in front of him with his hand. “One term. I want to get in there, make the changes that need to be made and then get out of the way.”A version of this article appears in print on March 7, 2015, on Page D5 of the New York edition with the headline: Blatter Faces a Prince Who Would Be King.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.