By TYLER KEPNEROCT. 13, 2015
CHICAGO — The Chicago Cubs played nearly 100 full seasons at their cozy North Side home without a day like this. From Three Finger Brown to Hack Wilson, Phil Cavarretta to Ernie Banks, Ryne Sandberg to Sammy Sosa, they had never clinched a postseason series at Wrigley Field.That changed on Tuesday, when a band of upstarts slew their biggest rival and barged into the National League Championship Series. The Cubs used three home runs and eight pitchers to eliminate the St. Louis Cardinals, 6-4, in Game 4 of this division series.The Cardinals have won 11 championships, all since the Cubs’ last title in 1908. St. Louis won 100 games this regular season and had reached the N.L.C.S. in each of the last four years. For the Cubs’ president for baseball operations, Theo Epstein, who once built the Boston Red Sox, it felt familiar.“We beat the Cardinals — I mean, these are like older brothers who’ve been kicking sand in our face for 100 years,” Epstein said on the field, soaked from the wild clubhouse celebration. “There’s a lot of similarities to when we knocked off the Yankees in ’04. That one put us in the World Series. This one just gives us a nice date on Saturday.”AdvertisementThe Cubs will travel to face the winner of the other division series between the Mets and the Los Angeles Dodgers. The Cubs have failed in their other three stops at this stage, in 1984, 1989 and 2003, and have not won a pennant since 1945.AdvertisementThe 2003 loss — which followed a division-series clincher on the road — was excruciating: a fan’s busy hands, a shortstop’s error, a Marlins rally, another nightmare. Now, with young stars like Anthony Rizzo, Jorge Soler, Kris Bryant and Kyle Schwarber, the Cubs have another chance.“We’re going to celebrate this,” said Rizzo, who homered off Kevin Siegrist to break a 4-4 tie in the sixth inning. “We deserve to celebrate this. It’s been a long time coming for this city, and hopefully it’s just a sign of things to come.”Closer Hector Rondon sealed it in the ninth, striking out Stephen Piscotty and leaping for joy with catcher Miguel Montero. “Go Cubs Go!” rang from the loudspeakers, and 42,411 believers sang along, waving white towels with a blue “W,” like the win flag the Cubs fly above their scoreboard.Before the game, as Jason Hammel warmed up, it was a different song: Pearl Jam’s “Alive,” a classic by Eddie Vedder, a fan who has been a regular around the Cubs this month. They might as well have blasted the song from a boom box held aloft by John Cusack, the “Say Anything ...” star and another celebrity along for this October joy ride.The Cubs are a happening, and Montero created a simple catchphrase for T-shirts and social media: #wearegood. He said he wanted to make a painting of it.“I remember we lost a couple of games in a row, so you start reading your Twitter from the fans, and they’re like, ‘Oh, here it comes again,’ ” Montero said, adding later, “If we don’t believe that we are good, we’re not going to have a chance.”The Cubs were losing before the first out of Game 4, after a two-run homer by Piscotty. By the end of the next inning, though, they were ahead, in an unusual rally off John Lackey.AdvertisementWith two on and one out in the second, Lackey faced Montero as Justin Grimm stirred in the Cubs’ bullpen. If Montero had reached to load the bases, Manager Joe Maddon said later, he would have used Tommy La Stella to pinch-hit. When Montero struck out, Grimm sat down and Hammel batted.Naturally, he singled to center to score the Cubs’ first run. On the very next pitch, Javier Baez lashed an opposite-field, three-run homer to the seats in right. Baez, 22, was playing for Addison Russell, the Cubs’ dynamic rookie shortstop, who hurt his hamstring racing for a triple in Game 3. These Cubs have young talent to spare.“My advice to him tonight was just to own the game,” Maddon said of Baez, “and he kind of did.”The Cardinals rallied for two runs off the Cubs’ bullpen in the sixth, but a strong throw from Soler in right that cut down Tony Cruz at the plate kept them from taking the lead. Then Rizzo struck in the sixth, and during a pitching change in the top of the seventh, Schwarber, the left fielder, told center fielder Dexter Fowler that he would go deep, too.“You hit it, and you run around the bases, and the place is going nuts,” Schwarber said. “That’s when it hits you, that this is what it’s all about. This is what you live to play baseball for.”Schwarber’s drive was majestic, soaring into the fading sky, landing atop the new video board down the right-field line. David Ross, the backup catcher, said most hitters could not even reach that in batting practice. Epstein quoted loosely from “Jaws.”“We’re going to have to build a bigger ballpark,” he said.The Cubs had been circling as Epstein overhauled them, and now they have struck, devouring Pittsburgh in the wild-card game before ravaging the Cardinals. As the Cubs’ owner, Tom Ricketts, surveyed the joyous stands from the field after the game, he had bigger plans.“We’re playing well, we’re playing loose, we’re playing focused at the right time,” Ricketts said. “And I think we’re going to keep moving.”A version of this article appears in print on October 14, 2015, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: A First, First, First for the Home Team.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.