By PAT PICKENSMARCH 7, 2015
NEWARK —  Martin Brodeur’s goaltending career is over, and he is perfectly fine with that.“I should have done it earlier,” Brodeur joked Saturday after allowing five goals on 22 shots during the Devils’ alumni game for members of the 1995 Stanley Cup-winning team. “My body feels a lot better, and I sleep better.”Brodeur was back for the Devils’ championship weekend, returning for the first time since announcing his retirement from the N.H.L. in January.Last year, after 21 seasons and three Stanley Cups, Brodeur was not offered a contract by the Devils. He skated with the team through the season’s first two months, and after an injury to St. Louis goaltender Brian Elliott in December, Brodeur signed with the Blues. Brodeur played in seven games, posting a 3-3 record, an .899 save percentage and a 2.87 goals against average.When Elliott returned, Brodeur called it a career.“I tasted it,” Brodeur said. “I had a blast while it was happening. In the end, I was not going to play a lot of games — or even be a part of the team. I was just kind of hanging around, and that made my decision a little easier to let go of the game.”AdvertisementBrodeur has been a front-office member with the Blues since announcing his retirement on Jan. 29. He is growing comfortable in that role and just went through his first trading deadline as an executive.Advertisement“It was a great experience; I’ve never done that part of the game at all,” Brodeur said. “For me, just being around — not that I had much input or decision to make; I was just listening. I asked a lot of questions. They’re probably happy the deadline was over, so I stopped asking questions. But I want to learn, and it’s a great setting for me and a great organization. Every day I’m learning things.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Being in the front office has given Brodeur a different perspective on what it takes to be a general manager, he said.“Roster size, sending guys down, the paper trail and how it’s done and why it’s done and the reasons, I didn’t know before,” Brodeur said. “I just focused on stopping pucks.”Brodeur travels with the Blues — he was in Philadelphia when the team played there Thursday — and attends every practice and game. He said that as the playoffs neared, he would “probably draw more assignments.”“Whatever they ask, I do, and I enjoy it,” he said.When Brodeur announced his retirement, the Devils’ president and general manager, Lou Lamoriello, hinted that Brodeur could return in a management role.“My home is New Jersey,” Brodeur said, “and eventually, hopefully, I’ll be back here in some sort of a role. But right now I’m in St. Louis and enjoying it.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.