AdvertisementSupported byN.H.L. RoundupBy The Associated PressJonathan Huberdeau scored the deciding goal of a shootout to lift the Florida Panthers over the Islanders, 4-3, on Saturday night in Sunrise, Fla.Huberdeau beat Michal Neuvirth in the first round of the tiebreaker on the stick side.Huberdeau also scored in regulation, and Nick Bjugstad and Erik Gudbranson added goals for the Panthers. Dan Ellis stopped 25 shots in his second start since being recalled from the American Hockey League on Wednesday. Ellis turned aside all three shots he faced in the shootout.Jaromir Jagr had an assist for Florida.Josh Bailey, Nick Leddy and John Tavares scored for the Islanders, who have lost three of four. Neuvirth made 15 saves while making his first start since the Islanders acquired him from Buffalo on March 2. Tavares also had two assists.Florida is 2 points behind Boston in the race for the second wild-card spot in the Eastern Conference. BRUINS 3, FLYERS 2 Boston’s Brad Marchand scored a tying goal and the winner against visiting Philadelphia.Marchand sent the game to overtime with a power-play goal with 14.1 seconds left in regulation and scored again with 1 minute 8 seconds left in overtime.“I think a lot of guys tend to strive in that situation, and I want to be out there,” Marchand said about the power play in the closing two minutes. “I want that challenge, and I think any guy in the N.H.L. wants it. I’m glad they showed that faith in me.”Tuukka Rask made 29 saves for Boston.Chris Vandevelde and Jakub Voracek scored for the Flyers, who fell to 5 points behind Boston for the Eastern Conference’s final playoff berth.Steve Mason made 34 saves for Philadelphia.BLUES 6, MAPLE LEAFS 1 Six St. Louis players scored in a rout of host Toronto, with Jori Lehtera and Alexander Steen each recording three assists for the Blues, who ended a two-game skid. The team also moved to within 2 points of the Nashville Predators, who lead the Western Conference’s Central Division.The loss was the Leafs’ 28th in 35 games.JETS 3, PREDATORS 1 Blake Wheeler scored a go-ahead goal midway through the second period, and visiting Winnipeg handed Nashville its sixth straight defeat.Ryan Ellis scored Nashville’s goal. Before this skid, the Predators had not lost three in a row all season.CAPITALS 6 SABRES 1 Curtis Glencross notched a goal and two assists, Alex Ovechkin returned from a one-game absence because of a lower-body injury to score his league-leading 44th goal, and host Washington defeated Buffalo.Jay Beagle added a goal and an assist for Washington, which broke a 1-1 tie with three second-period scores.LIGHTNING 5, STARS 4 Alex Killorn and Victor Hedman scored early in the third period, and Tampa Bay rallied to beat visiting Dallas.Dallas center Tyler Seguin, who had missed 10 games because of a sprained right knee, scored two goals in his return. CANADIENS 2, COYOTES 0 Carey Price made 29 saves for his seventh shutout, and Montreal beat host Arizona.Lars Eller and Brendan Gallagher scored for the Eastern Conference-leading Canadiens, who halted a three-game losing streak.Mike Smith made 33 saves for the Coyotes, who have lost 10 of 11.AVALANCHE 4, BLUE JACKETS 0 Jarome Iginla, Gabriel Landeskog and Matt Duchene scored in the first 10 minutes, and Semyon Varlamov made 44 saves to lead Colorado over host Columbus.Alex Tanguay had a goal and an assist for the Avalanche.Advertisement