By ANDREW KEHMARCH 7, 2015
Late in a season of calamitous twists and weird turns, the Knicks have somehow found their nightly fortunes in the delicate custody of Andrea Bargnani.Because of a hodgepodge of injuries, Bargnani has played just 54 games since joining the Knicks before the 2013-14 season, and as a result of his interminable absences and his general lack of productiveness, he has been a target of jeers and a walking symbol of the organization’s recent failures.Yet on Saturday night at Madison Square Garden, Bargnani scored a team-high 21 points and received high-fives and a warm round of applause after fouling out with less than four minutes left to play against the Indiana Pacers. Without him, the Knicks let a close, ugly game slip away and lost, 92-86.“I’m able to play,” Bargnani said. “I’m able to stay on the court. I’m healthy. I feel good from that point of view.”AdvertisementWins, in any case, will only help the Knicks (12-49) avoid a dubious milestone. They have 21 games to go this season, and all signs indicate that they will set a franchise record for fewest victories in a season.AdvertisementIn 1960-61 and again in 1962-63, seasons in which they played 79 and 80 games, the Knicks finished with 21 wins.They entered Saturday ranked 29th among the N.B.A.’s 30 teams in both points scored and points allowed per 100 possessions. They had the league’s fifth-worst shooting percentage, 43.2.In such a season, the Knicks’ new reliance on Bargnani, who will become a free agent this summer and almost certainly will not return to the team next season, seems like an oddly fitting development. Bargnani has averaged 18.3 points in big minutes over the past six games.“I don’t think this is the place or the time to talk about the future,” Bargnani said when asked whether he thought he fit into the Knicks’ plans.Absurdism and gallows humor have already become the norm around the team’s fan base, anyway. At the Knicks’ home game Tuesday, bored fans resorted to spiritedly chanting the name of the actor Tom Hanks, who was seated courtside.Spike Lee, a Knicks superfan and film director, attended a game Friday night in Oakland, Calif., between the Golden State Warriors and the Dallas Mavericks. When Warriors Coach Steve Kerr greeted Lee on the court and asked him what he was doing there, Lee laughed and said, “I haven’t seen a good basketball game this year.”Amid the wreck, Coach Derek Fisher has done his best to maintain a calming tone. He has, at times, picked spots to express frustration, including one moment after a horrendous 38-point loss to the Sacramento Kings on Tuesday night when he questioned whether his players had shown enough “character and integrity.” But his message of optimism has otherwise remained consistent.Advertisement“I think if everybody has the right perspective on it, it’s not that tough a situation,” Pacers Coach Frank Vogel said of Fisher. “It’s a situation where he’s getting his feet wet as a new coach, a young coach, and there’s an understanding that they’re building to the future.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.For several weeks now, the games the Knicks have played have essentially been forums in which to evaluate their own players. Still, when asked on Saturday whether the Knicks had any plans to use their remaining available roster spot to appraise an additional young player, Fisher said that did not seem to be the case.Vogel said that, from an evaluation standpoint, it was valuable to see how players conducted themselves, even when their teams were losing.“The whole thing about the N.B.A. is trying to get better,” guard Langston Galloway, who started the season with the Knicks’ N.B.A. Development League team, said, “so that’s what guys are trying to do each day.”He added, “I think there are only a few guys that are under contract for next year, so guys are just trying to see what they can do to show this organization they deserve to stick around for the long term.”That most likely does not apply to Bargnani.Yet the Knicks, as they reach the end stages of this strange season, are leaning on him now.REBOUNDSPaul George of the Pacers, who broke his right leg in August, was working out on the Madison Square Garden court before the game, but Frank Vogel said that the team did not have any expectations as to when George, a two-time All-Star, might be ready to play again and that his presence down the stretch would be seen as a bonus if it came about.“Honestly, we’re not even thinking about Paul George right now,” Vogel said. “Hopefully, he can make it back this year and get in some games. But how effective is he going to be having not played in a year?“This is a serious injury. He still has a lot of hurdles to pass before he’s even able to get back on the court. Our whole approach has been that he’s not going to play with us this year, even right now.”A version of this article appears in print on March 8, 2015, on Page SP5 of the New York edition with the headline: Bargnani Is Cheered in One More Game to Mock.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.