By TYLER KEPNER and TIM ROHANMARCH 7, 2015
The right-hander Chris Young, who won the American League Comeback Player of the Year Award last season, signed a one-year, $675,000 contract with Kansas City. He can make up to $5.325 million in incentive bonuses.Young, 35, went 12-9 for Seattle last season after missing all of 2013 because of thoracic outlet syndrome, an injury to the nerves in the lower neck and upper chest. He is expected to pitch in long relief for a staff that has no room in the starting rotation.Young, who has made one playoff appearance in 10 major league seasons, said of joining the Royals, who won the A.L. pennant last season: “At this point in my career, I want to win. What this team did last year, to have a chance at the playoffs and hopefully the World Series, that’s important to me.”WELCOMING OFFICERS’ FAMILIES The Mets are hosting family members of Rafael Ramos and Wenjian Liu, two New York Police Department officers who were shot to death in December. Ramos’s sons, Justin and Jaden, were each given their own lockers, next to Travis d’Arnaud’s, and both were in uniform as ball boys. They also went to dinner with David Wright on Friday night. On Saturday, the Mets held a ceremony in which they presented Liu’s family with a personalized jersey. Pei Xia Chen, Liu’s widow, was overcome with emotion while thanking the team. TIM ROHANAdvertisementHONORARY COACH Jim Harbaugh joined the Oakland Athletics as a guest coach at their spring training camp in Mesa, Ariz., for a day.Harbaugh, the coach of the San Francisco 49ers last season and the new coach at Michigan, was in uniform Saturday. He was expected to coach first base for an inning or two during an exhibition against the Los Angeles Angels. (AP)AdvertisementINJURY LIST Daniel Murphy of the Mets was listed as day to day after X-rays on his right hand came back negative. ... Toronto Blue Jays reliever Brett Cecil has an inflamed shoulder but is expected to resume throwing next week. ... Washington Nationals second baseman Yunel Escobar has a strained side and is expected to be sidelined for seven to 10 days. (AP)A version of this article appears in print on March 8, 2015, on Page SP2 of the New York edition with the headline: Royals Sign Pitcher.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.