By PAT PICKENSMARCH 7, 2015
NEWARK — The N.H.L. experienced a few firsts during the 1994-95 season. The league went through its first lockout, which cost it 111 days of its season and pushed the playoffs into the final week of June.And then, when that season wrapped up, Commissioner Gary Bettman handed out the Stanley Cup to the Devils for the first time.The Devils won two titles after that, but they are celebrating the 20th anniversary of that first championship this weekend. Twenty of 23 players and all three coaches returned for an alumni game Saturday, and the 1995 team was scheduled to be honored in a ceremony Sunday before the Devils’ game against the Philadelphia Flyers.Led by Brian Rolston’s three goals, and bolstered by two more from Scott Niedermayer, the Red team beat the White, 10-6, in Saturday’s alumni game at a sold-out AmeriHealth Pavilion, the Devils’ practice rink.AdvertisementThe Devils Alumni Association organized the weekend and somehow arranged the return of Larry Robinson and Niedermayer, who are assistant coaches in the N.H.L., as well as Bill Guerin and Martin Brodeur, who are front-office staff members in Pittsburgh and St. Louis.Advertisement“It’s been a collective kind of effort,” said Bruce Driver, a former Devils defenseman and the president of the alumni association. “Myself and other former players who are local were communicating with guys, making sure we can get as many guys as we can.”At the start of the 1994-95 season, the Devils had never reached the Stanley Cup finals, having lost seven-game conference finals in 1988 and 1994. The loss in 1994 came against their archrivals, the Rangers, on Stephane Matteau’s goal in double-overtime in Game 7.Although some former team members were still bitter over the season-ending loss, many said they felt that the series set them up for their championship season a year later.“It showed us we had the team,” the former forward John MacLean said. “We were so close the year before, and not to take anything away from the Rangers, but we felt we could have won that series and didn’t, and that’s the way hockey goes. It gave us a belief that we had the talent, and we put our focus into taking care of business.”The season was delayed until Jan. 20 by the league’s second work stoppage, and its first lockout, as each team played a 48-game schedule. The Devils struggled out of the gate, starting 8-10-4, but rebounded to claim 52 points and reach the playoffs as the East’s No. 5 seed.From there, playing a defensive style under Coach Jacques Lemaire, the Devils barely broke a sweat, winning 16 of their 20 playoff games and capping the season with a four-game sweep of the heavily favored Detroit Red Wings.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“We knew that they didn’t give us the respect we deserved,” Bob Carpenter, a former Devils forward, said of the Red Wings. “They thought they had a powerhouse, and they underestimated us. By the time they figured out what was going on, the series was over. They thought the offense was going to beat defense.”Lemaire’s style was referred to as the neutral-zone trap, a 1-2-2 defense in which a forechecker put pressure on the opposition in its own end and forced turnovers on the rink’s neutral ice. Other teams copied that style in subsequent years — benefiting as well from lax rules on holding and hooking — which stands as the dead-puck era.AdvertisementBut members of the 1995 Devils are not keen on the term “trap.”“You don’t give enough credit to the guys who were actually playing it,” MacLean said when asked about the trap. “There were a lot of high hockey I.Q.s that understood the game. You had to be smart to play it.”The 1995 Devils were backstopped by Brodeur, at the time a 22-year-old, second-year goalie. Brodeur went on to win more games (691) than any other N.H.L. netminder. But on Saturday, Brodeur spent two of the alumni game’s three periods playing center, leaving the goaltending duties to Driver.“Bruce wanted to play a little bit in net, so I said for sure,” Brodeur said. “These are fun games — or, this is my first; they’ve looked fun. I had a blast.”Brodeur picked up a goal and an assist for the White team before playing the third period in goal. Brodeur allowed five goals on 22 shots and took the loss.“That’s all right,” Brodeur said of the five goals, adding, when it was suggested that his team had stopped playing defense: “That’s why I only wanted to play one period. I knew that was going to happen. I know these guys.”Although the Devils went on to reach the Cup final four more times and win two more titles, the 1995 championship is considered the most special, as it signified the team’s arrival on the N.H.L.’s biggest stage.“I’m constantly reminded of ’95,” Driver said. “It was kind of unique in how important that team was to the franchise. That team set the standard for greatness.”An article in some editions last Sunday about the reunion of the Devils team that won the Stanley Cup in 1995 misstated the number of days the 1994-95 lockout cost the N.H.L. It was 111 days — not 114 — from the date of the first scheduled game to the date the first game was played.A version of this article appears in print on March 8, 2015, on Page SP4 of the New York edition with the headline: Devils Toast Men Who Hoisted the Team’s First Cup.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.