By KAREN CROUSEMARCH 7, 2015
DORAL, Fla. —  J. B. Holmes is like the miler who runs a blistering first lap and tries to hold off the pack. In his first loop around Trump National Doral’s Blue Monster, Holmes tied a course record with a 10-under-par 62. He has played the next 36 holes in one under, including a two-under 70 on Saturday to maintain his lead at the Cadillac Championship, a World Golf Championships event.At 11-under-par 205, Holmes is five strokes ahead of Dustin Johnson, who posted a 69, and Bubba Watson, who recorded a 70. Another stroke back, in fourth, is Ryan Moore (74).“To be able to have that kind of lead, I don’t have the mind-set that I have to go out and shoot 65,” Holmes said. “Somebody may go out tomorrow and shoot a low score, but I don’t feel like I have to go out there and press.”Holmes, a three-time PGA Tour winner, is trying to become the first golfer to secure a wire-to-wire victory on the tour since Rory McIlroy at last year’s British Open. A day after flinging his 3-iron into the water on the eighth hole, McIlroy, the world No. 1, carded a 72 while playing with 13 clubs in his bag.AdvertisementA man in scuba gear ventured into the water along the eighth hole and retrieved McIlroy’s club Saturday, but McIlroy did not sound as if he wanted, or needed, it back.Advertisement“I looked where the pin positions were and where the tees were, and I didn’t need a 3-iron, and I felt good with the wedges that I have in the bag,” McIlroy said.McIlroy’s club fling elicited so much reaction that it is hard to imagine a bigger spotlight being thrown on golf if McIlroy were leading the tournament (as it is, he is 10 strokes behind Holmes). Nobody in the third round matched McIlroy’s histrionics, but Holmes and Johnson did come through with twin theatrics. In the span of less than 30 minutes, both aced the par-3 fourth, which was playing 207 yards, using 7-irons.“I thought if I hit it perfect, with a little bit of a cut, it would stay straight, and it did,” Holmes said. “So one of those rare times you get a hole in one where you actually hit it just like you want to.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.An ace was not on many players’ radars, not with the wind blowing right to left on the hole and water on the right.“You’re going to have to play a pretty gutsy shot to start it right at that pin,” said McIlroy, whose eyes widened when he was told of the aces.“Both had a hole in one?” McIlroy said. He laughed. “That’s why I’m not leading the tournament.”Holmes, 32, played his best golf in the day’s worst weather. As the wind and rain intensified, he made four consecutive birdies on the back, beginning at No. 14. A bogey at the 18th did not dampen his spirits.“Obviously, you want to make some birdies, but I definitely wasn’t planning on making four,” Holmes said. “Was just trying to get one or just come in and make some pars, because I did have the lead.”He will employ the same strategy Sunday. “I’m just going to go out tomorrow and control what I control and do my routines,” Holmes said, “and whatever happens, happens.”A version of this article appears in print on March 8, 2015, on Page SP9 of the New York edition with the headline: Holmes Leads by Five After a Round of Maintenance.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.