AdvertisementSupported byRoundupBy The Associated PressReal Madrid, the Spanish league leader, stumbled in the title race for the second straight week with a 1-0 loss at Athletic Bilbao on Saturday.Bilbao’s Aritz Aduriz headed in the game’s only goal in the 26th minute, and the 20-year-old striker Iñaki Williams outshined Madrid’s high-powered attack, led by Cristiano Ronaldo.Ronaldo did not have a shot on goal, and Madrid’s best chance came toward the end of the game when Gareth Bale’s long lob hit the post.Madrid, which tied at home against Villarreal last week, was left 2 points ahead of Barcelona, which can take the league lead by beating Rayo Vallecano on Sunday. “We gave the game away,” Madrid Manager Carlo Ancelotti said.Bilbao, which rose to eighth place, earned this victory three days after advancing to the Copa del Rey final, where it will meet Barcelona in May. Less than three months ago, Madrid seemed unbeatable, finishing 2014 with a 22-game winning streak, a Spanish record. Since then, injuries, tired starters and tougher competition have brought the club down to earth.Since the winter break, Madrid has lost three times and drawn once in 11 league games and has exited the Copa del Rey. It hosts Schalke on Tuesday in the second leg of the Champions League round of 16, looking to make good on its 2-0 aggregate-goals advantage.Earlier, forward Vitolo scored twice to lead Sevilla to a 4-3 win at Deportivo La Coruña.FAN TROUBLE IN F.A. CUP Aston Villa’s win over visiting West Bromwich Albion in a tense F.A. Cup quarterfinal was marred by crowd trouble, with visiting West Brom fans throwing seats and Villa supporters invading the field during and after the game.Villa beat its rival behind second-half goals by Fabian Delph and Scott Sinclair in a 2-0 victory. Each team had a player sent off in the closing minutes.Toward the end of the match, West Brom fans threw seats into the section of the crowd below them, which contained Villa supporters. Some Villa fans jumped over the hoardings and ran onto the pitch during stoppage time in a premature celebration, and then several hundred more people invaded the field after the final whistle. “It’s disgraceful,” West Brom Manager Tony Pulis said. “We don’t want to see those scenes. They’ve beaten us and for that to happen, that’s just mindless idiots.”Delph said his captain’s armband and left boot were removed, and that some fans “tried to kiss me and were biting me. It was scary.”Villa Manager Tim Sherwood added: “You want to celebrate with the whole crowd. I don’t think it’s scary. It probably is for a West Brom player. Emotions are running very high after two wins, and it’s been a huge week for the football club.”In another F.A. Cup quarterfinal, Bradford, which plays in England’s third tier, kept alive its chances of playing in the semifinals at Wembley Stadium after drawing, 0-0, at home against second-tier Reading.In the Premier League’s only game, Tottenham beat host Queens Park Rangers by 2-1, with the young striker Harry Kane enhancing his reputation with both goals for Tottenham.BAYERN BUILDS ITS LEAD Bayern Munich restored an 11-point lead in Germany’s Bundesliga by beating Hannover, 3-1, while Wolfsburg fell to a 1-0 defeat in Augsburg.Bayern finished the first half of the season 11 points ahead, then lost to Wolfsburg, cutting the gap to 8 points.But Wolfsburg’s 11-match unbeaten run came to an end in Augsburg, allowing Bayern to extend its lead.In Hannover, Bayern fell behind in the 25th minute when Hiroshi Kiyotake scored, but Xabi Alonso delivered the tying goal on a free kick three minutes later. Thomas Müller scored on a penalty in the 61st after Robert Lewandowski was hit in the head by Marcelo’s foot on a header attempt in the area, and the substitute Franck Ribéry set up Müller’s second goal with a well-timed cross. Elsewhere, Borussia Dortmund drew, 0-0, in Hamburg after four straight wins; Schalke beat Hoffenheim, 3-1; and Werder Bremen won, 1-0, in Freiburg.Shinji Okazaki scored to help Mainz to a 2-2 draw against Borussia Mönchengladbach.P.S.G. MOVES TO FIRST FOR NOW Zlatan Ibrahimovic scored one goal and was involved in two more as Paris St.-Germain warmed up for next week’s Champions League game against Chelsea with a 4-1 win over Lens. The victory moved P.S.G. to a provisional lead in the French league. Ibrahimovic’s tally was his 12th league goal of the season.Lyon is 2 points behind P.S.G. and can reclaim the top spot with a victory at sixth-place Montpellier on Sunday. Marseille is 3 points behind P.S.G. in third.Advertisement