By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSMARCH 7, 2015
Ryan and Simone Manuel are as close as two siblings can be, even though they attend college in different parts of the country. They chat or text almost every day, doing their best to keep up with what the other is doing.Simone jokingly gets on her big brother to make his free throws. Ryan provides words of encouragement to his little sister before a big swim meet.In all likelihood, these Houston-area natives will have a lot to talk about over the next few weeks.Simone, one of the top freshman swimmers in the country, at Stanford, will be competing at the N.C.A.A. championships beginning March 19. Her brother is a senior guard at Southern Methodist, which is ranked No. 22 and probably will make the field for the N.C.A.A. men’s basketball tournament, which begins March 17.It’s going to be tough keeping up with the Manuels.“It should be a fun experience,” Ryan said. “Hopefully, I’ll make my first N.C.A.A. tournament. Hopefully, for my sister, it will be the first of many.”AdvertisementRyan and the family’s oldest child, Chris, both played college basketball. Simone was inspired to follow in her brothers’ athletic footsteps, but she decided on a different path.Advertisement“I remember it like it was yesterday,” Ryan said, looking back to age 5. “I had the water running and was sitting in the tub. Out of nowhere, my little sister comes around the corner and jumps in the tub with all her clothes on. I think that’s when my parents knew she wanted to be a swimmer.”Her brothers swam in a summer recreational league, and Simone started pestering her mother to join them by the time she was 4. Sharron Manuel insisted her daughter take swim lessons first, but by the second day she was paddling from one side of the pool to the other.Simone played plenty of other sports, including basketball, but she never shared her brothers’ love of the sport.“I played basketball one year at this club program, and I hated it,” she said. “I was the tall one on the team, so I had to play the post position. Well, I was always getting elbowed or hit in the face.”Simone emerged in the last couple of years as one of the top American sprinters. She earned a gold medal at the 2013 world championships from the preliminaries of the 400-meter freestyle relay. She will compete in the 50 and 100 free, and at least one relay, at this summer’s worlds in Kazan, Russia. She will be a leading contender to make the Rio Olympics in 2016.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Her college coach, Greg Meehan, thinks the long-term potential is even more exciting. He believes Simone will be even faster by the time of the 2020 Olympics, and he noted her consistency in sprint-oriented events, which is difficult.“You can just tell this kid is different,” Meehan said.While Simone’s college career is off to a flying start — she’ll compete in the 50, 100 and 200 free at the N.C.A.A. championships in Greensboro, N.C., along with several relays — her brother endured a few bumps along the way at S.M.U.Larry Brown took over as coach when Matt Doherty was fired after Manuel’s freshman season. Brown wanted the 6-foot-4 Ryan to take on more of a point guard role, which did not exactly come naturally.Advertisement“When I got him, it was like taking a power forward and trying to make him a point guard,” Brown said. “It was a tough transition. But every day he gets better.”Things definitely brightened up in Ryan’s senior year. He has started 24 games for the Mustangs (23-6), who host Tulsa in their regular-season finale on Sunday. He is averaging 6.6 points and 3.4 rebounds, and he ranks second on the team in assists. More important, S.M.U. has a shot to make the N.C.A.A. tournament for the first time since 1993.“When you’re trying to help build a program, to get to the level we hope to get to, you need quality kids, high-character kids. Ryan is at the top of the list,” Brown said before jokingly adding, “The only negative is Ryan’s sister swimming at Stanford and not here.”As an African-American, Simone is an anomaly in a sport that remains predominantly white, despite the inroads made by Olympic swimmers like Cullen Jones.Simone would love to see more African-Americans heading to the pool.“I always loved the water,” she said. “I’m trying to let my swimming inspire other people.”A version of this article appears in print on March 8, 2015, on Page SP8 of the New York edition with the headline: Brother and Sister Seek N.C.A.A. Titles, on Court and in the Pool .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.