By ROBERT HARMSMARCH 7, 2015
CHAPEL HILL, N.C. —  The student managers walked through a heavy glass door, turned right down a hallway and stopped at a door to their left. One of them punched in a code and placed a hand on a handprint scanner. The door unlocked and they walked in.“The keys to the kingdom,” Maggie Boulton, a junior, said of their palms, which grant them round-the-clock access to one of the most hallowed basketball arenas in the country, the Dean E. Smith Center.There are six of them, all undergraduates, who serve the coaches and players of the North Carolina men’s basketball team. The Smith Center, said Richie LaGrotta, the head manager, is where they spend up to 50 hours a week.“There’s a lot of days we go in there and we don’t see the light of day,” said Sam Rardin, a senior.AdvertisementFeb. 26 was one of those days. Classes were canceled after several inches of snow fell. But for the basketball team, a snow day meant two practices, at 9 a.m. and at 4 p.m. Between sessions, the managers napped, using white Gatorade towels as pillows and blankets.Advertisement“The epitome of manager life,” Chase Bengel, a sophomore, said of that day, when the managers stayed in the Smith Center for 11 straight hours.Becoming a manager at North Carolina is a straightforward but competitive process. The students start by working as one of 30 counselors at the summer basketball camps hosted by Coach Roy Williams, selected from hundreds of applicants. Based on their work ethic, timeliness and problem-solving skills at camp, 16 are chosen as managers for the junior varsity team before some are called up to the varsity.Their tasks include taking food orders, recording statistics, folding towels and doing almost anything else the players or coaches ask, including rebounding for players in shooting sessions that can last until midnight. They travel and eat with the team, and spend nine hours in the arena with the team on game days.Williams, a disciple of Dean Smith, who died Feb. 7 at 83, has preserved Smith’s philosophy of valuing every person equally, no matter the role or talent.LaGrotta called Williams “basically a clone of Coach Smith.”“They’re the same person,” said LaGrotta, who met Smith once but recognizes the many similarities with Williams. “He talks to us all the time, cracks jokes with us.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Williams, Bengel said, greets the managers when he sees them around campus. One morning, Williams made Bengel and Forrest Reynolds, a junior, sprint at the end of practice after Reynolds joked that the team’s infamous “33” suicides — up and down the court six times in 33 seconds — were easy.That relationship trickles down to the assistant coaches and players. Steve Robinson, an assistant, regularly asks the managers about their grades and social life, Boulton said. On Thursday, Brice Johnson, a Tar Heels forward, joked with Reynolds as the managers began setting up for practice. LaGrotta worked the clock and scoreboard. Maria Vanderford, a sophomore, hung practice jerseys and laid out towels. Bengel prepared cups of water and Gatorade.“Gatorade a little sugary today, Chase?” Reynolds asked Bengel.“Actually, it’s not,” Bengel said, aware that Reynolds does not like his sports drinks too sweet.Advertisement“There’s probably more running jokes in this group of six people than in other groups of six people on campus,” Reynolds said.Before rebounding for the players, Rardin and Reynolds carted out basketballs and launched shots from halfcourt. Reynolds made six of nine at one point. On Saturday, he parlayed that skill into an $18,000 windfall by making one on ESPN’s “College Gameday.” After Reynolds hit the shot, Williams ran on to the court to celebrate with him, shouting, “That’s one of my managers.”The closeness the managers feel for one another is never more evident than before home games, when the six walk out of the locker room together starting on a blue carpet with a Tar Heel on it. They walk for 30 seconds, side by side, before reaching the court, where, under the gazes of 20,000-plus fans, and the six national championship banners, they go to work.“Nothing beats it,” LaGrotta said, adding, “I always call it my family away from my family.”A version of this article appears in print on March 8, 2015, on Page SP11 of the New York edition with the headline: Part of the Team at North Carolina, Without Playing Time.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.