By MARC TRACYMARCH 7, 2015
LEXINGTON, Ky. —  Last month, Kentucky Coach John Calipari garnered attention for seeming to root for Louisiana State to defeat his team in a close contest that Kentucky eventually won, 71-69, to push its record to 24-0.A couple of Calipari’s players heard him say, “I hope we lose,” and responded, “I hope we don’t!”On Saturday afternoon, the top-ranked Wildcats defeated Florida, 67-50, letting the Gators (15-16, 8-10 Southeastern Conference) hang around but ultimately pulling away midway through the second half, overwhelming their opponents with their size and talent.The freshman forward Trey Lyles was Kentucky’s leading scorer with 14 points, but Kentucky’s best player was Karl-Anthony Towns, another, even more bruising freshman big man who contributed 13 points, a game-high 9 rebounds, 6 blocks and even 3 assists, including one from the top of the key early in the first half that any point guard would be proud to feature on his highlight reel.AdvertisementFlorida was led by the sophomore guard Kasey Hill, who scored 15 points, and the junior forward Dorian Finney-Smith, who scored 12.Kentucky (31-0, 18-0) is the first men’s basketball team from a major conference to go undefeated in the regular season since Indiana in 1976 (Wichita State of the Missouri Valley Conference went undefeated in the regular season last year), and it has a realistic chance to match those Hoosiers in much more rarefied air by remaining perfect through the N.C.A.A. national championship game. The Wildcats would be the eighth team to accomplish that feat.If they do so, they will have secured an unprecedented 40-0 record.They certainly seem to want the record. After the game, the Wildcats sported T-shirts that read, “31-0 Not Done.”Understanding Calipari’s psychology and motivational tactics requires a degree in something other than basketball, but one thing that can safely be said is this: Being undefeated was never the point. Cutting down the final nets is.“I’ve never really thought about it,” the junior Willie Cauley-Stein said Friday when asked about the possibility of going undefeated and equaling San Francisco (1956), North Carolina (’57) and four U.C.L.A. teams. “It’s kind of cool, though.”AdvertisementHe added: “We all have one goal — a couple goals. And one of them is winning a national championship.”Kentucky is better primed for a title run than any other team.The Wildcats will receive a double-bye this week at the SEC tournament in Nashville, a breezy four-hour drive away. If they win three games there against teams they have already beaten — and even, probably, if they do not — they will almost certainly receive the top seed in the N.C.A.A. tournament and play their games in Louisville, Cleveland and, for the Final Four, Indianapolis.In the N.C.A.A. tournament, they will not face a team with a more imposing frontcourt or more roster depth because no such team exists. Because of the media buzz that attends any Kentucky team, compounded with the electricity that attends teams on an undefeated run, they have effectively already played a month’s worth of games in playoff atmospheres.“Every game seems to be an event,” Calipari said Friday.Kentucky has run the gantlet of a conference that, while nobody’s idea of a group of death, may be underrated. The Wildcats’ victims have included Kansas (now No. 9), Louisville (No. 16), North Carolina (No. 19) and Providence (No. 24).Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.No team is unbeatable, and in the coming weeks there will be much discussion about which teams might spoil Kentucky’s season: No. 2 Virginia, which has the only defense more efficient than Kentucky’s; No. 3 Duke, which has the star freshman big man Jahlil Okafor; No. 5 Arizona, a physical standout that has bided its time out West all season; No. 6 Wisconsin, which would love revenge for its heartbreaking loss to the Wildcats in last year’s Final Four.But Kentucky’s most threatening opponent might be what Calipari calls clutter — the outside noise and hype.Players and coaches who have been in the Wildcats’ position agreed that the optimal strategy included looking past the potential to make history.“It wasn’t the focus,” Quinn Buckner, a television analyst for the Indiana Pacers who was a senior on the 1976 Hoosiers, said of going unbeaten. “The focus was to win a championship and get better — get better every day.”Referring to Bob Knight, Buckner added: “Coach Knight was terrific about that: ‘As long as you’re doing that, don’t worry about pleasing the media. You better worry about pleasing me.’ ”AdvertisementSt. Joseph’s Coach Phil Martelli, who guided the Hawks through an undefeated regular season in 2003-4, said the “circus” surrounding the phenomenon led to “some tired minds, some tired bodies” that contributed to losses to Xavier in the Atlantic 10 tournament and to Oklahoma State in the round of 8.“At the end of the year,” Martelli said, “we didn’t play as well, and some of it was the psychological, the mental grind of answering questions and that kind of thing.”(Along with St. Joseph’s and Wichita State, several midmajors have had undefeated regular seasons, including Larry Bird’s Indiana State team of 1978-79 and Nevada-Las Vegas in 1990-91.)Some Kentucky fans might wish the team had lost one somewhere along the way.New England Patriots Coach Bill Belichick attended Kentucky’s 72-64 victory at Georgia on Wednesday night — a game in which Kentucky trailed by 9 points in the second half — as if to remind everyone of the potential pitfalls of not losing until the last game of the season, as the Patriots did in 2007-8 (with a defeat in Super Bowl XLII).Calipari seemed to say something along those lines last month when he spoke of the importance of extending second-half leads.“You look at Wichita State,” he said, referring to a Kentucky game in the second round of the N.C.A.A. tournament against a Shockers team that had not yet lost that season. “They had us down 10. They messed around; we got back in the game; all of a sudden the weight of the world was on them at the end of the season, and their season ended.”On the other hand, should the Wildcats win the SEC title, they might find that never losing was excellent preparation. After all, once it comes time for the N.C.A.A. tournament, the national champion is the team that goes undefeated.A version of this article appears in print on March 8, 2015, on Page SP11 of the New York edition with the headline: Kentucky Finishes 31-0, but That’s Just a Warm-Up for the Ultimate Run.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.