AdvertisementSupported byBy David WaldsteinORLANDO, Fla. — With a threatened work stoppage seemingly averted and 2,000 standing-room-only tickets hastily added to a sold-out Citrus Bowl, Major League Soccer was set to introduce its two newest teams here Sunday.New York City F.C., after its choppy rollout, and Orlando City Soccer Club, with a fan base bursting to embrace the area’s hottest sports franchise, will face off in the inaugural M.L.S. game for both teams in what is expected to be a raucous, purple-infused spectacle.In the Bronx, workers were busily scraping away snow at Yankee Stadium and installing turf for N.Y.C.F.C.’s home debut next Sunday. But in Orlando, the weather was expected to be balmy, and 60,000 tickets were initially sold for a game featuring the league’s two newest international stars: the Spanish midfielder David Villa for N.Y.C.F.C. and Brazil’s affable Kaká for Orlando.The extra 2,000 S.R.O. tickets were added Wednesday and sold out in about 24 hours, the Orlando club said. Such is the substantial interest in Orlando, where fans gathered at the airport to greet the team on its return from a recent preseason game.Five years ago, when Phil Rawlins, Orlando’s team president, predicted that his minor league club would one day join M.L.S., few could have envisioned the buzz the team would generate as it roared to the 5 p.m. kickoff. The game was scheduled to be televised on ESPN2, as well as in parts of Brazil and Britain on Sky Sports, a first for M.L.S.That makes for an impressive debut for a team that was once a third-division United Soccer League outfit in Austin, Tex.But Orlando S.C. took up residence in Florida with the express intent of joining the top flight of American soccer. It adopted Fiorentina purple as the team color and, in rapid succession, secured a stadium deal, an invitation to M.L.S. and a Brazilian star in Kaká. More recently, it signed the American winger Brek Shea, a former F.C. Dallas mainstay whose two-year tenure in England was a disappointment.What else could a new team need? It already had a passionate fan base, an organized front office and a well-regarded coach, Adrian Heath, who turned down an offer with Toronto F.C. in 2012 to see through Orlando’s entry into M.L.S.While Orlando has had its core structure in place for years, N.Y.C.F.C. was formed out of nothing from the marriage of two of professional sports’ richest and most powerful organizations: the Yankees and Manchester City of England’s Premier League.Manchester City contributed 80 percent of the financing and all of the soccer know-how, while the locals helped sign up roughly 14,000 season-ticket holders.Still, N.Y.C.F.C.’s path has had bumps. Most notably, there were delays in building a planned soccer-only stadium, grousing over the team’s new sky-blue uniforms (some complained that they were too similar to Manchester City’s outfits) and the resignation of the chief business officer, Tim Pernetti, six weeks before the opener.But the real trouble came on Dec. 31, when Manchester City announced that Frank Lampard would not join the club on time. He had proved too valuable to the parent club and would not arrive in New York for six more months.Fans have since been reassured that Lampard will join the team in July, after the Premier League season and a brief rest. Further encouraging news came with the signing of the American midfielder Mix Diskerud, a solid and promising young player, from Rosenborg in Norway.Last month, when N.Y.C.F.C. was in Manchester during a preseason trip, Lampard took the entire team to dinner, perhaps another demonstration of his commitment to playing for the club. According to Diskerud, Lampard demonstrated enough knowledge of the players to suggest that he had probably done some research on them.“I told Frank that the midfield will be safe until he comes,” Diskerud said last week. “Nothing to worry about.”Diskerud, 24, is fighting to get more playing time with the United States national team, and he said that Coach Jurgen Klinsmann’s criticisms of the league would not disrupt that process. Diskerud noted that Klinsmann had stressed that players should get out of their comfort zones and face new challenges.“We both agree this is not my comfort zone,” Diskerud said. “I think it’s going to be good for me.”Kaká, too, has emphasized that coming to M.L.S. is no vacation. He has said he also hopes to use it as a way to get back into international play with Brazil, as unlikely as that might seem.Even with Kaká, Shea and the rugged defender Aurelien Collin, Orlando is still some way from becoming an elite team. N.Y.C.F.C., though, has the potential to be competitive, especially once Lampard arrives.The team looked competent during the preseason, incorporating defender Shay Facey, who was on loan from Manchester City. But as Coach Jason Kreis pointed out, the preseason means nothing, even for a new team with a brief and bumpy past.Advertisement