AdvertisementSupported byOn BaseballBy Tyler KepnerMESA, Ariz. — David Ross has felt it once before, the euphoria of romping out to the mound as a World Series champion, bathed in the lights of an ancient ballpark in a flagship baseball town. He wants to do it again, which is why he picked the Chicago Cubs as a free agent this winter.“This is the place to be in Major League Baseball right now,” Ross said Friday at his locker before a morning practice. “To be able to hold a World Series trophy in this city — it’s the Holy Grail, right?”That vision is the best and worst thing about the Cubs. It is so tantalizing that it is hard to resist the temptation to flip to the end of the story. As soon as the Cubs stop tearing down their roster, they give rise to the hope that sustains their tortured fans: This is the year.History and logic say it is not. The Cubs have not won the World Series since 1908, and have not won the National League pennant since 1945. They can probably contend for a playoff berth this season. That limited expectation should be enough.“We are so fully aware that we have not done anything yet — at all,” said Theo Epstein, the Cubs’ president for baseball operations. “We’re a fifth-place team three years in a row or whatever it is, and obviously we haven’t won the World Series in 107 years. We’ve gotten a lot of rope with our fans, with our owners, with this period of not being competitive in order to try to build this organization.“All we’ve done is get to a point where we have an opportunity to go compete and go do something special at the big league level. But the hard part begins now.”The Cubs have actually finished in fifth place in each of the last five seasons, three since Epstein arrived from Boston in October 2011 and imported his general manager, Jed Hoyer, from San Diego. This winter, after going 73-89, the Cubs signed an ace starter, Jon Lester, and a decorated manager, Joe Maddon. They traded for a veteran center fielder (Dexter Fowler) and catcher (Miguel Montero). They added complementary parts with championship backgrounds, like Ross, who won with the Red Sox in 2013, and reliever Jason Motte, who won with the Cardinals in 2011.The Cubs did not plan to accelerate from the slow lane like this. They needed tangible signs of progress last season, and they got them.First baseman Anthony Rizzo moved up on the plate, got better pitches to hit and became a star. Shortstop Starlin Castro cut his errors and learned to drive fastballs. Jake Arrieta and Kyle Hendricks emerged as viable starters. Outfielder Jorge Soler improved his strength program and tore through the farm system. Third baseman Kris Bryant bashed 43 homers in the minors. High-impact prospects like infielder Addison Russell and catcher Kyle Schwarber joined the organization.After witnessing all that, the Cubs gave end-of-season surveys — 150 questions each — to front-office personnel, scouts and coaches. When Epstein studied the results, he found a consensus: Sign Lester, then keep adding. A six-year, $155 million deal snagged Lester, but the person who announced it — Maddon, at the winter meetings in San Diego — was never part of the blueprint.Maddon, who had guided four underfunded Tampa Bay teams to the playoffs, startled the industry when he opted out of his contract in October. The Cubs acted swiftly to replace their own manager, Rick Renteria. He had done nothing wrong, but he was not Maddon.Epstein had interviewed Maddon in Boston before hiring Terry Francona in 2003. The two had not spoken much since, until Epstein and Hoyer met Maddon at a recreational vehicle park in Pensacola, Fla., as Maddon embarked on a cross-country drive. They soon signed him for five years and $25 million.“Believe me, if we couldn’t cohabitate, this could never happen,” Maddon said. “It was all based on philosophy. That was the conversation behind the R.V. It was all about: ‘How do you see things? Are we still on the same page? Do we still believe in the same things?’ That’s what became obvious. “When you come here and you work with these guys, it’s really very similar to where I had come from, regarding the progressive thought process, the analytical component, all that stuff.”Maddon, a 61-year-old baseball lifer, is a helpful recruiter. Motte, the former St. Louis closer, said he met Maddon around the batting cage last season, bonding with him over the bracelets that both men wear for charity. Jason Hammel, a starter the Cubs traded last season, re-signed and was thrilled to be reunited with Maddon, whom he knew from his time with the Rays.“We were trying to figure out the dress code, because his has always been crazy,” Hammel said. “And he says, ‘You know what, honestly, the dress code this year is going to be: If you feel hot, wear it.’ That was it. It was awesome. He really makes it fun to come to the ballpark.”More important, perhaps, was another insight from Hammel: Maddon does not intimidate young players. Maddon has no interest in policing a clubhouse. He respects players by letting them be themselves, and they, in turn, respect him.Epstein, whose savvy with numbers is well known, said there was no formula for how many wins a manager is worth. But Maddon’s value could be extraordinary.“Let’s put it this way,” Epstein said, “if he makes a handful of our best young players more relaxed to the point where they feel they can be themselves, that’s when players thrive.”The Cubs, under Epstein, have prioritized hitters over pitchers in their major trades and top draft choices. It is a strategy based on the current state of baseball, which is rich in pitching, and on history. The best hitting prospects, Epstein said, almost always become viable everyday players. The best pitching prospects often fizzle.“We’re not saying pitching isn’t important,” Epstein said. “Pitching is hugely important. But given the batter-pitcher dynamic now, it’s easier to develop pitching, easier to find pitching. Pitchers have naturally more confidence because the rules are tilted in their favor right now, and it takes special bats to be able to perform at truly elite levels. So we went for certainty, and we went for scarcity.”The Kansas City Royals nearly won the World Series last fall with an offense based on highly regarded prospects they had developed. Yet most of them struggled to adjust to the majors, and the Royals endured years of losing as they waited for them to make good.The Cubs envision a future lineup with Rizzo, Castro and some combination of Russell, Bryant, Soler, Schwarber, Arismendy Alcantara, Albert Almora and Javier Baez. But none of those players, besides Rizzo and Castro, have played a full season in the majors.The hope is that Maddon can smooth their path, so that some year soon — though not quite yet — the Cubs will be a World Series favorite. That is the idea, anyway. Others, including the Cubs’ new ace, are less patient.“When I played in Boston, we didn’t have time to grow up,” Lester said. “You just had to show up and play. Each year you’re expected to win. That’s how I feel. Every year, they should come in and expect to be not only division winners, but World Series champions.”There it is again, the mission that haunts the Cubs and invigorates them, all at once. This may not be the year, not just yet. But the outlook looks better all the time.Advertisement