By KAREN CROUSEMARCH 7, 2015
DORAL, Fla. —  After Adam Scott’s high-profile split with his caddie, dozens of suitors reached out to him, including a man who enclosed a photo of himself and claimed to have ties to Japan’s Imperial House. A match made in Snapchat, it was not.“In his letter, he says he’s extremely lazy,” Scott said with a laugh. “I can’t even remember the whole thing. But I’ve kept it because it’s just too good.”Scott was replacing Steve Williams, considered one of the best caddies ever, who wanted to slip into semiretirement in his native New Zealand. He shouldn’t have been surprised that he was deluged by résumés. A genial one-time major winner who spent three months last year at the top of the world rankings, Scott makes an appealing boss.Some of the letters of introduction Scott received left him with the impression that not everybody understood the job qualifications. He received one from a man with rippling muscles whose photograph made clear that lifting a 50-pound bag would pose no problem. The difficulty rested in leaving his 85-year-old mother, with whom he lives. “He made a point of telling me that as well in the application,” Scott said.AdvertisementIn the absence of a Tinder-like app to match golfers and caddies, Scott filled the role played by Williams the past three years the old-fashioned way. He organized tryouts.AdvertisementWhen Williams was still employed by Scott but was off racing cars, Scott enlisted a surfer, Benji Weatherley, to carry his bag at the 2014 Sony Open in Hawaii. That was a one-off arrangement.The auditioning process became more formal several months later when Scott invited Eddie Gardino to work for him in Japan and David Clark and Mike Kerr to caddie for him for two weeks apiece after that. Clark, whose former employers include the World Golf Hall of Fame member Vijay Singh, carried Scott’s bag at a World Golf Championships event in China and at the Australian Masters, both in November. Kerr took over for the Australian Open and the Australian P.G.A. Championship.Kerr had worked for Ernie Els, Lee Westwood and, more recently, Thorbjorn Olesen. His qualifications were solid, but would the chemistry work? Williams was a forceful presence, which is what Scott needed then, but now he is in a different place in his career and his life. “I know his personality quite well,” Scott said of Kerr, “and it was along the lines of what I thought I needed.”After Scott finished in the top five in both tournaments, he offered Kerr the job full time. They are making their 2015 debut this week at the World Golf Championships event at Doral’s Blue Monster.“Once he’s on the bag, they just prove they are good caddies, and I felt good with that,” Scott said.He no doubt would have been fine with Clark, too. In general, caddies are more Sherpa than soul mate.“You’ve just got to pick someone,” Scott said. “I could keep having different guys try all the time, but I don’t think I was going to get anything more, so I felt confident with Mike and my decision.”AdvertisementDeciding on a caddie can be as great a leap of faith as choosing a mate. Different golfers have different approaches. Some play the field, showing up with a different person on their bag from one month to the next.Others find someone they are compatible with and settle happily into a long-term relationship. Rory McIlroy’s partnership with J. P. Fitzgerald was an arranged marriage brokered by McIlroy’s then-manager, Chubby Chandler, in 2008, when a teenage McIlroy was well outside the top 150 in the world rankings. They have been together since, through four major championship victories, two management company splits and one broken engagement.In 2011, when McIlroy was going through a rough patch on the course, he publicly defended Fitzgerald against critics who suggested he needed to make a caddie change. “You’re spending eight hours a day with someone, there is going to be times where you feel like you just need your own space,” said McIlroy, the world No. 1, “but I’ve never really felt that with J. P. I’ve never really seen any reason to change.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The most enduring partnership on the tour is between the five-time major winner Phil Mickelson and Jim Mackay. It began in 1992 with a conversation between Mackay and Steve Loy, who coached Mickelson at Arizona State. Mickelson was turning pro, and Loy asked Mackay during a tournament week for caddie recommendations.Mackay mentioned a few candidates, and described their strengths, but he had to cut short the conversation because his player showed up. Mackay wrote Loy a note apologizing for having to hurry off, and included his phone number in case Loy had any more questions.Mickelson saw the note and appreciated Mackay’s gesture. He told Loy he had identified whom he wanted to carry his bag. When Mickelson made his first professional PGA Tour start, at the 1992 United States Open, Mackay was at his side.A federal lawsuit filed last month by more than 80 caddies against the tour has put the caddie-player microcosm under the magnifying glass. The plaintiffs gained a powerful ally recently when Williams added his name to the suit.What started as a disagreement over unpaid endorsement fees generated by the title sponsor’s logo on caddie bibs has deepened into a referendum on the sport’s inherent caste system, one that potentially pits employer versus employee and high-profile caddies against their less well-known and well-off brethren.Since the suit was filed, caddies have complained about being denied the shelter of a clubhouse during fog delays or electrical storms, of being turned away by the police from locker rooms when they are trying to retrieve their players’ bags, of having nowhere to park. The controversy threatens to overshadow the fact that at the most elemental sense, the player and caddie are in this together.AdvertisementLike snowflakes or marriage, no two relationships between a player and caddie are alike. Some players blame their caddies for bad shots and unlucky bounces; if they find someone whose focus becomes sharper with every sharp word, they have the makings of a beautiful relationship. Some players expect their caddies to pick every club and make every read on the greens. Others use their caddies mostly for moral and mental support.There are always a few players who come across as princes — until they hit a bad shot and turn into toads. The caddie Ted Scott, no relation to Adam, recalled working for a golfer known for thanking volunteers, picking up trash on the course and generally behaving like a gentleman.Scott was hired by the player, but their partnership was short-lived. Midway through the second round of their second tournament, in what quickly had become a pattern, the player berated Scott under his breath for a bad decision. At the end of the round, they mutually agreed to go their separate ways.Since 2006, Scott has worked for Bubba Watson, best known for his 2012 and 2014 Masters victories and his public scolding of Scott on the second-to-last hole of the 2013 Travelers Championship. After Watson hit his tee shot into the water, setting up a triple bogey that dropped him from the lead and out of contention, he blamed Scott in an exchange captured by television microphones.Scott did not get angry because he knew Watson did not mean it. He recognized Watson was a kettle at full boil letting off steam. He said Watson was quick to apologize afterward. The reason their partnership has been so long and fruitful, Scott said, is that they both own up to their mistakes and bad moments.Everything Scott needed to know to be a good caddie, he said, he learned in premarital counseling: Never go to bed mad and never bring up the past. From his wife, Melanie, he absorbed one more lesson that has proved helpful: If one person is mad, the other person has to remain calm.“My job is to help Bubba play his best golf,” Scott said. “If I get under his skin, he’s no longer focused on his golf, he’s focused on me.”He added: “Bubba’s the artist. I’m just carrying the brush.”A version of this article appears in print on March 8, 2015, on Page SP9 of the New York edition with the headline: The Right Caddie? It Depends on the Golfer.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.