AdvertisementSupported byOn College FootballBy Marc TracyAn apparently homeless Baylor football player was recently declared ineligible because of N.C.A.A. violations, resulting in a spasm of outrage followed by bewilderment. One week later, there remain more questions than answers about this case and, more important, about the procedure by which college students are barred from playing sports, an increasingly significant topic as the N.C.A.A.’s power to regulate its member institutions, from academics to amateurism, erodes.According to an article published in December on Sports Illustrated’s website, Silas Nacita, a walk-on running back for Baylor, had given up a scholarship to Cornell, drifted and eventually pieced together academic scholarships and a federal loan to attend Baylor and pursue his dream of playing for the Bears.He turned into an immediate cause célèbre for N.C.A.A. critics when he posted a statement on Twitter saying he was “no longer eligible to play football and pursue my dream” because a “close family friend” had put him “in an apartment” and contributed “living expenses.” “I had no idea I was breaking any rules, but I respect the decision of the N.C.A.A.,” he said in the statement.The story circulated widely — and was covered by a plethora of national outlets — even though its subject attempted only 31 carries in five games last season. Its popularity showed not only the public’s receptiveness to a story about the college sports establishment quashing the aspirations of a young man, but also the public’s misunderstanding of how the N.C.A.A. and its more than 1,000 member institutions self-regulate.“The N.C.A.A. did not declare Silas Nacita ineligible and Baylor has not requested a waiver for him,” the N.C.A.A. wrote on Twitter a few hours after Nacita’s post.In a statement released soon after, Baylor Athletic Director Ian McCaw said, “Silas Nacita will not be a part of the football program moving forward due to rules violations that impact his eligibility.” He added that Nacita was still enrolled at Baylor. The university declined to make anyone in its athletic department available for further comment.The balance between N.C.A.A. control and athletic programs’ autonomy has never been more charged: The five largest conferences have been granted increased power to legislate; the N.C.A.A. is facing accusations that it overreached with its sanctions against Penn State; a reported 20 programs are being investigated for academic misconduct. On Friday, sanctions were levied against Syracuse in part because of findings of academic misconduct by the men’s basketball program.“I think we all know, and even our members, that there’s a lot of misunderstanding around how eligibility works, and we’ve tried to do what we can to help people understand it,” the N.C.A.A. spokeswoman Stacey Osburn said.N.C.A.A. enforcement is so complicated that even Nacita appeared to make a common error, implying that the N.C.A.A. had ruled him ineligible. In fact, the N.C.A.A. does not declare players ineligible — their colleges do. Each university’s athletic department has a staff devoted to compliance.“If there’s a violation where N.C.A.A. rules say that a student is ineligible, it’s the institution’s responsibility to declare that student ineligible,” said Elizabeth Heinrich, who has worked in compliance for 10 years at the N.C.A.A., Texas and Michigan, where she is chief of compliance.The ineligibility process is also remarkably ad hoc. While violations are judged by the letter of the law, the N.C.A.A. routinely reinstates violators without punishments, on the basis of what amounts to common sense.“They make a lot of exceptions where there’s good reason to make an exception,” Heinrich said, referring to the N.C.A.A.For example, the bylaw prohibiting “preferential treatment” — which Nacita may have violated — “precludes the receipt of any benefit based on athletics reputation or skill,” said Geoff Silver, a former N.C.A.A. director of academic and membership affairs who is now at the law firm Jackson Lewis. He added that this “is not a difficult standard to meet when you consider the likelihood that a prospect or student-athlete came into contact with the potential benefactor as a result of their athletics participation.”Silver added, “It’s really left to the interpretive process to ensure the rule is applied reasonably and fairly.” Translation: The rule is strict, but it can bend. This is what the N.C.A.A. was referring to in its statement when it said Baylor had not sought a waiver. Technically, waivers apply to continuing or future situations that under normal circumstances would constitute a violation. For example, last year Boise State received a waiver so it could provide assistance to a homeless recruit until the start of summer classes, when his room and board would begin. Reinstatements deal with past violations (Osburn clarified that Baylor had not asked for either).Take the case of Georgia running back Todd Gurley, a former Heisman contender. Last season, Georgia held him out of two games during its investigation into whether he had received several thousand dollars in exchange for signed merchandise. He was eventually declared ineligible for the rest of the season, but then Georgia applied for his reinstatement. The N.C.A.A. ruled that the appropriate suspension was four games; Georgia lost a subsequent appeal — heard by campus representatives, not N.C.A.A. staff members — and Gurley became eligible again after missing four games. Although Gurley missed four games rather than two, it was still considerably less than the rest of the season.After Nacita first issued his statement, observers privately expressed surprise that Baylor had not sought reinstatement.The N.C.A.A. has gone out of its way lately to appear responsive to a perceived negative public image. When the N.C.A.A. suspended Gurley, President Mark Emmert expressed more sorrow than anger, saying he hoped members would re-examine the rule prohibiting signing of merchandise for money.Still, whether to seek reinstatement is at the university’s discretion, according to Heinrich.“There’s multiple reasons why an institution might not file for reinstatement,” Heinrich said, adding, “Maybe you don’t think they’re going to be reinstated — you certainly see that with agent cases.” Frequently, she said, members will informally reach out to the N.C.A.A. office to gauge the likelihood of reinstatement. The N.C.A.A. would not confirm whether that had happened in this case.Nacita subsequently released two more statements on Twitter, and one cast doubt on whether his violation was as trivial as it initially appeared. His benefactor, he said, had not been a “close family friend,” but, rather, “merely acquaintances.” He blamed himself for “disregarding guidance from Baylor compliance on what benefits I may accept.” Nacita did not respond to a request for comment.Nacita’s admitted contradiction raised the possibility that he had not been truthful with Baylor, which, Heinrich said, could have influenced Baylor’s decision not to seek reinstatement. “If they find you have lied in the enforcement process, you’re typically going to start at a year of ineligibility,” she said. Similarly, although finding that the college did an inadequate job of educating the student about violations could be considered a mitigating circumstance, Nacita implied that Baylor’s compliance department had offered appropriate guidance.Regardless, there is now a football player sidelined by an association and a member institution that assert they want to encourage students to play sports as a supplement to education. “In my opinion, the provision of basic living expenses needs to be exempted from the rule,” said Silver, the former N.C.A.A. official. “It shouldn’t be relevant to a student-athlete’s eligibility if a good Samaritan wants to put a roof over his or her head.”He added, “Unfortunately, the current rule is not that straightforward, and when these issues arise, schools and the N.C.A.A. staff must spend time and money vetting them.”Coach Art Briles told reporters last week he would love to have Nacita back, should he receive his eligibility.But a week later, the N.C.A.A. said it still had not received a request for Nacita’s reinstatement.Advertisement