

 Michael Powell
 

SPORTS OF THE TIMES
MARCH 7, 2015
PORT ST. LUCIE, Fla. — Pop. Pop! POP!Matthew Harvey, Boy Wonder pitcher, is back on the mound after an 18-month, take-a-tendon-from-the-back-of-his-leg-and-insert-it-into-his-elbow medical sabbatical. He rears and deals for the first time, and that sound is of Mets world sucking in its collective breath.Will the ligaments hold? Will Harvey get the jitters? Are those 12 career wins a tease? Will their alpha dog ace come spiraling back to earth ...POP!Reporters steal a look at a radar gun wielded by a scout in the 13th row behind the plate. The glowing red number is 98. As in miles per hour. Which is a Kool and the Gang moment for Mets General Manager Sandy Alderson and Manager Terry Collins.To commit optimism is a defensible rite of spring training. The Northern teams and the reporters who follow them have passed months dodging snowstorms, slate skies, black ice and indecently frigid temperatures. Suddenly life is pines and palms, 80-degree temperatures and fat, lazy puffball clouds cruising like yachts over the flatness of Central Florida.AdvertisementIn your T-shirt, on a sultry evening with foul balls disappearing into periwinkle sky, who would not want to think this team measurably better than last year’s so-so model? (Note to self: Trying to direct your son to shovel snow in Brooklyn as you sit in a soft 79-degree evening watching the Mets is an exercise in lost authority.)AdvertisementThe mood at Port St. Lucie, the spring training lair of the Mets, is indisputably upbeat. Players have trained their eyes on the playoffs. So has management.And despite myself — optimism to a lifelong Mets fan is a foreign tongue never fully mastered — I can’t entirely disagree. The pitching is formidable. Harvey is a made-for-Broadway package, inclined to tan himself in the media spotlight. Jacob deGrom, the longhaired string-bean kid, tossed scalding heat in his rookie year. Zack Wheeler appears an elegant work in progress. Kid pitchers with live arms are lined up in the minors like planes on the tarmac at J.F.K. Not the least is this 6-foot-6, 240-pound blond kid nicknamed Thor.The bullpen is thicket thick with arms, from Jenrry Mejia and his Harpo Marx curls and body-exploding delivery to Bobby Parnell to the twin hulks Jeurys Familia and Vic Black.The 41-year-old, 290-pound pitcher Bartolo Colon occupies a pitching category all to himself. He pitched Thursday evening and was in fighting trim. Which is to say his fastball hovered at 82 miles an hour and his body fat ratio looked to be about 42 percent.Oh, and he yielded no runs. (Last year, he won 15 games and posted the second best WHIP among the starters.)Even the team’s maybe, maybe not shortstop, Wilmer Flores, has a sweet broom sweep of a swing, his shoulders level, the ball taking a jolt off his bat. His range is marginal, his turning of double plays awkward if still statistically efficient. However, if the Mets can stifle their tendency to jerk him in and out of the lineup, he just might hit enough to earn himself a full-time job.You watch Flores and Juan Lagares and Travis d’Arnaud take their licks in the batting cage. The batting Svengali Kevin Long hangs on the back of the batting cage, a chattering, chortling, encouragement-whispering little bolt of a man. Lagares sends balls crashing in all directions. A recently graduated pupil, he now is firmly counted among team regulars.AdvertisementLong lets out a long appreciative whistle: “Maaaaaaan, what a B.P.!”For Collins, this is the first year since he’s arrived that genuine expectations pile like a valise on his back. He has wisely tried to tamp down too many enthusiasm eruptions. He studies the hitters with his hands steepled over his head.The difference between a 78-win and a playoff-contending 88-win team can be greater than it might appear. Winning teams can have a mysterious alchemy.I passed beautiful evenings in San Francisco last October, watching a Giants team with just two hitters with as many as 20 home runs. They weren’t fast or graceful and yet they are in indisputable possession of a World Series trophy.Wandering the Mets’ St. Lucie locker room is like walking a horizontal rent-stabilized building (on this floor are the wide-eyed young pitchers, over there are the gregarious catchers, on that floor are the young Dominican players who sit gathered around Colon like devotees before a jolly swami). And in this corner are the veterans, who have been this way before.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.I pose the how-do-you-win question.“Look, the line between winning and losing, you’re only talking about eight to 10 games,” says Michael Cuddyer, the outfielder who arrived this winter from the Colorado Rockies. “This team has grown up together; I’m one of a very few new arrivals. That’s a good sign.”I turn to David Wright. He’s experienced a lot of winning, and a lot of not recently. “You’ve got to practice winning,” he says. “You’re not talking about it, you’re not expecting it, you’re doing it.”Carlos Torres, the team’s rubber-armed middle reliever, adds another thought. You really don’t want team cancers. Did you, I ask, ever play with one?He adjusts his socks. “That’s a very interesting question that I will not answer.”Alderson has done a fine renovation job on the minor leagues, with Baseball Prospectus almost gushing at the quality and depth of talent embedded there. His choices in free agents are more quixotic. In consecutive years, he picked up Curtis Granderson, 33, and Cuddyer, 35, who in baseball terms are geriatrics.Granderson has a coiled cobra of a power swing. But he has not hit higher than .232 since he was 30. And he trailed even the lightest hitting of the San Francisco Giants’ starting outfielders in slugging percentage.AdvertisementCuddyer is, like Granderson, a fine professional and teammate; he has missed almost 150 games in the last three years.Too much optimism is like arsenic to Met fans. But it’s 85 degrees. Soon enough I’ll be walking through six inches of new snow in Brooklyn. How about watching Harvey take those economical last pitches off the practice mound, as the entire pitching staff looks on?How about watching him take that strut walk of his to the mound, which he treats like his old apartment? And hearing a pop such that you look for smoke to rise from d’Arnaud’s glove?Harvey grooves on it and does not pretend otherwise. “When I left the dugout,” he says, “I could hear the fans — that was really, really special.”His catcher, no less a kid, speaks to the news media a few minutes later. He confesses he was squatting and feeling nervous a full month before meaningful baseball would be played.Why? ask reporters.He looks at them as if they are daft. “It was Matt Harvey day!”A spring training daydream will do for now.Email: powellm@nytimes.com A version of this article appears in print on March 8, 2015, on Page SP3 of the New York edition with the headline: Zing and Talent Add Up to Hope for the Mets.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »