By TYLER KEPNERMARCH 7, 2015
SURPRISE, Ariz. — Yu Darvish, a star right-hander for the Texas Rangers, may soon become the latest ace pitcher to have Tommy John surgery. The Rangers said Saturday that Darvish had a sprained ulnar collateral ligament in his right elbow and that their doctor had recommended the operation, which would cost Darvish the entire 2015 season.Darvish, an All-Star in each of his three major league seasons, did not pitch after Aug. 9 last season because of elbow inflammation. He left his spring-training debut on Thursday after 12 pitches, and a magnetic resonance imaging exam revealed the sprain.“He couldn’t have looked better early on in camp,” Rangers General Manager Jon Daniels said. “Live batting practice, throwing an intrasquad game, he looked like himself. The hitters wanted no part of him. So there were no signs. He had no symptoms up until two days ago.”Daniels said Darvish would get a second opinion. Darvish said in a statement that he had not made a final decision but would be disappointed if he needed to miss the season.Advertisement“Hey, if this is what I need, then we’ve got to get it done,” Daniels said, describing Darvish’s reaction to the news. “He doesn’t want to waste time.”The Rangers were ravaged by injuries last season and finished 67-95, the worst record in the American League. They added three potential starters this winter — Yovani Gallardo, Ross Detwiler and Anthony Ranaudo — to join Derek Holland and Colby Lewis, but there would be no replacing Darvish, who has averaged 11.2 strikeouts per nine innings, with a 3.27 E.R.A., since arriving from Japan in 2012.AdvertisementEven so, the Rangers’ new manager, Jeff Banister, cited examples of teams that won championships without top starters. The St. Louis Cardinals did it — against Texas — without Adam Wainwright in 2011, and the San Francisco Giants did it last fall without Matt Cain.“It takes more than one,” Banister said. “One player does not define an entire organization. It takes an entire team. We’ve got a season to play, however this goes.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Darvish is the latest star Japanese pitcher to sustain serious elbow damage. Daisuke Matsuzaka, then with Boston, had Tommy John surgery in 2011, and the Yankees’ Masahiro Tanaka is trying to pitch through a partial U.C.L. tear after missing more than two months last season.“I do think it’s an interesting question, why these guys have had issues,” Daniels said, adding that while pitchers get more rest between starts in Japan, he did not consider that a cause.“There’s other factors involved, and I’m not sure it’s any one factor,” Daniels said. “There’s different recovery — not just the rest between starts, there’s some other things that they do. It’s a different ball, and their mound is a little softer over there. Their ball is a tick smaller, a little easier to grip. I don’t know; I can’t sit here and tell you I’ve got the answers.”A version of this article appears in print on March 8, 2015, on Page SP2 of the New York edition with the headline: Rangers May Lose Darvish for the Season.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.