By SETH BERKMANOCT. 13, 2015
During parts of four seasons with the Mets, Justin Turner earned a reputation as a plucky, lighthearted utility man who could field adeptly and reach base regularly. Because of his demeanor and clubhouse stature, though, he was often recognized more for his merits as a teammate than for the statistics on the back of his baseball card.So it might have been a curious sight for Mets fans during Game 4 of the National League division series between the Mets and the Dodgers on Tuesday night, when Mets Manager Terry Collins decided to intentionally walk Turner in the fifth inning to pitch to Corey Seager, one of baseball’s best young players. In 301 games as a Met, Turner was intentionally walked three times.The strategy worked, as Seager struck out, but the damage by Turner was already done. He burned the Mets with a two-run, two-out double in the third inning that put the Dodgers ahead, 3-0, in an eventual 3-1 victory.In Los Angeles, where Turner signed after being nontendered by the Mets in December 2013, he has evolved past a cliché. During this playoff series, he has hit .467 and posted a 1.233 on-base plus slugging percentage.AdvertisementTurner has also displayed a penchant for particularly tormenting the Mets’ vaunted young starters, collecting six of his team-high seven hits this series in 11 at-bats against them. His success is not surprising to his former teammates.Advertisement“When he was with us, I knew he was good,” said Mets pitcher Jon Niese, who played with Turner from 2010 to 2013. “But yeah, now that he got that everyday role over in L.A., you can see how good he really is.”Collins deployed Turner throughout the infield when he played in Queens. His versatility and personality made him one of Collins’s favorite players. Before Game 3 on Monday night, the two met during batting practice, and Turner wrapped his arms around Collins’s shoulder, and they laughed heartily.“He’s a good baseball player,” Collins said. “He always has been. He did a great job while he was here.”Turner also endeared himself to Mets fans by dousing players with whipped cream pies after walk-off wins and using pop songs like Carly Rae Jepsen’s “Call Me Maybe” for his walk-up music. The memories of those idiosyncrasies still resonate: During Monday’s pregame introductions, Turner was the only Dodger not roundly booed.The sentiment did not carry over after his third-inning double against Steven Matz scored Howie Kendrick and Adrian Gonzalez, putting Los Angeles ahead, 3-0. Turner was jeered walking to the plate before Collins elected to walk him in the fifth.Dodgers Manager Don Mattingly penciled Turner into the cleanup spot Tuesday, ignoring his .248 average against left-handers this season, 64 percentage points lower than his average against right-handers, confident in his overall ability to jump-start the Dodgers’ offense.“He’s a guy that hits both sides,” said Mattingly, who later revealed that Turner has played the last two games with a sore knee. “He’s one of our main guys kind of two-through-five there — you look at him to drive in runs, get on base, he gives you good at-bats kind of pretty much against everybody. So, obviously a big part of what we plan to do.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Mets may regret letting Turner go after the 2013 season, but not everyone in the organization was apparently thrilled with him by the end of his tenure with the team. His release was somewhat surprising, given his popularity. He was due only $800,000 in 2014, but there were reports that the front office was not pleased with a perceived lack of hustle.AdvertisementOne former Met still enamored with Turner was Marlon Byrd, who spent part of the 2013 season with the team. Byrd shared hitting strategies with Turner throughout the season, and even after being traded to the Pittsburgh Pirates, he continued mentoring Turner during the winter. For five days a week, Turner tweaked his swing with Byrd. The results have been staggering. Since signing with the Dodgers before the 2014 season, Turner has hit .314 with an .876 O.P.S. during regular-season play and entrenched himself as the club’s starting third baseman.He has also displayed power unforeseen during his time with the Mets, clocking 23 of his career 31 homers while wearing Dodger blue. This season, Turner hit 16 home runs in 126 games, even after missing two weeks because of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus, or MRSA.“I kind of took a turn for the better offensively when I met Marlon Byrd in 2013,” Turner said during a news conference earlier in the series.His Los Angeles teammates certainly appreciate him. “Honestly, I never thought he’d be this good of a hitter,” said Clayton Kershaw, the Dodgers’ ace and the winning pitcher Tuesday night. “He’s one of the best hitters in the game.”Against the Mets’ best arms, Turner has executed crisply with his new approach. He crowds the plate, sandwiching his feet into the lower right corner of the batter’s box. Despite the deep stance, Turner is still able to attack pitches, getting in front of the ball.“Great guy,” said Niese, who still regularly speaks with Turner, even after he gave up a home run to him on July 24, the day Niese’s son was born. “I couldn’t be happier for him.”A version of this article appears in print on October 14, 2015, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: The Dodgers Get a Big Offensive Lift From a Player the Mets Let Go .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.