
MARCH 9, 2015

We're reluctant to tell people to shirk work to watch soccer but ... O.K., we're not reluctant at all. Good game Monday, so clear the decks early. Andrew Das, our soccer editor and shameless Ajax supporter, tells you what to watch this week.
Related Article

We're reluctant to tell people to shirk work to watch soccer but ... O.K., we're not reluctant at all. Good game Monday, so clear the decks early. Andrew Das, our soccer editor and shameless Ajax supporter, tells you what to watch this week.
Manchester United hosts Arsenal on Monday in the last of the four F.A. Cup quarterfinals (3:45 p.m. Eastern, Fox Sports 1). Fair warning: Two of the three quarterfinals played over the weekend ended in draws, and will require replays, so I do not promise a clear-cut result. The good news is these teams are both talented enough up front and disorganized enough at the back to ensure some good scoring chances.As usual, the losing team will host a live piece of performance art on Twitter after the game. This will not be televised, although it should be.The knockout stages are back Tuesday and Wednesday, and the most important thing to note is that the games will kick off at 3:45 Eastern, not 2:45, since most of us turned our clocks ahead Saturday. Three of the four matchups are tied after the first leg, but realistically only one — Paris St.-Germain's trip to Chelsea after a 1-1 tie at home (Wednesday, FS1) — holds the promise of something really delicious, namely a poor refereeing decision that sets off José Mourinho.In the other games, Porto hosts Basel with the benefit of an away goal scored in a 1-1 tie in Switzerland (Tuesday, FS2); Real Madrid will complete its bludgeoning of Schalke (Tuesday, FS1) with the advantage of two road goals; and Bayern will host Shakhtar (Not) Donetsk. Technically, Bayern-Shakhtar (Wednesday, FS2) is a tossup after they played a scoreless tie in Ukraine, but really, given Bayern's form, a Shakhtar victory in Munich seems so unlikely that the idea of it ought to have us more worried about the end times than the next round of the Champions League.  The continental championship that does not get enough credit, the Copa Libertadores, continues its group stage in midweek.Tired of poseur friends going on and on about the E.P.L. and the Bundesliga? Figure out where Fox Deportes is on your cable and watch Racing Club-Sporting Cristal (Tuesday, 8:30 p.m. Eastern) or Boca Juniors-Zamora (Wednesday, 7 p.m.). Then lie in wait for the moment you can embarrass your friends by asking them where Sporting Cristal* and Zamora** are from. (Quiz answers below.)Yes, you read that correctly: The qualifying cycle for the 2018 World Cup begins this week with a set of first-leg games in Asia. Among the matchups: India faces Nepal in a Himalayan Derby and Yemen hosts Pakistan in the Security Services Championship. That one, it should surprise no one, will not be televised in the United States, though that's only a minor problem. A bigger one is that, as of Monday morning, FIFA could not even tell you where the match would be played. Not that you were going, anyway.Ajax Amsterdam, the greatest club in the world and one you should consider supporting, faces Dnipro Dnipropetrovsk in the Europa League on Thursday afternoon (Fox Soccer Plus, 2 p.m. EST), which seems like a rough draw until you realize everyone and his brother seemed to draw a Russian team in Europe's second-tier trophy chase. Other games include Zenit-Torino and Napoli-Dynamo Moscow. Everton hosts Dynamo Kiev, which, despite recent Russian interest, remains solidly the pride of Ukraine.*Peru**VenezuelaOrlando City, which rose from soccer’s lower tiers, will play New York City F.C., a team built from scratch, at the sold-out Citrus Bowl on Sunday.AdvertisementOrlando City, which rose from soccer’s lower tiers, will play New York City F.C., a team built from scratch, at the sold-out Citrus Bowl on Sunday.