
Keeping Score By                     
JAY SCHREIBER

OCT. 13, 2015
If Clayton Kershaw needs any inspiration as he heads to the mound tonight to face the Mets on three days’ rest, he can look to Sandy Koufax, the Dodgers left-hander who was even more dominant than Kershaw.After all, it was 50 years ago Wednesday that Koufax pulled off what might have been the greatest feat of his Hall of Fame career. Pitching on just two days’ rest, in Game 7 of the World Series, Koufax shut out the Minnesota Twins on three hits in a taut 2-0 victory.Koufax pitched the entire game, nearly unthinkable now, but not then. And just three days earlier, in Game 5, Koufax shut out the Twins, 7-0, allowing four hits. That one, needless to say, was a complete game, too.Koufax had been forced into that condensed timetable because he had famously skipped Game 1 of the Series because it fell on Yom Kippur, a Jewish holy day.Which brings us to Kershaw, who is often compared to Koufax because of their names, their Dodgers lineage and the fact that they both throw from the left side. The two are also friends.AdvertisementKershaw, 28, is in his eighth major league season, and he has won three Cy Young awards and a most valuable player trophy.AdvertisementAnd while pitching on three days’ rest is a foreign concept to him, as it is to basically every other starter in this era, he has done it the past two postseasons — with mixed success.In 2013, he pitched Game 4 of the Dodgers’ first-round series against the Atlanta Braves on three days’ rest, went six innings, gave up two unearned runs and struck out six. The Dodgers won the game, 4-3, and eliminated the Braves.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Last year, Kershaw pitched Game 4 of the division series against the St. Louis Cardinals, with the Dodgers needing to win to stay alive in the best-of-five series, the same scenario they are facing against the Mets tonight.In that game, played in St. Louis, Kershaw had a one-hitter through six innings but then came undone in the seventh, surrendering a three-run homer to Matt Adams that gave the Cardinals a 3-2 victory and the series.That game is part of Kershaw’s unimpressive record in the postseason. He is 1-6 over all, with a 4.99 E.R.A. His latest loss came to the Mets on Friday night, a 3-1 defeat in Los Angeles in which he pitched well but not as impressively as the Mets’ Jacob deGrom.Kershaw threw 113 pitches and looked worn out in the seventh inning, when he walked two batters in a row to load the bases and was pulled by his manager, Don Mattingly. That strategy backfired as reliever Pedro Baez gave up a two-run single to David Wright.Kershaw has another chance Tuesday night. It is a tough assignment, but not anywhere near as daunting as what Koufax did on Oct. 14, 1965.An earlier version of this article misidentified the player who hit a three-run homer in Game 4 of the 2014 National League division series for the Cardinals against the Dodgers. It was Matt Adams, not Mike Adams. An earlier version of this article also misstated the score of Game 1 of the 2015 division series between the Mets and the Dodgers. It was 3-1, not 3-2.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »