By JONAH BROMWICHMARCH 9, 2015
Every week, The New York Times will choose one essential game to watch, highlighting hot teams, winning and losing streaks and statistical intrigue in the N.B.A.Memphis at Washington, Thursday, 7 p.m. Eastern, TNTWoe is Washington, which has dropped precipitously from Eastern Conference contender to also-ran. After going 9-4 in November and 12-4 in December, the Wizards were 9-8 in January and 3-9 in February. Having lost two of their first three games of March, the Wizards, once in second in the conference, have fallen to fifth and seem likely to slide further.Fans and commentators have railed about all that is wrong in Washington, and even the Wizards’ owner has entered the debate, analyzing his team’s shortcomings in a recent blog post.For the most part, the Wizards’ offense is to blame. With Bradley Beal out for a majority of last month, Washington struggled to score.AdvertisementBeal is the team’s most reliable catch-and-shoot option, and the attention he draws from opposing defenses creates opportunities for his teammates. Even with Beal in the lineup, though, the Wizards’ offense has been largely incoherent, with little movement inside. Often, the team’s baskets seem like happy accidents.AdvertisementBack in December, a month in which the Wizards’ offensive efficiency was nearly 10 points higher than it was in February, the team scored with a variety of pick-and-roll actions that showcased John Wall’s ability to find his teammates. The team’s core — Wall, Beal, Nene and Marcin Gortat — was strong and full of capable scorers. It is no wonder, then, that much of the recent criticism has landed on Coach Randy Wittman, with many fans calling for his ouster.Other than coaching, the team’s bench is its primary impediment. No reserve averages 9 points a game.On another team, a couple of injuries and some ineffective shooting by the starters might create an opportunity for an enterprising player to inject some energy off the bench. None of the Wizards’ reserves have shown that ability, and the team has stayed in its rut.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Wizards will probably not be able to fix their bench problem in time to salvage their season. But firing Wittman could improve the fans’ morale and help Washington set a new direction. After all, teams like the Memphis Grizzlies have proved that even without a lot of reserve firepower, the right system and the right coach can yield success.In some ways, the Grizzlies resemble the Wizards, with a playmaking point guard and a tough frontcourt. Despite a mediocre offense, Memphis has scrapped its way to first place in the N.B.A.’s toughest division — the Southwest — through its dominant defensive play and smart management.The Grizzlies’ front office demonstrated its foresight by acquiring forward Jeff Green from Boston in a Jan. 12 trade. Green was long viewed as a solid player, if nothing special, and he has fit in nicely with the Grizzlies, offering much-needed scoring and a defensive mentality that fits in with the team’s ethos. Memphis has gone 18-7 with him in the lineup.The Grizzlies parted ways with Coach Lionel Hollins before the 2013-14 season and replaced him with his assistant David Joerger. Memphis had not been struggling with Hollins; his team reached the Western Conference finals before his contract was not renewed. In Joerger’s first season at the helm, the Grizzlies were knocked out in the opening round of the playoffs, losing to Oklahoma City in seven games.Fans often discuss coaching changes as though they are easy fixes, but the reality is that each one is more like a reconstructive operation than a Band-Aid application. It takes time and effort to institute a new system and a new philosophy. Memphis was lucky that Joerger shared certain tendencies with Hollins, but the Grizzlies’ players did not immediately start trusting their new coach.If Washington makes such a coaching change, it could similarly doom the Wizards’ prospects this season, eliminating any chance that the team will rediscover its earlier stride. But with the team’s offense in such disarray, many fans think that the Wizards are already doomed and that the long-term dividends would be worth the gamble.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.