By KAREN CROUSEMARCH 8, 2015
DORAL, Fla. —  The player who has emerged as a favorite to capture next month’s Masters won an important tuneup Sunday, but it was not Rory McIlroy, the world No. 1, who can complete a career Grand Slam with a victory at Augusta National.McIlroy, 25, who has one top-10 finish in six Masters appearances, closed with an even-par 72 at the Cadillac Championship, the World Golf Championships event at Trump National Doral. But McIlroy was eight strokes behind Dustin Johnson.Johnson shot a 69 for a nine-under par 279 total to secure his ninth PGA Tour victory, and his first since he won another W.G.C. event, in China, in 2013. Johnson, making his fifth start since returning from a six-month competitive hiatus, finished one stroke ahead of the 54-hole leader, J. B. Holmes, who struggled to a 75, and two ahead of Bubba Watson, who carded a 71.“It’s one of my biggest wins, especially after a long layoff,” Johnson said. “I’ve been working hard on my game, and I’ve been working hard on me.”AdvertisementIn the last month, Johnson has recorded top-five finishes on some of the tour’s toughest courses. He lost in a playoff at the Northern Trust Open at Riviera Country Club and tied for fourth at the AT&T Pebble Beach National Pro-Am before prevailing Sunday on a Blue Monster layout that gave up only five sub-70 scores (and yielded three in the 80s).AdvertisementHolmes, who started the day with a five-stroke lead, said, “Even if I had a little bit of an off day, it would take a good round to beat me” — and 69, he acknowledged, was better than good for a final round.Johnson, Watson and Holmes led the field in driving distance. Using their prodigious length, they were able to knock out some of the Blue Monster’s teeth.“It helps because there’s a lot of carries of 300, 310 yards to get it over the fairway bunkers,” Johnson said.With his recent play, Johnson, 30, has moved to No. 7 in the world and solidified his standing as the American most likely to emerge as McIlroy’s consistent rival. This past week, McIlroy was his own worst adversary. His share of ninth made less of a splash than his club toss into the water on Friday.When McIlroy arrived at the practice range Sunday for his final-round warm-up, Donald Trump, the course owner and unofficial host, gave him back his iron, which a diver had retrieved.“He’s the No. 1 player in the world, so when he does pretty much anything on the golf course, it’s going to get a lot of attention,” PGA Tour Commissioner Tim Finchem said Sunday.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Johnson attracts attention for a different reason. Two leaves of absence from the Tour — his first was in 2012 — started tongues wagging. It was reported last summer that he failed a third drug test for recreational substances, leading to his departure from the Tour. But when asked Sunday if he had ever failed a drug test, Johnson said, “No.”Johnson is engaged to Paulina Gretzky, who gave birth in January to their first child, a son, Tatum. She stood near the scoring area, cradling Tatum in her arms, while Johnson finished his round. As soon as he spotted them, his strides quickened.Advertisement“Yeah, that’s what I wanted to see,” he said as he leaned in to give Gretzky a kiss. He took Tatum into his arms and cooed at him for a few steps before reluctantly handing him back to Gretzky.“That was the best part of the day, for sure,” Johnson said.In recent interviews, Johnson has said that he abused alcohol as a way of managing stress but that he has replaced nights at the bar with morning workouts.“I really think the effort and time I’ve been putting in the gym and the effort I’ve been putting into my personal life has made the difference,” he said.In six trips to the Masters, Johnson’s best finish is a tie for 13th in 2013. He missed the event in 2012 while on another hiatus after he was injured lifting a water scooter. Johnson’s crisp iron play in the swirling winds here gave him a boost of confidence going into this year’s Masters.“At Augusta, you’ve really got to hit quality iron shots, control your ball, control the distance — and I think I did that really well this week in very tough conditions,” he said.He added: “So going into Augusta, it’s just another tough course, and I feel like my game is definitely suited for there. It’s always fit my eye really well. Just haven’t played it that great.“But this year, I’m looking forward to it.”A version of this article appears in print on March 9, 2015, on Page D7 of the New York edition with the headline: Rededicated to His Game and Himself, Johnson Prevails at Doral.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.