By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSMARCH 8, 2015
The Phillies left-hander Cliff Lee was temporarily shut down after feeling soreness in his pitching elbow, Philadelphia General Manager Ruben Amaro Jr. said Sunday morning.Lee, who had a magnetic resonance imaging test Friday and was examined by a team physician, has “very mild inflammation” in his elbow, Amaro said. Lee will seek a second opinion from Dr. James Andrews.Lee, 36, was limited to 13 starts last season and had two stints on the disabled list. He was sidelined for the season’s final two months with an elbow strain.“You have to be alarmed — we have to be concerned — because it’s the same area and he feels something,” Amaro said. “It’s the same area, the same issues he had last year.”AdvertisementEARLY EXIT FOR CARDINAL The St. Louis Cardinals right-hander Lance Lynn left a spring training game against the Miami Marlins in the second inning with a left hip flexor strain.AdvertisementLynn said the injury was not serious, but he was to have further tests Monday.“There was some tightness,” Lynn said, adding that he expected to throw a bullpen session Tuesday as scheduled. Manager Mike Matheny smiled when told of that remark.“I think our guys need to slow down on some of their comments and make sure they’re going through the proper channels,” he said. “But I’m glad to hear he’s excited about getting back out there.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.FAMILIAR INJURY FOR A TIGER Detroit shortstop Jose Iglesias sustained yet another shin injury when he was hit by a hard shot during batting practice.Iglesias was fielding grounders before the Tigers’ exhibition against the Houston Astros when he was struck in the right shin. He was listed as day to day with a bruise.Iglesias, 25, missed all of last season because of stress fractures in his shins. He left an exhibition game Friday after bruising his right shin on a slide. Iglesias said he was considering wearing padding over both his shins.GAME DELAYED BY BEES A swarm of bees in the outfield delayed the start of a game in Tempe, Ariz., between the Los Angeles Angels and the Kansas City Royals for 10 minutes. The bees disrupted play again in the fourth inning before being removed by exterminators.NO OBJECTIONS FROM UNION Tony Clark, the executive director of the players’ union, said the union had no problems with the Mets’ voluntary off-season workout program but would continue to monitor it.Many Mets players spent part of the off-season working out at a fitness center at the team’s Florida training complex run by Mike Barwis, who oversees the organization’s strength and fitness programs. The fact that players paid to work out with Barwis drew attention to the program.A version of this article appears in print on March 9, 2015, on Page D5 of the New York edition with the headline: Phillies’ Lee Again Feeling Pain in Elbow.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.