
On Baseball By                     
 TYLER KEPNER
 
MARCH 8, 2015
GLENDALE, ARIZ. — Before their game here on Sunday, the Los Angeles Dodgers practiced cutoffs and relays from the outfield. In past spring trainings, this was less a demonstration of fundamentals and more the Yasiel Puig Show. But times are changing.“He would want to show everybody this off-the-charts throwing arm that no one had ever seen before, and he’d airmail the cutoff man and it’d go all the way to the catcher,” A. J. Ellis, the Dodgers’ catcher, said of Puig. “It would look amazing, but in a baseball setting, that’s not a good play.“And today, he’s catching the ball and he’s still throwing with that amazing arm, but now he’s accurate and he’s diligent and he understands where he needs to throw the baseball. It’s still impressive, but it works in the baseball setting.”That is precisely what the Dodgers want from Puig, their 24-year-old right-field sensation. They want him to take all his sizzle and flash and apply it in the right places.AdvertisementPuig, who defected from Cuba in 2012, seems to agree. He reported to spring training early, with the pitchers and catchers, a signal that he was serious about getting to work after a bitter end to last season.Advertisement“That’s what I’m doing now, just being more disciplined, getting here on time, getting work done and working hard,” Puig said through an interpreter. “That’s what I’ve been doing to try to get better.”The Dodgers won the National League West last season but were eliminated in a division series by St. Louis. Puig, who had eight strikeouts in 12 at-bats, was benched for the finale and appeared only as a pinch-runner.In the off-season, the Dodgers revamped their front office and made several roster renovations. In their flurry of moves, they traded Matt Kemp to the Padres and let Hanley Ramirez leave for Boston in free agency.The Dodgers had sound reasons for moving on from both players, who were often injured and are now in their 30s. But Kemp and Ramirez hit for power, which would seem to underscore the need to get more out of Puig.“We feel like we have a lot of depth, really good balance and guys that have competitive at-bats,” said Andrew Friedman, the Dodgers’ new president for baseball operations. “So, on the surface, there’s a chance that we lost power, but we still feel like we’re going to be really good on the run-scoring side, just maybe in a slightly different way. Puig will be a big part of that in the middle of our lineup, but there’s not any more pressure on him to do something he hasn’t.”Last year, Puig hit .296 with 16 homers, 69 runs batted in and a .382 on-base percentage. He started the All-Star Game and dominated for stretches, hitting .398 in May and .351 in July.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But the overall production was less, perhaps, than it could have been, and the season was marred by off-field mistakes. He was benched for the home opener when he showed up late, and benched again in September when he skipped early batting practice. Manager Don Mattingly said then, “You can’t force guys into work.”Despite that — and his two reckless-driving arrests in 2013 — Puig has been immensely popular with fans. His No. 66 jersey ranked fifth in sales among all major league players in the second half of last season, trailing only Derek Jeter, Clayton Kershaw, Mike Trout and Buster Posey.Advertisement“I think they like the way I work, the way I play, whether it be the good things I do or the bad things I do,” Puig said, referring to the fans. “And maybe they see the potential of me being a superstar the likes of Miguel Cabrera.”The other top-selling stars — and Cabrera, for that matter — are far more accomplished but with less outward emotion than Puig, who loves to flip his bat and once slid into the plate after a game-ending homer. His swagger is a big part of his appeal.“There are a lot of people that are stars in the game, and their personality is very normal, just very quiet guys who go about their business,” Dodgers pitcher Brandon McCarthy said. “I’m not an advocate of forcing them out of their shells, but I’m a big believer in letting everybody be who they are. People fall in love with those players, because they’re the players who don’t seem to fit what everybody else looks like.”At that moment, as if on cue, Puig entered the clubhouse, announcing his presence in a booming voice in Spanish.“There you go,” McCarthy said, smiling.As for the substance to go with the style, Puig is working on it. Ellis said his batting practice, like those cutoff drills, seems more serious now, not just an audition for the home run derby.“It’s not just talent, talent, talent,” Ellis said. “It’s talent, along with trying to execute as a baseball player would execute. And that combination is dangerous, whenever that fully forms. It’s Mike Trout, that’s what it is.”Trout is considered the best player in baseball. Puig may have that in him, and the Dodgers are encouraged as he tries to bring it out.A version of this article appears in print on March 9, 2015, on Page D4 of the New York edition with the headline: Dodgers’ Puig Moves to Match Swagger With Heads-Up Play.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »