By PATRICK MAKSMARCH 8, 2015
COLUMBUS, Ohio —  Midway through the first half of No. 6 Wisconsin’s obliteration of No. 23 Ohio State on Sunday, D’Angelo Russell, the Buckeyes’ star freshman, zipped a pass under the basket to his teammate Marc Loving.It was a play that, if executed properly, would most likely have given his team a much-needed basket in an otherwise tepid and uninspiring affair. Instead, Loving bobbled the catch before tripping over a couple of cheerleaders along the baseline.Russell walked back to midcourt, slapped his hands together and stared up at the rafters of the Schottenstein Center. The moment — one of many blunders in a 72-48 loss to the Badgers — seemed to underline the Buckeyes’ season-long tendency to lean on Russell to carry them through highs and lows.Sunday’s game could be seen as that campaign’s nadir, and Russell, who scored a team-high 17 points, could not rescue his team.AdvertisementInstead, the Badgers survived a brief second-half cold spell before flogging Ohio State on its senior day, a spectacle of ovations and fireworks that ended in the largest defeat of the Buckeyes’ season.AdvertisementFrank Kaminsky, a senior forward for Wisconsin and a Naismith Award favorite who was jeered during the pregame introductions, bludgeoned Ohio State’s interior defense for 20 points by spinning past defenders and dunking over them.“You have games like this where nothing seems to work,” said Thad Matta, who remains one victory shy of becoming the Ohio State coach with the most victories.The Buckeyes made 34 percent of their shots and were dominated in the lane — in rebounds and in scoring.“We weren’t communicating at the level we needed to communicate at,” Matta said. “We were tight-lipped, and usually when we’re playing, we’re talking and we’re moving, and they kind of had their way. When you play a team like Wisconsin and they chew the clock, they chew the clock and they score, it can be deflating.”In the second half, it appeared that Russell might lead a comeback after a flurry of offense cut the deficit to 7 points with 13 minutes to play. The rally brought the once-lethargic crowd to its feet. But Wisconsin vaporized any hope with two 3-pointers and pulled away in emphatic fashion.“They made some big-time plays,” Matta said. “We just weren’t able to sustain what we needed to in terms of offense. We had some good looks that didn’t go down for us, and I told them — when we cut it to 7, I said: ‘All right, we’re back. We got our team back. Here we are. This is my team.’ But they sort of took it to another level with the execution.”Before the Buckeyes — who trailed by as many as 25 points — slunk off their home court for the final time this season, a certain optimism had abounded in Columbus. Ohio State had won eight of its last 11 games, and the Buckeyes had said they were capable of beating the Badgers (28-3, 16-2), the Big Ten champions and a robust squad that is expected to compete for a spot in the Final Four.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Ohio State (22-9, 11-7) had urged its fans to wear white in a display of solidarity and intimidation for a game that was to serve as a barometer for the Buckeyes on the eve of the postseason.AdvertisementBecause of Russell, the Buckeyes are expected to reach the N.C.A.A. tournament despite having had an erratic season. But the defeat — Ohio State’s second at home — raised questions about whether a team built around one player can make a dent in the postseason.Shannon Scott, a senior point guard, said: “They blew us out, but we have no choice but to shake it off. If we don’t shake this off right now, we’re going to lose our very next game. If you want to be a great team, you’ve just got to let it go right now.”Russell said, “I don’t know anything about March, but I know anything can happen.”Referring to Wisconsin, he added: “We had a bad day, and they had a lot do with that. It just all added up at the end.”On Saturday, Ohio State’s seniors, who combined for 16 points against the Badgers, declared their intention to make a serious postseason run.“I think we want to be a class that made the Final Four twice — a lot of players in the N.C.A.A. can never say that,” said Scott, who scored 10 points. “If we can find a way to be able to do that, that would be a great accomplishment.”By the end of the game — as the Badgers pounded Ohio State inside and out and as fans trickled out the exits with six minutes left to play — a sense of despair seemed to linger over the arena.It was then that the spotlight turned to Russell once more, as if those in attendance had accepted the defeat and turned toward the future. In an attempt to encourage Russell, who can leave for the N.B.A. after this season, to return to campus, they chanted “One more year!” during the game’s final minutes.Matta played down the moment. “I didn’t hear them chanting ‘One more year,’ ” he said.“If I would have,” he continued, “I would’ve been yelling it, too.”The moment was the reminder that even on senior day, Ohio State is a team buoyed by a freshman, for better or worse.A version of this article appears in print on March 9, 2015, on Page D3 of the New York edition with the headline: Wisconsin Dominates, Flustering Ohio State and Its Star Freshman.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.