

 Michael Powell
 

SPORTS OF THE TIMES
MARCH 8, 2015
TAMPA, Fla. — Joe Girardi could be forgiven if he feared his head was about to spontaneously combust.Hidden by his ubiquitous shades and his Joe McCool manner, Girardi, the Yankees’ 50-year-old manager, runs a team that has more bruised and broken — not to mention decrepit — parts than any man could be expected to keep track of.He has a coterie of aging stars in possession of spectacular, yes-I’ll-sign-that! long-term contracts. All are in various states of disrepair and hoped-for repair.His amiable onetime ace C. C. Sabathia, 34, is rehabbing from an operation on a degenerative knee. His new ace, Masahiro Tanaka, has a partially torn elbow ligament. His No. 2 pitcher, Ivan Nova, had a fully torn elbow ligament and is expected back by the summer.AdvertisementThere are promising kids wending their way up through the minor leagues. There is a formidable bullpen, as well as professional hitters and a sweet-fielding new shortstop. But Yankees management has embraced the mausoleum marketing phase of team decline: Unable to flog more retirement tours, they have turned to retiring numbers, planning days to celebrate Andy Pettitte, Jorge Posada and Bernie Williams.AdvertisementOh, yes, and Alex Rodriguez, the cryogenic man, took the field at third base Sunday for the first time since he returned from his steroids sabbatical.Rodriguez toed the grass. He looked eager. In the third inning, he fielded a grounder and made a throw without obvious injury to his AARP-quality surgically repaired hips.“It felt like 10 years,” he said later. “It’s not going to be Ozzie Smith here.”With that, he left the locker room alone and at a brisk pace.Through all this, as his team sheds parts like a jalopy gone through a guardrail, Girardi just might be doing his best managing job. His team has stayed in playoff races well into September.“Last June, it was like we had an entirely new roster,” Sabathia said. “He did a fantastic job.”Girardi described his managerial philosophy as a bouillabaisse (literary license alert: He did not actually draw an analogy to a French fish stew), a mix of Joe Torre and other luminaries, not to mention high school and Little League coaches.For the number-obsessed out there, he sees value in analytics. “Sabermetrics is a really good way of finding out if what you think you are seeing with your eyes is real,” he said while sitting in the dugout before Saturday’s game against the Astros. “It tells a good story over time.”AdvertisementAll of which is reasonable but perhaps does not quite connect with his greatest strength, which is to somehow convince his players that their leaky pontoon boat of a team will not sink in the Harlem River.To this end, he indulges in pretend. He described Rodriguez, who drew loud applause and a rumbling current of boos Sunday, as an avuncular figure in the clubhouse, beloved by old and young alike. (Not mentioned is that Rodriguez’s representatives, in fighting his suspension, slammed Major League Baseball and the Yankees, who slammed him back, calling him a liar and hinting that retirement was preferable. Rodriguez had also insisted that he no longer used steroids and had no relationship with the dealer Anthony Bosch. Neither statement was true.)Tanaka personifies the porcelain quality of the Yankees’ starters. A fierce competitor, he found out last summer that he had a partial tear of his elbow ligament and declined to have surgery, which could have knocked him out for 18 months.He opted for rehabilitation. Now he will embark on a season-long path in which his every start causes team executives to cover their eyes.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Do you worry the next inning might be Tanaka’s last?” a radio reporter asked Girardi on Sunday. The manager gave that cool-cat shrug.“Whatever is going to happen will happen,” he said. “A lot of times with that injury, you will lose your control before it tears completely. That hasn’t happened to him yet.”As reassurances go, this is like a pilot explaining that most times, a loose wing has to shear off completely before the plane pitches into a downward spiral.After Saturday’s game, Girardi described his pleasure with a simulated game tossed by Tanaka, and one coming up for Sabathia. It was as if his staff were more simulacrum than real.Sabathia held court in his corner of the locker room, his shoulder packed in ice after he threw a practice session. He professed that his shoulder and his knee felt fine — his knee ached all last season, and his velocity nosed downward precipitously.AdvertisementThen again, pitching is precarious squared, and Sabathia acknowledged that professional mortality was on his mind. “Not knowing if you can ever pitch again, it kind of plays with your mind,” he said. “Big time.”How long, I asked, do you want to pitch?“Until I can’t,” he replied. “We’ll see how long that is.”Nova, a few seats away, nodded his head. He tore up his elbow last April and has worked hard to return. He takes glimmers of hope where he finds them.On Friday, he was in his uniform and ready to go out onto the field. “My friend put on the TV,” he said. It was Matt Harvey, the Mets’ rehabbing ace, about to pitch for the first time in many months.“I said, ‘Hey, man, wait a minute; I want to see this guy pitch,’ ” Nova said.Did he like what he saw?“Aw, man, it was beautiful: not just the pitching but the velocity!” he said. “He throws a 98-mile fastball up and away, and then it was 3-2, and he throws a curve 86 miles an hour. No one is going to hit that.”Nova shook his head. “Watching that made me feel like I can breathe again,” he said.Girardi walked through the locker room. He gave a thumbs up to Nova and ducked into the cool dark corridor to the field. It’s almost time to try to pull another winning season out of a tattered hat.Email: powellm@nytimes.com A version of this article appears in print on March 9, 2015, on Page D5 of the New York edition with the headline: Yankees’ Skipper Plugs Holes in a Leaky Ship.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »