AdvertisementSupported byBy Tim RohanPORT ST. LUCIE, Fla. — Back in late 2002, Michael Cuddyer was 23 years old, talented and full of promise. He was just establishing himself with the Minnesota Twins. The baseball world was at his feet. He had played in the American League Championship Series and had batted .333 in his first postseason. He was back home, the hometown hero, relaxing in the Hampton Roads area of Southeastern Virginia. And he was bored. While others would have taken the winter off, watched TV, goofed off or basked in their newfound success, Cuddyer reached out to Great Bridge High School in Chesapeake, Va., his alma mater, and asked if he could be a substitute teacher. The answer was a resounding yes. Cuddyer said he worked as a substitute about 10 times that year. Years later, after the Mets signed Cuddyer this off-season, well into his career, the Mets are hoping he can become a team leader, using some of the same attributes that made him a trustworthy substitute teacher. “Michael Cuddyer could do anything he put his mind to,” said Carolyn Bernard, the Great Bridge principal who approved Cuddyer as a substitute. “He has that type of personality and that type of intelligence.”If there was a process in choosing substitutes, it did not seem to apply to Cuddyer. He did not go to college, choosing instead to pursue baseball as a professional, but that did not bother Bernard. Cuddyer was a three-sport athlete who also ranked near the top of his class. He was a student government president and a member of the National Honor Society. On the day of the 1997 draft, Cuddyer was taking a calculus test when the principal at the time entered the classroom and asked him to leave the room. The school had been buzzing all day; everyone knew that Cuddyer could be drafted early.“Can I finish my test?” Cuddyer asked.His teacher took the pencil out of his hand and ordered him to go. Sheepishly, Cuddyer went to the principal’s office, where he heard he had been selected in the first round, ninth over all, by the Twins. He was due a seven-figure bonus. Cuddyer went back and finished his test.He was, in many ways, a role model for athletes in the Hampton Roads region, including David Wright, Melvin Upton (formerly B. J.), Justin Upton and Ryan Zimmerman. Wright credited Cuddyer for blazing a trail, and for drawing scouts and college coaches to the area. Of all those future stars, Cuddyer was the biggest. On the days Cuddyer substituted, word quickly spread around school. Teachers volunteered to have him take over their classes. Students checked their schedules to see if they would have him. A few brave students asked for his autograph.Others were more enterprising. During class, they asked Cuddyer for a hall pass to the library, to the bathroom, just to have something signed by him.For all the excitement, it was not that rare to see Cuddyer around town. He still lives in the area with his family, in the same neighborhood as his father. “I try to make myself visible, so it’s not too much of a novelty, especially back home,” Cuddyer said. “Nowadays, I go to the grocery store, and it’s not a novelty to see me anywhere. ‘Oh, it’s Michael.’ It’s not as big a deal as it may be some other places.”From a young age, Cuddyer understood the effect he had on people, but he preferred not to broadcast his actions. He knew his role and he played it well. Not everyone knew that he visited a special needs class and surprised the students with gifts. As a substitute, he was quiet, unassuming. He ate lunch in the teachers’ lounge. “If you weren’t from the area, you might not have known who he was,” said Matt Brittan, a Great Bridge student at the time.Cuddyer is quick to point out that he did not actually do much teaching but rather filled in where needed. He passed out worksheets and made a deal with the students: If they were quiet, he would turn on the radio. “It was more like substitute babysitting,” Cuddyer said, grinning.But he was only about five years older than some students.The Mets signed Cuddyer to a two-year, $21 million deal this winter. Several of their core players, their best players, are 26 and younger. The Mets wanted Cuddyer to provide a veteran presence and help build a winning culture, alongside Wright and Curtis Granderson. Cuddyer made the playoffs six times with the Twins. “He’s been there before,” Wright said. “He plays the game hard, plays it the right way. For young players, it’s good for them to watch that type of guy, the way he goes about it.“You’ve got to have a good mix, in my opinion. You got to have good, young talent — we have that. But you also need a veteran presence, veteran leadership.”By chance, Wright also briefly worked as a substitute at his high school. He remembers playing sports with the students in gym class and playing movies in the classroom. He is more demanding now as the Mets’ captain. Just last week, he confronted Noah Syndergaard, the team’s top prospect, for eating lunch in the clubhouse during an intrasquad game instead of watching from the dugout.Now during spring training, Wright is helping Cuddyer assimilate. The Mets are expecting Cuddyer to drive in runs in the middle of the order; maybe play left field, a position he has never played regularly; and sometimes fill in at first base. Some might say it’s a lot to ask of a 35-year-old who missed 113 games last season.Bernard, the former principal, has faith.“He makes a commitment and he follows through,” she said. “New York is going to love him.”Advertisement