By BILLY WITZOCT. 1, 2015
As Adam Warren saw the hard grounder coming back up the middle, he knew he was in trouble. His balance was betraying him, and he began to topple backward. So Warren did all he could do: He reached his glove out behind his back.Much to his surprise, the ball stuck, leaving Warren with an easy throw to first base to extricate himself from trouble.It was not a consequential play, but it was one that was emblematic for the Yankees, who have lost their footing in recent days but regained it Thursday to clinch a playoff berth with a 4-1 victory over the Boston Red Sox at Yankee Stadium.The Yankees had a chance to clinch a wild-card berth on Wednesday, but lost in extra innings to the Red Sox for their third straight defeat. So when Dellin Betances struck out Josh Rutledge to end the game Thursday, a handshake with catcher John Ryan Murphy was not enough. Instead they chest-bumped, celebrating the Yankees’ return to the playoffs after being absent since 2012.AdvertisementAfter modestly congratulating each other on the field, the rest of the Yankees had a more exuberant celebration in the clubhouse, soaking one another with beer and champagne, a reward for the six-month endurance test that is the regular season and a release from the trying last few days.“It’s been like Christmas Eve — you want to go down and open your presents, but it’s not quite time,” said third baseman Chase Headley, who is in the playoffs for the first time. “It felt like an eternity.”AdvertisementThe Yankees’ hunt for their 28th World Series title has taken many twists and turns, and Thursday was no different. They rode an effective, if not artistic, effort by C. C. Sabathia, who has found late-season life with a brace for his degenerative right knee that he called “a lifesaver.” They got a strong relief effort by Warren, who learned when he arrived at the ballpark that he would be in the bullpen rather than starting Friday in Baltimore.And their offense was again a mix of the young and old — Carlos Beltran, 38, staking the Yankees to a lead with a solo home run, his 19th homer of the season, and the late-season call-ups Greg Bird and Rob Refsnyder adding late solo homers to provide a level of comfort.“The good thing about all our rookies is they’ve come up and shown tremendous respect and poise — they’re well schooled,” said Alex Rodriguez, also including Luis Severino, who has lived up to his considerable billing by becoming one of their best starting pitchers. “They know how to play winning baseball.”This formula — young and old, sound starting pitching and home runs — is one the Yankees will be looking to replicate Tuesday in the wild-card playoff, which they will host with either another win or a Houston loss.They will play either the Astros, the Texas Rangers, the Los Angeles Angels or the Minnesota Twins.If little has come easily for the Yankees as they staggered down the stretch, having won just 10 of their past 23 games to watch Toronto run off with the American League East title, neither did the clincher.Sign up to receive an email from The New York Times as soon as important news breaks around the world.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Staked to a 2-0 lead on Beltran’s homer and Brendan Ryan’s run-scoring single, the Yankees survived when Sabathia retired Travis Shaw with the bases loaded to end the fifth. They had another scare with a 2-1 lead in the seventh, when Mookie Betts, who hit two homers on Wednesday, hit a drive to left field that looked as if it would give the Red Sox the lead. But the wind, blowing in from left, held the ball up long enough for Chris Young to haul it in.Advertisement“I was kind of holding my breath there for a minute,” said Warren, who admitted he muttered a few cross words when the ball was hit.Despite a light but steady rain that began about 5 p.m., there was determination to finish the game because the Yankees are headed to Baltimore for the final series of the regular season this weekend.This type of environment — a game with big stakes — mattered greatly for Sabathia, who has endured the worst season of his career. But since he returned from a two-week stint on the disabled list in early September, Sabathia has begun to give hints of a pitcher who can make the transition from a pitcher who won with fearsome power to one who can thrive with effective control.Sabathia, who allowed six hits, walked three and did not have a clean inning, was helped out by his defense, which turned two double plays. He also helped himself by retiring Shaw to end the fifth. In five starts since returning from the disabled list, Sabathia has a 2.17 E.R.A. and has allowed more than one earned run just once.“I feel like I was letting the team down early in the year,” Sabathia said. “To be on the mound and be able to help us win, it feels great.”Sabathia is one of a handful of longtime Yankees who may have best appreciated the return to the playoffs. For some franchises, two years without the playoffs is something that happens. For the Yankees, it can seem like an epoch.But now they are back in the playoffs, with a difficult road ahead, but at least with a chance.“For some reason we’re an underdog,” reliever Andrew Miller said. “For some reason, we’re thought of as underachieving. We’re a really good team. We have a chance to beat anybody, and that’s what the playoffs are all about.”An article in some editions on Friday about the Yankees’ 4-1 victory over the Boston Red Sox that clinched a wild card in the playoffs misstated, in some copies, the time frame in which Carlos Beltran hit his last four home runs. They came in 13 days, not in the past week.A version of this article appears in print on October 2, 2015, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Staggering but Surviving, Yanks Hold On to Clinch Wild Card.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.