By ROB HUGHESMARCH 8, 2015
LONDON — The goal was a hammer blow to Real Madrid. From the moment Aritz Aduriz met the ball with his forehead, the roar of the crowd of 52,000 in the Basque stronghold of San Mamés stadium in Bilbao, Spain, signaled that the home side was up for a famous victory.And so it proved. Real’s goalie, Iker Casillas, was in fine form on Saturday, but he could get nowhere near this wonderfully powered header from 12 yards.Yet as Madrid struggled for rhythm or retaliation, there was to come an equally significant burst of applause. It came when Iñaki Williams, the find of Athletic Bilbao’s season, left the field 15 minutes from the end.He was exhausted, and entitled to be. Not simply in this game against the world’s richest team, but in 90 minutes on Wednesday when Athletic won to advance to the final of the Copa Del Rey — the King’s Cup — Williams ran until he almost dropped.AdvertisementThere is a huge significance to this young man. He is, like every player picked by Athletic, a Basque. He was born 20 years ago in Bilbao, and as of Feb. 19, when he scored during the 2-2 Europa League match at Torino, Iñaki Williams was the first, and only, black player to score for Bilbao.AdvertisementColor should be irrelevant, but it is terrific news for Spain, let alone for the Basques.Williams is the son of immigrants. His father is from Ghana, his mother from Liberia. What is important to the fans is that he is one of theirs, and he shows it through the desire, running and sacrifice he makes for their team.This stood out on Saturday because, as much as everyone at Real Madrid plays it down, the body language of Cristiano Ronaldo, Karim Benzema and Gareth Bale suggested that they struggled to make the moves for one another that young Williams and Aduriz do time and again for their team.Soccer depends upon momentum. Madrid, for one reason or another, lost some of that after the winter break. It was bullied into a 4-0 loss by its neighbor, Atlético, and held 1-1 at its home stadium, the Bernabéu, a week ago by Villarreal.These are not results that Real is used to. And the loss of rhythm is ill-timed, given that on Tuesday it faces the German club Schalke in the Champions League, and on March 22 it plays Barcelona in the Clásico.There are extenuating circumstances to this wobble by Ronaldo, et al. One is that, like so many others, they lack freshness. Their seasons overlapped relentlessly last year, with the Champions League final in Portugal, the World Cup in Brazil, and then barely a break before preseason touring and the new La Liga commencement.Add to that Real’s little trip to Morocco in December for the FIFA Club World Cup, and it gets exhausting just thinking about it all.Also factor in that Madrid is lacking the cutting edge provided by Luca Modric, its playmaker, who was injured on duty with Croatia against Italy back in November. Modric is the artist of the precision pass and invention that releases the front players to strike their goals.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.His thigh injury still hasn’t healed. And when Aduriz, Bilbao’s 34-year-old center forward, found the space to win Saturday’s game, the absence of another wounded player, defender Sergio Ramos, was glaringly obvious. Without him, Pepe, in central defense, lacked the awareness to cover all the spaces or to sense the danger.AdvertisementBut even with a full defense, Real might have found it difficult against the tireless runs of Williams and Aduriz, who has been a focal point of Bilbao’s attack for almost 200 games in three spells.It has long been curious that the Basque could only once, as a substitute, get a cap for the full Spanish side — though he has scored nine times in eight appearances for the autonomous Basque team.Maybe that is looking for reasons where his exclusion was simply because the national coaches did not think the style of Aduriz suited the Spanish team that after all won a World Cup and twice won the European Championship without always fielding an out and out No.9.The Basques love him anyway, just as they are learning to love Williams.Love is maybe a little lacking just now in Real Madrid. Its coach, the Italian Carlo Ancelotti, faced hostile cross-questioning in the San Mamés media room after Saturday’s result.“We gifted them the whole game,” Ancelotti said in his disarmingly straightforward fashion.“In the first half, they scored, and in the second half we were not able to do so. It is not a problem of attitude, it is a tactical problem in our attacking play.”The reporters pushed and prodded. “My responsibility is big,” Ancelotti responded. “This is my team, despite what people say. The team is playing badly, we are playing too slowly and without moving the ball well, so the forwards do not have the spaces. We will try to fix it, quickly.”He hears what the media, and the fans, are saying: that he is not being tough enough with the star players — the Galácticos. The president buys individuals, not just the three big names in attack, but Isco, who is rated as Spain’s top rising player, and Toni Kroos, who came as a World Cup winner, and James Rodríguez, the Colombian star of last summer who is another player sidelined with an injury.“This is not a fitness issue,” Ancelotti countered again at the postgame news conference in Bilbao. “There is no link-up play. We are lacking a little effectiveness up front; the passes are not arriving, because we take too many touches on the ball.”An honest man is Ancelotti. He fronts up, but the explanations need a little help from the forwards, especially Ronaldo and Bale, who are so athletically dynamic that in other seasons if the ball was not served up to them, they foraged deep for it and turned midfield into attack.AdvertisementJust as Aduriz and Williams did Saturday.A version of this article appears in print on March 9, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.