By KEN BELSONMARCH 6, 2015
NEW ORLEANS — Tom Benson sat at the head of a wooden conference table unruffled in a dark business suit, with a crisp aqua necktie and a handkerchief tucked neatly in his breast pocket. One after another, the top executives who run his two teams — the N.F.L.’s Saints and the N.B.A.’s Pelicans — offered details about how their ad campaigns, ticket sales and digital signboards were doing.As he listened, Mr. Benson, 87, sipped Coke from a glass that his wife, Gayle, 68, who sat at his side, kept refreshed. He asked about budgets and timetables and playfully needled an underling. When he heard that the Saints’ media guide was being prepared for the coming season, though, he issued a command.“Now that Gayle is going to be more involved, I want her to have a separate page,” he said.Everyone nodded.Mrs. Benson’s future ownership of the Saints and the Pelicans is at the center of a compelling legal drama that has gripped a city that is no stranger to fevered melodrama. In January, Mr. Benson announced that when he died, the city’s cherished Saints as well as the Pelicans would be passed on to his wife of 10 years — not to his daughter, Renee Benson, and her two children, Rita and Ryan LeBlanc, as had long been assumed.AdvertisementWithin hours, the three filed a lawsuit that sought to have Mr. Benson — the wealthiest man in Louisiana, with a fortune estimated at $1.9 billion — declared mentally unfit, and for Renee to be put in charge of “Tom Benson’s property and person” to protect him.AdvertisementSuddenly, New Orleans’s most prominent family became Topic A at cocktail parties and on sports radio. There is no shortage of theories: greed, jealousy and ineptitude. Or questions: Is Mr. Benson feeble or frail? Is Gayle Benson a gold digger or his protector? Are his daughter and grandchildren spoiled or spurned?“All the people who came before me that said money can’t make you happy, this proves their point,” said the political consultant James Carville, who worked with the Saints to bring the Super Bowl to New Orleans in 2013. “This has all the elements of a story that is going to last. It’s not the question of whether it’s going to be a book, but how many.”In the coming weeks, Mr. Benson, by court order, will be tested by a panel of three doctors, who will report their findings to a judge. If the doctors decide that Mr. Benson is incapable of taking care of himself, he could be in for a struggle to save an empire that he initiated almost 70 years ago while working at a local Chevrolet dealership. New Orleanians are watching — the Saints especially are considered a barometer of the city’s self-esteem, and fans worry that a struggle for the team could hurt its fortunes on the field.“I think now people want to know what is best long term for the Saints and New Orleans,” said Deke Bellavia, a local sports radio talk show host. “There’s been some mudslinging, but it could get real, real, real nasty.”Fight Gets PersonalThe Saints, who are worth $1.1 billion, and the Pelicans, valued at $650 million, are not the first professional teams to become caught in a custody battle. In 1962, the second husband of Violet Bidwill tried unsuccessfully to wrest control of the St. Louis Cardinals from her sons from her first marriage. In 1994, estate taxes and feuding among the trustees of Joe Robbie’s estate prompted the sale of the Miami Dolphins to H. Wayne Huizenga. A few years later, Robert Irsay’s wife, Nancy, was unable to take over the Indianapolis Colts from the trustees, including his son, Jim.More recently, a California state judge ruled that Rochelle Sterling had the right to sell the Los Angeles Clippers on behalf of her estranged husband, the longtime team owner Donald Sterling, after two doctors had found him incapacitated.In New Orleans, however, the battle has gotten more personal because Renee, 59, Rita, 38, and Ryan, 35 (who refer to themselves as the Three R’s), say that Mr. Benson is mentally unfit and is being manipulated by Mrs. Benson, his third wife.AdvertisementRenee Benson — a daughter from the first marriage — and Rita and Ryan LeBlanc declined to speak for this article. Ms. LeBlanc was the most involved with the Saints, as a vice chairwoman, but had an uneven record there. In 2012, Mr. Benson forced her to take a sabbatical from the team because of mistreatment of co-workers and her work ethic. But several people who had worked with Ms. LeBlanc came to her defense.“Besides being an engaged partner, she was a cheerleader for the city,” said Rod West, the chief administrative officer at Entergy Corporation, who worked with Ms. LeBlanc and other members of the Benson family on the host committee for Super Bowl XLVII. “Particularly within the New Orleans region, Rita was the face of the Saints and Hornets to the business leaders who dealt with the committee.”Ms. LeBlanc has also been active in the movie industry, working with the Louisiana Film and Entertainment Association. She is credited with contributing to the growth of the New Orleans Film Festival.“She’s very interested in it, been active on the board, very interested in growing the film economy here and a terrific advocate,” said Susan Brennan, who owns Second Line Stages. “She does her homework and is prepared and asks good questions.”In court papers, Renee, Rita and Ryan have said they are close with the family patriarch and are victims of a “coup attempt” that has banished them from the teams, auto dealerships and other businesses that, until recently, they had helped run and stood to inherit.Gayle Benson, who once ran a home-sales jewelry business and is twice married and divorced, has “increasingly isolated and alienated Mr. Benson from family, friends, business associates and employees,” according to their complaint. To prove that Mr. Benson is unfit, Renee, Rita and Ryan have said that Mr. Benson believed that Ronald Reagan was still president and that Mr. Benson subsists on a diet of candy, ice cream, soda and red wine. They are seeking to remove him as the trustee of a trust he established for them because he withdrew $24 million from a bank owned by the trust. Mr. Benson said he was angry that his daughter had gone behind his back and sought his personal financial information. In late December, he sent her and her children a letter stating that he never wanted to see them again, something the three say could have been written only under duress.“Suddenly after I remarried you all became offensive and did not act in an appropriate manner and even had arguments among yourselves which created a very unpleasant family situation which I will not stand for,” Mr. Benson wrote.In court papers, Mr. Benson said that his decision to give the teams to his wife, and not his daughter and her children, was not a result of a pique of anger, but of years of disappointment. He tried to groom them to take over the teams and his other businesses, but “unfortunately, the petitioners never rose to the task.”AdvertisementIn late December and January, the Saints fired Ms. LeBlanc, and her company car was taken away. Mr. Benson revoked Ms. LeBlanc’s lease in his office tower because she failed to pay the rent. The N.F.L. removed her from various owners’ committees.Still, Mr. Benson’s complaint said Renee and her two children “will continue to enjoy hundreds of millions of dollars they have been given; they simply will not have the specific assets they would like to have.”A Couple Rarely ApartThe critical legal issue in the Benson case is simply: Is Mr. Benson capable of taking care of himself and his property?In several meetings last month at the teams’ headquarters in a New Orleans suburb, Mr. Benson talked at length about his work, joked amiably with colleagues and guests and recalled friends and events from years ago.Seven operations on his knee last year have taken their toll. He walked slowly with a cane and occasionally had to fish for a date or a name. But Mr. Benson said that he continued to work five days a week because it kept him sharp mentally and physically.“Some people like to play golf; I like to come to work,” he said. “Nobody makes me come here. It’s what I like to do.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Benson conceded that his daughter and grandchildren’s lawsuit was a shock but insisted that he had moved on.“Was I surprised? I think so, because when your family attacks you, it’s kind of hard to take, hard to understand,” he said. “At first, I couldn’t believe it, you know. But I finally accepted it, and hopefully it will work out all right. The only bad thing is, you just go your way and leave us alone, you know?”Mrs. Benson, who sat next to her husband at meetings and works in a small office nearby, said the couple were apart only three days a year, when Mr. Benson attends an all-male religious retreat.Advertisement“I’m with him 24 hours a day,” she said. “We have a very close relationship. He tells and talks to me a lot about what’s going on. It’s been a big help to me.”Mrs. Benson acknowledged that she knew little about football when they met a decade ago, not long after Mr. Benson’s second wife died from complications of Parkinson’s disease. But over time, she has developed relationships with N.F.L. Commissioner Roger Goodell and David Stern, the former N.B.A. commissioner, as well as other owners and their wives.“In the beginning, I was a little shy about it,” she said. “I would sit back a little bit.”Mrs. Benson said that her husband made all the business decisions but that she was very familiar with the inner workings of the teams. Mr. Benson does not have a cellphone, for example, so Saints and Pelicans executives who need to reach him when he is out of the office often call or email Mrs. Benson to relay their messages.“He doesn’t have a phone; he doesn’t want to deal with it,” she said. “He would rather me tell him about it.”Mr. Benson, sitting nearby, nodded and then smiled. “But one thing about it, she doesn’t ever try to overrule me.”Remaking a TeamMr. Benson built a network of about 30 auto dealerships (most have since been sold), opened a bank and has accumulated a portfolio of real estate, including the Benson Tower next to the Superdome.He has significant business holdings in San Antonio, but he is rooted to New Orleans, where he and his three brothers grew up. In 1985, when John Mecom Jr., the owner of the Saints, indicated that he might move the team from New Orleans, Mr. Benson and a group of investors bought the team for $64 million.After 20 consecutive nonwinning seasons, the Benson-owned Saints went 12-3 in 1987 and qualified for the playoffs for the first time. They made the postseason three times in the early 1990s before slumping toward the end of the decade.AdvertisementAfter Hurricane Katrina forced the Saints to decamp for San Antonio in 2005, Mr. Benson explored staying in Texas and even fired Arnie Fielkow, one of the Saints’ executive vice presidents, who publicly favored returning to New Orleans. But the N.F.L. commissioner at the time, Paul Tagliabue, urged Mr. Benson to return the team to Louisiana.The return recast Mr. Benson as a savior and raised Rita’s profile. After cutting a favorable deal with the state to continue playing at the Superdome, Mr. Benson bought and refurbished a dilapidated office tower near the stadium. He also bought a local television station and an Arena Football League franchise. In 2012, he took control of the struggling Hornets and changed their name to the Pelicans.When the Saints won their first Super Bowl, in February 2010, Coach Sean Payton and quarterback Drew Brees were the on-field heroes. But Mr. Benson was regarded as the Saint of New Orleans behind them.Struggle on ParadeBy outward appearances, at least, Mr. Benson remains engaged. Kevin Avin, the headmaster at the Stuart Hall School for Boys, said that in September Mr. Benson talked to some of his students for 30 minutes about growing up in New Orleans, his education and his career in business.“The guy was sharp,” Mr. Avin said. “It takes a good bit to hold the attention of a 7- or 9-year-old boy. He had a wit about him that was humorous.”Dawn Benson Jones, whose father, Robert, was Mr. Benson’s only son, said she spoke to her grandfather twice a week and visited him in New Orleans around Christmas. She decided to speak out in her grandfather’s defense when she saw that his legal trouble was “not going away and was ratcheting up.”“I have every confidence that he’ll pass the test with flying colors, and once that’s established, other things will be put to rest,” she said.Until then, the Bensons will remain an object of fascination in the city. Days after the lawsuits were filed, the Krewe of Muses, a social organization that puts on one of the largest Mardi Gras parades, captured the spirit of the family struggle.On one of its floats, the group mocked the Saints’ up-and-down season. They asked whether Brees was a hero or overpaid and whether the team was playoff-caliber or cringe-worthy. On the front, they added a wheel with the words “Rita” and “Gayle” in different quadrants and a bottle that spun like a dial.Advertisement“It started out as, ‘Who Dat going to show up on the field this Sunday,’ and it turned into ‘Who Dat owner,’ ” said Virginia Saussy, a longtime Saints fan who helped create the float. “The whole float worked with what was going on with the team.”A version of this article appears in print on March 9, 2015, on Page D1 of the New York edition with the headline: Saints’ Owner Marches Out of Step With His Heirs’ Expectations.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.