AdvertisementSupported bySports of The TimesBy William C. RhodenAs I pulled into the parking lot at Citi Field before the N.L.D.S. Game 3 on Monday, the cheerful attendant extended a greeting as he waved me in. Then he asked if I wanted to hear a dirty joke.Of course not, but, O.K.: What’s the joke?“Chase Utley,” he said.So this was how life would be for the next few hours as Citi Field hosted its first playoff game, and the Mets’ first at home since 2006. Although 48 hours had passed since Utley broke shortstop Ruben Tejada’s right leg while breaking up a double play in Game 2, the memory was fresh at Citi Field.That was the play of Saturday’s game, and it will be the play of the series if the Los Angeles Dodgers advance. Utley was quickly suspended by Joe Torre, Major League Baseball’s chief operations officer, but he is playing as he appeals the two-game suspension. I understand why Torre acted — reacted — so quickly. A player’s leg was broken in a playoff game. Something had to be done.But Utley should not have been suspended. He made a hard baseball play, adhering to the unwritten rules of rough-and-tumble baseball that have guided him throughout his career. His intent was not to hurt an opponent, but to break up a double play. To give his team its best chance to win.Utley even apologized — not for the play, but for the injury.On Monday night, the protracted pregame introductions gave fans an opportunity to blow off steam. They booed every Dodger in sight: trainers, equipment managers, ball boys. But the crowd reserved its most penetrating boos for Utley. Even by New York standards, the vitriol was unnerving.“I told the boys before we came, I said, ‘Listen, it’s going to be a wild one,’­” Dodgers outfielder Carl Crawford said. “Fans are going to be into it. They’re going to be loud. You might hear some things that you might not like. You’re just going to have some thick skin.”Tejada, using a blue cane with orange Mets logos, was cheered as he slowly, dramatically made his way to the first-base line to join his teammates. What the fans might not have noticed was that the Dodgers — Utley included — cheered along with them.Before the game, the Dodgers ace Clayton Kershaw suggested that Torre had been “bullied” into suspending Utley. “I’ve seen slides a lot worse,” he said.Commissioner Rob Manfred, speaking to reporters, brushed off the charge. “The thought of Joe Torre being bullied by anyone,” he said, “I find just to be a little laughable.”Torre and baseball were not bullied as much as they were influenced by the intensity of the response to the Tejada play on social media, and by whispers that the Mets would have their revenge.By virtue of his appeal, Utley was in uniform Monday and could have played. Wisely, Dodgers Manager Don Mattingly kept him in the dugout. “Baseball reasons,” he said, but the reason seemed anything but.The mayor of New York, Bill de Blasio, hadn’t helped things by declaring that Utley was “guilty as sin.” Mattingly played in New York; Torre managed and won championships here. They read the mood and did not like it. Citi Field was a tinderbox, a fuse waiting to be lit.“In today’s society, I don’t think you can take that lightly,” Mattingly said. He said he wanted to make sure Utley “felt comfortable as far as being safe.”Fans are not rational beings sometimes. They know this. Mild-mannered men and women can become crazed venom-spewing spectators once they’re in possession of a ticket.The villain on your team is a hero. The villain on the other team is, well, Chase Utley.Crawford admitted as much, saying: “It’s just one of those things that if it was your team, then you’d be for it; when you’re on the other side, you’re against it.“If it would have been flipped around, we probably would have said it was a dirty play and they would have said it was a fair play.”I was concerned when the Dodgers took an early 3-0 lead. But the Mets rallied right back, calming nerves and turning the night into a 13-7 celebration.At several points after the Mets pulled away, some fans tried to sustain chants of “We want Utley.” But by then, most of the crowd had moved on.They should keep it that way. They may see Utley in Game 4. If the Dodgers force a Game 5, they are likely to see him back in Los Angeles.Utley plays the way he plays and Tejada faces a challenging healing process.Mets fans had their boisterous say Monday.It’s time to move on.Advertisement