AdvertisementSupported byBy Matt HigginsLANCASTER, N.Y. — One week after a community forum intended to promote dialogue over the use of the nickname “Redskins” for scholastic sports teams, this Buffalo suburb remained divided, with supporters of each side attending a board of education meeting Monday night.Representatives from the Lancaster Central School District board said they were in no hurry to make a final decision on the use of the nickname, which many across the country have said is an offensive slur against Native Americans.“The arguments I’m hearing, it really hurt,” Al Parker, a member of the Tonawanda Senecas who attended Monday’s meeting to address the mascot issue, said. “The people who want to keep the name don’t understand the hurt.”He added: “It is not an honor. We are not honored by your continuing this mascot.”Nathan Geary, a record-setting diver at Lancaster High School who went on to win a Big East championship in the three-meter event for Notre Dame, asked that supporters of the nickname examine the issue after removing the feelings they had for their school or their hometown. “If we focus on what’s really important, changing the name of the mascot is not going to diminish the pride we feel in Lancaster High because the mascot is not the source of our pride,” Mr. Geary told the board.Not everyone seemed prepared to embrace his view. Some said that the name was not a slur and that it reflected positive values and a commitment to excellence. “Being a Redskin is a feeling, one of strength, honor and utmost respect,” said Kelly Depczynski, who graduated from Lancaster High in 1993.She added: “This is our town. We will not let others define us. We know who we are. We are the mighty Redskins.”The continuing debate over the nickname and the attention it has garnered have increasingly isolated the school.Late last week, two nearby school districts with significant Native American enrollments canceled what amounted to five nondivisional lacrosse games. One of the districts, Akron, serves the Tonawanda Reservation, home to the Tonawanda Band of Senecas. Tribal leaders asked Akron High School to consider canceling a varsity boys’ lacrosse game against Lancaster.“They started the conversation of, what is our stance on this?” Akron’s superintendent, Kevin Shanley, said of meetings with the lacrosse team, the athletic director and school officials over the game against Lancaster, which had been scheduled for March 31. “We are playing them, and what are we going to do about it?”In Akron, 11 percent of the students are Native American, and so is 50 percent of the lacrosse team. “As we became educated on this, we can’t just say we do this because we’ve always done it,” Mr. Shanley said. “Based on our education, it’s an offensive term to the Native American population based on its origins.”By Friday, the debate had spread to Lake Shore Central School District, which serves about 250 students from the Cattaraugus Indian Reservation.The majority of the players on the lacrosse teams at Lake Shore High School are Native American, the district’s superintendent, James Przepasniak, said. A Native American player on the girls’ team approached coaches, as well as the athletic director, who brought the issue to Mr. Przepasniak’s attention.Lake Shore’s eventual cancellations affected boys’ and girls’ games at both the varsity and junior varsity levels.“Anyone who does their true homework will find that the term ‘Redskin’ is offensive to Native Americans,” Mr. Przepasniak said. “This nickname is clearly offensive.”Advertisement