AdvertisementSupported byN.F.L. RoundupBy The Associated Press and Bill PenningtonAndre Johnson was released by the Houston Texans, and quarterback Ryan Mallett agreed to return to the team on Monday.Johnson, a 12-year veteran and the longest-tenured Texan, was a first-round draft pick in 2003, joining the expansion team in its second season.He had 85 catches for 936 yards last season, but the Texans were beginning to see DeAndre Hopkins as their top receiving threat.“After exhausting all options of a possible trade, we informed Andre Johnson that he would be released,” General Manager Rick Smith said. “No player in the history of this franchise has represented the team, city and community in a more professional way. Andre is a Hall of Fame-caliber player and we appreciate his years of service and contributions to our team.”Johnson, 33, is a seven-time Pro Bowler with seven 1,000-yard receiving seasons and has 1,012 receptions for 13,597 yards in his career. Johnson led the N.F.L. in yards receiving in 2008 and 2009. His career high came in 2012, when he had 1,598 yards receiving and the Texans reached the playoffs for the second time.STEELERS RETAIN MOATS The Pittsburgh Steelers are keeping at least one of their free-agent linebackers around.The team announced it had signed Arthur Moats to a three-year contract that will keep him in Pittsburgh through 2017. Moats, who turns 27 next weekend, had four sacks in his first season with the Steelers in 2014.Gone is defensive end Brett Keisel, a longtime fixture in Pittsburgh who was released later Monday.Keisel spent 13 seasons with the Steelers, becoming known for his lengthy beard. But he was an accomplished player on some strong defenses and won two Super Bowls with the team. He tore a triceps last season after appearing in 12 games. The move was expected.The Steelers also agreed to terms with the backup tight end Matt Spaeth on a two-year contract. JETS’ JOHNSON LEAVES HOSPITAL Jets running back Chris Johnson was released from a hospital in Orlando, Fla., on Sunday after a shooting over the weekend that left him and a friend wounded and the driver of their car dead. Johnson is “doing well,” his management team said, adding that he was expected to make a full recovery.A report released by the Orange County Sheriff’s Office said Johnson had been uncooperative with deputies who responded to the shooting. SPOUSAL ABUSE ARREST Northern California authorities said that San Francisco 49ers fullback Bruce Miller was arrested on spousal battery charges. An arrest log for the Santa Clara Police Department shows that Miller was arrested last week at an undisclosed location.San Francisco’s general manager, Trent Baalke, said in a statement Monday that the team was disappointed to learn of the arrest and was collecting information on the episode. MANZIEL STAYS IN REHAB Quarterback Johnny Manziel remains in a rehab treatment center, Browns Coach Mike Pettine said. Manziel entered a private facility in Ohio on Jan. 28, and Pettine said there was not a specific date for him to be released. STADIUM PLAN DROPPED Plans have been abandoned for a downtown Los Angeles stadium that until recently was the front-runner for returning the N.F.L. to the region.The developer AEG said in a statement Monday that it was “no longer in discussion with the N.F.L. or any N.F.L. team.”CARDINALS’ OKAFOR ARRESTED Arizona Cardinals linebacker Alex Okafor was jailed in Texas after leading the police on a foot chase after a report of a disturbance in downtown Austin. Okafor was charged with evading arrest and was released on bond Monday evening.In a statement, the Cardinals said they were “aware of the report and are in the process of gathering all of the details regarding the situation.”RAMS LET TWO LINEMEN GO The St. Louis Rams released the veteran offensive linemen Jake Long and Scott Wells on the eve of free agency. Both players have been injury prone. Long missed nine games last season with a second torn A.C.L. Wells started every game but was hampered throughout by an arm injury that caused him to wear a brace much of the year. JETS MAKE OFFERS The Jets tendered offers to two restricted free agents, Damon Harrison and Jaiquawn Jarrett. Harrison, the team’s starting nose tackle, received a second-round tender worth $2.356 million. Jarrett, a backup safety, received an original-round tender also worth $2.356 million. GIANT TAKES PAY CUT Giants middle linebacker Jon Beason, who was a stalwart of the defense in 2013 but missed most of last season with a foot injury, agreed to take a pay cut to remain with the team. Beason, who has been injured three of the last four seasons, renegotiated his contract to give the Giants an additional $3 million in salary cap room heading into the free agency period. The Giants will have about $16 million to spend under the salary cap.The Giants are looking for an additional pass rusher and a pass-catching third-down running back as well as help at linebacker, safety and offensive line, although some of those needs — like offensive line — may be addressed in the coming college draft. BILL PENNINGTONAdvertisement