AdvertisementSupported byBy Tom PedullaCourtney Banghart, the women’s basketball coach at Princeton, believes one pivotal defeat has put the Tigers on the cusp of a historic regular season.That loss, 80-64 at home to Penn, came in the regular-season finale last year and denied Princeton a fifth consecutive Ivy League title. Afterward, Banghart acknowledged, “The moment was a little big for my youngsters.”Still, she thinks the Tigers grew immensely from that setback, which became a rallying point.“We weren’t good enough,” she said. “They each took the summer to say, ‘I’m going to be good enough.’ ”No. 13 Princeton faces another huge moment against Penn (20-7, 11-2 Ivy) on Tuesday at the Palestra in Philadelphia. The Quakers have won nine consecutive games, the second-longest winning streak in team history. They won 21 in a row in 2000-1.After clinching the Ivy League crown and a berth in the N.C.A.A. tournament with a 63-44 rout at Columbia on Saturday night, the 29-0 Tigers are aiming for the first perfect regular season by an Ivy League basketball team since the Penn men’s team in 1970-71. (The Quakers reached 28-0 before losing in the N.C.A.A. tournament.)The Tigers, 13-0 in league competition, find themselves as unlikely companions of Kentucky’s men’s team, the only other undefeated team in college basketball. The Wildcats already closed their regular season with a 31-0 record. Because the Ivy League does not have a postseason tournament, Princeton joined Tennessee State in gaining an N.C.A.A. bid. Tennessee State won the Ohio Valley Tournament.These are heady, almost surreal times, at Princeton.“We get mentioned by professors in class — it’s really cool,” said Blake Dietrick, a point guard who is the only senior in a balanced starting lineup otherwise made up of juniors.Alex Wheatley, a junior forward, said: “Obviously, the pressure is picking up. We’re staying focused and just staying together.”The Tigers achieved the highest national ranking of any Ivy League team by relying on one another offensively and defensively. Dietrick, in addition to handing out 145 assists, leads four starters in double figures by averaging 15 points per game. Michelle Miller (11.8), Wheatley (10.5) and Annie Tarakchian (10.1) are bunched close behind. When help is needed defensively, it seems as though someone is always there.Even as the victories mounted and Princeton crushed one league opponent after another, Banghart continued to push her team. The result was constant improvement.“I think we are a lot better than we were,” Banghart said.Although some question the level of Princeton’s competition, Penn Coach Mike McLaughin is convinced that the Tigers are worthy of their national ranking.“I would put them with anyone in the top 15,” he said. “They are that talented and that skilled.”The Quakers got an up-close look at the Tigers’ quality during an 83-54 loss at Princeton on Jan. 10, their 12th defeat in the last 13 games against their archrivals. But Kathleen Roche, a senior guard for Penn, noted that Princeton also dominated the first meeting in the 2013-14 season, 84-53, only to falter when it counted most.Roche said of Tuesday’s matchup: “I think it’s going to be a really great game for us. I don’t think it’s going to be like January at all.”Sydney Stipanovich, a 6-foot-3 sophomore center, gives the Quakers a strong inside presence on both ends of the court. She leads the team in scoring (11.2) and rebounding (7.3). Penn also received a lift from Michelle Nwokedi, a blossoming 6-3 freshman forward from Missouri City, Tex., who swept Ivy League rookie of the week honors throughout February.McLaughlin said he was delighted with his team’s progress.“We defend you hard,” he said. “We play you hard. We do what a team needs to do to try to win. We are not looking for any individual accomplishment.”McLaughlin also said he would not be surprised if his team kept Princeton from perfection.“If we play the game the right way and handle situations, anything is possible,” he said. “We certainly have the talent to do it. But we know what we’re up against. We know this is a really good team.”Banghart is emphasizing the need to win for reasons that extend beyond wanting to close the regular season without a blemish and avenge last year’s defeat. The Tigers, having never won a game in the N.C.A.A. tournament, are intent on gaining a high seed.Advertisement