

 Karen Crouse
 

ON GOLF
MARCH 9, 2015
DORAL, Fla. — If the PGA Tour needed any more convincing that its lack of transparency in meting out fines and suspensions was hurting its product, Dustin Johnson’s news conference after his victory Sunday at the World Golf Championships event at Doral was the clincher.Johnson’s outclassing a quality field weeks before the Masters had the makings of a Hallmark Channel instant classic. With his brother on his bag and his fiancée, Paulina Gretzky, and their infant son in attendance, Johnson slew two demons: the Blue Monster and the Grey Goose.Johnson has said that he abused alcohol and that he took a six-month leave from competition to work on personal issues. His break began last summer, when his game appeared stout, his world ranking was solid, and the FedEx Cup playoffs and the Ryder Cup loomed on the horizon.Seldom do high-level athletes voluntarily step away from competition for an extended period when they are performing well. Did Johnson act on his own, or at someone else’s insistence? With rare exceptions, the PGA Tour does not announce suspensions for behavior detrimental to the game, unless performance-enhancing drugs are involved.AdvertisementThe tour disputed a published report on Golf.com that Johnson had failed a third test for recreational drugs. The absence of empirical evidence, and the innuendo that has rushed in to fill the void, has left Johnson in the untenable position of having to continually address the situation.  On Sunday, Johnson gave a general accounting of his days during his hiatus and never mentioned rehabilitation or counseling, which only served to create more questions about what he was trying to fix or improve.“I really enjoyed being able to be home and not having to leave or do anything,” Johnson said. “So it was actually really nice. I was in the gym every single day, every morning, and then spent the rest of the time, either I would go practice a little bit, or just hang out with Paulina.”AdvertisementWhen pressed, Johnson said he didn’t feel the need to be more forthcoming. He said, “It’s personal, and frankly, it’s not really anybody’s business.”But the PGA Tour is a big business, and Johnson is one of its marquee names who disappeared at the top of his game without a trace — except for the updates he and Gretzky posted to their half-million combined followers on Twitter.Johnson’s stance could not have been any more awkward if he had had one foot in the sand and the other on the bunker’s lip. It’s not his fault that he kicks up a cloud of question marks with every fabulous finish. The tour’s lack of transparency is sacrificing the players and the overall image it is meant to serve.Tim Finchem, the PGA Tour commissioner, does not see what all the fuss is about. Who cares if Johnson is left to wiggle like a worm on a hook when baited by reporters?Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.At a news conference Sunday, shortly before Johnson teed off, Finchem was asked about the tour’s hush-hush policy on conduct and substance-abuse violations.“I’ve said this many times,” he said. “We don’t think the fans really want to know about most of the stuff we would be talking about. We don’t think there’s a large volume of it, and we don’t think much of it is very serious.”What would constitute a serious code-of-conduct infraction? Finchem imagined a situation in which Rory McIlroy and Rickie Fowler were playing competitors, and their fans got rowdy and started a brawl.“We have got to say something about that,” Finchem said.That would hold true especially if one or both of the players were to get involved, or were the instigators.“The fans have to know about that stuff,” Finchem said. “ ‘What did you do about that?’ But most of the stuff we deal with is not of that variety, and we just don’t see the need to do it.”AdvertisementNever mind that public accountability can act as a powerful deterrent. If the guilty aren’t identified, nobody is seen as truly innocent. After Tiger Woods announced last month that he was taking an indefinite leave from competition to work on his short game, a journeyman pro in a radio interview claimed Woods was serving a suspension for performance-enhancing drugs. The tour disputed the claim, and the golfer recanted his story.If the tour’s conduct policy were more transparent, officials and players would not find themselves fending off the kinds of personal attacks that cut to the heart of the sport’s integrity.“I think you raise a good point when you say, ‘Well, if it triggers a situation where a player is stepping away from the game, or maybe being suspended, but we really don’t know,’ does that create confusion?” Finchem said. “And that’s one point that we are giving some thought to.”It is a point well worth pondering. If enough athletes attract attention for questionable behavior, pretty soon the whole sport becomes tainted. It happened with steroids in baseball and with illegal blood boosters in cycling. Once the stain spreads, it takes a long time to rub out.A version of this article appears in print on March 10, 2015, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Johnson’s Case Is a Compelling Argument for Transparency.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »