AdvertisementSupported byBy David WaldsteinTAMPA, Fla. — Kevin Cash said he was honored to meet Cal Ripken Jr. last week, but he is too young to recall Ripken’s sensational rookie season of 1982 or the next year, when the Orioles won the World Series. Cash’s first Major League Baseball memory is of Pete Rose breaking the career hit record in 1985, when Cash was 7. Thirty years later, with the Tampa Bay Rays, he is the youngest manager in baseball, facing two monumental challenges. First, he is following the successful tenure of the charismatic Joe Maddon, now the Chicago Cubs’ manager. And Cash, in his first managerial job at any level — including Little League — will have to match wits with a group of respected managers in the American League East, including the Baltimore Orioles’ Buck Showalter and the Yankees’ Joe Girardi, who have thousands of games of experience between them.“It’s a unique situation in the A.L. East,” said Cash, who was a catcher for three of the managers in the division and played against Showalter’s teams. “To me it’s as good a division as there is in baseball.” Cash, though, is not only the youngest manager in baseball; he is the youngest manager or head coach in any of the four major pro sports leagues. The next youngest, at 38, is Brad Stevens, the Boston Celtics’ coach.Cash is so young that in a spring training game on Monday, he was managing against two players who are older than he is: Alex Rodriguez, Cash’s Yankees teammate in 2009, who is 39, and Carlos Beltran, who will turn 38 on April 24. Cash will not be 38 until Dec. 6.He may not remember those Orioles teams of his youth, but Rodriguez does. “Are you saying I’m old?” Rodriguez said Monday when notified of their age difference. “That is a really strange feeling for me. But I think he’s going to do a great job over there. He’s really smart, and he’s definitely a people person.”None of Cash’s players are older than he is, but some are not too far behind: Reliever Grant Balfour was born 24 days later. Another pitcher, Ernesto Frieri, who broke in with the San Diego Padres in 2009, is only seven years Cash’s junior.“He is good,” Frieri said. “He knows what it is to be a player, but he talks like a real manager.”Several managers Cash could end up tangling with are old enough to have been playing at the time of his early baseball consciousness. That includes Bruce Bochy, now San Francisco’s manager, who was the Padres’ catcher in the game in which Rose broke the hit record. Bochy will turn 60 on April 16. But he is not the oldest manager in the majors. That distinction goes to the Mets’ Terry Collins, 65, who started his managing career in the minor leagues the year Cash turned 4. Showalter, 58, played his final season in the minor leagues two years later. Showalter has managed 2,421 regular-season games in the majors. Cash has five exhibition games on his résumé, including Monday’s 4-3 loss to the Yankees.“Hey, I’ve been at it a month already,” he joked. “Yes, I’m young, but Tom Foley will be standing right next to me, talking over every pitch of every inning,” Cash added, referring to his bench coach, who is serving under a fourth manager since he joined the major league club in 2001. “That’s going to help a ton.”Cash’s predecessor, Maddon, won 754 games over nine seasons with Tampa Bay and led the Rays to the A.L. pennant in 2008. He was known for innovations like expanding the use of infield shifts, as well as for team-building novelties, like bringing penguins into the clubhouse.Cash is as personable as Maddon but knows he must be himself: There will not be any penguins around, for instance. Still, he is not looking to change the entire culture of what has been a successful organization.“What Joe did was incredible here,” Cash said. “I think you embrace it. How lucky am I to be walking into a situation that was already so good to begin with? “I don’t like changes. I think there will be adjustments here and there, but I feel lucky to have come to a place with such a solid foundation.”Cash, who had an eight-year major league career that ended in 2010, played under Maddon in 2005, appearing in 13 games for the Rays. He also played a handful of games with the Blue Jays in 2004 under John Gibbons, who is again Toronto’s manager. John Farrell, now the Red Sox’ manager, was Boston’s pitching coach when Cash was a backup with the team in 2007, 2008 and 2010. Cash’s biggest influence in Boston, though, was Terry Francona, then the Red Sox’ manager, who later picked Cash to be Cleveland’s bullpen coach after the Indians hired Francona for the 2013 season. The idea was always for Cash to learn the art of managing.“I watched Tito closely,” Cash said, referring to Francona. “His handling the media, communicating with players, making moves, all those things. I could not have asked for a better mentor.”At every stop he made as a player, including Tampa Bay, Cash made an impression. Girardi, who managed Cash in 2009, when Cash appeared in 10 games for the Yankees, said he could tell that Cash had the makings of a manager. He is smart and confident enough to lead a team, which is why the Rays made sure to hire him before the Texas Rangers, who interviewed him in October, had the chance.Across the league, teams no longer hesitate to hire former players with no managing experience. Minnesota hired Paul Molitor in November, and Girardi was new to managing when the Marlins turned to him for the 2006 season. A. J. Hinch, now with Houston, was only 34 when he was hired by Arizona in 2009.“Ownership groups aren’t afraid to go to young managers today,” Girardi said. “The game has changed a little bit in that sense. It happened to me.”Cash will have many opportunities this year to face off with Girardi and some of his elders who are still playing.“Hey, for him that’s good,” Beltran said. “If he does well, he can manage for a long time.”Advertisement