
On Baseball By                     
 TYLER KEPNER
 
MARCH 9, 2015
SCOTTSDALE, Ariz. — Troy Tulowitzki reported to work on Monday and played a baseball game. He had not done this since last July, before his latest major surgery. It was going to be a good day.“Today’s a big step for me, no matter how many innings or at-bats,” Tulowitzki said by his locker in the Colorado Rockies’ clubhouse. “Just getting back out there and getting into this locker room healthy is going to be huge for the mental side of my game.”The game was uneventful. Tulowitzki struck out looking, popped out to the catcher and got no plays at shortstop. He was mad at himself, he said, for stranding a runner he should have driven in. In a way, that was comforting.“That’s me,” he said. “That’s the way I operate.”Operate is a verb that has stalked Tulowitzki the last few seasons. He played just 47 games in 2012 because of groin surgery. He played just 91 games last season because of surgery to repair a torn labrum in his left hip. He also missed a month in 2013 with a fractured rib.AdvertisementThe injuries have obscured his on-field brilliance. Tulowitzki, 30, was having the best season of his nine-year career, with a .340 average and an on-base plus slugging percentage of 1.035, before the hip surgery. Had he maintained those numbers to the end, he would have won the National League batting title and led the majors in OPS.“He’s an elite player every time he’s on the field,” Manager Walt Weiss said. “I don’t see that changing. It’s not like he’s old. He’s still in his prime.”Yet the injury diminished Tulowitzki’s trade value in a winter when the Yankees needed a shortstop to replace Tulowitzki’s idol, Derek Jeter. The Mets also explored shortstop options.But Tulowitzki stayed in Denver. Despite the Rockies’ streak of four losing seasons, Jeff Bridich, the new general manager, said the team was too talented to break up. It needed its cornerstone.“We kept him because, one, we believe in him,” said Bridich, who oversaw the farm system before his promotion last fall. “Two, he’s the best shortstop in the game, when he’s on the field. That’s pretty easy to see. There’s actually not that much competition for that moniker. There’s a couple of guys you could bring up, but it’s him, and it’s a premium position.”AdvertisementTulowitzki has six years and $118 million remaining on his contract. He was the first major leaguer signed through 2020, agreeing to the deal in November 2010, when the Rockies were riding the high of a 2007 N.L. pennant and a wild card in 2009.Since then they have averaged more than 92 losses per season, without contending. Bridich has added low-cost veterans like John Axford, Daniel Descalso, Nick Hundley and Kyle Kendrick, but there were no splashy additions, despite lots of rumors.Tulowitzki paid attention to the reports, but ownership had told him he would be notified if a deal came close. Because he never was, he said, he never imagined what it would be like to play in New York. But he seems to remain in a holding pattern.“I know if we don’t win, there’s a possibility those rumors come back up,” Tulowitzki said. “Hopefully they don’t, and we take care of business here. If we don’t, then I’ll deal with those when those concerns or questions come up.”Part of the appeal of his contract, Tulowitzki said at the time, was the responsibility of being the long-term focal point of a fan base. He embraced that role and has maintained an open dialogue with the front office. As long as he is here, the best-case scenario is still possible.“If I can win here, it’d be that much more special to me, because this is where it all started,” said Tulowitzki, who was drafted by Colorado in 2005. “I don’t know what my future holds, but at the same time, to win here would mean more to me than anywhere else.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.To make the most of their chances, the Rockies need Tulowitzki and Carlos Gonzalez on the field. Gonzalez, a two-time All-Star outfielder, also made his spring debut on Monday after playing only 70 games last season because of operations on a thumb and a knee. The two try to set an example for the clubhouse.“Sometimes I show up at 6 in the morning, and the guy’s already here,” Gonzalez said. “I guess I’m going to have to bring a blanket and sleep on the couch to beat him.”Tulowitzki does not mind the preparation. It took him longer than usual to get ready for games last season, he said, but playing was the easy part. Relaxing was hard. He would sit on the couch, and his hip would throb in pain.AdvertisementIn late July, after consulting with a doctor in Philadelphia, Tulowitzki watched a Yankees game in the Bronx. He sat in the stands and did not even try to meet with Jeter. He just wanted to see him play one more time, as if he were a regular fan. He had never watched Jeter from the stands before.To some, Tulowitzki seemed to be telegraphing a wish to succeed his idol. He wears No. 2 in Jeter’s honor, and a pair of socks bearing Jeter’s likeness hangs in Tulowitzki’s locker here.The reality was different. The injury had shaken Tulowitzki. A day at the ballpark, watching Jeter at work, helped him.“For me, it was not knowing what was going on with my leg, not knowing if I was going to be able to come back,” Tulowitzki said. “Watching my favorite player growing up did a lot for my mental side. I don’t think people took that into account, to say, ‘Hey, this guy is just doing things that he likes to do.’ I like baseball. Why not watch my favorite player?”The Yankees, of course, traded for Didi Gregorius a few months later, and the Mets stood pat. A strong, healthy season could re-establish Tulowitzki’s trade value, or, perhaps, help the Rockies make good on Bridich’s goal of playing meaningful games in August and September.To have a chance, the Rockies must play better on the road. They led the majors in runs at home, where they were 45-36, but ranked last in runs on the road, where they were 21-60. The way to normalize things, Bridich said, was to concentrate on the finer points so they could win all types of games.“Frankly, we were just flat-out out-executed last year, offensively,” he said. “The Giants are the benchmark; they’re the shining example of doing a great job at executing the game and winning those moments in the game better than their opponent. They’ve been doing it better for the last five years.”The Rockies stood just three games behind the Giants at the start of September in 2010. A month later, the Giants began their every-other-year title run, while the Rockies faded to the shadows. A lot must go right to emerge, but a full season from Tulowitzki is crucial.He plans to play smarter, he said, and to rest when Weiss, a former shortstop, suggests a day off. Tulowitzki knows that Monday was just the beginning.Advertisement“The bottom line is all this is talk, and I have to go out there and prove to people that I can be healthy,” he said. “But nobody wants it more than me.”A version of this article appears in print on March 10, 2015, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: Once Star Recovers, Rockies Hope They Will, Too.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »