By RICHARD SANDOMIRMARCH 9, 2015
Like many former Yankees, Reggie Jackson wanted some things to remember the old Yankee Stadium by after its final season in 2008. He bought his old locker. He acquired a section of the black bleacher seats, where he hit the last of three home runs in Game 6 of the 1977 World Series that cemented his reputation as Mr. October.His third purchase was perhaps the quirkiest: the 10-foot-high letters that spelled “YANKEE STADIUM” near the edge of the roof for 32 years after the renovated stadium opened in 1976.Now, Jackson is planning to auction the letters through Sotheby’s, which estimates that they will sell for $300,000 to $600,000. The auction is scheduled to take place on April 1.As pieces of sports memorabilia, the letters are unusual. They were part of the atmosphere but looked outward, and saw no action save for the comings and goings of fans and traffic on the Major Deegan Expressway. They are difficult to display at home, unless you own a nearly 31,000-square-foot mansion like Derek Jeter’s in Tampa, Fla., or you have a ballpark of your own in need of lettering.AdvertisementThe 13 letters (some as wide as 10 feet 1 inch) lack the panache of game-used apparel like the 1920 Babe Ruth road uniform that sold for $4.4 million; a rare trading card such as the Honus Wagner T206 that went for $2.8 million, or a historic document such as the original basketball rules set down by James Naismith that were bought for $4.3 million.AdvertisementAnd they are not as magical as the old frieze that dramatically ringed the roof at original Yankee Stadium.Brandon Steiner, who sold the letters to Jackson through his memorabilia venture with the Yankees, said, “They’re large and weathered, and I don’t know where they’ll go.”Still, the letters — aluminum casings with blue Plexiglas inserts — are identifiable parts of the old stadium that was razed and replaced with a new one across the street.“Can you imagine them in your backyard, lit up?” said David Redden, the enthusiastic vice chairman of Sotheby’s. “That would be quite something.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Redden said that Jackson had acquired the letters to “preserve them, not display them,” and had been storing them in New Jersey.The letters will not be sold separately.“We’re not breaking them up,” Redden said.Sotheby’s nearly sold another famous set of building letters in 1993 when the Pan Am building in Manhattan was renamed for MetLife in 1993. Sotheby’s was asked if it would auction the letters of the defunct airline, but the plan was shelved when it proved too difficult to remove them intact, Redden said. Separately, Steiner said that he had sold off the letters from outside Giants Stadium, one at a time.As rare as it is to auction off stadium or building letters, Sotheby’s has sold its fair share of diverse artifacts, from panels of the parquet floor at old Boston Garden to the Tyrannosaurus rex fossil that the Field Museum of Natural History paid $8.36 million to acquire.Jackson, not a Cretaceous Era dinosaur, was paid about $3 million by the Yankees from 1977 to 1981. He spent some of his time feuding with Billy Martin, George Steinbrenner and Thurman Munson and some of it hitting 144 of his 563 regular-season home runs. He left to play five seasons with the California Angels and one with the Oakland A’s, but his Baseball Hall of Fame plaque shows him in a Yankees cap.AdvertisementJackson, a longtime Yankees special adviser, said in a statement, “I see this auction as an opportunity for a new generation to own and enjoy the icon of the Yankees and of New York City.”But until someone buys all 13 letters and shows them publicly, no one will be able to enjoy them.Sotheby’s is auctioning something else on April 1 that is more portable and probably more fun to own than tall stadium letters: a Mets bullpen cart that used to deliver relievers to the pitching mound at Shea Stadium.For $20,000 to $30,000 — the price range estimated by Sotheby’s — a fan with money to burn can fantasize about being Tug McGraw.A version of this article appears in print on March 10, 2015, on Page B15 of the New York edition with the headline: Jackson to Auction Off Sign From Old Stadium.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.