AdvertisementSupported byBy Nick RaducanuWith bye weeks upon us, finding good fill-in players is imperative. But the rampant injuries that have overtaken the N.F.L. (and taken out some of the better fantasy players) have complicated matters.Injuries, however, can provide fantasy football owners with opportunity. And while fantasy team owners of Jamaal Charles, who tore the anterior cruciate ligament in his right knee on Sunday, may be cursing me for saying that, there are some new waiver wire names that are ripe for the plucking. With that, we wish Charles a speedy recovery and move on to Week 6 waiver wire picks.These player rankings from the Sablich brothers are for standard and PPR scoring formats and will be updated throughout the season.Teddy Bridgewater, Minnesota Vikings (44 percent) — Week 6 is very generous for QB bye weeks, as Brandon Weeden, Derek Carr, Jameis Winston and Nick Foles are off. With Peyton Manning struggling and guys like Russell Wilson and Cam Newton having tough matchups, Bridgewater could be a solid streaming option in Week 6 against a Chiefs defense that is allowing an average of 2.8 touchdowns per game to opposing quarterbacks this season, easily the most in the N.F.L. Kansas City is also allowing 28 fantasy points per game to signal callers, which is also the most in football. Bridgewater has not been great this year, but mainly because his team has not asked him to be. The way you beat this Chiefs defense is through the air, and Bridgewater is more than capable of exploiting this elite matchup. And with more bye weeks looming, and Bridgewater having had his, he gets the Lions and the Bears after this week, so there will be two more solid opportunities to start him.Charcandrick West, Kansas City Chiefs (11 percent) — With the injury to Charles, someone has to try to fill the void. Enter West, who continues to play more than Knile Davis. West showed flashes of promise in the preseason, and when Charles went down Sunday, he had eight touches to Davis’s two. The coaching staff says the players will split the workload, which makes sense, considering one player probably cannot replace one of the best running backs in the N.F.L. But I think West will get the goal line work for Kansas City and the immediate nod at the starting gig, especially when you consider that Davis played the same number of N.F.L. snaps in Weeks 2 and 3 as I did — zero. Both players could be added in many leagues because Davis has that rare combination of size and speed. But if I could pick only one, it would be West.Thomas Rawls, Seattle Seahawks (47 percent) — Entering Week 5, no one had scored a rushing touchdown against the Cincinnati Bengals this season. After Rawls bounced outside and trucked through a weak Reggie Nelson tackle, that changed. It was an impressive 69-yard touchdown scamper from Rawls, who got another start for the injured Marshawn Lynch, who is nursing a bum hamstring. Rawls finished with 169 yards on 23 carries against one of the best defensive units in football. The undrafted rookie free agent looked great, and if this is the moment when Lynch’s workload is catching up to him, we may continue to see Rawls get some opportunities. If you own Lynch and have yet to grab Rawls, you messed up, but he is still out there in about half the leagues.Javorius Allen, Baltimore Ravens (1 percent) — This is purely a speculation add, but Justin Forsett left late in the fourth quarter Sunday, injuring his ankle. He walked off the field under his own power, but did not return. If Forsett cannot play, Allen would be a very interesting option for Week 6 against the 49ers’ depleted defense. Allen was getting a handful of red zone and goal line work when Forsett was in the game, and he had an impressive 44-yard run Sunday. Keep an eye on Forsett’s practice status over the week, but hopefully his ankle will be good enough to play on.Brandon LaFell, New England Patriots (28 percent) — Now is the time to check your waiver wire and try to stash LaFell. His recovery is on schedule and he is eligible to return to the Patriots in Week 7. LaFell was seen working out on the field before Sunday’s game against the Cowboys, and since New England had its bye, LaFell could be a WR3 for the rest of the season in this Patriots offense, which ranks fifth in the N.F.L. in pass attempts per game (40) and sixth in passing play percentage (64.5). Last season, LaFell emerged alongside Tom Brady, posting five games of double-digit targets, as well as eight games with at least eight targets. He scored seven touchdowns last season, including two in the postseason. It was easily the best season of his career, and he looked like a good fit in the New England offense.Tavon Austin, St. Louis Rams (48 percent) — I don’t know what to do with Austin, but he keeps scoring touchdowns. He scored again Sunday, giving him three over his last two outings. I wish the Rams’ offense was more trustworthy, but with Todd Gurley emerging, maybe they become more consistent, giving Austin more opportunity. The Rams keep finding ways to get him the football in space; he has carried 13 times this season. I advise getting Austin if you are in a deeper league or in dire need of help at wide receiver, but we know Austin is a talented playmaker. Perhaps this is the year. If I have roster space, I would be willing to take a chance and see.Willie Snead, New Orleans Saints (43 percent) — Snead keeps making plays. He led the Saints in receiving again in Week 5, hauling in 6 of 11 targets for 141 yards, and Drew Brees loves looking his way on third down: Nearly half of his total receptions this season have come in such instances. And 66 percent of his receptions Sunday were third-down conversions, so we know Brees is going to keep looking his way. He has now caught at least five passes in three consecutive contests, as he continues to play more snaps than Brandon Coleman and Marques Colston. Right now, Snead is a borderline must own in all leagues, especially when you consider how bad the Saints are and that the passing volume should remain throughout the season.Gary Barnidge, Cleveland Browns (51 percent) — It is time to take Barnidge seriously. After making one of the most ridiculous touchdown catches fans will see, Barnidge has found the end zone in three straight games, accumulating over 100 yards in two of those contests. He has been targeted 26 times in that span, and the Browns continue to throw the football a lot. Considering that you’re basically streaming if you do not have Rob Gronkowski, Greg Olsen or Travis Kelce, Barnidge needs to be owned in all formats.Nick Raducanu is the owner of ProjectRoto.com and is a contributor to Rotoworld and 4for4.com. You can find him on Twitter @ProjectRoto.Advertisement