AdvertisementSupported byEssayBy Gerald EskenaziI’ll remember that scoreboard, and the schizophrenic fans.The first meeting at Nassau Coliseum between the Rangers and the Islanders was an exhibition game on Sept. 27, 1972, which I covered for The New York Times.The new building in Uniondale did not even have a scoreboard ready for the game, so someone borrowed one from Skateland, a local rink where the Rangers trained.The scoreboard read “Home” and “Guest.” And you couldn’t tell which was which from the crowd. Many of the fans were seeing their Islanders for the first time; others came to see their Rangers.From that odd beginning to now, the Coliseum and its tenants grew, and the Rangers-Islanders battles became one of hockey’s most vociferous rivalries. Almost 43 years later, the Rangers and the Islanders will meet Tuesday for their final regular-season game at the Coliseum before the Islanders move to Brooklyn next season. Unlike in those early days, the teams are in a heated battle for first place in the division.A key element of a geographic rivalry is sometimes the newbie versus the establishment, which has played out many times in New York sports with the Mets and the Yankees, the Jets and the Giants, the Nets and the Knicks.Who were the fans to root for that first night at Nassau Coliseum? The Islanders’ new coach was a former Ranger, Phil Goyette. Most of the Rangers lived on Long Island. In the opening period, the Rangers went ahead on a goal by a cheeky, smallish forward named Glen Sather, who is now the team’s president and general manager.A “1” flashed on the scoreboard under “Guest,” bringing fans to their feet.But soon, Billy Harris, the Islanders’ very first draft pick, tied the score. Fans stood and cheered. What was going on here? The Rangers won that first encounter, 6-4.Less than a month later, they met in a regular-season game that counted. It attracted a standing-room crowd. Here were the Rangers on enemy ice, but when the Broadway Blueshirts started a rush, the crowd roared. But then, a moment later, when Isles goalie Billy Smith made a save, the crowd cheered even louder.Vic Hadfield scored the first official goal for the Rangers in the Coliseum, but then Craig Cameron beat Gilles Villemure to tie the score. The Rangers won that opener, 2-1, and went on to win many more during the next few years.Then the Islanders got good. Their first playoff appearance came in 1975, against the Rangers. In a best-of-three series, the Rangers trounced the Islanders in Game 2 at the Coliseum, 8-3, to even the series at 1-1. But J. P. Parise’s goal 11 seconds into overtime at Madison Square Garden the next day gave the Isles upstarts their first playoff series victory.Things were now serious between the teams — and their fans. In the 1979 playoffs, the underdog Rangers upset the Isles, and Garden fans chanted, “Beat your wife, Potvin, beat your wife!” That lasted for years, whenever the All-Star defenseman Denis Potvin touched the puck, in reference to domestic-abuse allegations brought by Potvin’s spouse at the time, who was contesting the financial terms of a separation agreement before they divorced.But Coliseum fans soon retaliated with a ditty of their own, unveiled during the 1980-81 season, when the club was in a four-year stretch of Stanley Cup dominance. The Rangers had not captured the Cup since 1940, so whenever the Isles did something good against the Rangers, fans chanted, “1940!” Take that, you Rangers.The country rubes had overtaken the city slickers. And yet, the dichotomy for some fans continued. In 1994, the year the Rangers ended that Stanley Cup drought, Rangers goalie Glenn Healy reflected on what it was like playing at the Coliseum. He had been with the Islanders the season before:“It confused me,” he acknowledged. He would hear half the fans shouting, “1940!” Then his head would swivel and he would hear the singsong “Let’s go, Rangers!”Soon the Islanders will be playing in Barclays Center in Brooklyn, making for a real subway series when they meet the Rangers. But for all these years, they were the only big league club on Long Island.It took time — in that first season they produced the worst season in N.H.L. history at the time, going 12-60-6 — for them and their fans to figure out who they were. In fact, when Al Arbour took over in their second year, he admitted that he had originally turned down General Manager Bill Torrey’s overtures. Arbour did not know where Uniondale was.“I thought the Islanders played on Seventh Avenue,” Arbour said, and he did not want to live in the city.But he took a ride around Long Island with Torrey. The Isles figured it out, and over time weaned fans away from the Rangers.Still, there will probably be thousands of fans at the Coliseum cheering the Rangers on Tuesday night, as they always have. But there will be no confusing loyalties. The Islanders’ followers will grit their teeth at the nerve of these people coming into their building. After the team moves to Brooklyn, who knows who will draw the loudest roars then?Advertisement