By ZACH SCHONBRUNMARCH 9, 2015
ONEIDA, N.Y. —  College athletics officials have engaged many types of nefarious characters over the years — the booster with the slush fund for Southern Methodist football players, the man who paid Michigan basketball players to help conceal his gambling profits, the now-imprisoned investor who lavished millions on athletes at Miami.So when the N.C.A.A.released a report Friday outlining years of widespread cheating at Syracuse, perhaps the most surprising detail was about an accomplice: a beige V-shaped building on a hill overlooking this small city 30 miles east of campus. According to the N.C.A.A.’s findings, which stemmed from a series of investigations dating to 2007, the Oneida Family Y.M.C.A. served as an arm of Syracuse’s elaborate system of violating the rules governing college sports.Two men with close ties to Syracuse athletics used the Y.M.C.A. in Oneida as a haven where men’s basketball and football players could receive academic credit for fake internships; money for volunteer work; and car rides and fast-food meals.The handouts were not limited to players, the N.C.A.A. found. An assistant basketball coach was provided free gym memberships, two trainers were paid for volunteering at separate basketball clinics, and a basketball administrative assistant once received $440 toward his rent.AdvertisementThose allegations were among more than a dozen included in the 94-page N.C.A.A. report, which also documented years of academic misconduct — a basketball staff member commonly gained access to players’ accounts for email and MySlice, the data portal used by Syracuse students and faculty members — and a failure to adhere to the university’s drug policies. The N.C.A.A.’s punishment included a reduction of 12 men’s basketball scholarships over four years, a nine-game suspension of Coach Jim Boeheim at the start of next season’s conference play, and the vacating of 108 wins between 2004 and 2012.AdvertisementSince 1992, the Oneida Family Y.M.C.A. — in a city best known for the 134-year-old flatware company of the same name — has been the kind of place where the receptionist greets members by name, where the parking lot backs up onto sprawling farmland, and where parents and children have shuffled in with bags of gifts for birthday celebrations, as they did last weekend. Yet this community center in a quiet city of about 11,000 became entangled in a wide-ranging N.C.A.A. investigation into the major athletic program of the university 30 minutes up the interstate.According to the report, 21 checks were distributed to Syracuse athletes out of a checking account handled by Jeff Cornish, an Oneida native who was the youth sports coordinator at the Y.M.C.A. from 1996 until 2006.Mr. Cornish had been hired by Hank Leo, the Y.M.C.A.’s chief executive officer since 2000, who worked as a part-time tutor for Syracuse athletes five evenings a week from 1989 until 2007.Through Mr. Leo’s connections, and Mr. Cornish’s involvement with youth basketball camps in the Oneida region in the 1990s, Mr. Cornish got to know Mr. Boeheim and his staff. They gave him tickets to Syracuse basketball games and the Big East tournament and made appearances at his youth clinics. They also relied on him to be a mentor for the troubled guard Billy Edelin, who eventually dropped out in 2005.Mr. Cornish used the checking account to make more than $8,300 in payments to three football and two men’s basketball players over 14 months, according to the report, which also said Mr. Leo used his influence at the Y.M.C.A. to secure internships for three football players as part of their academic requirements in 2005-6. The N.C.A.A. found that one of the activities Mr. Leo had mentioned in his recollection of their internship experience — participating in a charity softball game — could not be counted as part of the service requirement because it took place before the players had enrolled in the course.In another example, the report said, Mr. Leo recognized a player’s assistance in a basketball clinic. The player told the N.C.A.A. he had never attended any clinics. Another player submitted internship time sheets certified by Mr. Leo that placed him at the Y.M.C.A. when he was in fact performing football duties in Syracuse.The N.C.A.A. determined that Mr. Leo had committed academic fraud, and in the Committee on Infractions’ report, it singled him out as someone who had engaged in “unethical conduct.”Advertisement“Mr. Leo is disappointed with the N.C.A.A.’s determination and disagrees with its findings relative to him and the internships that occurred at the Y.M.C.A.,” Mr. Leo’s lawyer, Robert C. Whitaker Jr., wrote in an email. “Mr. Leo and the Y.M.C.A. are happy to move forward from this matter.”Mr. Cornish, in a statement released through his lawyer, Scott Bielicki, on Monday, said he had “neither misappropriated nor diverted a penny from the Oneida Y.M.C.A.” Craig Bailey, chairman of the board of directors for the Y.M.C.A. of the Greater Tri-Valley, whose branches include the Oneida location, did not respond to a request for comment.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In a statement Friday, Mr. Boeheim, the Syracuse coach, cast blame on the “rogue and secretive actions” of Mr. Cornish, who the N.C.A.A. said had provided players with impermissible extra benefits, including money, car rides and meals. Mr. Boeheim said Mr. Cornish was “not someone who was allowed unique access to the men’s basketball program,” contrary to what the report indicated.“My coaches and I knew and trusted this man, and he was thoroughly vetted by the office of athletic compliance before he was permitted to interact with our student-athletes,” Mr. Boeheim said, referring to Mr. Cornish. “If the committee is correct that this individual abused the trust that had been placed in him by the Y.M.C.A., the university and me, then I am deeply disappointed.”The N.C.A.A.’s report noted that Mr. Cornish had personal relationships with members of the basketball staff, who secured him access to Syracuse’s practices, the locker room and the weight room.“The institution knew or should have known through its staff that the representative was more than a ‘nice guy who would talk to players and try to give them the right advice,’ ” the committee wrote.Mr. Cornish, a project manager for the New York State Transportation Department, ended his affiliation with the Y.M.C.A. in 2006.David Potter, a former Syracuse professor who has been critical of the athletic department and the N.C.A.A. for several years, said he had not been aware of the Oneida connection. But he was not surprised that members of surrounding communities had sought to assist Syracuse athletes in various ways.Mr. Potter called the draw of basketball and football games “cultural, almost religious events” for many people in upstate New York.Advertisement“Everybody rejoices in being able to have a community meeting and something to cheer for that is better than the drab closing of local industry,” he said. “I think there’s that element of it, and it’s not surprising in part for that reason.”The Y.M.C.A was quiet on Saturday afternoon. Shaded windows obscured views into the weight-lifting complex and the swimming pool.Jason Toner, who wore a hat with the Orange’s block “S” logo as he walked into the Y.M.C.A., said the N.C.A.A.’s report was more severe than he had expected, but not enough to change his perception of Mr. Boeheim, a Hall of Fame coach.“I don’t believe that he knew about every single thing that was going on,” Mr. Toner said.Michael Veley, the chairman of Syracuse’s David B. Falk College of Sport and Human Dynamics, said he expected that season-ticket holders would remain loyal and that sponsors, given time to reassess the situation, would also stand pat.The university, however, has been dealt a black eye, said Mr. Veley, who has also been the public address announcer at the Carrier Dome for men’s basketball, football and lacrosse games since 2006.“I think the university has to re-evaluate,” Mr. Veley said. “There’s no question you cannot allow this to happen again. If you continue to do business as usual, that’s not going to speak well for the leadership of the university or the athletic department. So there will be changes — there has to be.”A version of this article appears in print on March 10, 2015, on Page A1 of the New York edition with the headline: Activities at Y.M.C.A.: Laps, Yoga and Helping Syracuse Cheat.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.