By SAM BORDENMARCH 9, 2015
VILAMOURA, Portugal —  The players of the Japanese women’s national soccer team went through a training drill here last week, scooting short passes in from the wings before sprinting toward the penalty area and blasting shots on goal. One after another after another they went, mostly working in silence except when they broke into loud cheers after a player hit a particularly pretty shot that found the side netting. The mood was upbeat — the sunny weather on Portugal’s south coast surely helped — but also serious and focused.“This is an important period for us,” the team’s captain, Aya Miyama, said afterward. “We must be strong as we defend our title.”Yet even Miyama, whose wizardry on the ball and easygoing demeanor makes her an oft-smiling star, had to admit something was different. The Japanese were here to play in the Algarve Cup, the annual springtime tournament for the sport’s top teams. But Homare Sawa, the most famous Japanese women’s player and one of the country’s most beloved athletes, was not with them.Sawa, whom fans remember for her game-tying, extra-time goal against the United States in the World Cup final four years ago (and subsequent gleeful trophy-raising), has been dropped from the team by Coach Norio Sasaki. And while Sasaki has not given Sawa’s No. 10 jersey to another player, he has also not given any indication that he plans to bring his former superstar back. It is also not clear if Sawa wants to play.AdvertisementThe circumstances surrounding Sawa’s absence are murky: A 36-year-old midfielder, Sawa injured her knee in December, giving Sasaki some cover for leaving her out. But Sawa has since returned to action with her club team in Japan, and she has not announced any international retirement, leaving a measure of incompleteness to the situation.In interviews, Sasaki has been reluctant to talk specifically about leaving out Sawa, and those around the team are quick to say that nothing is final. There is still a possibility that Sawa will be recalled when Japan opens its World Cup defense in June. Yet the Algarve Cup is the most significant warm-up event for Nadeshiko, as the team is known, and so Sawa’s exclusion from it seems telling.Advertisement“This Algarve Cup is my first time to play a big game without Sawa,” said Miyama, who took over the captaincy from Sawa in 2012. She added: “It is difficult. I always think of her.”Miyama is surely not the only one. The best way to explain Sawa’s importance to women’s soccer in Japan might be to liken her to Mia Hamm: Just as Hamm drove both the success of the United States national team as well as the broader rise of the sport’s popularity in America, so too did Sawa lead women’s soccer in her country.Sawa played her first senior international when she was 15, long before women’s soccer was even on the periphery of the sporting consciousness in Japan. She scored four goals in her first game, which set the tone for a career that spanned five World Cups and four appearances in the Olympics.When she led the team to victory at the World Cup in 2011, months after Japan had been rocked by the earthquake, tsunami and nuclear disaster at Fukushima, the team was “seen as a light in the darkness,” according to Kenchiro Hidaka, a reporter for Kyodo News who has covered women’s soccer.“Sawa was the symbol,” Hidaka said.After the London Olympics in 2012, Sawa announced her retirement from the national team. But then she returned for the 2014 Asian Games, where she scored her 82nd international goal as Japan claimed the trophy.Sawa’s playing style, however, was always going to be susceptible to the weaknesses of age. Her pace on the field is widely known, and her constant running — back to be part of the defensive alignment, and then forward to be central in the attack — was a big part of her appeal. Sasaki, speaking after Sawa was named world player of the year in 2011, called her “an iconic figure.”Advertisement“She perfectly symbolizes the kind of football that our team tries to pull off,” he said.Now, though, Sasaki is trying to look forward. In large part because of the interest generated after the team’s World Cup win, player development has become a priority for Japan, which like the United States had come to rely largely on veterans.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Miyama, 30, remains at the heart of the action, but younger players like striker Yuki Ogimi (27) and defender Saki Kumagai (24) are critical pieces as Japan, which split its first two games at the Algarve and then lost to France on Monday, prepares for its World Cup title defense. Sawa, whose performances were inconsistent with her club last year, cannot fill the role she once did.And yet, still, it is odd to think of Nadeshiko without her. The French midfielder Camille Abily said it was strange to prepare for a game with Japan and not see Sawa in the scouting. Hidaka, the Japanese journalist, said that Sawa’s penchant for delivering in the biggest moments had left many wondering whether Sasaki, the coach, would turn back to her one more time this summer.Even if she is a bench player, Hidaka said, her presence “would be important.”Perhaps Sasaki will agree. Or perhaps Sawa’s era is finally over. Miyama, who said she was disappointed that Sawa was not with the team, did not hesitate to offer her opinion on the issue. When asked if she thought Sasaki might bring back the team’s longtime leader, she grinned.“I don’t know,” she said, “but I hope so.”A version of this article appears in print on March 10, 2015, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Japanese Women Play Without Their Superstar.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.