AdvertisementSupported byWild 6, Devils 2By The Associated PressST. PAUL, Minn. — Thomas Vanek scored twice, Devan Dubnyk stopped 30 shots, and the Minnesota Wild beat the Devils, 6-2, on Tuesday night.Chris Stewart and Jared Spurgeon each had a goal and an assist, and Sean Bergenheim and Jason Pominville also scored for the Wild.“I think that’s Stewart’s best game that he’s played with us,” Wild Coach Mike Yeo said. “I thought he was really good.”Stewart has scored in two straight games and now has four points in five games since joining Minnesota in a trade-deadline deal. Bergenheim’s goal was his first in seven games since being traded in late February.Yeo dropped Bergenheim to the fourth line before Tuesday’s game but emphasized that it was not a demotion. Still, Bergenheim was all over the ice early in the game and played as if he had something to prove.“This was a better day,” Bergenheim said. “I think there’s still stuff that can be improved, and I’m going to keep on working on those things.”Dubnyk improved to 19-4-1 with Minnesota while making his 26th consecutive start and the 200th of his career.Dainius Zubrus scored his first goal in 50 games for the Devils, and Scott Gomez scored his sixth of the season with the Devils trailing by five goals in the third.Devils General Manager Lou Lamoriello had coached every game since firing Peter DeBoer in late December, but stayed in the press box on Tuesday. Adam Oates was flanked by Tommy Albelin and Scott Stevens on the Devils’ bench during the game.“I just wanted to watch the game from a little different area just to see something a little different,” Lamoriello said. “It certainly isn’t what I would have liked to have seen up there.”Dubnyk’s streak of 26 straight starts is the longest in the N.H.L. since Anaheim’s Jonas Hiller started 32 straight in 2011-12. Before joining Minnesota in a trade on Jan. 14, Dubnyk started 17 games with Arizona.Minnesota was not penalized for the sixth time in team history.Advertisement