By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSMARCH 11, 2015
In a matchup of teams fighting for postseason spots, only the Pelicans looked playoff-worthy.Alexis Ajinca and Quincy Pondexter each scored 17 points as New Orleans moved within percentage points of eighth place in the Western Conference by beating the Nets, 111-91, at Barclays Center on Tuesday night.Omer Asik had 12 points and 15 rebounds for the Pelicans, who won their third straight. Anthony Davis scored 15 points a night after tying his career high with 43 in a win at Milwaukee.The Pelicans are two percentage points behind Oklahoma City for the West’s final playoff spot.“It’s big,” guard Eric Gordon said. “Every game counts from here on out, and we’ve just got to keep on fighting for the eighth spot. We just know that it’s going to be tough to reach the eighth seed because they’re winning a lot of games and we are, too, so we can’t slow down.”Brook Lopez had 15 points and 9 rebounds for the Nets, who lost their fourth straight in the finale of a five-game homestand.AdvertisementNets Coach Lionel Hollins was disappointed that his team did not respond after the Pelicans roared back from an early 14-point deficit.Advertisement“Well, that’s all year long,” Hollins said. “I think competing is what this business is about. That’s the reason I played, the reason I coach — to compete. It’s not about the money; it’s not about the fame; it’s not about anything but just going out there competing and earning respect of your opponent. That’s all that matters.“People can write good or bad about you, and you can make a lot of money or not make a lot of money, but the money doesn’t matter when you get between the lines.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Ajinca had 11 points during a four-minute stretch of the second quarter as the Pelicans took a 55-46 lead into halftime.“He was good,” Coach Monty Williams said. “He gave us a big lift. Being able to throw him the ball is something that we’ve gone to the last few weeks, and he’s delivered for us.”New Orleans extended its lead to 78-61 by the end of the third quarter as Asik and Davis combined for 13 of the team’s 23 points in the period.Pondexter had 14 points in the fourth.Davis was hit in the face and returned to the locker room to be checked out early in the period. By the time he was cleared to return, the Pelicans were well ahead and did not need him.The Nets lost Alan Anderson, Markel Brown and Sergey Karasev to injuries and fell to three games out of the final playoff spot in the East.“Every game at this point is a big game,” guard Deron Williams said, adding: “The teams in front of us are not showing any signs of slowing down. We got some ground to gain and got to play better than we are if we want a chance to win.”A version of this brief appears in print on March 11, 2015, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: Pelicans Top Nets and Gain Ground in Playoff Race.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.