By ZACH SCHONBRUNMARCH 10, 2015
The gold ball was at one end of the court, and the St. Francis of Brooklyn players — stunned, drained, devastated — were at the other, walking quickly out of the arena, toward a quiet locker room and another year of longing.After 76 years, it had seemed as if a berth in the N.C.A.A. tournament was finally coming to Brooklyn Heights. It has touched almost every corner of the country. But St. Francis, the oldest collegiate program in New York City, has the unflattering distinction of being one of just five teams to have played in the modern Division I since it was founded in 1948 and never earned a spot in the tournament.Tuesday looked like the day. The northern wall of the arena was devoid of even an N.I.T. banner from a year more recent than 1963. But this Terriers team — fueled by two seniors — appeared to be the one to add another, a bigger one, one with four letters instead of three.Instead, Robert Morris danced on St. Francis’ home court with the golden Northeast Conference tournament trophy after escaping, 66-63, in a thriller that yo-yoed back and forth. No lead appeared safe, not even the Colonials’ 10-point second-half advantage, which dwindled to 3 in the waning seconds.AdvertisementWith 13.8 seconds remaining, St. Francis had no more timeouts, and it raced the ball up the court. Yunus Hopkinson had an open look at a 3-pointer, but his shot veered right. Tyreek Jewell scrambled after the rebound, turned and flung up another 3-pointer. The whistle blew. He was fouled.AdvertisementThere were 2.4 seconds left. Fans buried their faces in their hands; they could not watch. Jewell, a junior, had scored a team-high 19 points. But his first free-throw attempt, and then his second, and then his third all missed.After Lucky Jones of Robert Morris missed two free throws with one second remaining, Lowell Ulmer had a chance for one final heave.The ball slammed into the back iron, bounded straight up in the air, hanging there seemingly for hours.“After all these years,” St. Francis Coach Glenn Braica said, “I thought it was going in.”But Robert Morris started celebrating as soon as the ball hit the court.The Pope Physical Education Center usually fits 1,200, making it among the smallest Division 1 arenas in the country. On Tuesday, they wedged in a few hundred more. Students stood five-deep along the southern baseline, just a few feet from the court’s perimeter. Within a minute of the opening tip, a student accidentally stepped on the cord for the shot clock, unplugging it.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Other fans filled the corner balconies framing the court. Still more watched the game on a projector screen in an auditorium elsewhere in the building. They were no doubt close enough to still hear the relentless roar from the gym, from people packed as tightly as patrons in a pub on St. Patrick’s Day.The noise sometimes worked in Robert Morris’s favor, too. When Elijah Minnie fouled Jewell in that moment of desperation, he escaped Coach Andy Toole’s ire. “I knew Coach was screaming at me,” Minnie said.The two teams split their regular-season meetings in January, each winning on its opponent’s home court. The margin of the victories was 7 points combined.Advertisement“I can’t tell you how much we respect Glenn and his staff and what they’ve done here,” Toole said.St. Francis took a 35-29 lead into halftime, led by 13 points from Jewell, who put the finishing touch on his first-half performance with an emphatic dunk with 35 seconds left.Nine St. Francis turnovers in the first 11 minutes of the second half allowed Robert Morris to come back and take the 10-point lead.Jones said: “I was thinking too much. I wasn’t a player. I wasn’t playing like myself.”Back-to-back 3-pointers by Jewell got St. Francis back into it. A steal and a layup by Jones, a senior who grew up just blocks from campus, cut Robert Morris’s lead to 3. The arena throbbed.But the deficit proved too much to come back from.As regular-season champions, St. Francis has clinched a berth in the N.I.T., guaranteeing another banner on the northern wall.It is just not the one they wanted.“We fell short of our ultimate goal, which is disappointing,” Braica said. “But it doesn’t take away what these guys did this year.”A version of this article appears in print on March 11, 2015, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Time Runs Out as St. Francis Falls Short of Earning First N.C.A.A. Bid.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.