AdvertisementSupported byRangers 2, Islanders 1By Allan KredaUNIONDALE, N.Y. — In a jammed Nassau Coliseum packed with the usual tapestry of Islanders and Rangers colors, the longtime rivals and their confluence of fans met Tuesday for their 126th regular-season clash on Long Island.But the swirl of home team blue and orange clashing with the visitors’ red, white and blue had a different tinge. Unless the clubs meet in the playoffs for the first time since 1994, this match was their last meeting at the arena before the Islanders move to Brooklyn next season.With both teams vying for Metropolitan Division supremacy and the best record in the Eastern Conference and the N.H.L. overall, the Islanders dominated early. They scored first and outshot the Rangers, 13-7, in the opening period. But the Rangers used a second-period goal by the rookie Kevin Hayes and an early third-period score from Rick Nash — along with ferocious defense — to emerge with a hard-fought 2-1 win.“This was more of our style,” Nash said, indirectly referring to the previous time the teams met, a topsy-turvy 6-5 road win by the Rangers on Feb. 16. “I thought it was a lot more tighter, obviously, than the last one.”Cam Talbot made 29 saves for the Rangers to improve to 11-2-3 since he replaced the injured Henrik Lundqvist.The victory by the surging Rangers (41-17-7) continued their torrid play over the last three months. They were 11-10-4 on Dec. 8. But starting with an overtime win against the Pittsburgh Penguins that night at Madison Square Garden, they are 30-7-3, including an 11-1-3 mark in their last 15 games.The Rangers trail the first-place Islanders by just a point with four games in hand. “This team has so much heart and confidence in each other,” Talbot said. “Everyone is just pushing and making each other better.”The Rangers are 53-63-8-2 at Nassau Coliseum. They also beat the Islanders last season at Yankee Stadium, in a game that was considered a home game for the Islanders.With the fans exchanging “Let’s Go Rangers” and “Let’s Go Islanders” chants, the tension was as palpable as it can possibly be for a nonplayoff contest. The Islanders have been selling out nearly every game down the stretch as they prepare to end their run at the Coliseum, where they have played since 1972.Anders Lee opened the scoring for the Islanders at 9 minutes 35 seconds of the first period, nudging the puck past Talbot for his 23rd goal of the season. Lee is second to John Tavares (33), the Islanders’ captain, for the team lead in goals.“Both teams were tight defensively and with the puck,” Lee said. “That’s exactly what a playoff game would look like.”Hayes tied the score with a marvelous singular effort at 11:35 of the second, outmuscling defenseman Thomas Hickey on a partial breakaway before ramming the puck past a prone Jaroslav Halak. Entering the third, the Islanders held a 23-18 shot advantage.Nash scored his team-leading 39th goal at 2:50 of the final period when his centering pass from the right boards deflected off Islanders forward Ryan Strome and Halak. Derick Brassard and Marc Staal assisted on the play.“It was a real lucky goal,” Nash said. “I was thinking about dumping it, and then I saw I could get the blue line. I just shot it anywhere in the direction of the net, and lucky enough it went in.”Earlier Tuesday, Tavares said the return of Kyle Okposo, who missed 22 games with a detached retina in his left eye, would surely bolster the Islanders, who are having their best season since the early 1980s, when they won four straight Stanley Cups.“He was playing great before the injury,” Tavares said of Okposo, the team’s second-leading scorer with 14 goals and 30 assists. With the loss, the Islanders (43-22-4) still have an impressive 19-5-1 record against division opponents, including an 11-3-0 mark at home. They host Ottawa and Montreal this weekend and then will have 11 games over the season’s final four weeks.“I can’t ask for a better effort,” Islanders Coach Jack Capuano said. “We played hard against a really good team.” SLAP SHOTSThe first game between the teams, on Oct. 21, 1972, was also a 2-1 Rangers victory. ... The Islanders won the first three meetings this season before the Rangers rallied at Nassau Coliseum last month for that wild 6-5 comeback win. The Islanders won two games at Madison Square Garden earlier this season and won again, 4-1, at home Jan. 27. ... The Islanders played without Nick Leddy for the first time this season. Leddy, a top-pair defenseman, was injured in Monday night’s overtime win at Toronto when he collided with Maple Leafs’ defenseman Morgan Rielly. Advertisement