By MATT HIGGINSMARCH 10, 2015
TORONTO —  In the final stretch of a season that flirted with promise but has degenerated into a sideshow, the Maple Leafs arrived here last week for a rare three-game homestand.The Leafs had not played more than two consecutive home games since mid-December, when they were surging and held sixth place in the Eastern Conference. In the ensuing three months, the Leafs won only eight games, plummeted out of playoff contention, fired Coach Randy Carlyle and endured fans at Air Canada Centre and on the road tossing team jerseys onto the ice in protest over poor play. Phil Kessel, the team’s star player, sparred with the news media.The Leafs (26-35-6) have the N.H.L.’s second-worst road record at 8-21-5. But home has hardly provided a refuge. On Saturday night, the St. Louis Blues jumped to a 3-0 lead at the end of the first period, chasing goaltender Jonathan Bernier, on the way to a 6-1 win.“You never want your team to come in to play a game without the highest possible effort,” Peter Horachek, the interim coach, said Saturday. “There’s no real excuses for it, so I’m not going to make any. It’s unacceptable for me, and I’m not happy about it.”AdvertisementUnhappiness and its synonyms have become a theme for the Maple Leafs.“We’ve got to be very disappointed in the way that we played at home, in front of our fans,” defenseman Dion Phaneuf, the team’s captain, said after the loss to St. Louis. “To play the way that we did, it’s not even close to acceptable.”AdvertisementIt got worse Monday, when the Leafs took a 3-1 lead in the third period against the Metropolitan Division’s first-place team, the Islanders, but lost, 4-3, in overtime.Toronto, the most lucrative franchise in the N.H.L., has not won a Stanley Cup since 1967, the longest drought in the league. In the off-season, seeking a new identity and direction after a late-season collapse that caused them to miss the playoffs for the ninth time in 10 seasons, the Maple Leafs hired Brendan Shanahan as team president.But this season was rocky from the start.The Leafs’ already rancorous relationship with their fans took a hit in November during a stretch when jerseys were being thrown onto the ice. After a home victory, the players departed from tradition and did not gather at center ice to raise their sticks in a salute to the crowd. The incident became known in Toronto as Salutegate.Criticism of the team’s attitude and play has focused on Phaneuf and Kessel, a keg-shaped right wing, for his perceived indifference to fitness, defense and tact.Kessel has 23 goals, and only four in his last 25 games, putting him on pace for his lowest total in a full season since he joined the Leafs in 2009. A lack of scoring has exacerbated defensive shortcomings for him and his linemates James Van Riemsdyk and Tyler Bozak. Kessel called this season the most challenging of his nine-year career.An anti-Kessel campaign began last spring, when fans questioned his priorities because of a Twitter message — since deleted — that read, “Night fishing with friends doesn’t get much better.” At the time, the playoffs were underway, and Toronto had failed to qualify.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Then at training camp in September, Kessel told reporters that he had skated perhaps 10 times all summer, raising further questions about his commitment.On Jan. 6, Carlyle was fired amid a 3-7 slide as Toronto clung to the final wild-card spot in the East. Carlyle’s predecessor, Ron Wilson, who coached the Leafs from 2008 to 2012, implied in an interview that the team’s troubles were not Carlyle’s fault and that Kessel and other players were “uncoachable.” Asked later if he was difficult to coach, Kessel referred to the reporter who posed the question as an “idiot.”AdvertisementThe latest flare-up happened March 3 in Florida, when Kessel complained about mistreatment of Phaneuf, who was thought to be on the trading block before the March 2 deadline.“The way the media treats Dion Phaneuf in this city is embarrassing,” he said, adding, ”a lot of people should be ashamed of themselves.”Kessel’s outburst was presumably a response to one of the season’s more bizarre turns. An inappropriate Twitter message about Phaneuf, his wife — the actress Elisha Cuthbert — and Leafs wing Joffrey Lupul was broadcast on TSN, a Canadian sports television network, during coverage of the trade deadline. Phaneuf, Cuthbert and Lupul threatened a lawsuit. TSN called the incident a regrettable mistake and apologized on air. The author of the message, not affiliated with the network, also apologized.Kessel’s comments might have made him even less popular with fans and the media, but they scored points in the dressing room.“I think, as a team, that’s a thing where all of our players have to have each other’s backs,” Horachek said. “We need to stand up for each other, and that was his version of doing that, so I applaud him for that.”While the Leafs were able to unload the expensive contract of the struggling forward David Clarkson in a trade, one of the biggest surprises of the season was that Toronto did not deal Kessel, Phaneuf or any other high-priced stars at the deadline. Those players remain candidates to move in the off-season as General Manager Dave Nonis rebuilds.In the meantime, the Leafs have recalibrated their goals with 15 games remaining.Although “it’s never fun,” Lupul said, to play out the string with no hope for the postseason, young players will be looking to secure a roster spot in the N.H.L. Veterans have an incentive with coming contracts. And the Leafs can hope to play the spoiler against teams with playoff aspirations.In many recent years, Toronto was the team having its season spoiled.The homestand concludes with the last-place Buffalo Sabres on Wednesday before a run of three games on the road. Expect the Leafs to be traveling with the usual baggage.A version of this article appears in print on March 11, 2015, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: Like Fans’ Discarded Jerseys, Maple Leafs’ Season Lands in a Heap.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.