By BILL PENNINGTONMARCH 10, 2015
Roughly two years ago, when Darrelle Revis was traded by the Jets to the Tampa Bay Buccaneers, he insisted he did not want to leave.Asked at the time how he ended up in the employ of the Buccaneers, Revis referred to the Jets’ owner, Woody Johnson, and said, “I have no idea, maybe you need to ask Mr. Johnson about that.”Revis’s exit was a dispute over money, and the choice by the Jets to not meet their star cornerback’s salary demands was quite likely not Johnson’s alone. But Tuesday, given the chance to rectify the franchise’s 2013 decision, Johnson reacted very differently.The Jets brought Revis home with a five-year contract worth a whopping $70 million. About $39 million of the deal includes guaranteed money, with Revis earning $33 million in the first two seasons of the contract and $48 million during the first three years.Advertisement“New York, I’m coming home,” Revis wrote on his Twitter account just past 9:30 p.m., not long after his agents had confirmed the signing.AdvertisementRevis, 29, became a free agent Tuesday afternoon when the Super Bowl champion New England Patriots declined to pick up an option for next season that would have paid him $20 million. Johnson, who earlier had expressed his desire to return Revis to a Jets uniform, made sure his team was among the first to pursue the former Jets star, who was drafted by the team in 2007. Other teams joined the bidding, including the Patriots and the Buffalo Bills, coached by the former Jets coach Rex Ryan.But the Jets, more than most of the N.F.L. teams in the Revis hunt, had the salary cap space to make an outsize offer to the six-time Pro Bowl player.Revis’s arrival will not only solidify a stout defense whose principal deficiency last year was its cornerback play, it will also be a blow to the Patriots, whose defense was built around a superior secondary.Revis, who played from 2007 to 2012 for the Jets, was the most noteworthy transaction on a day the N.F.L. calls the first day of its new season. Both the Jets and the Giants remodeled their rosters with a flurry of free-agent signings and other modifications. And neither team appears to be done yet.The Jets made official their trade with the Chicago Bears for wide receiver Brandon Marshall, cut the jack-of-all-trades offensive weapon Percy Harvin and signed cornerback Buster Skrine, who played for the Cleveland Browns.The Jets did not rule out the possibility that Harvin, whose release saved the team $10.5 million in salary cap space, could still return to the team. But Tuesday night Harvin was already entertaining offers from other teams, including Buffalo and New England, so it appeared unlikely he would rejoin the Jets.Skrine, a fifth-round selection in the 2011 draft, started the last two seasons for the Browns. He had four interceptions and 18 passes defensed.AdvertisementThe Jets also bolstered their offensive line by agreeing to a four-year, $18 million contract with guard James Carpenter, who has started 39 games for the Seattle Seahawks since he was their first-round pick in 2011.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Giants were not left out of the free-agent bonanza, signing five players who could be valued contributors, if not starters.The most prominent of the group, in terms of potential regular playing time, was the former New England running back Shane Vereen, who will most likely be used to spell starter Rashad Jennings and as a third-down back. Vereen was a valuable pass-catching weapon out of the backfield for the Patriots. Vereen signed a three-year deal worth $12.35 million that included a $3.5 million signing bonus.The free-agent addition that may bring the biggest jolt to the Giants, especially since it could revive the team’s special teams, was the acquisition of the kick returner and wide receiver Dwayne Harris, who played the last four years for Dallas.Harris returns both kickoffs and punts, which might ease some of the burden on Odell Beckham Jr., who will be starting his second year in the league. Harris received a five-year contract worth $17.3 million.Harris has a career punt return average of 11.1 yards and has returned two punts for touchdowns. The Giants have not returned two punts for touchdowns in the last five years.The Giants also signed the former Patriots linebacker Jonathan Casillas, who could compete for the starting job on the weak side, but more likely figures to provide depth and help on special teams. The Giants are expected to lose last year’s starting linebacker Jacquian Williams, who is an unrestricted free agent.J. T. Thomas, who played linebacker during the last two seasons for the Jacksonville Jaguars, also became a new Giant, as did the former Green Bay right tackle Marshall Newhouse.The Giants continue to be in the market for a pass rusher and safety. One of the recent leaders of the defense, safety Antrel Rolle, now a free agent, was visiting the Bears on Tuesday.AdvertisementIn a statement issued by the Jets, Marshall spoke glowingly of working again with the new coach Todd Bowles, who was on the staff of the Miami Dolphins when Marshall played there in 2010-11.“I kind of knew about it before it all happened,” Marshall said of his trade, which sent a fifth-round pick to Chicago. “It was pretty cool to be able to sit back and figure out who really wanted me and the right place for me. Being able to be in New York with Coach Bowles, I thought, was an amazing opportunity and one that I thought I couldn’t pass up.“Coach Bowles allows guys to be themselves,” he added. “He treats everyone like men and like pros. That’s what I’ve seen work, is when guys feel comfortable coming to work and they’re not micromanaged and there’s someone there they can believe in, they can trust. He’s an amazing leader.”Marshall’s 2015 salary will count $7.7 million against the salary cap.A version of this article appears in print on March 11, 2015, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: ‘New York, I’m Coming Home’.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.