By TOM PEDULLAMARCH 10, 2015
PHILADELPHIA —  Princeton received a rare locker-room visit from the university president on Tuesday night after it achieved the first perfect regular season in Ivy League women’s basketball, downing its archrival, Penn, 55-42, at the Palestra for its 30th victory.Christopher L. Eisgruber, the Princeton president, who was among hundreds of fans who accompanied the team, wanted to make certain his student-athletes understood the magnitude of what they had accomplished, telling them this season would be remembered forever.Princeton finds itself in the heady company of the men’s team at Kentucky (31-0) as the only Division I teams to sweep through the regular season unbeaten. The Tigers previously clinched their fifth Ivy League title in six seasons and a bid to the N.C.A.A. tournament. The Ivy League does not have a postseason tournament.As much as Eisgruber’s visit meant, it was hard for the players to absorb everything that had happened since they opened their schedule with a 59-43 victory at Pittsburgh on Nov. 14 and defeated 16 nonconference opponents before storming through the Ivy League portion of their schedule. They entered the regular-season finale with an average margin of victory of 26.2 points against Ivy League opponents.Advertisement“Thirty and 0 hasn’t hit me yet,” said the junior forward Alex Wheatley. “Thirty and 0 doesn’t compute.”AdvertisementIt seemed so far-fetched that Blake Dietrick, the team’s point guard and its only senior starter, asked Annie Tarakchian, a junior, if she would be willing to bleach her hair if the team went undefeated. It was early in the schedule and Tarakchian, knowing the long odds, shrugged her shoulders and agreed.“Annie will have her hair bleached for the tournament,” Dietrick said.Courtney Banghart, in her eighth season as coach, set the league title as one of the team’s primary goals and readily acknowledged that a team dominated by underclassmen far exceeded her expectations. “It is hard to look at this team and say they should be doing more,” she said.The players, though, expect even more from themselves. For starters, they are intent on joining Harvard, the only Ivy League women’s team to win a game in the N.C.A.A. tournament. “It’s No. 1 on my list,” Dietrick said. “Second is probably finishing my thesis.”After achieving the highest national ranking in league history, the Tigers will learn how the selection committee views their accomplishments when their seeding is announced on Monday. Banghart expressed hope that they might be given a game at Jadwin Gymnasium, their home court, as a reward for their magical ride.“It’s not our decision,” she said. “We’d love to play at home. It would be special for the Ivy League, Jadwin and our players.”Whatever the site, and whoever the opponent, Princeton will need a repeat of its performance here if it is to gain the win it longs for above all others. The Tigers displayed their balance — one of their greatest attributes — and played with tenacity, particularly on the defensive end.Wheatley paced them with 17 points, and her 12 rebounds helped them to a 42-34 margin on the boards. Dietrick scored 11 points, and Tarakchian, who may not agree so readily to a dare next time, added 10 points.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Sydney Stipanovich, a sophomore center, and Michelle Nwokedi, a freshman forward, each scored 13 points for Penn (20-8, 11-3). Nwokedi also grabbed 14 rebounds.AdvertisementPrinceton held the Quakers to 29.6 percent shooting from the field (16 of 54). Penn connected on only 1 of 15 3-point attempts. “Their pressure was terrific,” said Kathleen Roche, a senior guard for the Quakers.Princeton had routed Penn at home on Jan. 13. But Penn, which denied the Tigers’ bid for the Ivy title in the regular-season finale last year, again proved to be a difficult opponent.The Tigers led by only 31-29 early in the second half before they stitched together a decisive 11-2 run that began and ended with baskets inside by Wheatley, a 6-foot-2 junior forward.Dietrick, a point guard and the only senior starter, contributed 5 points during the spree and drilled a 3-pointer from the left corner that provided a 40-31 margin leading to Wheatley’s bank shot inside.Penn had won nine consecutive games for the second-longest winning streak in the history of its women’s program.With the victory, Banghart was looking forward to the N.C.A.A. tournament.“It’s going to take a really good team to beat us,” she said.A picture caption in some editions on Wednesday with an article about Princeton’s 55-42 victory over Penn in women’s basketball, which clinched an undefeated regular season for the Tigers, misspelled, in some copies, the surname of one of the Princeton players shown holding the Ivy League trophy. She is Blake Dietrick, not Dietrich.A version of this article appears in print on March 11, 2015, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Princeton Takes Its Seat by Undefeated Kentucky.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.