AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressAs free agency began Tuesday, the N.F.L. looked more like fantasy football. Trades, anyone?Monster deals sending Jimmy Graham to Seattle and Sam Bradford to Philadelphia competed with free-agent signings.New Orleans agreed to send Graham, its star tight end, to the Seahawks for center Max Unger, with draft picks changing hands.That stunner was followed by Bradford, the injury-prone quarterback who barely has played the past two years (knee), going to Philadelphia for Nick Foles, who also comes off an injury-shortened season (collarbone). Bradford was the top overall draft pick in 2010. Terms of that deal were still being worked out.Foles is the latest starter to depart Philadelphia. He joins the two-time All-Pro running back LeSean McCoy, now in Buffalo, and the Pro Bowl wide receiver Jeremy Maclin, headed for Kansas City.Baltimore dealt nose tackle Haloti Ngata to Detroit, which is about to lose the All-Pro defensive tackle Ndamukong Suh in free agency. Ngata, 31 and a five-time Pro Bowler, is due $8.5 million next season and has a $16 million salary cap figure.The Bills confirmed acquiring McCoy for linebacker Kiko Alonso; McCoy also signed a contract extension for $40 million over five years.LOCKER RETIRES  Quarterback Jake Locker retired from football rather than test free agency after four N.F.L. seasons with the Tennessee Titans, saying he no longer has the “burning desire” needed to keep playing the game for a living.Locker, 26, wrote in a statement released through his agent, Camron Hahn, that he decided to retire after talking with his family.The Titans drafted Locker with the eighth pick over all out of Washington in 2011, but he was benched last October. He played behind Matt Hasselbeck in his first season, then was named the starter for 2012.GORE SIGNS WITH COLTS  Indianapolis agreed to a contract with the free-agent running back Frank Gore. The deal’s terms were not immediately available.The news comes two days after it appeared Gore would sign with Philadelphia. Gore, 31, had eight 1,000-yard seasons and five Pro Bowl selections with the San Francisco 49ers.RAVENS TRADE NGATA  The Baltimore Ravens bid a reluctant farewell to the five-time Pro Bowl defensive tackle Haloti Ngata, trading him to the Detroit Lions to create much-needed salary cap space. The Ravens will receive a fourth- and a fifth-round pick for Ngata, as well as a seventh-round selection, according to a report on the Lions’ website. Ngata starred for nine years in Baltimore after being selected with the 12th overall pick in the 2006 draft.WILLIS RETIRES His eyes swollen from crying and reciting scripture as he spoke of retirement, the five-time All-Pro linebacker Patrick Willis bid farewell to football and called it one of his happiest days yet because he is leaving on his own terms. Willis’s 2014 season was cut short by a toe injury that required surgery and because of sore feet that made everything more of a challenge.“In my head, I’m already a Hall of Famer,” said Willis, 30. “I am leaving this with closure, saying that I am happy today, more happy today than I was the day I was drafted. That says something to me.”PANTHER IS RELEASED  The Panthers announced they had released running back DeAngelo Williams, the franchise’s career leading rusher. Williams, 31, ran for 6,846 yards and 46 touchdowns in Carolina, but his production dropped in recent years.BRONCOS SIGN TWO The Denver Broncos moved on from the Pro Bowl tight end Julius Thomas by signing Virgil Green and Owen Daniels to three-year deals. Thomas is the only tight end in N.F.L. history to catch a dozen touchdown passes in consecutive seasons, and Green has just one touchdown catch in his four-year career.Thomas, a free agent, was reportedly a target of the Jacksonville Jaguars.Advertisement