By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSOCT. 1, 2015
The Texas Rangers clinched a wild-card spot and moved to the cusp of the American League West title on Thursday night, with a three-run double by Adrian Beltre backing Derek Holland in a 5-3 victory over the visiting Los Angeles Angels.The Rangers are a win or a Houston loss away from their first division title since winning two straight and going to the World Series in 2010-11.The Angels cannot successfully defend their A.L. West championship, but they can still claim the second A.L. wild card with three games left. Los Angeles is a game behind the Astros and tied with Minnesota.TWINS 4, INDIANS 2 Pinch-runner Eduardo Nunez scored from third base on a wild pitch and Torii Hunter hit a sacrifice fly in the ninth inning to give Minnesota a victory in Cleveland.AdvertisementFacing a crushing loss, the Twins scored a run in the eighth to tie it and then scored two unearned runs in the ninth against Cody Allen (2-5) to pull one game behind idle Houston.Trevor Plouffe reached on a throwing error by second baseman Jose Ramirez with one out in the ninth. Nunez, running for Plouffe, then raced to third on a single to right by Eddie Rosario before Allen bounced a 2-2 pitch to Hunter in the dirt. Hunter followed with a fly to deep right, bringing in Rosario.CUBS 5, REDS 3 Austin Jackson hit a three-run homer, Anthony Rizzo added a run-scoring double, and Chicago kept alive its slim hopes for home-field advantage in the National League wild-card playoff game with a victory in Cincinnati.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Chris Denorfia also drove in a run, and the Cubs overcame two errors to move two games behind idle Pittsburgh in the race to host the playoff game on Wednesday. Both teams have three to play — Chicago in Milwaukee and the Pirates against the Reds in Pittsburgh.ORIOLES 6, BLUE JAYS 4 Toronto extended the celebration of its first A.L. East title in 22 years by resting its starters in a rain-delayed defeat at Baltimore.AdvertisementAlthough the Blue Jays are still dueling with Kansas City for the best record in the A.L. — a distinction that will provide home-field advantage through the postseason — Toronto Manager John Gibbons has placed a priority on keeping his players fresh.ROYALS 6, WHITE SOX 4 Jonny Gomes drove in three runs, and banged-up Kansas City moved into a tie with Toronto for the A.L.’s best record with a victory in Chicago.Kansas City played without outfielders Lorenzo Cain and Alex Rios, and designated hitter Kendrys Morales (left quadriceps tightness) and catcher Salvador Perez (swelling in right thumb) each departed during the game. Cain was sidelined by a sore right knee, and Rios was scratched because of a stiff back. DODGERS 3, GIANTS 2 Brett Anderson pitched two-hit ball into the eighth inning, and Los Angeles wrapped up its road schedule with a victory in San Francisco.Tim Hudson (8-9) allowed three runs and three hits in two and a third innings in the final start of his 17-year major league career.A version of this article appears in print on October 2, 2015, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: Rangers Beat Angels, Securing Spot in the Postseason.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.