AdvertisementSupported byBy Tim RohanPORT ST. LUCIE, Fla. — After a long day of throwing and fielding drills, Mets reliever Vic Black retired to his hotel room Sunday afternoon, slouched in a chair directly in front of the television and started playing Destiny, a first-person-shooter video game.Black was stuck on one stage of the game that required defeating what looked like a giant robot. The task would have been easier if he were playing with other people, and he kept running out of ammunition. But he kept trying — for more than an hour. “Ah-ha!” Black finally shouted at the TV, bouncing in his chair.He had passed the stage. “I get so worked up sometimes,” he said. “I get a lot of tongue action going, too. “David does it when he fields ground balls,” he continued, referring to third baseman David Wright. “I do it when I play video games.”This is how Black, 26, relaxes during spring training, with what he calls mindless entertainment. For a few hours each day, he can sink into his chair and forget about finding his delivery, forget about the pressure, the expectations and the natural anxieties that come with his job.For Black, spring training is typically a mental battle, a time when he becomes obsessed with perfecting his delivery to the point that he may be a detriment to himself. Black has been invited to three big league spring training camps now and has pitched in the majors for parts of two seasons, but he has yet to make an opening day roster.Black used to warn his coaches, “I’ve never had a good spring training.”Black calls himself a feel pitcher, meaning that for him to be his best, the rhythm and the timing of his delivery have to be in accord. His foot has to land at the right moment. His arm has to be in the right spot. When it all feels right, he does not give it any thought. Everything flows freely and smoothly. But that generally takes time to achieve. Black lost sight of that at some point over the last few years. He tried hastening the process in spring training, tinkering with his mechanics, forcing the issue. He was impatient, constantly wrestling in his mind with how he could fix himself. When the Pittsburgh Pirates left Black off their opening day roster in 2013, his anxiousness grew. His concerns blended together. Was he tinkering to solve his problems? Or was his tinkering causing his problems? During spring training last year, his first camp with the Mets, the team had high hopes for him. The Mets had acquired him as part of a trade that sent John Buck and Marlon Byrd to Pittsburgh. But Black was a mess. He allowed, on average, more than two base runners per inning. His spring E.R.A. was 5.79. He did not make the opening day roster.Eventually — as usual — he recovered the feel of his delivery. With it came peace of mind. Black suddenly became perhaps the Mets’ best reliever under pressure. The team often put him into games in the middle of an inning, with runners on, and he thrived. He inherited 26 base runners after he was called up and allowed only one to score. That rate was the lowest among National League relievers who inherited more than 10 runners, according to Stats L.L.C. Black joked that he felt more comfortable with runners on. “In those situations, his focus, his concentration, is as good as anybody’s,” said Dan Warthen, the Mets’ pitching coach.Warthen made one mechanical tweak in late June that helped put Black at ease, telling him to lower his arm slot and fix his posture. That gave Black better control and also helped him develop a two-seam fastball, which, with its sinking action, produced easy ground balls. Now, if Black ever feels off or needs to regroup, he can rely on that pitch. It did not seem to be a coincidence that Black reported to camp this year with a smile fixed to his face, saying he was taking a new, calmer approach to spring training. Black also seems more self-assured. He is not tinkering anymore. He trusts that his delivery will come. It helps that he had success last year. It appears he will not only make the roster, but also have an important role in the bullpen. Manager Terry Collins has indicated Black could be a closer someday. On Monday, Black pitched a perfect inning. He did not feel the way he usually does midseason, but, he said, it was the closest he had come during spring training. “When your mind speeds up, everything else wants to go faster,” Black said. “Once I got my mind to calm down, I was in the right acceleration process throughout the whole delivery. Also, your muscles relax. I think people take for granted how much your thoughts play a role in how your body feels. I’m learning how to trim out the bad thoughts, embrace the good ones and fill it up with more good ones.”Playing video games, like Destiny, Battlefield 4 and Call of Duty, helps him maintain that mind-set. He plays for a few hours each day after leaving the ballpark. Last month, he sent out a Twitter post that essentially invited Mets fans to search out his Xbox One user name, UncleBlack38, and play with him online. He does not know any of the fans beyond their brief conversations online and during the games, but they ask all kinds of questions. How is Matt Harvey doing? What does Jacob deGrom put in his hair? Who is Black’s favorite teammate? (Carlos Torres.) Black is happy to answer. He is one of the more open and friendly players on the team.Some other young Mets play Destiny together — Noah Syndergaard, Zack Wheeler, Jack Leathersich, Erik Goeddel, Cory Mazzoni and Tyler Pill. They play the PlayStation version, and they have pressured Black to switch consoles. Black is content, though, with his current setup. “I feel like I’ve got a pretty strong core of online gamers that I can hang out with on the regular,” he said.INSIDE PITCHJosh Edgin, the Mets’ top left-handed reliever, said he felt discomfort in his left elbow, which will receive a magnetic resonance imaging test. In his appearance on Monday, his pitch velocity had noticeably decreased.Advertisement