AdvertisementSupported byGlobal SoccerBy Rob HughesLONDON — After 144 years, the F.A. Cup, the world’s original knockout soccer tournament, still holds something of a compelling aura. It has changed, as all things must, but after Arsenal won at Manchester United, it is fair to say that the result sent echoes to wherever soccer is played.The feisty contest Monday was won in the end by a goal from a player who was born five minutes from Manchester’s Old Trafford Stadium, where the game was played.But when Danny Welbeck sped around United’s goalkeeper to score in an empty net after 75 minutes, the twist in the tale was that he, the son of Ghanaian immigrants, knocked out the team of his dreams. Welbeck first caught United’s eyes when he was eight years old, so it knew all about his speed and his desire. He advanced through every level of a United academy put in place by the club’s former manager, Alex Ferguson. He worked his way up to the senior team, either as the center forward that he wanted to be or, because United always had the money to buy the world’s best strikers, out on the wing.Nevertheless, the boss, Ferguson, coveted the way that Welbeck would work and run in whatever role he was asked to perform. He had that hallmark of a Ferguson player: talent combined with a work ethic.However, even Ferguson had to retire, and Louis van Gaal, the second replacement in less than two years, didn’t see in Welbeck what others did. United already had Robin van Persie and Wayne Rooney, and then signed Radamel Falcao.“It was because of Falcao that we let Danny Welbeck go,” van Gaal said last September. Falcao, however, has been on the bench through most of this season, and van Persie is injured after playing for van Gaal with the Dutch team at the World Cup last year.Arsenal had paid 16 million pounds, or $24 million, for Welbeck. On Monday, Arsenal Manager Arsène Wenger played the “law of the ex” by selecting to start the player van Gaal spurned.This, however, is not just a story of local boy returning to bite the hand that reared him. This is a story of the thoroughly modern era, with players from 12 different countries taking part for both teams.The tradition is English, but the Cup is now global. Arsenal and United are the most successful clubs in the tournament, each having won it 11 times. So something had to give at Old Trafford, and it proved to be the home team that fell, 2-1. That score did not flatter Arsenal in the slightest, because it was the faster, more cohesive and more assured team throughout.The result was close only because David De Gea, Manchester’s goalkeeper, made two incredible reaction saves. First he dove to his ankles and blocked with his left hand a volley from Santi Cazorla. Then, with an even more spectacular reach, De Gea got his fingertips on the ball to deflect another low shot, this time from Alexis Sánchez.Spanish keeper, Spanish and Chilean shooters: That is how cosmopolitan this F.A. Cup has become. Yet with a crowd of 74,285 animated throughout the match, with many having driven 250 miles each way to support Arsenal, it remained the theatrical event invented almost a century and a half ago in little old England.Monday’s opening goal was prompted by a pass from Mesut Ozil, the German World Cup winner who sometimes seems to be overrun in the Premier League. But it was then an English youth, Alex Oxlade-Chamberlain, whose dancing feet deceived the United defenders.One, two, three players were fooled by Chamberlain’s twisting and turning in such tight space. The Ox still had the time and the composure to pick out a colleague with a short, sharp pass, which Nacho Monreal struck for a goal from 10 yards out.United fought back with its own amalgam of talents. Ángel Di María, the most expensive player in English soccer, sent over a marvellous, slanted cross from the right, and Wayne Rooney threw himself into the air to meet it with his head.An Argentine cross, an English bullet, and the game was even once again.But not for long. Just after the hour, Welbeck struck. One couldn’t say this was the moment he was waiting for, because, as Ferguson taught him to be, Welbeck was forever on the move during the game.He spotted a careless back-pass from Antonio Valencia. He knows the Ecuadoran well because they played together for United, and as soon as Valencia under-hit his pass, Welbeck intercepted the ball, ran around a charging De Gea and sent in the game winner.As he celebrated, some of his one-time fans booed. But it was United that rejected Welbeck, not the other way around. Now 24, he did what he had to do and won an F.A. Cup quarterfinal at Old Trafford.What followed was a silly, self-wounding act by Di María. Twice the Argentine tested Michael Oliver, a referee who made impeccable calls all game long, by falling theatrically to try to gain free kicks. Oliver yellow-carded him the second time, whereupon Di María grabbed the back of the referee’s shirt. Oliver had no option but to send him off.“We gave it away by ourselves,” said van Gaal. As for Di María, the manager said: “He has touched the referee, and that is forbidden in every country. He has no excuse, and we have lost our chance of a title.” Advertisement