AdvertisementSupported byN.F.L. RoundupBy The Associated PressReceiver Andre Johnson signed with the Indianapolis Colts. Johnson, a standout for the Texans, made seven Pro Bowls but was released by Houston. The Colts released wideout Reggie Wayne this off-season, and Johnson will move into his spot. Johnson was released by Houston and joined Indianapolis on Wednesday.Johnson, 33, holds the N.F.L. record with 21 career games with 10 or more receptions and 100 or more yards receiving. He has 10 games with at least 10 receptions and 150 yards receiving, tied with Jerry Rice for the most in the N.F.L.SUH SIGNS RECORD DEAL Ndamukong Suh signed a $114 million, six-year deal with the Miami Dolphins. The contract made Suh the highest-paid defensive player in N.F.L. history, surpassing J.J. Watt’s $100 million, six-year deal with Houston.The Detroit Lions went 0-2 in the postseason in Suh’s five years with them, and Miami has not been to the playoffs since 2008. But the Dolphins believe the three-time first-team All-Pro defensive tackle can transform them into a contender after consecutive 8-8 seasons.THURMOND SIGNS WITH EAGLES The Eagles agreed on a one-year contract with the free-agent cornerback Walter Thurmond III and re-signed quarterback Mark Sanchez to a two-year deal. Thurmond is the latest former Oregon player to join the Eagles since Coach Chip Kelly left the Ducks two years ago. Thurmond spent four seasons with Seattle and played two games for the Giants last year before a torn pectoral muscle ended his season.Thurmond, 27, has started nine games in his five-year career. He bolsters a secondary that is replacing three of its four starters; cornerback Byron Maxwell already was signed away from the Seahawks.BEARS COMMIT TO CUTLER Chicago Bears General Manager Ryan Pace said that Jay Cutler would start at quarterback for the Bears’ 2015 season, less than a month after declining to commit to Cutler at the N.F.L. combine. Cutler’s $15.5 million base salary for 2015 is guaranteed. Another $10 million of his 2016 salary will become guaranteed for injury on Thursday.“We went through the process of thoroughly evaluating the roster and we’re moving forward with Jay as our starting quarterback,” Pace said.NEW DEAL FOR 49ERS RECEIVER Wide receiver Torrey Smith completed a new five-year contract with San Francisco.GIANTS’ COUGHLIN EXTENDED The Giants extended Coach Tom Coughlin’s contract through 2016. The terms were not immediately available.Advertisement