AdvertisementSupported byN.B.A. RoundupBy Andrew KehThe players’ union formally rejected an N.B.A. proposal to artificially limit increases to the salary cap once lucrative new national television deals begin next year, the league said in a statement Wednesday.The N.B.A.’s salary cap, the amount each team can spend on players, is tied to league revenue, which is set to grow significantly once the television contracts, worth more than $2.6 billion a year, begin before the 2016-17 season. The league hoped to phase in gradual increases to the salary cap — a process it called smoothing — to avoid a single dramatic spike in free-agent contract amounts that season.Michele A. Roberts, the executive director of the union, had said that she and the players were against the idea.The N.B.A. on Wednesday emphasized that the players, as a group, would not have lost any money in the proposal, and that the difference could have been paid out.“Smoothing would have avoided a substantial salary cap spike in 2016-17,” Mike Bass, a league spokesman, said in the statement. “Under the league’s smoothing approach, the salary shortfall resulting from more gradual cap increases would have been paid directly to the players’ association for distribution to all players, and thus the total compensation paid to players in any given season would not have been impacted.”The move could lead to players becoming free agents this summer to push for one-year contracts, so they could negotiate new deals after more money was available.The salary cap in the 2016-17 season could jump by more than $20 million from the 2015-16 cap.HEAT 104, NETS 98 Dwyane Wade scored 28 points and added nine assists, Chris Andersen tied a career high with 18 points and set a season high with 14 rebounds, and Miami finished off a season sweep of the visiting Nets. The Heat moved back into the No. 8 spot in the Eastern Conference playoff race. (AP)CLIPPERS 120, THUNDER 108 Chris Paul had 33 points and 9 assists, J. J. Redick added 25 points, and Los Angeles ending Oklahoma City’s seven-game home winning streak. DeAndre Jordan had 18 points and 17 rebounds for the Clippers, who are fighting for a top-four seed in the Western Conference. Oklahoma City fell a half-game behind New Orleans in the race for the conference’s final playoff spot. (AP)Advertisement