AdvertisementSupported byBy Tim RohanJUPITER, Fla. — Matt Harvey and Giancarlo Stanton were locked in the baseball equivalent of a staring contest on Wednesday. It was the first inning of an exhibition game between the Mets and the Miami Marlins, the count was full, and Harvey hurled a 96-mile-per-hour fastball toward home plate, where Stanton stood waiting, bat in hand. Stanton hit a low line drive to third base, and when he saw it was caught, he stopped and clapped his hands. The inning was over. Harvey walked off the mound, crossed paths with Stanton and smiled at him, a subtle sign of respect for a player just as intimidating as Harvey.Two innings later, they squared off again, and this time, Stanton doubled off the left-field wall to drive in a run. One batter later, Harvey’s day was done. His second outing in his comeback from Tommy John surgery was not as impressive as his first, last Friday, but it was good enough. The battles between Harvey and Stanton are probably just beginning. Both are 25, and they play in the same division, which means they may be squaring off over and over again for years to come. Stanton is emerging as the pre-eminent slugger in baseball, and Harvey, when fully healthy, is one of the game’s best pitchers. Harvey had dazzled in his first spring training start, although the Detroit Tigers lineup he had faced for two innings was without its big hitters. On Wednesday, the test was a little tougher: Stanton was in the lineup, and so were some of the other Marlins regulars. Harvey had mixed results against them. He allowed two runs on six hits and lasted two and two-thirds innings, throwing 49 pitches. Afterward, Harvey admitted he felt sluggish on the mound, but the Mets said they were not concerned, chalking it up to the rhythms of spring training.Stanton is doing some acclimating of his own this spring. Last September, he took a fastball to the face and sustained multiple fractures. Two months later, he signed a $325 million, 13-year contract extension with the Marlins that will presumably keep him in Miami, and the National League East, for a long time.This spring, he has been batting with a stylized face mask attached to his batting helmet. It features a customized G for his first name, and Stanton may keep wearing it for a while. He did not seem affected by the mask in the slightest on Wednesday against Harvey. Their first duel lasted eight pitches, with Stanton fouling off several of them to stay alive. At one point, Harvey broke Stanton’s bat. Stanton eventually lined out “He was solid — firm and precise, I’d say, working in and out,” Stanton said of Harvey. During their second matchup, in the third inning, Harvey was approaching his pitch limit. Dan Warthen, the Mets’ pitching coach, had asked Harvey to throw more changeups, and he had complied. The excitement of his first start had worn off a bit. It seemed more important that Harvey polish his stuff than put on a show. He fell behind in the count to Stanton, 2-1, and tried firing a fastball past him over the inner part of the plate. But Stanton, who is 0 for 6 against Harvey in the regular season, swung and connected, and the ball soared through the air and bounced off the left-field wall. “He’s so big and strong that, even though I got it in on him, he still was able to get it out to the warning track,” Harvey said. “He’s making $300 million for a reason.”Harvey said that he was mostly pleased with his outing, even if the Marlins scuffed him up a bit. Christian Yelich singled twice. Jarrod Saltalamacchia drew a walk. Morse, Martin Prado and Ichiro Suzuki singled on three consecutive pitches in the second inning. Harvey also struck Morse with his final pitch of the day, and it left an impression on Morse. “I’m pretty sure we can say he’s healthy,” he said.The Mets and the Marlins will meet three more times in spring training. Then come 18 games in the regular season, including six in April. It is almost inevitable that Harvey and Stanton will be meeting again soon. Wednesday was just a sneak preview; the slugger and the ace are still warming up. Advertisement