AdvertisementSupported byBy David WaldsteinTAMPA, Fla. — Despite Major League Baseball’s efforts to diversify its front offices and coaching staffs, former Japanese players have not been included. There was no record of a former Japanese player working in the front office of a Major League Baseball team until Tuesday, when the Yankees announced that Hideki Matsui would become a special adviser to General Manager Brian Cashman.“To me, it’s not so much about being Japanese,” Matsui, who played for the Yankees from 2003 to 2009, said Wednesday through an interpreter. “It’s more about what can I do to help the organization.”As a multitude of players have circulated through the Yankees over the years, some stood out to Cashman as potential coaches, managers or executives. Manager Joe Girardi was one, as was Eric Chavez, now a scout.Matsui’s professionalism, hitting knowledge and comportment impressed Cashman to the point where he essentially left open the possibility that Matsui could have a job whenever he wanted. For years, Matsui declined the offer, preferring to stay at home in New York with his family. During the last two spring trainings he served as a special coach, but Cashman wanted more.“We’ll take as much Hideki as we can get,” he said. Cashman said Matsui, as his new special adviser for hitting, would travel around the Yankees’ minor league system to help managers, coaches and players with all aspects of hitting and outfield play.“I will be an adviser to Brian,” said Matsui, 40, who has been studying English but will travel with an interpreter, for now. “But hopefully I can perform that position without the special interpreter. That’s next.”He will travel from team to team and will be in uniform in the dugout for games, advising and helping the players with all aspects of the game, including one of his best skills: dealing with the news media. “No one handled the press as well as Hideki did,” Cashman said. “He played in the two largest media markets in the world and handled that responsibility with true grace and professionalism, and that’s something that every one of us can learn from.”According to Cashman, Matsui will also report to the Yankees’ new player development chief, Gary Denbo, who Cashman said has always been impressed with Matsui’s knowledge. “He has been dazzled by this man and his abilities forever,” Cashman said.Cashman all but ruled out the idea of Matsui being used as a scout or a recruiter in Japan. He seemed far more interested in Matsui working with the players in the system.Matsui was not considered for a job as a major league hitting coach, but as his English improves he could one day transition into that role, or could perhaps even become a manager. “Maybe this will serve as some kind of foundation if I do take that path,” Matsui said. “But at this point I haven’t really thought about that.”Advertisement