By SAM BORDENMARCH 11, 2015
LONDON — A few minutes after the referee blew the final whistle here on Wednesday night, the Paris St.-Germain players ripped off their shirts in the bitter cold, ran toward the end of the field at Stamford Bridge and danced, their arms thrown around one another, in front of a band of giddy, frothy fans.The celebration was long and loud and entirely understandable. P.S.G. had played 90 minutes with 10 men against Chelsea after losing its star player. It had trailed twice. It had given up a goal on a penalty kick in extra time while battling a coach who is a master at keeping a lead yet still, somehow, had overcome it all.Technically, the result was a 2-2 draw, but that is semantics. This was unquestionably a win for P.S.G., which advanced to the quarterfinals of the Champions League on the away-goals rule because the teams tied, 3-3 on aggregate, in this two-legged matchup.The Parisians will play the first leg of the next round without forward Zlatan Ibrahimovic, who was sent off under controversial circumstances in the first half. They will not worry much about that now, however, as a looping header by defender Thiago Silva late in the second period of extra time allowed them to complete a most unlikely comeback and exact a measure of revenge for last year, when a late Chelsea goal eliminated them from this tournament in wrenching fashion.Advertisement“We want to be one of Europe’s top clubs,” said Coach Laurent Blanc, who joined P.S.G. in 2013, two years after Qatari investors drastically increased the club’s payroll and, simultaneously, its global expectations.AdvertisementBlanc added, “I think going forward this game will be seen as a turning point, a reference point, for the club’s history.”Maybe so. For Chelsea, though, it will linger as a maddening night, one in which the team, the Premier League leader, made little use of its man advantage. Coach José Mourinho, who has proved adept at crafting his way through these two-game series, stalked up the tunnel after the match in a fit of fury. Blanc, meanwhile, skipped out onto the field with glee.The contrast was jarring. For most of the night, it seemed certain that Blanc would be chasing down the referee, Bjorn Kuipers, once the game was over; instead, he joined his players in a postgame jig.“I’m surprised, but I try to be pragmatic,” Mourinho said. “When the opponent is better, then the feeling is, you deserve to lose.”It was not a pretty match — not at all — but that fit the tense mood surrounding the game. Parisian fans streamed into London early Wednesday, many of them arriving via the Eurostar train at the St. Pancras station to find the customs area, which generally has nominal supervision or is completely unstaffed, heavily patrolled instead. Police and border officials seemed to be openly targeting soccer fans, particularly young men, and pulling them aside for questioning and a review of their documents.One official said the strong presence was a result of an incident that occurred before the teams’ first leg, in Paris, when Chelsea fans were filmed singing racist chants and refusing to allow a black Parisian man to board a subway train. “We’re guarding against a mass of troublemakers” believed to be traveling here, the official said.The scenes around the stadium were mostly tame — or at least as tame as a nighttime mingling of French and English soccer fans can be — but the tenor on the field quickly turned fiery. P.S.G.’s Thiago Motta clipped Cesc Fàbregas after nine minutes. Moments later, David Luiz, a former Chelsea defender now playing in Paris, complained to the referee that Diego Costa had knocked him down away from the ball. Luiz then appeared to return the favor with a sly elbow.AdvertisementThe boiling point came after half an hour. That was when Ibrahimovic slid toward a bouncing ball as Oscar, a Chelsea midfielder, did the same from the other side. Oscar arrived first, and Ibrahimovic’s foot slammed into Oscar’s legs, a collision that, when viewed from the stands in real time, looked nasty.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In truth, Ibrahimovic appeared to sense he was beaten to the ball and pulled his foot back. His cleats were down, and his contact with Oscar was more of a glancing blow than an ill-mannered stomp.It did not matter. Every one of Chelsea’s players rushed toward Kuipers in anger, and the referee quickly went to his front pocket. Red card.From his knees, Ibrahimovic raised his hands in frustration. On a night when P.S.G. needed to surmount Chelsea’s away goal from the first leg, the team’s biggest threat — and one of the sport’s superstars — was in the locker room with an hour remaining in regulation.“I spoke with him after the game,” Mourinho said of Ibrahimovic, whom he coached at Inter Milan in 2008 and 2009. “When he speaks with me, he is always honest, and he would tell me if it was a reason for a red card. And he was very disappointed.”Mourinho added that he hoped Ibrahimovic’s mandatory suspension would be overturned. “If he did nothing wrong, he deserves that,” he said.The rest of the match was mostly a muddle of all that soccer fans often bemoan. There was diving, playacting and embellishment. There was chest-to-chest yammering and posturing. There was (an incredible amount of) screaming at the referee.There were occasional moments of actual soccer beauty. P.S.G. should have scored in the 58th minute when Edinson Cavani received a gorgeous pass, rounded Chelsea goalkeeper Thibaut Courtois and fired at an empty net only to watch his shot glance off the near post.A half-volleyed blast by Chelsea defender Gary Cahill in the 81st minute was also a gem, and that score looked poised to serve as the decider. But Cahill’s moment of skill was topped just minutes later by a bullet header from David Luiz that leveled the score again and sent the match, in all its ugliness, to extra time.Advertisement“We kept our mood and character,” David Luiz said. “They scored first, but we always believed in ourselves.”Kuipers became the center of attention once more, although this time there was little to argue. Just four minutes into extra time, Silva, the P.S.G. defender, inexplicably jumped for a header with his arms in the air, and when the ball struck his hand, Kuipers immediately pointed to the penalty spot.It was a foolish play, and Eden Hazard coolly deposited the penalty kick into the corner of the goal, leaving P.S.G. on the precipice. Blanc kicked the grass. The fans moaned. The players looked stunned.Then Silva rose for another header. And this time he raised his hands in glory.A version of this article appears in print on March 12, 2015, on Page B16 of the New York edition with the headline: P.S.G. Survives a Red Card, a Penalty and Two Deficits to Dispatch Chelsea.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.