

 Michael Powell
 

SPORTS OF THE TIMES
MARCH 11, 2015
Darrelle Revis, who has torn up and rehabilitated a knee in service of the N.F.L., established this winter that his market value was $39 million for five years.That is guaranteed money in a sport in which so many contracts are not worth the ink on the signatures.Revis, an All-Pro cornerback, decided Tuesday night to return to New York and ply his wizardly defensive talents for the Jets. Good for those lost souls such as myself who follow the Jets. He did not sign for a penny less than his market value. Good on him.In this brutal and most lucrative of major American sports, players have tiny windows in which to earn their pile. Then their bodies present the lifelong bill for broken bones, torn ligaments, bent fingers and toes, and rattled brains.AdvertisementMay the day never come when Revis at 65 cannot remember what he accomplished at 29. Such are the occupational hazards of pro football that you applaud Revis for refusing to give a salary discount to the New England Patriots — with whom he won a Super Bowl — or to the Jets.AdvertisementNo less intriguing are the actions of four of his contemporaries, who, as free agency opened in the N.F.L., declared that rather than sign for millions of dollars, they had had enough and would retire.Not all of them left because of injury, or the fear that one day their brains might flicker in and out like an old television set. Pittsburgh Steelers linebacker Jason Worilds, 27, who made $10 million last season, is said to have forgone a new contract out of his desire to render service to Jehovah’s Witnesses.A more common sentiment, though, came from San Francisco 49ers linebacker Patrick Willis, 30, a seven-time Pro Bowler, who noted that his bruised and battered feet had simply given out. “You’ve seen me break my hand on Sunday, have surgery on Monday and play on Thursday with a cast on,” Willis said. “But there’s something about these feet. And those are what made me who I am.”Cornerback Cortland Finnegan, 31, also retired. He issued a jaunty statement of his love for the game and his disregard for those “haters” who had booed him. But page back through the injury reports, and you find he accumulated a litany of broken bones, sprained ankles and wrists, and strained and torn hamstrings. He fractured an orbital bone in 2013 and played with that injury. “I’m tough,” he explained.The next off-season, the Rams cut him rather than pay his nonguaranteed $6 million contract. He later signed with the Miami Dolphins. Then they let him go.Jake Locker, a quarterback for the Tennessee Titans, was poised for a grand payoff. He was 26, a strong-armed quarterback about to enter a weak free-agent market. He waved goodbye.Locker did not mention injuries, although his tally is a long one. When Locker entered the N.F.L. draft, an analysis noted his college injury history: a concussion, a broken thumb, a broken rib. He was a risk-taking quarterback, and that took a toll on his pro career. He was hospitalized with a sprained hip, he sprained his shoulder and he fractured his foot.Advertisement“I no longer have the burning desire necessary to play the game for a living,” he said in a statement. “To continue to do so would be unfair to the next organization with whom I would eventually sign.”Not to mention perhaps unfair to himself.That brings us back to Revis, who hails from Aliquippa, the caldron of Pennsylvania steel country.This cool cat cornerback remains near the pinnacle of his game, an analytical player who studies the running routes of opposing receivers with a Jesuitic intensity. Yet in 2012 he sustained a concussion and then tore the anterior cruciate ligament in his knee.Six months later, the Jets traded him to Tampa Bay.The N.F.L. is a remarkably unsentimental league. Revis helped the Patriots win their first Super Bowl in 10 years, but salary negotiations this winter stalled. The owner Robert K. Kraft — who is worth north of $4 billion — and his Patriots would not pay a dime more than $35 million guaranteed over five years.So Revis signed with the Jets for $39 million guaranteed. (He could earn as much as $70 million, although that figure is funny money. If Revis comes up lame or woozy, the Jets can — and almost certainly will — dump him.)Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Here’s a parenthetical comparison: N.F.L. Commissioner Roger Goodell, who runs no crossing routes, was paid $35 million in 2013. You assume his money was guaranteed, even if the commissioner had tripped on the carpeting and torn his A.C.L.Revis’s announcement that he was “coming home” ignited a giddy effusion in the New York newspapers. A swooning writer purred that Woody Johnson, who makes more mistakes in a year than some owners make in a decade, was “passionate” and “beyond brilliant.”It’s more likely that Johnson, a billionaire, simply made a common-sense decision to reverse the silliness of a year back. He and his putative brain trust refused to consider re-signing Revis; the Jets finished last season 4-12. Those facts are related.This time Johnson paid Revis his dollar value.May Revis dance and cut and offer the Jets his usual flypaper defense. And may he bank those dollars and leave this game in one piece.Email: powellm@nytimes.com A version of this article appears in print on March 12, 2015, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Revis Stands Ground as Others Walk Away.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »