AdvertisementSupported byBy Zach SchonbrunVal Ackerman, the commissioner of the Big East, has her own offices now, and a full staff, and an email system, and a host of corporate sponsors, and all of this has made Year 2 of the new league considerably less rocky than the first.There is another element that has seemingly sorted itself out over the past six months: the basketball.In fact, the level of play this season from the Big East’s 10 members — all of them private colleges with no top-tier football programs — has risen perhaps above and beyond even the most sanguine expectations. There was the .761 winning percentage against teams from other conferences. Then the league finished the regular season second in Division I in Rating Percentage Index — behind only the Big 12 — with three teams ranked in the top 25. Entering the Big East tournament, which began Wednesday at Madison Square Garden, six Big East teams are projected to play in the N.C.A.A. tournament — as many as the Atlantic Coast Conference and twice as many as the Pacific-12.“Hopefully the rest of the world will understand and is seeing what everyone within the conference always has felt,” Georgetown Coach John Thompson III said. “We’re not going anywhere.” Certainly, the league is feeling more self-assured two years after splitting from Connecticut, Cincinnati, South Florida and the others that wound up forming the American Athletic Conference, which is projected to have three N.C.A.A. tournament teams this year. That occurred after high-profile programs like Syracuse, Pittsburgh and Louisville bolted for the A.C.C., leaving Ackerman and her fledgling conference awash in uncertainty.Last year at this time, Ackerman was working out of temporary office space on Eighth Avenue, and many staff members still lived in Rhode Island, where the conference had its headquarters. The logistical snarl was staggering and was mixed with doubts about the league’s outlook, its relevance and its new television partner, Fox Sports 1 — all without the easy assurance of money generated by football programs. In a telephone interview this week, Ackerman said that 12 months later, her concerns had been largely assuaged. Ratings on Fox Sports 1 have risen by about 20 percent, she said, no doubt because fans have started recognizing the quality of play. “I think it’s everything our presidents had hoped for, to break away from their existing leagues and buck the trend,” Ackerman said. “The dream is starting to get fulfilled.”It has helped having No. 4 Villanova (29-2 over all, 16-2 Big East), a recognizable basketball brand with a Final Four appearance just six years ago. The Wildcats never dipped below No. 12 this season, and they are considered a favorite to earn a No. 1 seed when brackets for the N.C.A.A. tournament are revealed on Sunday.But the league’s surprising depth has been its most encouraging characteristic. Ackerman said it was the result of having 10 institutions whose athletic focus was primarily basketball. Kevin Willard, the coach at Seton Hall, said the league had done a good job providing a mix of senior-led teams (like St. John’s) and younger teams (like his Pirates).“I think top to bottom, the league has really solidified itself with very good veteran players,” Willard said in a teleconference with coaches Monday, “and an infusion of good young players.”In terms of minutes played, the Big East had far more seasoned players than any of the five major leagues — the Big Ten, the Big 12, the Pac-12, the Southeastern Conference and the A.C.C. According to Statsheet.com, which generates its experience rating by dividing average class year per minute played, only 11 other conferences (all midmajors or lower) generally had older players getting meaningful time.Then again, the Big East has three programs (Marquette, Villanova and Georgetown) with top-25 recruiting classes coming in next season, according to ESPN’s rankings. “The Big East is what I thought it would be,” said Steve Wojciechowski, Marquette’s first-year coach and a former player and assistant at Duke. “You have a lot of very good, experienced players, obviously outstanding coaches, and tremendous home courts. I’d put our league against any league in the country.”Thompson, the coach of No. 23 Georgetown (20-9, 12-6), said the coaches had few doubts that the league would regain its footing. Basketball was in the conference’s DNA when it was established in 1979, and came to the forefront again in 2014 when the league broke away from the colleges where football ruled.“I think that those within the league are not surprised and knew it would shake out like this once the smoke clears,” Thompson said in the teleconference. “The Big East has been and will always be one of the best basketball conferences.”Ackerman had some misgivings when she was hired. A first-time college commissioner starting a league from scratch, she needed to maintain the recently signed contracts with Madison Square Garden, to retain it as the site for the Big East tournament, and with Fox Sports, to ensure that games were televised nationally. “It was chaotic,” Ackerman said. “Now we have our staff, we have our office, and we have a year under our belts.” The Garden deal, which runs through 2026, seems especially prescient now. Both the A.C.C. and the Big Ten have since arranged to host their conference tournaments in New York later in the decade, hoping to take advantage of a wilting Big East product and steal most of the spotlight. But that might not be the case, after a vintage season from a conference that started anew.“We’ve got strong programs and very inspired coaching,” Ackerman said, adding, “Our schools, top to bottom, are showing they can compete with anybody.”Advertisement