By BEN ROTHENBERGMARCH 11, 2015
INDIAN WELLS, Calif. —  With Serena Williams making her return to Indian Wells after a 14-year boycott, her longtime hitting partner, Sascha Bajin, came to the tournament for the first time this week.But under an intense midday sun Monday, Bajin stood across the net not from Williams, but from his new employer: Victoria Azarenka.Bajin’s move from the Williams camp to the Azarenka team was the latest turn in the dizzying coaching carousel at the top of women’s tennis in recent months. Azarenka’s longtime coach, Sam Sumyk, went to work with Eugenie Bouchard; Bouchard’s previous coach, Nick Saviano, began working with Sloane Stephens; Stephens’s past coach, Thomas Hogstedt, spent time with Simona Halep; and Halep’s former coach, Wim Fissette, is now alongside Bajin with Azarenka.Azarenka, who is friendly with Williams, first suggested adding Bajin to her team on her way to the final in Doha in February, and Fissette agreed.Advertisement“I believed in the importance of a good hitting partner,” Fissette said. “It’s not easy to find a good hitting partner, and I think Sascha is maybe the best hitting partner on tour. He plays the ball exactly how you want, he’s strong from every side. And he has the experience with Serena. He knows what it is to be in a Grand Slam semifinal or final. I think it’s good he’s on the team.”AdvertisementBeing a hitting partner is a nuanced role that requires striking a balance between challenging the player and letting her confidence grow.“You have to be able to read minds, you have to be able to read body language,” Bajin said. “You have to put your own needs back and you have to swallow quite a bit. But at the same time, it’s just a certain feel for situations, when you know you have to push somebody, when you have to take it easy, when you have to switch it up. And be a little bit of a role model, too; I’m going to try for Victoria to be a role model just as I tried for Serena to be one. Working out hard, staying in good shape for myself, so she knows that there’s somebody on the other side of the court who she knows is a little stronger than her physically, stronger mentally or something.”Bajin said that he and Williams formally split on March 1, but Bajin had not appeared with Williams all season, missing her run to a sixth Australian Open title. Bajin added that he had not spoken to Williams since she decided to return to Indian Wells, which she announced in early February.The new partnership between Bajin and Azarenka was revealed by Williams, who last week posted on Twitter, “don’t have too much fun without me congrats Sasha.”“That was real nice of her,” Bajin said. “At the end of the day, it’s business. But I’m happy, and I hope Serena is going to be happy, too, with whatever decision she makes.”Bajin was with Williams for 10 of her 19 Grand Slam titles and even lived with her for three of their eight years together. He was also a pillar and confidant through her many setbacks and physical struggles. Bajin cited her comeback from a life-threatening pulmonary embolism as their moment together of which he was proudest.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“We really did go through a lot,” Bajin said. “There were so many highs with Serena, it’s so hard to name one. I was at the Olympics with her. Just spending every day with one of the world’s greatest athletes is just beautiful.”Bajin acknowledged that the next time Azarenka plays Williams will not be easy for him. Azarenka and Williams are on opposite sides of the draw at Indian Wells and cannot meet until the final.Advertisement“Of course, it’s going to be strange,” he said. “At the end of the day, it is some sort of a breakup. It is, because for eight years I dedicated my life to her. Now I’m in Victoria’s corner. I know that Serena is going to try to go at her on the court, and, of course, now that I’m working for her, I want Victoria to do well against her. Outside of the court, if I see her, of course, I’m going to be the same to her as I was. But on court it’s just business.”Part of Bajin’s new business with Azarenka is adjusting to the patterns and needs of a new player after eight years of working exclusively with Williams.“Since I was hitting with Serena for so long, I knew where her shots were going to go in practice,” he said. “Now for me, I have to learn to anticipate, I have to learn how to react again in order to read her game. It’s a new player. But there are a couple of things where I was surprised where she’s actually really strong, better than I thought.”Bajin has valuable experience preparing Williams to play against Azarenka, who is one of Williams’s toughest opponents.“I asked him, when you were playing against Vika, what was your plan, how did you feel about playing Vika?” Fissette said. “We spoke about it, and on the other hand, of course, he had the experience working with Serena, and they had also talked about tactics. We will know, maybe, a few other secrets.”Given that he estimated spending 330 days a year with Williams, Bajin said he thought the title “hitting partner” fell short of representing his contributions.“If I take certain things off court, which even an assistant or an agent would do, I’m just trying to help,” he said.“I’m doing a little more than just hitting balls, but I don’t care about the title. As long as Victoria knows what work I put in, I’m good with that. Call me a gardener if you want, I don’t care.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.