AdvertisementSupported byUnited States 2, France 0By The Associated PressFARO, Portugal — Hope Solo stopped a late penalty kick to preserve her 81st international shutout and lead the United States over France, 2-0, Wednesday night at Faro, Portugal, for its 10th Algarve Cup title.Julie Johnston and Christen Press scored for the second-ranked United States, which rebounded from a 0-0 draw against No. 20 Iceland Monday. Solo made her 160th start in goal, passing Briana Scurry for the American record.No. 3 France had defeated the United States, 2-0, last month in an exhibition in Lorient, the first win for Les Bleus in 17 games against the Americans. It was the American team’s 20th Algarve Cup appearance and first title since 2013.Johnston got her third start at center back this year as Coach Jill Ellis continued to adjust her lineups in the team’s last tournament before the Women’s World Cup.Amy Rodriguez started up front for the first time in the tournament with Alex Morgan, while Abby Wambach entered in the 85th.There had been concern after the loss to France and the 0-0 draw. But the United States came out attacking.Johnston scored her first international goal in the seventh minute on a header off a free kick from Lauren Holiday.Solo, who was serving a 30-day suspension when the United States lost at Lorient, made a key save on a long drive from Kheira Hamraoui in the 40th minute. Moments later, Press drove past a group of defenders and slotted the ball into the net.Solo tipped a shot over the bar in the 71st minute and stopped Amandine Henry’s penalty kick in the 81st after defender Meghan Klingenberg was whistled for grabbing Marie-Laure Delie’s arm.The United States is 15-1-2 against France, including 4-0 in the Algarve Cup, a tournament Les Bleus have not won in six appearances.The Americans return home for a series of exhibition matches that serve as a send-off for the team before it opens the World Cup on June 8 against Australia in Winnipeg, Manitoba. France plays its World Cup opener the next day against England in Moncton, New Brunswick.Nine of the 12 teams playing in the Algarve Cup were headed to the World Cup. In the third-place match Wednesday, top-ranked Germany defeated Sweden, 2-1. The defending World Cup champion, Japan, beat Iceland, 2-0; Brazil defeated Switzerland, 4-1; and Portugal downed China on penalty kicks after a 3-3 tie.The French team wore black armbands in honor of the three French athletes — swimmer Camille Muffat, boxer Alexis Vastine and pioneering sailor Florence Arthaud — who were killed in a helicopter crash in Argentina Monday. There was also a moment of silence before the match.Advertisement