By TIM CASEYMARCH 11, 2015
With a name and a game few could forget, God Shammgod carved out his niche on New York’s playground courts and later at Providence College. In 1997, after his sophomore season, he declared for the N.B.A. draft, a decision his father strongly opposed.God Shammgod Sr. knew the value of maturity and education. He had spent nearly four years in prison after his son was born before he turned his life around, becoming a more involved parent and graduating from college.After Shammgod’s N.B.A. career foundered — he played 20 games in the league, all in the 1997-98 season — he toiled in lesser leagues and overseas for nearly 15 years. During that time, his father never stopped urging him to return to school. Shammgod had four boys of his own to support, and he had to think about life after his playing days ended.This week, Shammgod, 38, is back in New York for the Big East tournament at Madison Square Garden and back with the team he once starred for. He is again a student at Providence, but now he is an undergraduate assistant for the men’s basketball team, which won last year’s tournament.AdvertisementShammgod attends practices and games and has earned praise from Coach Ed Cooley and the Friars players for his ability to teach and motivate. Because of N.C.A.A. rules, he is not allowed to be paid for his work and he cannot recruit players. But he views the role as an apprenticeship that will prepare him for his goal of becoming a college or N.B.A. coach.AdvertisementShammgod’s father planned to attend Providence’s game Thursday afternoon against St. John’s in the quarterfinals. He will also be in Providence on May 17, when his son is expected to receive an undergraduate degree in leadership development, 20 years after Shammgod first enrolled at the college as a McDonald’s all-American from La Salle Academy in Manhattan.“It will be a dream come true,” Shammgod said. “I’m just happy that I’m going to accomplish it.”For Shammgod’s father, witnessing his son’s journey has been rewarding, and it has been a process he can relate to. He never returned to prison after his release in 1980. He earned a bachelor’s degree from the New School for Social Research in New York and worked as a central office technician for Verizon for 27 years before retiring in 2008. He also spent time as a volunteer.As his son grew up and became closer to him, he used his own story as a message that it was never too late to make changes in life.“Whether my son was overseas or wherever he was, I always told Shamm, ‘There’s more to life than New York City,’ ” Shammgod Sr. said. “Most of the time when Shamm came back to New York, he would go around so-called homeboys and stuff. He saw what I was saying to him, that you keep coming back to the same thing since you were a child. Why don’t you go someplace and reinvent yourself? Because you can’t do it here in New York. It’s too much of a distraction. I always told him: ‘I don’t care where you land at. Just go and stay and do something with yourself.’ ”Shammgod’s path back to Providence began at the Big East tournament four years ago, when he met the Friars’ athletic director, Bob Driscoll. Shammgod had sustained an injury while playing in China, and Driscoll encouraged him to rehabilitate that summer in Rhode Island and consider enrolling in classes.“I liked him from the first time that I met him,” Driscoll said. “You know how you have this instant connection? He has that ability with everybody he meets. I watch him walk around campus and when he’s in New York City. Strangers come up and say hello and say, ‘I remember when you played.’ He’s just a very gifted person.”After Shammgod’s season in China ended in 2012, he went to a 15th anniversary celebration of Providence’s 1997 team, which advanced to the N.C.A.A. tournament’s round of 8. That weekend, Shammgod decided he would return to the school he had left after the 1997 run ended with an overtime loss to the eventual national champion, Arizona.AdvertisementShammgod had 23 points and 5 assists in that game and held his own against Arizona point guard Mike Bibby. But he was viewed as a borderline professional prospect because of his erratic college shooting (39.3 percent over all and 20.8 percent on 3-point attempts), relatively small size (6 feet and 165 pounds) and inconsistency. Shammgod was still determined to play in the N.B.A., and he ignored the advice of coaches and family members who urged him to spend at least one more year in college.Shammgod said he had expected the Knicks to draft him with the No. 25 pick, but they chose Minnesota’s John Thomas instead. The Washington Wizards picked Shammgod in the second round.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I’m happy I played in the N.B.A.,” said Shammgod, whose oldest son, Shammgod Wells, is a sophomore point guard at Fairmont State in West Virginia. “Could I have stayed in school a little bit longer? Yeah, I could’ve done that. Would it have been a better decision? I don’t know. That’s up to people’s judgments. I like the person I am today.”Despite his short N.B.A. career, Shammgod, who had excellent dribbling skills, remains a popular figure in basketball. He even has a move named after him in which a player throws the ball in front of his body, pulls it back with his opposite hand and performs a crossover dribble. Chris Paul of the Los Angeles Clippers and Kyrie Irving of the Cleveland Cavaliers are among the point guards who use the Shammgod dribble to drive past defenders.“When I played, people used to say, ‘Oh, he dribbles too much,’ or this or that,” Shammgod said. “But now everybody dribbles like how I dribble. Now if you look in the N.B.A., that’s all the point guards do is dribble. I’m happy that I know I played a big part in that.”On the playground courts where Shammgod learned the game, he was an imposing figure. As a child in Brooklyn, he said he often fought with other children, but he stopped getting into trouble when he moved to Harlem at age 12 and began playing basketball. The former N.B.A. point guard Nate Archibald, who is known as Tiny, was Shammgod’s middle school coach at P.S. 175, and Shammgod idolized the future N.B.A. point guard Kenny Anderson, who was then a star at Archbishop Molloy High School in Queens.Shammgod, who was known as Shammgod Wells in high school, mostly played at the 145th Street park near his family’s apartment, and he also traveled to Rucker Park and throughout the city to compete. His legacy has endured.“Shamm is international, not only in New York,” said the director of basketball operations at the University of South Florida, Jerry McCullough, who played at Pitt in the 1990s and grew up near Shammgod. “He has a generation of kids out there doing dribble moves. Up until two years ago, they were coming out to the parks hearing rumors of a Shammgod sighting. He was going to come back out and play.”AdvertisementThese days, Shammgod is not a performer but a teacher, a role he has always enjoyed. He said he showed Kobe Bryant dribble moves when they were both at the prestigious ABCD summer camp in high school. When Shammgod played in China, he worked with guards on the national team there.In the past three years at Providence, he has had a role in the development of guards Bryce Cotton and Kris Dunn, who were both first-team all-Big East selections.“We worked out every single day,” said Cotton, who now plays for the Utah Jazz. “And after every workout it would turn into a half-hour or hour conversation about experiences that he had. Over time, it gradually transitioned from trainer-player to little brother-big brother. He’s helped me tremendously, not just with basketball, but just with my outlook on life.”Providence is hoping he will stick around. Cooley said Shammgod would be his first choice if one of the current full-time assistants left for a head coaching job in the off-season. Shammgod said that if he was not at Providence next season, he hoped to find another coaching job or to work as a trainer for college or N.B.A. players. For now, he is preparing for the Friars’ postseason run and for his graduation.“I’m so proud of him because I know that it was a struggle,” his father said. “I know Shamm’s journey, not just as his dad but as another man because I have a family that I have to take care of and everything. I know this graduation, to him, is a big step in his life.”A version of this article appears in print on March 12, 2015, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Crossing Over to Teaching.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.