By TOM PEDULLA and ZACH SCHONBRUNMARCH 11, 2015
One day after the Jets brought home Darrelle Revis and officially acquired the big-play wide receiver Brandon Marshall, they addressed their need at the ever-troublesome quarterback position.They obtained the journeyman Ryan Fitzpatrick from the Houston Texans in exchange for a conditional late-round draft choice that can go no higher than a sixth-round choice, based on playing time.Fitzpatrick, 32, will be reunited with Chan Gailey, the Jets’ new offensive coordinator. Fitzpatrick was at his best when he played for the Buffalo Bills from 2009-12, when Gailey was their head coach. He completed 60.3 percent of his passes for 10,232 yards, with 71 touchdowns and 54 interceptions in that span.Another reunion is Revis and the Jets. Revis officially signed his contract late Wednesday, and in a teleconference, Revis said that returning to New York after a two-year hiatus was “surreal.”Advertisement“The history I have with this organization — it’s just great,” Revis said. “They have welcomed me back with open arms. We’ve been through a lot. They drafted me and gave me the chance to fulfill my dreams. There’s a lot of love here. I’m excited to be back being a part of it.”AdvertisementRevis said his year with the Patriots, winning the Super Bowl, helped him grow as a player. He spoke glowingly of Coach Bill Belichick, saying he tried to soak up as much as he could.“Just to be able to sit in the room and see how he operates and the way his coaching style is, I learned a lot from it,” Revis said.But the opportunity to return to the Jets — with a lucrative contract and $39 million in guaranteed money — was too enticing to pass up again.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“It was just basically a no-brainer,” Revis said. “This is where my heart is.”Fitzpatrick will be a helpful mentor to Geno Smith. Smith’s body of work has largely been poor in his first two seasons. He was plagued by turnovers — as was his predecessor, Mark Sanchez — and he struggled without a strong supporting cast. Neither he, nor Sanchez, ever had a receiver as imposing as Marshall, who has game-changing ability.Smith made some progress in his second season after throwing 12 touchdowns with 21 interceptions as a rookie. He fired 13 touchdowns and was picked off 13 times last year. His passer rating rose from to 77.5 from 66.5, and he closed the season achieving a perfect passer rating of 158.3 in a 37-24 road win at the Miami Dolphins in the regular-season finale.The Jets will be Fitzpatrick’s sixth team since he broke into the league after majoring in economics at Harvard. He hoped to secure the position at Houston, but failed to do so last season as the team briefly turned to Ryan Mallett. Fitzpatrick returned as the starter after Mallett was injured. Fitzpatrick hit 63 percent of his passes last season, with 17 touchdowns and 8 interceptions. Houston had an excess of quarterbacks after it signed Brian Hoyer as a free agent to join Mallett.Fitzpatrick’s acquisition could ease pressure on Mike Maccagnan, the team’s newly hired and aggressive general manager, to invest the sixth draft selection over all in a quarterback — particularly if the team’s evaluation of Marcus Mariota, the Heisman Trophy winner, does not deem him worthy of such a high pick. Many mock drafts projected that Mariota would go to the Jets.By securing Fitzpatrick, Maccagnan may have the option of trading down in exchange for multiple draft picks to help stock a 4-12 team that still has many needs as it looks to its first season under the new coach, Todd Bowles.Fitzpatrick’s acquisition also makes good sense financially because he is owed only $3.25 million in base salary for this season.AdvertisementThe Jets are under pressure to save room under the salary cap wherever possible after lavishing a front-loaded, five-year contract worth $70 million on Revis, with approximately $39 million guaranteed.A version of this article appears in print on March 12, 2015, on Page B15 of the New York edition with the headline: Jets Acquire Ryan Fitzpatrick; Darrelle Revis Says Return Is ‘Surreal’.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.