By ROB HUGHESMARCH 11, 2015
LONDON —  No one has ever successfully defended the Champions League crown in its current format, and unless there is a 50 percent improvement in the way that Real Madrid is playing, that is not going to change this season.Madrid scraped through to the quarterfinals despite being beaten, 4-3, on its own soil by a brave and young Schalke squad on Tuesday. And despite Cristiano Ronaldo’s scoring two exceptional headers to become the all-time leading scorer in European club competition, the crowd at the Santiago Bernabéu applauded Schalke but whistled jeers and waved white handkerchiefs at their own players.“I’m so sorry,” Madrid Coach Carlo Ancelotti said after Real suffered its first home loss in the tournament in four years.“We failed in many respects,” the coach conceded. “We deserve the whistles, but they will motivate us more. I still trust this team because I know what they can give. We have to work more.”AdvertisementPushed by the Madrid media, he answered: “I don’t think about being fired. I have to do better and make the team play better than tonight. We were under pressure until the last minute. Anything could have happened.Advertisement“The players and myself are the key to fixing this. We lost confidence in our game and our identity.”There were two glimmers of light for Real. Ronaldo twice did what Ronaldo incomparably does: he managed to lose his defenders in the goalmouth and, as if like a ghost, rose and headed majestic, powerful goals after Schalke had taken the lead.The other major plus for Madrid was the return of Luka Modric, the playmaker that the team has been missing. Out since November with a thigh injury, he came on in the second half to give some semblance of shape to Real’s performance.But what was so impressive and remarkable about Schalke is that with eight players unavailable, the German club found youngsters with the spirit and pride to take the game to Madrid. Schalke had already lost the first leg in Gelsenkirchen, 2-0, after it was demolished by a total score of 9-2 when these two teams met in last year’s Champions League.Schalke might have considered damage limitation as a prudent option. It clearly thought no such thing.“We played a great game and we dreamt of going through,” said Schalke’s recently appointed coach, Roberto Di Matteo. “We scored four goals against Real Madrid but we are not going through.”He was smiling when he said those words on television. “We are happy,” Di Matteo added, “but also sad. We had a little bit of bad luck, we hit the goal frame in both games.”AdvertisementDi Matteo, who was an Italian national team player when Ancelotti was gaining coaching experience at the team’s base two decades ago, said Tuesday that one player made the difference, both at home and away.That man, it hardly needed saying, is Ronaldo. He headed his 76th European goal in the first leg in Germany and the 77th and 78th goals in the Bernabéu to overtake the former Madrid striker Raúl and also to move ahead of Lionel Messi — at least until he plays Manchester City next week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Yet did fans see Ronaldo smile? Not once. He greeted his goals with dark, brooding looks, shaking off the teammates who ran to him. Heaven help the opponents when Cristiano finds joy again in his game.Modric was joyous just to get some minutes under his belt.And the boys of Schalke exhibited more than enough pleasure in taking on the European champion in its own backyard. One former Real player, Klaas-Jan Huntelaar, equaled Ronaldo on Tuesday by striking two goals, and it was also Huntelaar who hit the corner of the bar and post when he had Madrid goalkeeper Iker Casillas completely beaten.Casillas has played almost 150 Champions League games for Real. He has captained the club to glory and led Spain to a title in the World Cup. But on Tuesday he was a nervous wreck, left quivering by shots that he normally would have saved in his prime.Perhaps his time is up, although 33 is no great age for a goalkeeper.Perhaps it was the disorganization of the defense in front of him. Not for the first time, Pepe ran around like a man possessed but, without Sergio Ramos to give instructions, he ran too often toward the wrong Schalke forwards.Maybe that is being disingenuous to the young Germans who relished the opportunity, rather than show fear on the big stage.Schalke is one of the clubs that acts as a nursery for young players who intend to succeed the current world champions on the German national team.Max Meyer is one such player. He is still in his teens, and his quick and decisive midfield play was developed by playing indoor soccer, or futsal. He now is at the hub of Schalke after rising through all the different age brackets of the German national team.AdvertisementMeyer’s darting runs and smart distribution was at the core of Schalke’s performance Tuesday.And then there was Leroy Sané, who turns 19 in January. Sané made his Champions League debut as a substitute after Eric Maxim Choupo-Moting was injured.Sané’s goal made it 3-3 soon after Karim Benzema seemingly turned the game Madrid’s way shortly after halftime. It was quite a goal from Benzema, who dragged the ball away from two opponents before side-footing it home.That was a cameo of Benzema’s talent. Despite playing so often in Ronaldo’s shadow, he has an impressive 42 goals in 71 games in the competition.Sané can now boast one goal in one game — and a spectacular strike it was. Allowed to run freely from the right edge of the penalty box, he suddenly turned and curled the ball beyond Casillas and beneath the bar.Where on earth does Germany find them? Leroy Sané gets his composure from his mother, the former German rhythmic gymnastics champion Regina Weber. And the finishing instinct? From his father, Souleyman Sané, who scored plenty of goals in the Bundesliga and for Senegal’s national team 25 years ago.Schalke is just the finishing school for talents like these.A version of this article appears in print on March 12, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.