AdvertisementSupported byOn BaseballBy Tyler KepnerMESA, Ariz. — The Oakland Athletics needed two outs to win the American League wild-card game last fall when Eric Hosmer came to bat for the Kansas City Royals. It was the bottom of the 12th inning, and the A’s led by a run with the bases empty. At this point, according to Baseball-Reference.com, Oakland had an 89 percent chance of winning.Numbers matter when the subject is the A’s, baseball’s analytical darlings, and the center fielder who tried to catch Hosmer’s deep drive. Replays showed that Sam Fuld, a defensive specialist who once interned at Stats L.L.C., probably had no shot. The ball ricocheted off the top of the wall in the left-field gap, far from center field, where he had started his desperate sprint.But Fuld lost all hope of a miracle when he crashed into Jonny Gomes, the lumbering left fielder. Fuld crumpled to the warning track as Hosmer dashed to third with a triple. More than five months later, Fuld still bears a slash on his lower back from the play that cut his team’s chances of winning, statistically, by 30 percent.“Emotional and physical scars,” Fuld said wryly before Oakland’s morning practice here Tuesday. “We had the lead going into that inning. If I catch that, there’s a really good chance we win. There’s so many what-ifs in that game. I mean, every game has some what-ifs, but I feel like that one in particular, it’s almost too painful to think of.”Fuld remembered the play clearly. He can still see the ball slicing through the night. He can still feel the thud of Gomes’s body. After the Royals prevailed, 9-8, Fuld could not bear to watch the rest of the postseason until it was nearly over.The Royals used their momentum to help propel them through the A.L. playoffs. Eric Sogard, Oakland’s second baseman, said the A’s could have done the same thing. Sogard also shunned October baseball.“I’ll usually tune in, yeah, absolutely,” he said. “It was just, I didn’t want any part of it this year. My wife would usually let me know the scores.”The A’s used 20 players in the wild-card game, and now just nine of them remain. The starting pitcher, Jon Lester, is gone. So are the Nos. 3 and 4 hitters, the shortstop, the catchers and more. In less than two months, General Manager Billy Beane made eight trades involving 27 players.The A’s had baseball’s best record at the All-Star break last season but then went 29-38 and staggered into the playoffs. Rather than risk a sluggish start with a similar cast, Beane made moves while his players still had trade value. For this franchise, waiting too long is the worst strategy of all.“We didn’t want to be in a rebuilding stage where, for two or three years, you’re not competitive,” the team’s owner, Lew Wolff, said before spring training. “It’s not fun if you’re not competitive every year.”It took time for the vision to come into focus. Some deals, like a three-year, $30 million contract for the free agent Billy Butler, suggested one direction. Trading the All-Stars Josh Donaldson and Jeff Samardzija suggested another. Reliever Sean Doolittle said he was not sure, at times, if the Athletics were reloading or rebuilding.“We pretty much accomplished both,” said Doolittle, who is nursing a shoulder injury. “We got younger, and we added depth and versatility.”To Doolittle, Beane’s January moves made things clear. In two trades, he flipped catcher John Jaso, two minor leaguers and infielder Yunel Escobar — who was with the team for only four days — for Tyler Clippard and Ben Zobrist. Both are two-time All-Stars who give the A’s what they crave most: options.Clippard has been a setup man and a closer for Washington. Zobrist, who started at five defensive spots for Tampa Bay last season, will in many games be part of an all-new infield for Oakland. Ike Davis can play first base, with Zobrist at second, Marcus Semien at shortstop and Brett Lawrie at third.Davis and Lawrie are under 30 but are known commodities. Other newcomers fit the Beane mold perfectly, as former college players with strong minor league résumés but little major league experience. Among them are Semien, catcher Josh Phegley, outfielder Mark Canha, and pitchers Jesse Hahn, Kendall Graveman and Sean Nolin.“This team’s got an extreme amount of talent,” said Butler, a former Royals designated hitter. “We’re really young, with a lot of guys that nobody’s ever really heard of, but they’re going to — really soon. We’ve got a lot of guys with big league talent, and they’re going to produce at this level for a long time.”Two veteran outfielders have been hurt lately, Coco Crisp with a triceps injury and Josh Reddick with a strained oblique. Crisp got good news on Tuesday when a test showed no structural damage. He is the team’s longest-tenured player, at five years.All the roster turnover has not led to playoff success. But the A’s keep showing up, in each of the last three postseasons, and the players know the point behind the scheming. The goal is to try something, anything, to avoid a protracted phase of losing.It is harder this way, perhaps, but more interesting.“Teams can build, load up and then dump, have a couple of down years and then get back to being competitive,” Fuld said. “But to be able to sustain success, year after year — that’s an extra level of skill. It seems like they’re doing a pretty good job of it.”Advertisement