By SETH BERKMANMARCH 13, 2015
This week, for his preschool class’s show and tell, Philip Stephen Martelli brought in a printout of the Atlantic 10 tournament bracket and demonstrated how teams advance to the championship.On Thursday, while Philip Stephen’s 5-year-old classmates were studying the letter T (his favorite T words are turtle and taxi), he attended the A-10 tournament at Barclays Center, dressed in a custom suit created by the tailor of St. Joseph’s Coach Phil Martelli, Philip Stephen’s grandfather.Phil Martelli’s grandson is a fixture at Hawks games, where he mimics the coach’s motions, like rubbing his hand under his chin or standing with his arms folded. Phil Martelli, who has won 375 games, is Philip Stephen’s idol. And since Philip Stephen’s family moved in with Phil and his wife, Judy, in 2011, the grandson has mellowed the coach and provided a salve for family sadness.“I’ve noticed a little bit of a change in him,” Judy Martelli said of her husband. “One of the game days, I had to laugh because he was playing hide and seek. That would have never happened when our children were growing up.”AdvertisementSince 1995, when Phil Martelli was hired at St. Joseph’s, he has had certain steadfast habits, like working out at the same time and laying out his clothes in a particular way.AdvertisementHis wife, who played on the Immaculata College team that won the first women’s basketball national championship, in 1972, knew to stay away from him before games.One day, Philip Stephen entered Phil’s room as he was preparing for a game. Judy chased after him, but Phil allowed his grandson to stay. Philip Stephen sat nearby, memorizing how his grandfather tied his shoes and what order he put his clothes on.“From that day, he did exactly the same thing in the same order,” Judy Martelli said.For St. Joseph’s second-round game against St. Bonaventure on Thursday, a 60-49 loss that ended the Hawks’ season at 13-18, Philip Stephen, one of five grandchildren, wore a pink tie (as his grandfather did) and a pink handkerchief, given to him by his father, Phil Jr., an assistant coach at Delaware.Philip Stephen rode with the team on the bus to Brooklyn on Wednesday, and on the trip from the team hotel to the arena before Thursday’s game. He brought along a drawing that spelled out various A-10 teams and a dry-erase board, so he could concoct plays while his grandfather did the same on the bench.Before the game, while watching his favorite players, including DeAndre’ Bembry and Chris Wilson, warm up, Philip Stephen held court on a variety of subjects.The boy calls his grandfather Tug, which stands for The Unnamed Grandfather — the grandchildren originally could not think of a proper nickname. Philip Stephen wants to become a construction worker one day.Philip Stephen, who plays basketball in a Y.M.C.A. recreational league, was also adamant that he preferred his grandfather’s St. Joseph’s Hawks to his father’s Delaware Blue Hens.Advertisement“They’re my first favorite team,” he said. “Delaware’s my second.”At last year’s A-10 tournament, Philip Stephen became a star after television cameras captured him in action. In the days afterward, he was interviewed during St. Joseph’s N.C.A.A. tournament run and on various television newscasts.Although he now speaks eloquently and with precision — as when he tells his grandmother when he has to use the bathroom — Philip Stephen was not always so loquacious.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Judy Martelli said that when he was 2, a family pediatrician questioned his verbal capabilities, but soon after he started speaking in more complete sentences and with a bigger vocabulary.Since then, Philip Stephen’s words have often helped heal the family.In 2013, over a five-week span, Phil’s sister and sister-in-law died. This past year, both of Judy’s parents died.“They bring a smile to your face,” Judy Martelli said. “The kids would be there and say things to you like, ‘Nanny’s in heaven now.’ It just makes you feel a little better, put things in perspective.”Phil Jr.; his wife, Meghan; and their 2-year-old daughter, Marra, did not attend Thursday’s games. So Philip Stephen sat with his grandmother, eating french fries in between the folded-arm poses.During timeouts on Thursday, Philip Stephen danced to St. Joseph’s fight song and yelled, “Miss it!” to Bonnies on the free-throw line. After a jump-ball call that Phil Martelli thought should have been a foul on St. Bonaventure, Philip Stephen extended his arms in disbelief.After the game, the grandson followed the coach into the interview room, both having removed their suit jackets. Philip Stephen shook the hand of St. Bonaventure Coach Mark Schmidt and congratulated him on the victory.“His parents deserve a lot of credit for the way he’s been raised — and the players don’t blink,” Phil Martelli said of his grandson’s presence around the team. “I appreciate that.”AdvertisementPhil admitted that before Philip Stephen and family moved in, he often put his team first and his family second, but now the dynamic is balanced.“I wasn’t crazy about how aggressive I went at some of the players,” he said. “He and his sister take the edge off game day for me.”He added: “Some of the things are small things. Like when I came out of the locker room, I said, ‘How are you doing?’ and he said, ‘I’m not doing good because we don’t play tomorrow.’ You’re trying to do this for more than just the players in the locker room.”As Phil, his wife and their grandson walked toward the St. Joseph’s locker room and eventually the team bus, Philip Stephen peppered his grandfather with questions.“Is there a team meal?”“Yes,” the coach replied.“When’s your first game next year?” Philip Stephen asked. “Are you still going to be coach?”“Yes,” Martelli answered. “I am.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.