AdvertisementSupported byBy Jay SchreiberIn his first four seasons as the general manager of the Mets, Sandy Alderson put together a body of work that included a lot more losses than victories, a surprising number of quips and a steadfast ability to never point a finger at the team’s owners for repeatedly saddling him with payrolls that were meager by major-market standards.Now, as Alderson begins his fifth season in charge amid growing expectations that the Mets may finally become a winning team again, he is adding a new element to his New York résumé — a book. “Baseball Maverick,” written by Steve Kettmann in cooperation with Alderson, is scheduled to be published next month by Atlantic Monthly Press. It is a profile of Alderson’s life: college at Dartmouth, a stint as a Marine platoon commander in Vietnam, a long run as the general manager of the Oakland Athletics, a subsequent role as a top executive in Major League Baseball and, finally, his decision to try to resurrect the Mets just as they were being sideswiped by the Bernard L. Madoff financial scandal.About half the book is devoted to his tenure with the Mets, who remain a work in progress. A person in baseball familiar with the workings of the Mets said Alderson had kept the team’s ownership informed about the book project as it moved over the course of several years toward publication.And a reading of an uncorrected proof of the book that was sent to The New York Times did not reveal anything at which the team’s owners, Fred Wilpon and Saul Katz, and the chief operating officer, Jeff Wilpon, would presumably take offense.Most notably, Alderson told the author that he would have taken the Mets job even if he had fully grasped just how much the owners’ link to the Madoff scandal would affect the team’s finances in the years that followed. “It just added to the challenge,” Alderson said. Kettmann, in the book, added his own observation. Kettmann first met Alderson when he was an A’s beat writer in the 1990s, and he suggested that Alderson had a healthy sense of the absurd that allowed him to find humor in the mess he walked into with the Mets and to keep an even keel even as one losing season followed another.The most intriguing part of the book may be the recounting of the flirtation that took place between the Mets and Robinson Cano, the Yankees’ power-hitting second baseman who became a free agent after the 2013 season.Because Cano was said to be seeking a long-term deal worth as much as $300 million, it was widely assumed that the Mets, with their glaring payroll limitations, would not be suitors. But the book suggested that Alderson was interested in trying to get Cano to move from the Bronx, where he had played nine seasons and hit 204 home runs, to Queens, feeling it would be a game-changer that would quickly alter the lopsided relationship between the two New York teams.Alderson, Jeff Wilpon and an assistant general manager, John Ricco, had dinner with Cano and his agent, Jay Z, in November 2013. The book said Alderson even contemplated calling the Mets’ captain, David Wright, to discuss a possible deal for Cano.But according to the book, Alderson’s ceiling on a deal for Cano would have been $200 million, if that, and eventually, Cano got more — $240 million over 10 years from the Seattle Mariners. On Thursday, Alderson was asked about the book at the Mets’ training camp in Port St. Lucie, Fla., after several excerpts appeared online in an article by Howard Megdal, a writer for Capital New York. Speaking about the book’s section on Cano, Alderson said the pursuit of the player had been an “entertaining diversion for us.”“But I don’t think we ever expected that it was going to go anywhere,” he added. “Jeff and I had conversations about it. We decided to take a preliminary look at it, but I don’t think anybody had any expectations we were going to sign Robinson Cano. I certainly didn’t.”As for the continuing issue of the Mets’ finances — the 2015 payroll stands at $100 million, a $15 million increase from last season but still much smaller than those of many other big-market teams — Alderson reiterated that money was simply not an issue for him.“I never talked about the payroll as an unfortunate limitation to us,” he said. “I haven’t talked about it recently. I haven’t talked about in the past. I don’t intend to. It’s not relevant to me.”At one point in the book, Kettmann described Alderson as becoming agitated last August after the Mets were again steamrollered by the Washington Nationals at Citi Field. He upbraided Collins in private and told Kettmann that “something needs to change.”In the end, of course, Alderson calmed down, Collins stayed on as manager and the Mets moved into 2015 with a good deal more hope, much of it stemming from their young, talented pitching staff.If those pitchers can propel the Mets into the 2015 postseason, it will be a pretty good story. But that is six months away. For now, Mets fans can read Alderson’s story, soon available in bookstores. Advertisement