AdvertisementSupported byXavier 67, Butler 61By Brendan PruntyEven the most ardent of Big East rivals can usually wrap up a game in regulation. That was true of Butler and Xavier in their two regular-season meetings this year. But not on Thursday night. “It’s bone on bone,” Butler Coach Chris Holtmann said after the game, which went to overtime. “It’s really physical.” By the time the final horn sounded, Xavier had survived the battle, 67-61. The Big East’s semifinals now set, but not after one gate-crasher sneaked its way into the party. After the higher seeds won the first three quarterfinal games on Thursday, sixth-seeded Xavier became the first team to upset the balance. The Musketeers were able to topple the third-seeded Bulldogs, largely in part to a balanced scoring attack. Five Xavier players scored in double-figures, but with none scoring more than 13 points, a total reached by center Matt Stainbrook and guards Myles Davis and Dee Davis. That was enough to offset the game-high 22 points from Butler guard Alex Barlow. “It seems like every time we play Butler here over the last five or six years, they’re just gritty games,” Xavier Coach Chris Mack said. “We didn’t get off to a really good start either the first or second half. I thought our team responded with the resiliency that at times, maybe we haven’t had..” Mack said that his team was spurred on by the assumption that the trend of the higher seed winning would continue. That Butler-Georgetown was a foregone conclusion for the second of Friday night’s semifinal games. Xavier decided that if that was the script, it was going to tear it up and create a new ending. “I think our team is resilient,” Stainbrook said. “We didn’t get too high with the highs and low with the lows. They’re going to make their runs and we’re going to make our runs. I think we did a good job of every media timeout, saying ‘Hey, we’re still in this one. We’ve got to keep fighting and pushing.’ ” The back-and-forth 45-minute game was a departure from the two regular-season meetings between the teams this year. The Bulldogs won by 12 points on their home court in January, with the Musketeers returning the favor with a 17-point victory in February. But neither team was willing to concede in the Big East tournament. With the score tied at 53-53, Stainbrook’s attempt at a game-winning basket was thwarted by Barlow, who stripped the ball and with time expiring threw up a half-court heave that fell inches short of the basket, grazing the front of the net. Xavier seized the openings in the overtime and survived. “Our guys are competitors,” Mack said. “We felt like, if we played at our best that we would advance. That’s exactly what we did. These guys played really tough.”GEORGETOWN 60, CREIGHTON 55 Georgetown’s recent past in the Big East tournament has been dubious. Last season, it was a first-round exit to DePaul that helped send the Hoyas to a National Invitation Tournament appearance. Often, coaches will bury the past and focus on the future. Not Hoyas Coach John Thompson III. Before Thursday’s quarterfinal game against Marquette, Thompson showed his players tape of last year’s game. “You could see the mind-set in how we approached that game,” the Georgetown junior guard D’Vauntes Smith-Rivera said. “I think this time around, we approached it differently. We were a lot more aggressive this time.”The result was exactly what the second-seeded Hoyas were looking for, as they outlasted 10th-seeded Creighton, 60-55. While the victory was sloppy, it likely was still a relief for the Hoyas. Since reaching the conference championship game in 2010, the Hoyas had won just two of their next six tournament games. They had been seeded first, fifth, seventh and eighth. It mattered little.“It’s been things we can control in games,” Smith-Rivera said. “It’s not what the other teams have been doing. Not taking credit away from them, but it’s what we can control as a team.”Smith-Rivera’s 25 points were a primary reason Georgetown advanced to the semifinals for the first time since 2010. Creighton, which lost to the Hoyas by 15 and 27 points in its two regular-season meetings, made a strong push to become the latest team to eliminate Georgetown early. The Bluejays held the lead with 2 minutes 16 seconds remaining. But Smith-Rivera’s play ensured another early exit was not to be.“You have to play and you have to play well to win every night,” Thompson said. “They came out and they played with a sense of purpose and their execution — I thought Creighton’s execution was at a high level today — so we got to the point where we needed someone to step up.”Advertisement