By MARC TRACYOCT. 1, 2015
OAKLAND, Calif. —  Minutes after a hearing began Thursday regarding two cases that challenge college sports’ amateur model, Judge Claudia Wilken, unprompted, addressed the elephant in the room.“The Ninth Circuit is looking out for us by having its opinion come out yesterday,” she said with a smile.She was referring to the finding Wednesday by a panel of the United States Court of Appeals that N.C.A.A. rules barring payment to some athletes are subject to antitrust law.In doing so, the panel affirmed Judge Wilken’s opinion from last year, although two of its three judges struck down her ruling that the N.C.A.A. could limit colleges from offering as little as $5,000 per year in deferred compensation in exchange for the commercial use of their names, images and likenesses. The panel instead said that the N.C.A.A. could limit colleges to offering more than the full cost of attendance.AdvertisementAlthough the so-called O’Bannon case decided on Wednesday had emerged as the most prominent of several lawsuits against the N.C.A.A., one of the cases under discussion Thursday, the so-called Jenkins case, is the one many experts see as the gravest threat to the amateur model.AdvertisementWhile the case is in the preliminary stages — Thursday was on class certification — Judge Wilken seemed sympathetic to allowing it to move forward. Several technical complications remain, however, including its apparent similarity to the other lawsuit under discussion.The Jenkins case asks a federal court to declare illegal an N.C.A.A. rule barring compensation beyond a scholarship to top-tier football and Division I men’s basketball players. It is spearheaded by the lawyer Jeffrey Kessler, who represented N.F.L. players two decades ago in their successful bid for free agency (and more recently represented quarterback Tom Brady in the case regarding the use of underinflated footballs).“You have a current rule that says no compensation can be provided by the schools of any amount other than perhaps cost of attendance,” Mr. Kessler told the court. “That’s the rule we’re seeking to strike down.”The case is often described as seeking a free market for college athletes’ services, and Mr. Kessler has in the past referred to it as the “freedom case.”Lawyers representing the N.C.A.A. and its five richest conferences attempted to use that against Mr. Kessler. They argued a free market for players would help some members of Mr. Kessler’s proposed class of athletes and harm others, and therefore Judge Wilken should not certify the class.“Once you eliminate the cap, you don’t know what the N.C.A.A. might do or not do, or what the court might do or not do,” said Jeffrey Mishkin, who represented the N.C.A.A., speaking for the defendants.Noting that the “last player on the bench” might have as much to lose from eliminating the cap as a star player might have to gain, Mr. Mishkin concluded that, absent the rule capping compensation, “people will be bidding for athletes.”AdvertisementBut Mr. Kessler argued that he was obliged only to prove that the rule was illegal, and that, if he did so, it would be the defendants’ job to establish a new system that passed legal muster.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“We are not going to seek any remedy that is designed to seek differential pay,” he said. “We are simply trying to strike down the existing rules that we’ve identified that we believe are anti-competitive. We’re not going to be seeking any type of different remedy.”Judge Wilken appeared to agree that a court’s elimination of the existing rule would not preclude the N.C.A.A. from coming up with a new one. “The N.C.A.A., as we well know, makes a lot of rules,” she said.Other than Judge Wilken, Mr. Kessler, spoke the most of the four main lawyers. He was animated, raising his voice in excitement and pacing back and forth.Steve Berman, a lead lawyer for the plaintiffs in the other case, sometimes known as the Alston case, spoke softly and calmly and began his argument with several bullet points.There are several differences between the Jenkins case and the other one, sometimes known as the Alston case. Among the Alston case’s proposed class are women’s basketball players; the Jenkins case seeks to represent only football and men’s basketball players.Unlike the Jenkins plaintiffs, the Alston case is also seeking monetary damages, in the amount of the gap between the value of the scholarships athletes had received before this season and the full cost of attendance, which is typically several thousand dollars higher.The Ninth Circuit’s O’Bannon decision, which found that the N.C.A.A. could not restrict scholarship amounts below the full cost of attendance, buttressed the case for damages, he said, adding that he planned to model how many colleges would have opted into the full cost of attendance offering and how much retroactive compensation athletes were entitled to.AdvertisementThe defendants appeared to have more success when arguing that it was inappropriate for Wilken to certify two distinct classes. Such a situation, they suggested, could lead to one case proceeding more quickly and the other stayed — a scenario that Wilken termed a “race to res judicata,” a Latin phrase indicating settled law.“You’re being asked to certify simultaneously two duplicative classes,” said Scott Cooper, who represented the Pacific-12 Conference and spoke for the defendants.He added, “The reason you haven’t seen cases precisely on these facts where someone is trying to advance in the same court two entirely duplicative class actions is because people don’t do it.”Berman and Wilken argued that the several differences between their complaints made separate cases advisable. Wilken agreed to give them several days to confer and file a plan for how to proceed.Although Wilken expressed skepticism for allowing both cases to go forward as separate class actions, she noted that one argument for doing so was that the Jenkins case was filed in New Jersey federal court, not in Oakland, and therefore would be under the jurisdiction of the United States Circuit Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit.Although “the Ninth Circuit has ruled” — in Wednesday’s O’Bannon decision — she said that “the Third Circuit is not bound by Ninth Circuit law” and that “we could end up with the circuits split, and there’s a lot of strategic considerations out there for both sides.”Although Wilken did not mention it, differing decisions among federal appellate courts is one of the main ways that issues of law eventually find themselves in front of the Supreme Court.A version of this article appears in print on October 2, 2015, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Case That Could Erode Amateur Model Takes Step.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.