By ALLAN KREDAMARCH 12, 2015
The Rangers said Thursday that Kevin Klein, a stalwart defenseman who has a knack for scoring key goals, would miss three to four weeks with an upper-body injury.Klein was struck on the left arm by an Alex Ovechkin shot with 41 seconds remaining in Wednesday’s 3-1 win at Washington. The 30-year-old Klein has a career-high nine goals — including four game-winners — and 17 assists. Matt Hunwick is the likely candidate to replace Klein, barring a recall from Hartford of the American Hockey League. ISLES EXTEND BOYCHUK’S DEAL The Islanders announced that defenseman Johnny Boychuk had agreed to a seven-year, $42 million contract extension. Boychuk, 31, joined the team in a trade from Boston on Oct. 4.Boychuk has seven goals and 25 assists in 59 games.“Johnny’s influence in our dressing room, both on and off the ice, has been immeasurable,” General Manager Garth Snow said in statement.AdvertisementAVALANCHE 2, DEVILS 1 Jarome Iginla had a second-period goal and the winner in a shootout as the Avalanche beat the Devils in Colorado.  (AP)AdvertisementBRUINS 3, LIGHTNING 2 Patrice Bergeron and Brad Marchand scored shootout goals to lift Boston over visiting Tampa Bay.It was the 10th straight loss to the Bruins for the Lightning, who have never beaten Boston after regulation in 18 tries, going 0-9-9.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Boston is 6-0-1 in its last seven games, including four straight wins. (AP)SENATORS 5, CANADIENS 2 Erik Karlsson scored twice, and goalie Andrew Hammond remained unbeaten in regulation time as Ottawa defeated host Montreal. The Senators have won nine of 11 as they chase a playoff spot. (AP)PENGUINS 6, OILERS 4 Steve Downie and Patric Hornqvist scored just over a minute apart late in the third period, and Pittsburgh avoided an embarrassing collapse as it downed visiting Edmonton after letting a four-goal lead slip away. Brandon Sutter scored twice for the Penguins, and Sidney Crosby added his 23rd goal.  (AP)BLUE JACKETS 3, RED WINGS 1 Scott Hartnell scored the go-ahead goal, and Sergei Bobrovsky made 41 saves to help Columbus top host Detroit. (AP)STARS 5, HURRICANES 3 Alex Goligoski, Cody Eakin and Patrick Eaves each had a goal and an assist, lifting Dallas to a road victory over Carolina. (AP)BLUES 1, FLYERS 0 Ken Hitchcock, the former coach of Philadelphia, became the fourth N.H.L. coach to win 700 regular season games as St. Louis prevailed on the road in a shootout. Hitchcock joined Scotty Bowman, Al Arbour and Joel Quenneville in the 700-win club. (AP)PANTHERS 2, JETS 1 Aleksander Barkov scored the go-ahead goal in the third period, lifting host Florida over Winnipeg. (AP)A version of this article appears in print on March 13, 2015, on Page B15 of the New York edition with the headline: Rangers’ Klein, Injured by Puck, Will Miss at Least Three Weeks.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.