AdvertisementSupported byBy David WaldsteinTAMPA, Fla. — With 19 precise pitches, Masahiro Tanaka did more to calm the nerves of anxious Yankees fans than any of his declarations of good health possibly could. People needed to see it live, and Tanaka, the right-handed pitcher who sneered at the surgical knife last summer, put his ability on display Thursday with striking resolve.Looking comfortable and determined, as if he were pitching in the middle of June rather than in March, Tanaka retired all six of the Atlanta Braves batters he faced and struck out two of them in his spring training debut. He threw all his pitches, including his signature split-finger fastball, a pitch that some believe puts more stress on the elbow. He struck out Jonny Gomes with a splitter in the second inning and sprinkled in a few more in his emphatically successful outing. The Yankees went on to win, 3-2.“I was able to throw just like I would throw before I got injured,” he said through an interpreter.Last July, Tanaka developed a small tear in the ulnar collateral ligament in his right elbow. But eight months later, without having Tommy John surgery that would have sidelined him for at least a year, he is operating without restriction, like any healthy pitcher. That means throwing fastballs, sliders and the splitter that was so effective that it made the Yankees spend $175 million to sign him.“He’s going to pitch,” Manager Joe Girardi said. “We can’t take his weapons away.”Tanaka, 26, was so efficient Thursday that after his outing, he was sent to the bullpen to throw 18 more pitches, just to get the work in because he was expecting to throw about 30 to 35 pitches in the game.He is coming off a remarkable rookie season in which he was 13-5 with a 2.27 earned run average. He began 12-3, with a 2.27 E.R.A., and might have been a candidate for the Cy Young Award. But after a bad start in Cleveland on July 8, he learned of the tear.Three doctors recommended a conservative approach, and after 10 weeks of rest and rehabilitation, Tanaka returned to make two starts in September. One was fine, but on Sept. 27 he gave up five earned runs in one and two-thirds innings and was removed from a game at Fenway Park. That raised some concern, but a few days later he had a magnetic imaging resonance test that showed no further tearing of the ligament. If those two starts were shaky, Thursday’s helped ease the concern, even if it was only spring training.“I think it was better than those two games,” Tanaka said of his crisp two innings of work.All spring Tanaka had been informing people, including teammates, that he felt fine. That has helped reduced the anxiety level about the health of perhaps the most important elbow in Yankees camp.“He keeps telling me he’s fine,” C. C. Sabathia said, “and as long as he’s fine we don’t have to worry about what he’s got. The first half of last year he was the best pitcher in the American League. As long as he’s healthy, I look forward to him doing the same kind of thing he did last year.”Other pitchers with similar tears have also tried to avoid surgery, with varied results. Adam Wainwright of the Cardinals is one of the most notable. He lasted six years before he finally had Tommy John surgery. At any point, Tanaka could face the same fate, but the Yankees say they are not fretting about it.“It’s not in my control whether Tanaka pitches 10 more years or 10 more days,” General Manager Brian Cashman said. “So it’s not something, quite honestly, I’m going to worry about. If it declares itself in an adverse way, we’ll have to deal with it and do whatever the next course of action is, which would be a surgery if he has a problem. But he’s been great.”Thursday was also a big day for Sabathia, who is recovering from a knee injury that limited him to eight starts last year, the last on May 10. He threw 29 pitches in a simulated game in the afternoon, and was very happy with his stuff, especially the movement and life on his fastball. “I’m not hurt,” Sabathia said. “I feel good. That’s the only way I judge myself right now.”Advertisement