

      By VICTOR MATHER

OCT. 15, 2015

Knicks and Lakers games are known as the best events for spotting celebrities, but wasn’t that Eddie Vedder on the field at Wrigley when the Cubs won their division series earlier this week?

This year’s playoffs have given baseball teams a chance to show off their own star fans.
Lead singer, Pearl JamWhy the Cubs? Grew up in Evanston, Ill.Sign of Love for the Team: Considering not scheduling concerts in October in the future.Quotation: “Cubs-Cards for me is Fergie Jenkins against Lou Brock or Bob Gibson knocking down Jose Cardenal with an inside pitch.”Other Celebrity Fans: Vince Vaughn, John Cusack, Bill Murray.ComedianWhy the Mets? Grew up on Long IslandSign of Love: Cast Keith Hernandez on “Seinfeld.”Quotation: “The life of a stand-up comic is very similar to that of a baseball player. You perform on this 85 to 93 percent level on a daily basis. You can’t give 100 because you’ve gotta do it every day.”Others: Jon Stewart, Matthew Broderick, Hilary SwankActor, “Ant-Man”Why the Royals? Lived in Overland Park, Kan., from age 10.Sign of Love: Offered to host a two-keg party at his mother’s house if the team wins the World Series.Quotation: Nobody can dislike you for being a Royals fan,” he said in 2011. “People are like, aw that’s cute.”Others: Jason Sudeikis, Eric Stonestreet, Lorde.Rapper, “Started From the Bottom”Why the Blue Jays? Grew up in Toronto.Sign of Love: Used a picture of the 1993 World Series as the cover art for a recent track dissing his rival Meek Mill.Quotation: “I have officially made it now!!! Thanks to my man @drake. I’m honored bro.” (Joe Carter)Others: Avril Lavigne, Geddy LeeRapper and actor, “Barbershop”Why the Dodgers? Born in South Central L.A.Sign of Love: Joined with D.J. Felli Fel and various other rappers on “Dodgers Anthem 2013”Quotation: “It’s opening day! Time Warner Cable and DirecTV — get it together so I can see my Dodgers!”Others: Bryan Cranston, Red Hot Chili Peppers, Tom Cruise, Alyssa Milano.Actor, “Dallas Buyers Club”Why the Rangers? He’s a Texan.Sign of Love: Partnered with the team on his “Just Keep Livin” after-school programs.Quotation: Though once an Astros fan, he’s “much more of a Rangers fan now.”Others: Demi Lovato, Owen Wilson, George W. Bush.Rapper, “Hot in Herre”Why the Cardinals? Moved to St. Louis from Texas at age 7.Sign of Love: Bet Arsenio Hall that the Cardinals would beat the Dodgers in the 2013 N.L.C.S. Hall lost and had to sing “Country Grammar” in Cardinals gear.Quotation: “I’m stealing second and third and looking home peeping greedy now. See me now, people call me speedy now.” (“Batter Up”)Others: Jon Hamm, Billy Bob Thornton, Jenna Fischer.Former presidentWhy the Astros? Grew up a Red Sox fan and played for Yale, but moved to Texas after graduation.Sign of Love: Threw out the first pitch at Game 3 of the division series despite being in a wheelchair with fractured vertebrae.Quotation: On his favorite baseball moment: “Being able to see my home team, the Astros, play in the World Series.”Singer/songwriter, “Graceland”Why the Yankees? Born in Newark and grew up in Queens.Sign of Love: Proposed to Carrie Fisher after a Yankees game.Quotation: “Where have you gone, Joe DiMaggio? A nation turns its lonely eyes to you.”Others: Jay-Z, Rudolph W. Giuliani, Billy Crystal, Spike Lee.Rapper, “We Dem Boyz”Why the Pirates? Went to high school in Pittsburgh.Sign of Love: Wrote a No. 1 hit, “Black and Yellow” in tribute to the colors of the Pirates and the Steelers.Quotation: ”Reppin’ my town, when you see me you know everything. Black and yellow, black and yellow, black and yellow, black and yellow.”Others: Michael Keaton, Christina Aguilera.Advertisement