AdvertisementSupported byBy Pat BorziST. PAUL — The idea sprang as a brainstorm from a first-time father. After Nathaniel Dubnyk was born in August 2013, his father, Devan Dubnyk, then a goaltender for the Edmonton Oilers, asked the noted Swedish mask designer David Gunnarsson to incorporate an image of the baby on the mask he planned to wear that season.“I had a pretty cool picture of me holding him with his head in my hand as a newborn,” Dubnyk said. “I got that one painted on the back and thought it was pretty cool.”Dubnyk had no way of knowing the nomadic direction his N.H.L. career was about to take. Traded from Edmonton to Nashville to Montreal within three months, Dubnyk finished the 2013-14 regular season with the Hamilton Bulldogs of the American Hockey League. He signed with the Arizona Coyotes as a free agent last July, only to be traded to the Minnesota Wild in January. Team-specific elements on the masks meant that Gunnarsson had to make a new one for Dubnyk at each stop, five in all. Each time, Dubnyk updated his son’s image. Lining up all the masks offers the sort of evidence of a child’s growth that many proud fathers would carry on a smartphone.“I was able to document the first year of his life pretty good through pictures on the back of my helmet,” Dubnyk said. “I got a newborn, a six-month-old, and a nine-month-old. Arizona is like a little over a year. And here, I’ve got him at a year and a half.“Hopefully we can just do it a year at a time from here on out.”The Wild might be wise to keep Dubnyk, 28, an impending free agent. Acquired on Jan. 14 for a third-round draft pick, the 6-foot-6 Dubnyk joined a team that was reeling from a mumps epidemic and shaky goaltending, and that had fallen 8 points out of the final Western Conference playoff spot. Dubnyk shut out Buffalo, 7-0, in his Jan. 15 debut, and has started every game since — a club-record 25 straight. With Dubnyk posting five shutouts, a 1.67 goals-against average and .937 save percentage, Minnesota went 19-4-2 with him in net, the best record in the N.H.L. in that span. Entering play Thursday, the Wild held the first wild-card spot in the West. Dubnyk posted four shutouts in his first nine starts, something no N.H.L. goaltender had done since the 1967-68 season, according to the Elias Sports Bureau. Before Dubnyk arrived, Minnesota’s .889 save percentage ranked last in the league, tying Edmonton. Dubnyk also has two assists, a testament to his puck-handling skills.“He’s been a godsend here,” said Bob Mason, Minnesota’s goaltending coach. “We were flailing away, and he came in and stabilized everything.”Dubnyk’s success has even led to a tribute song by Lester McLean, a musician who often performs on TSN, the Canadian sports network. This week, Wild Coach Mike Yeo gave no hint that he would start any other goaltender in the team’s final 15 games. Dubnyk will have to rest on days when there is no game. “I don’t think we’ve taxed him too greatly here,” Yeo said. “When you look at the number of starting games he’s played this year, he’s still relatively low compared to the rest of the league. It’s something we have to make sure that we monitor. But that said, these games are critical right now, and we’ve got to make sure we’re putting the best group on the ice to give us the best chance.”Dubnyk credited Sean Burke, the Coyotes’ goaltending coach and a former N.H.L. veteran, with restoring his confidence. Dubnyk began last season as Edmonton’s No. 1 goalie, but foundered before being traded. In Nashville, he gave up five goals in each of his first two starts and never played again. Montreal sent him directly to the minors. He was recalled for the playoffs as a practice extra. “Last year in Edmonton, some hesitation started to creep into my game a little bit, where you’re questioning different things you’re doing, different plays,” Dubnyk said. “The game happens so fast that if you even have an ounce of hesitation, you don’t have a chance.”Burke reminded Dubnyk to rely on his size. Dubnyk is so tall and wide that if he squares himself to the puck, comes out of the net a little and lets the shooter make the first move, most shots simply hit him. “A guy as big as I am, that’s the most important part of your game,” Dubnyk said. “When you can get set in those angles, it allows you to be so confident to sit there and wait for the plays to happen. That’s a lot of the work I had done with Burkie.”The Wild’s goaltending had been a mess since the summer. The presumed No. 1, Josh Harding, who missed much of last season with multiple sclerosis symptoms, broke his right foot in an altercation with a teammate a week before camp. Sent to Minnesota’s A.H.L. farm team in Iowa a month and a half into the season to get in shape, Harding had an M.S.-related relapse and has not played since.Young Darcy Kuemper slumped after opening the season with back-to-back shutouts. The veteran Niklas Backstrom was not any better, allowing three or more goals in nine consecutive appearances. Mason said the Wild overcommitted offensively to try to score more. It did not work. Then Dubnyk showed up. Yeo said that Dubnyk’s calmness and sense of control put his new teammates at ease and restored trust in the goaltending. “As much as anything else, it settled everybody down and allowed them to concentrate on themselves and prepare in their own game,” Yeo said. Without faulting Kuemper or Backstrom, the Wild’s captain, Mikko Koivu, said that the team’s overall defense and penalty killing improved with Dubnyk in the net. Minnesota allowed 1.64 goals per game in Dubnyk’s starts, the fewest in the N.H.L. in that period, after allowing 3.65 in 23 games before that. Minnesota’s 94.4 percent penalty kill rate since Jan. 27 leads the league.“We weren’t able to help them as much as we should,” Koivu said. “From the time that Duby got here, our defensive game got better all over the ice.”Last season, Dubnyk went 10 weeks without seeing his wife, Jennifer, or Nathaniel. Zach Parise, the team’s leading scorer, made sure that would not happen this time. Parise is selling a home in suburban Minneapolis, but took it off the market so Dubnyk and his family could live there for the rest of the season. “It was such a big help and a nice thing for him to do,” Dubnyk said. “It allowed us to get my wife and son settled into a home, a place that feels like home.”Maybe they will even put up some baby pictures.Advertisement