By THE ASSOCIATED PRESS and TOM PEDULLAMARCH 12, 2015
Running backs took their place at the head of the free agency class on Thursday, the third day of the N.F.L.’s business year. Two of them, the 2014 Offensive Player of the Year DeMarco Murray and the Chargers’ Ryan Mathews, wound up in Philadelphia. Justin Forsett is staying where he made his breakthrough last season, in Baltimore.Murray, 27, helped the Cowboys win the N.F.C. East while rushing for a league-best and franchise-record 1,845 yards, breaking Emmitt Smith’s team mark. Murray also set a league record with eight straight 100-yard games to start the season.He will combine with Mathews to replace the two-time All-Pro LeSean McCoy, the N.F.L.’s rushing leader in 2013, who was dealt to Buffalo by Coach Chip Kelly.Mathews, 27, leaves San Diego after an injury-plagued five seasons. A first-round draft pick in 2010, he had his best season in 2013, with 1,255 yards rushing and seven total touchdowns, but it is the only year in which he has played all 16 regular-season games.AdvertisementForsett, 29, agreed to a three-year contract with the Ravens. He comes off the finest season of his seven-year career, replacing Ray Rice and rushing for 1,266 yards and eight touchdowns.AdvertisementJETS AND CROMARTIE NEAR DEAL  Darrelle Revis and Antonio Cromartie, who formed a stifling cornerback tandem for the Jets from 2010 to 2012, were on the verge of being reunited as the team reached an agreement with Cromartie.The four-year agreement worth $32 million was in the last stages of being completed, according to a person with direct knowledge of the negotiations. It would cap an overhaul of a secondary that turned porous for the Jets last season. The unit was burned for 31 touchdown passes, most in the A.F.C.John Idzik, then the general manager, released Cromartie after an atypical season in 2013, Cromartie, known for his ability to bottle up receivers, was visibly slowed by a hip pointer and struggled to keep pace with the league’s elite pass catchers.Cromartie signed with the Arizona Cardinals and enjoyed a resurgence under Todd Bowles, who was the Cardinals’ defensive coordinator before he agreed this off-season to become the Jets’ head coach. TOM PEDULLASAINTS TO SHORE UP DEFENSE  The New Orleans Saints said they had agreed to sign the free-agent cornerback Brandon Browner  to a three-year contract and linebacker Ramon Humber to a two-year deal.The 30-year-old Browner has been a starter on the past two Super Bowl winners: the 2013 Seattle Seahawks and 2014 New England Patriots. Browner has started every game in which he has played and intercepted 11 passes during the past four seasons. (AP)CHIEFS RELEASE BOWE Two years ago, the Chiefs were so desperate to keep Dwayne Bowe on the roster that they gave him a five-year deal that made him one of the league’s highest-paid wide receivers. Turns out that he was going to be paid a bit too well.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Chiefs released Bowe, 30, unwilling to take the $14 million hit against the salary cap that he carried this season.AdvertisementBowe started 112 of his 118 games in Kansas City. He had 532 catches for 7,155 yards, third-most in franchise history, and his 2010 season — 72 catches, 1,162 yards and 15 touchdowns — earned him a Pro Bowl spot.The move came a day after the Chiefs made a $55 million, five-year deal with receiver Jeremy Maclin, who was drafted by Chiefs Coach Andy Reid in Philadelphia. (AP)49ERS RE-SIGN GABBERT The San Francisco 49ers re-signed quarterback Blaine Gabbert to a two-year contract while also releasing wide receiver Stevie Johnson a day after acquiring Torrey Smith.Gabbert, acquired in a trade with the Jacksonville Jaguars last March, appeared in one game as relief to Colin Kaepernick and threw a touchdown pass. (AP)GIANTS’ ROLLE HEADS TO BEARS The Chicago Bears agreed to a three-year contract with the three-time Pro Bowl safety Antrel Rolle.A 10-year veteran, Rolle has 26 interceptions with the Arizona Cardinals and the Giants. (AP)JURY FINDS FOR FANS VS. LEAGUE  A federal jury ordered the N.F.L. to pay nearly $76,000 to fans affected by the 2011 Super Bowl seating mess in Texas, wrapping up a trial that included testimony from Commissioner Roger Goodell and the Cowboys’ owner, Jerry Jones.The eight-member jury in Dallas concluded that the N.F.L. breached its contracts with seven holders of tickets to the game at the Cowboys’ $1.2 billion stadium in Arlington. However, the jury concluded the league did not defraud the fans.Five fans said they ended up with no seats, and two said they had obstructed views for the game, in which Green Bay won the title over Pittsburgh. The jury ordered compensation ranging from $5,670 to $22,000.About 1,250 temporary seats were deemed unsafe hours before kickoff. That forced about 850 ticket holders to move to new seats and 400 others to standing-room areas. The N.F.L. has said it fully compensated displaced fans. (AP)A version of this article appears in print on March 13, 2015, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Jets Near Deal to Reunite Cromartie With Revis; Murray Goes to the Eagles.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.