AdvertisementSupported byBy Tom PedullaDarrelle Revis and Antonio Cromartie, who formed a stifling secondary for the Jets from 2010 to 2012, were reunited Thursday as the team reached an agreement with Cromartie.The Jets and Cromartie agreed to a four-year deal worth $32 million. When completed, the signing will cap a sweeping overhaul of a secondary that turned porous for the Jets last season. The unit was burned for 31 touchdown passes, most in the A.F.C.The team’s new general manager, Mike Maccagnan, moved with an aggressiveness that provided a stark contrast to the deliberate style of John Idzik, his predecessor. The Jets outspent their A.F.C. East rivals, the New England Patriots and the Buffalo Bills, on Tuesday, the official start of the new N.F.L. season, to bring back Revis with a five-year contract worth $70 million. That front-loaded deal included about $39 million in guaranteed money. New England had released Revis instead of picking up a one-year option on his contract worth $20 million.Idzik released Cromartie at the end of a 2013 season that was atypical for him. Known for his ability to bottle up receivers, Cromartie was visibly slowed by a hip pointer and struggled to keep pace with the league’s elite pass catchers.Cromartie signed with Arizona and enjoyed a resurgence under Todd Bowles, who was the Cardinals’ defensive coordinator before he agreed this off-season to become the Jets’ head coach. Cromartie made four interceptions and comes off his fourth Pro Bowl season, one that helped the Cardinals reach the playoffs despite a series of injuries at quarterback.Cromartie will be 31 on April 15, but it is clear that Maccagnan and Bowles believe he can continue to play at a high level for at least the next few years.In a less heralded deal that brought another well-regarded corner, the Jets previously signed Buster Skrine, a former Cleveland Browns cornerback.The spending spree on cornerbacks marks an abrupt turnaround for the organization. Idzik, presumably with the backing of the owner Woody Johnson, parted with Revis because Idzik was unwilling to invest too heavily in one player at that position. He instead tried to rebuild the secondary through the draft, selecting Dee Milliner with the ninth pick over all in 2013 and taking Dexter McDougle in the third round last year. Both had a history of injuries in college and sustained season-ending injuries last year, decimating an already thin unit.How, or if, they fit into the mix is unclear. McDougle took an upbeat approach, posting on Twitter, “We’re about to be too real, can’t wait to learn from some greats.”Advertisement