By HARVEY ARATONMARCH 12, 2015
LOS ANGELES — If there was one Knicks road game that Phil Jackson was certain to attend, it was Thursday night’s visit to Staples Center for a second and final meeting with the Lakers, the team he coached to five N.B.A. titles from 2000 to 2010 and whose co-owner Jeanie Buss has been his longtime companion.For one reason or another, he seemed to think it was an important enough clash for the Knicks, 12-51 going into the game, even though they were facing a Lakers team that was 17-46.“This is a game to win,” he said while stopping to chat with a half-dozen reporters after the Knicks’ morning shootaround at U.C.L.A. “We have a chance to play a game that’s decent.” And, in fact, the Knicks did win, 101-94.There has been little in Jackson’s first full season as president of the Knicks that has approached the level of decent. After telling The New York Times last month, “So far, my experiment has fallen flat on its face,” he reworded his mea culpa on Thursday, calling his work to date “a project gone awry.”AdvertisementBut he also said that those who were already judging his long-anticipated return to the Knicks, the team he played for in the 1960s and 1970s, based on this season’s record were not making “a valid point.”AdvertisementHe again expressed optimism that a combination of factors — the return of a healthy Carmelo Anthony next season, the drafting of a prize rookie with what should be a top-four draft pick and the potential addition of at least one free agent — should present a different narrative next season.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“We know what the first-round pick is going to mean to us,” he said, although he cautioned not to expect too much from a player who most likely will be 19 or 20 years old. “But we also know we’re going to build our team with free agents.”At one point, Jackson poked fun at himself. Referring to Buss, he said: “My partner said: ‘You’re sitting on all this information. Come on out and destroy a basketball team that you love.’ ”“That’s what I’ve done,” Jackson added.Jackson was also asked about his much-discussed post on Twitter last month after a lopsided defeat by a Cleveland team with two players he traded there — J. R. Smith and Iman Shumpert, who combined for an acrobatic late-game dunk by Smith and celebrated fancifully.“Each N.B.A. game,” Jackson wrote, “is an opportunity for players to show their ‘best’ nature and please the basketball gods ... and those who know what ‘It’ takes.”Jackson’s explanation was right out of his Zen philosophy playbook: “That’s for anybody that it resonates with. Could be fans, you guys, could be Cleveland, could be the Knicks.”A version of this article appears in print on March 13, 2015, on Page B15 of the New York edition with the headline: Jackson Sees Opportunity as Knicks Visit Lakers.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.