AdvertisementSupported byProvidence 74, St. John's 57By Zach SchonbrunIt had been so long that even Coach Steve Lavin could not remember the last time St. John’s won a game in the Big East tournament. He had near-perfect recall of games he lost while at U.C.L.A. in overtime — who hit the shot, the time on the clock, the most minuscule of details — but the Red Storm’s record at Madison Square Garden in postseason play escaped him.That is what four straight years of short-lived tournament appearances will do. Not since 2011, Lavin’s first year, had the Red Storm lasted beyond a few short hours at the Garden, and the streak of early exits continued Thursday, when fifth-seeded St. John’s lost to Providence, the No. 4 seed, by 74-57.St. John’s play ranged from lackadaisical to disengaged to dreadful, with a few short bursts of energy but nothing sustained, nothing threatening. The Friars (22-10, 11-7), who won this tournament last year but lost to St. John’s (21-11, 10-8) twice this season, appeared sound, confident and perfectly content letting the Red Storm unravel themselves.For instance, there was a period in the first half in which St. John’s missed 15 consecutive shots, went 10 minutes 5 seconds without a field goal and committed six turnovers. At the end of that stretch, Providence led, 28-13, with seven minutes left in the half, and St. John’s looked panic-stricken. “We couldn’t buy a bucket,” guard Jamal Branch said. “They capitalized.”Of all St. John’s grotesque halftime statistics (26.7 percent shooting, 1 of 9 from 3-point range), its zero fast-break points seemed to jump out, at least for a team that had shown impressive athleticism and defensive energy earlier in the season.Providence Coach Ed Cooley said limiting the Red Storm’s ability to get out in transition was one of his keys to the win. “You can’t let St. John’s loose,” Cooley said. “You let them loose, you’re going to be in trouble.”St. John’s came no closer than 8 points in the second half. LaDontae Henton scored 20 points and had 12 rebounds, and Kris Dunn added 17 points, 11 assists, and 2 steals for the Friars, who will meet the top-seed Villanova on Friday night.“We feel like we can play with anybody,” Henton said. The Red Storm’s befuddling streak of uninspired play on their home court in the conference tournament could not be explained by Lavin, who went on to even besmirch himself by saying, “I’m a poor conference tournament coach.”He added that he did not necessarily believe that league tournament play indicated success or failure in the N.C.A.A. tournament. St. John’s has struggled in its last two games, however, losing by 37 points in a short-handed effort against Villanova before this latest demoralizing defeat.“Today we’re just disappointed as a group with our performance,” Lavin said. “We didn’t feel that we brought the aggressiveness. I thought we were tentative.” At this point, the Red Storm appears destined to make the N.C.A.A. tournament, having won 10 games in league play. Nothing, though, is certain until the brackets are announced Sunday night. “If they don’t put us in,” guard D’Angelo Harrison said, referring to the selection committee, “then that’ll be on them.”VILLANOVA 84, MARQUETTE 49 The top-seeded Wildcats tied a Big East tournament record with 17 3-pointers. The No. 4 Wildcats (30-2, 16-2), who have won 13 in a row, appear to be playing as well as any team in the country. In the second half of their last regular-season win, over St. John’s on Saturday, Villanova scored 55 points without committing a single turnover. On Thursday, they shot 59 percent from beyond the arc. “We just came out and we just made threes,” Villanova Coach Jay Wright said. “I thought that set the tone for the game.”Marquette (13-19, 4-14), which throttled Seton Hall by 22 in the opening round, did not have an answer for the Wildcats’ exceptional floor spacing, their altruistic approach to ball distribution and their dynamic shot-making.Marquette never came within 15 in the second half. The Golden Eagles’ 35-point defeat was its largest in the Big East tournament since 2006.Josh Hart finished with 20 points, on 7-of-10 shooting, off the bench, while Darrun Hilliard added 13 points and 8 assists. Six Villanova players hit at least one 3-pointer in the game.“I don’t know if they could play much better,” Marquette Coach Steve Wojciechowski said. “Certainly, I don’t think they could shoot much better than they did.”Brendan Prunty contributed reporting.Advertisement