By TIM ROHANMARCH 12, 2015
PORT ST. LUCIE, Fla. —  The Mets announced Thursday that Josh Edgin, their top left-handed reliever, had a stretched ligament and tendinitis in his left elbow. Within the next day or two, he is expected to decide how to proceed.Edgin could rest the elbow and try throwing in a few weeks, or he could have Tommy John surgery and miss the 2015 season. Sandy Alderson, the Mets’ general manager, indicated that the decision was Edgin’s, although the Mets are sure to offer opinions as well.“It’s disappointing,” Edgin said. “Actually, really disappointing. We’re going to have a great year this year, whether it’s with me or without me.”Last season, after starting the year in the minors, Edgin established himself as a valuable weapon out of the Mets’ bullpen. Left-handed batters hit only .185 against him, and he posted a career-low 1.32 earned run average in 47 appearances.AdvertisementThe Mets were hoping to have two left-handed relievers in their bullpen, including Edgin. For the moment, they are left with the other left-handers in camp — Scott Rice, Sean Gilmartin, Jack Leathersich and Dario Alvarez — none of whom have been impressive this spring and none of whom have major league contracts. Combined, their E.R.A. can be described only as preposterous.AdvertisementAfter Thursday’s game against the Washington Nationals, which the Mets won, 11-9, and in which Alvarez was pounded, Alderson and Manager Terry Collins acknowledged that they were not happy with what Alderson described as the team’s “left-handed situation.”The Mets’ top two relievers — Jenrry Mejia and Jeurys Familia — are right-handed, as is Bobby Parnell, who was formerly the team’s closer and is now working his way toward a roster spot after Tommy John surgery.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But it is hard for a bullpen to be effective without one situational left-hander in the mix, and with the Mets finally expected to be competitive this year after six straight losing seasons, it becomes imperative to find a realistic solution if Edgin cannot pitch effectively, or at all.One option, Alderson said, will not be Steven Matz, a young left-handed starter for the Mets, who could challenge for a spot in the rotation at some point in 2015. Alderson said the Mets wanted to maximize his potential as a starter and also did not want to tinker with him because he, too, had had Tommy John surgery.More likely is that the Mets will look to see what trade options are available as the regular season moves closer. The Mets have a major trade asset — a surplus of starting pitching — but it is unclear whether they would be willing to deal a starter for a lefty reliever. As is often the case with the Mets, who spend cautiously, Alderson was asked Thursday why the team had not invested money during the off-season in another established left-handed reliever to provide more depth.“There just wasn’t anybody in whom we were prepared to invest a major league contract,” Alderson replied, adding, “It’s not the financial issue.”Still, if Edgin cannot be a competitive pitcher in the weeks and months ahead, the Mets will need a Plan B who may not currently be on their roster.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.