AdvertisementSupported byOn BaseballBy Tyler KepnerSURPRISE, Ariz. — Kris Medlen could not help noticing Matt Harvey’s spring training debut last week. Medlen was in the Kansas City Royals’ camp here, watching on MLB Network, when it all came rushing back.There was Harvey, firing fastballs again for the Mets after missing a year because of reconstructive elbow surgery. Also in the game was Curtis Granderson, the hitter Medlen faced last March, on that same mound in Port St. Lucie, Fla., when he blew out his elbow for the second time.Medlen, in that moment, went from being the No. 1 starter for the Atlanta Braves to a repeat victim of a torn ulnar collateral ligament. He had Tommy John surgery in 2010 and knew he would need it again.“I was devastated,” Medlen said. “Finally establishing myself as a big league starter and just having it taken away, it ripped my guts out.”Medlen, 29, is not alone. Two lockers down at Surprise Stadium is Ryan Madson, 34, the former closer for the Philadelphia Phillies. He had Tommy John surgery in 2012 and has not returned.Between them is Danny Duffy, 26, who had the operation the same year as Madson. Duffy made 25 starts last season and pitched in the World Series. Another Royals left-hander, Tim Collins, had the surgery Wednesday. On the other side of this complex, the Texas Rangers have recommended it for their ailing ace, Yu Darvish.“You have much more respect for the game having gone through that,” Duffy said. “I feel for guys that have to do that. It seems like it’s becoming more common. You just have to dominate the rehab and know that the percentages are with you to come back, and stronger.”But not always. Major League Baseball estimates that 70 percent to 80 percent of Tommy John patients who follow proper protocol will return to their previous level of competition. But that leaves 20 percent to 30 percent who do not — like Madson, so far.A study by the American Sports Medicine Institute found that 19 percent of patients will need another elbow surgery, like Medlen and the former Los Angeles Dodger Chad Billingsley, who had Tommy John surgery in 2013 and a different operation the next season. Billingsley has not returned to the majors and is now in camp with the Philadelphia Phillies.“A pitcher can’t stand the idea of missing a year,” Billingsley said before a practice in Clearwater, Fla., last month. “You want to try everything possible to maybe give you a few more years, like Wainwright had, before you have to go under the knife. These last two years have been a mental grind of just watching baseball. You miss competing.”Billingsley and Adam Wainwright, the St. Louis Cardinals’ star, represent opposite ends on the spectrum of outcomes facing the Yankees’ Masahiro Tanaka, who is trying to pitch through a partial U.C.L. tear and looked impressive in his first outing of the spring Thursday night. Wainwright did so for six years, quite well, before needing the procedure in 2011.Billingsley tried to pitch through his injury in 2012. Like Tanaka, he received platelet-rich plasma injections and started the next season strong. But he needed the surgery after just two starts, and then, on the comeback trail in the minors last season, his arm suddenly went dead.“I could throw, but I couldn’t put anything on it,” Billingsley said. “I finished the inning, just to do it, and then I told my trainer: ‘Something’s wrong. My arm’s killing me.’ ”It was a torn flexor tendon, and it cost Billingsley the rest of 2014. The same injury now afflicts his Phillies teammate Cliff Lee, who has acknowledged he may be forced to retire.Lee earned the last Phillies victory in the World Series, over the Yankees in 2009, in a game saved by Madson. The next two seasons were Madson’s best, but he now believes they took a severe toll.Madson, who is 6 feet 6 inches, developed a habit of staying tall in his delivery and not driving enough with his legs. It created more deception, he said, and as his strikeout rate rose while his walk rate fell, he saw no reason to change.Even after the 2012 surgery, which came after he had signed with Cincinnati, he persisted with the faulty mechanics in a failed 2013 comeback with the Angels. He never pitched for either team and attracted limited interest in a tryout last February. He went home to Temecula, Calif., seemingly for good.“I was so burnt from that whole ride,” Madson said. “My heart wasn’t in it. My wife was pregnant, bunch of kids at home, and I’d been away from them trying to get this thing healthy. I was ready to go home. Mentally, boom, it was gone.”Madson had signed with the Phillies at age 17. This was the first time he was homesick. He changed diapers for his newborn and cared for his other four children. He is financially secure and did not need to work. But people looked at him funny when he said he was retired, and he understood why they felt that way.“Finally I started feeling like, Wait a second, I need to do something — I don’t know what it is, but I need to produce,” Madson said. “I needed to make something happen.”Pitching lessons for Little Leaguers were unfulfilling. Then Jim Fregosi Jr., a Royals executive who had signed Madson for the Phillies, asked him to work with a local high school prospect. The sessions awakened Madson’s fire. His wife encouraged him to try one more comeback.His stuff is sharp now, Madson said, but his command has been off. In his spring debut Monday, he got three outs, allowed a homer and showed a fastball at 92 miles an hour, to go with his signature changeup.Medlen, meanwhile, said he was nearing his first bullpen session as he approaches the first anniversary of his surgery. He has not said precisely when he will take the mound, and he is taking nothing for granted.“I never had that thought process of, I deserve another chance,” Medlen said. “Because who’s to say that I do? I’ve just always felt that I needed to prove myself.”If his arm responds well, Medlen could give a midseason jolt to the rotation of the defending American League champions. If not, he has his family. At the time of his first surgery, he and his future wife had just started dating. The day before his surgery last March, they found out they would soon have their second child.“So it’s life,” Medlen said. “It’s give and take.”Pitching in the majors has been taken from Medlen and Madson, and so many of their contemporaries. For now, at least, they still have hope.Advertisement