AdvertisementSupported byGlobal SoccerBy Rob HughesLONDON — The Champions League is the best competition on earth, and at times the most cynical. The tournament matters more to most players than the World Cup because it is contested every year; its level of play is better than any single country can offer; and its profits have allowed clubs to pay ever-higher salaries.If only the clubs involved played in a sporting manner.Gamesmanship, a euphemism for cheating, affected both of Wednesday’s matches: Bayern Munich’s 7-0 thrashing of Shakhtar Donetsk, and Paris St.-Germain’s 2-2 tie with Chelsea, which allowed the French club to advance on the away goals rule.Red cards affected both outcomes. In Munich, Donetsk capitulated after it lost a defender when he was sent off in the opening minutes. In London, P.S.G. reacted in the opposite way. Its players refused to be overrun after losing their top scorer and ended up advancing. With mighty scoring headers from David Luiz and then Thiago Silva, P.S.G. outjumped a Chelsea defense that normally imposes aerial superiority on opponents.And that’s the beauty of soccer. Luiz and Silva were part of the Brazil team that imploded last year on home soil at the World Cup, surrendering in a 7-1 loss to Germany. Yet those two players led the comeback at Stamford Bridge.Some of the Germans who administered that thrashing were at it again in Munich on Wednesday, though the seven goals this time also included strikes from imported players, Franck Ribéry and Robert Lewandowski.Shakhtar Coach Mircea Lucescu had described Bayern as the best collection of players in the world at the moment, and it effectively had the game won from the second minute on.That was all the time it took for Mario Götze to feel the presence of Olexandr Kucher on his back, and when Kucher tried to win the ball, Götze quickly fell to the ground. It was possibly a slightly mistimed tackle, but the moment it happened, a posse of Munich players, led by their captain, Bastian Schweinsteiger, surrounded the Scottish referee, William Collum.They didn’t get out of his face until Collum first signaled a penalty kick and then issued the fastest red card in Champions League history.Maybe Collum would have made that call anyway. But Munich’s players did as so many pros do these days: they held up their fingers, demanding that he send off the Ukrainian defender as well as award the penalty kick.FIFA regulations — the so-called double jeopardy rule introduced recently — leaves the referee with no choice. It is unnecessary, as well as unpleasant, for players to harangue the referee as Schweinsteiger and his pals did.Once the jostling subsided, the penalty was taken in the fourth minute, sending Bayern ruthlessly on its way. It was the second time this tournament that the Muncheners have pummeled an opponent with seven goals. The first time, in Rome, had been a display of disparity in talent; Wednesday compounded that with the sour taste of players wanting to be judge, jury and executioner on the field.The red card in London, in an encounter that might have merited red cards to both sides on more than the one occasion, came with even uglier interference by Chelsea players.Indeed, one could argue that Chelsea’s Oscar and P.S.G.’s Zlatan Ibrahimovic were both reckless as they rushed toward the ball. Oscar, though, was the better actor. He lay on the turf like a broken man, and almost the whole Chelsea team massed around the Dutch referee Bjorn Kuipers.As in Munich, the players’ intentions were clear. They wanted the other team’s player, Ibrahimovic, to be ordered off. The unanimity of the protest bore the hallmark of the Chelsea manager, José Mourinho.He had been vocal, to say the least, in accusing Paris of being the most “aggressive” bunch of players that Chelsea had come up against all season long. Mourinho did as he habitually does: He planted in the media, and in the minds of the referees, the suggestion that P.S.G. was out to rough up his Blues with foul and overly physical play.It is a familiar tactic — so familiar that 10 years ago Volker Roth, a retired official who headed the UEFA referee’s committee, called Mourinho “an enemy of football.” That came after Mourinho had falsely stated that Barcelona coach Frank Rijkaard had gone into the referee’s room at halftime during a Champions League game against Chelsea.It was a slur that persuaded Anders Frisk, the referee that night, to quit the sport after he and his children received threatening phone calls.It is up to FIFA and UEFA to do something about the corrosive behavior of theatrical falls during games and of players trying to get their fellow professionals removed from the field.It can still be the beautiful game. But winning at all costs makes it ugly. Players who foul and those who fake are not doing this alone. Their coaches have a role, and the men who supposedly lay down the laws too often turn a blind eye on what is becoming organized and often violent dissent.It would cease abruptly if referees had the authority to issue yellow cards — red even — to players who surround them in an attempt, all too often successful, to intimidate them.Advertisement