By VAIBHAV SHARMAMARCH 12, 2015
ADELAIDE, Australia — Syed Mirranay knew he had to be there for the match in the Adelaide Oval: Afghanistan against India, the world champion, as the two faced off in a warmup game before the Cricket World Cup.“The news from Afghanistan has always been about terror and war,” said Mirranay, a 30-year-old whose family moved from Afghanistan to Sydney when he was 3. “Suddenly we are playing in the World Cup. It feels like a dream.”As it prepares for its final match of the tournament against England on Friday, the Afghan team has done more than just inspire the expatriate fans who have loyally followed the team at its matches in Australia and New Zealand, which are co-hosting the tournament. Afghanistan has performed far beyond anything expected of a team making its first appearance at the sport’s biggest event.In just its third match, Afghanistan recorded its first victory when it beat Scotland Feb. 26. (Scotland has yet to win a World Cup match — and it is playing in its third World Cup overall.) In the match before that, Afghanistan pushed Sri Lanka, the 1996 champions and a two-time finalist. While it will not make the knockout round, Afghanistan could finish fifth in its group of seven teams.AdvertisementAfter five games, Afghanistan has the same number of points (2) as England, which invented the sport. If it defeats England in its final match — which is not beyond the realm of possibility — it would be a bittersweet twist, as the British Embassy in Kabul supplied the equipment during the early days of the fledgling Afghan national team.Advertisement“What fundamentally distinguishes Afghanistan from cricket’s new nations is their natural talent and self-belief,” said Tim Albone, author of “Out of the Ashes,” a book on the origins of Afghanistan cricket. “And there is no team they’d rather beat than the English.”Cricket is by far the biggest sport in nearby Pakistan, which won the World Cup in 1992, and India, which won in 1983 and 2011 and dominates the sport financially. Its popularity in Afghanistan is a relatively recent development and has its roots in the Taliban’s seizing of power in 1996. Refugees had been pouring into Pakistan’s northwestern province, which shares a culture and language with the eastern provinces of Afghanistan, ever since the Soviet invasion in 1979. After the Taliban took power, the exodus grew exponentially, and the number of Afghan refugees in Pakistan surpassed five million.The game began to attract the refugees in the shantytowns that dotted Peshawar, northwestern Pakistan’s largest city. When those refugees returned after the ouster of the Taliban in 2001, they carried the game back home. Mohammad Nabi, the captain of the Afghan national team, was one of them.In less than 15 years, Afghanistan has arrived at cricket’s biggest stage.Given its origins, Afghan cricket unsurprisingly has something of a street edge, similar to the game in Pakistan. As in Pakistan, the team’s best players and stars are its fast bowlers: Hamid Hassan, whose game-day attire features a miniature Afghan flag painted on each cheek and a headband featuring the red, green and black colors of his country, and Shapoor Zadran, whose flowing locks and raw aggression make him the epitome of Afghan exuberance. Both grew up as refugees in Peshawar.Their celebrations on the field have been as compelling as their looks and play. Hassan attempted a cartwheel after dismissing Kumar Sangakkara of Sri Lanka, the highest run scorer in the tournament. Zadran, after scoring the winning runs against Scotland, dropped his equipment and flew around like a soccer player who had just scored the decisive penalty in a shootout.Thanks in large part to their personalities and exuberance, Afghanistan has gathered more neutral fans than any other team at the tournament.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Pulling the strings at coach is Andy Moles, a 54-year-old who previously coached New Zealand. His desire and determination to be at the helm was a story in itself. Moles was invited to Kabul last August to work as a batting consultant for the team. A month later, Kabir Khan resigned as coach, and Moles was invited by the Afghanistan Cricket Board to take over.It was a no-brainer for Moles. His three-week stint as a batting consultant had already left him bewitched. “What struck me was the Afghans’ passion for the game and their willingness to learn,” he said.AdvertisementMoles’s family wasn’t as pleased. His brother, who works as a security consultant in Britain, warned him against the move. Anxiety roils the family every time Moles makes a trip to Kabul.His time in the capital is strictly regimented; he is either at his hotel or at the training fields. He never ventures out to town, and evenings are spent watching television in his hotel room. “I have room service, you know,” he said.Despite his cloistered existence in Afghanistan, Moles remains aware of cricket’s role as a uniting force in the country. In January, The Sydney Morning Herald described his role as “foiling Taliban.”The team has picked up fans along the way in Australia. “I had no interest in cricket,” said Ahmed Nabi Safi, a   28- year-old Afghan construction worker who took a day off in February to watch the warmup match against India. (India won by 153 runs.) “I never watched it, or cared about it, until I heard Afghanistan was coming to the World Cup.”But witnessing his fellow countrymen compete on the global stage, with Afghanistan scrawled across their green jerseys, left him inspired. “I have decided I want to prepare my children for cricket,” he said. “Life has given us a chance. All of us must give something for our country.”Before Afghanistan took on Australia in Perth on March 4 at the Cup, Moles described it as “a massive opportunity for us to make a mark.” Things didn’t turn out quite as planned. Australia plundered the Afghan bowling, racking up its highest run total at the tournament, 417. Afghanistan’s batting collapsed as it crashed to a 275-run defeat. The gulf between the four-time world champion and the World Cup’s newest team was just too great.That didn’t deter the exuberant Afghan fans in the stands, though. Blissfully oblivious to the situation on the field, they performed the attan, a traditional Pashtun dance, to the sound of drums. Chants of “AFG,” the popular abbreviation for the team, were sung through the day.“For these boys to get here is simply unbelievable,” said one fan, Ahmed Qais Dost, 28, who booked his tickets the moment online sales opened. “No matter what happens in this World Cup, we have already won.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.