AdvertisementSupported byOn College BasketballBy Harvey AratonHis parents met while playing for the Washington Generals, eternal foils of the Harlem Globetrotters, but this is no losers’ narrative, not by a long shot.Although the very existence of T. J. Cline might be attributed to his mother’s being a basketball superstar born a generation too soon, Nancy Lieberman would also admit that her bad timing and worse luck helped provide life’s greatest gift. That would be motherhood.“I was so single-minded — all I wanted to be was the best women’s basketball player in the world,” Lieberman, Cline’s mother, said. “But I didn’t get a Plan A in my life. I had to have a Plan B. And I did get T. J.”At the height of Lieberman’s Hall of Fame career, long before anyone had the commercial brainstorm of adding a W to N.B.A., women’s professional leagues came and went seemingly in the blink of an eye. Having played as a teenager in the 1976 Montreal Summer Games, she was primed to be an Olympic star — nicknamed Lady Magic — but the United States boycotted the 1980 Moscow Games. When the Games came to Los Angeles four years later, she had surrendered her then-required amateur status for the professional fling. But as John Lennon wrote during the years when Lieberman had on her basketball blinders, with a singular goal, “Life is what happens to you while you’re busy making other plans.” Looking for a game anywhere she could find one, she wound up with the ever-martyred Generals in 1987, and that was how she met Tim Cline, whom she married soon after. T. J. was born in 1994. On Friday, he will take the court as a big man for Richmond (19-12) in the quarterfinals of the Atlantic 10 tournament at Barclays Center in Brooklyn, the borough of his mother’s birth before she moved to Far Rockaway, Queens.“Being so focused on the postseason, I don’t really feel an attachment to playing there — though my mom is coming up for a game, and I know she’s excited,” Cline said in a telephone interview. He grew up tall in Plano, Tex., near Dallas, and is now listed on the Richmond roster as 6 feet 8 inches, the same as his father. A sports marketing executive who did not play college basketball, Tim Cline grew 6 inches between his junior and senior years of high school. T. J. had a 4-inch spurt that helped turn a junior varsity player at Plano West Senior High School into a Division I recruit at Niagara. “To that point, he kind of had skills more applicable as a guard,” Tim Cline said. “He was a pretty good shooter, had won a national free-throw shooting contest.” The business of college basketball intruded after a solid freshman season at Niagara, where T. J. was a teammate of Antoine Mason, son of Anthony. The coach, Joe Mihalich, left for Hofstra. “When he found out that Mihalich was leaving, he was devastated,” Tim Cline said. “But there’s another part of it. By transferring to Richmond and sitting out a year, he was able to work on his body, get a lot stronger. And now he’s part of a terrific program. It makes you believe that things do happen for a reason.”Crashing the starting lineup, Cline has averaged 11.2 points and 3.8 rebounds in about 23 minutes a game this season. Recently, with his team down by 2 in the dying seconds of overtime against nationally ranked Virginia Commonwealth, he cut to the basket on an out-of-bounds play for a layup. Richmond pulled off the upset in double overtime, and the heady maneuver made the television highlight rounds.“My phone blew up,” Lieberman said. She has long maintained a presence around the sport, on both sides of the gender line, fighting to stay active, relevant or at least not retired. Beyond the Generals, she played with men in the old United States Basketball League. She returned as a player at 39 to join the Phoenix Mercury of the newly introduced W.N.B.A. and again at 50 for a cameo run with the Detroit Shock, a team she coached.Maybe none of that would have been necessary had Lieberman had the kind of career pathway available to contemporary female stars, thanks in large part to pioneers like her. The pay may not be great in the W.N.B.A., but the work has been steady for almost two decades. And the most gifted and talented players can make plenty more overseas. In Lieberman’s time, Tim Cline said, “it probably wasn’t worth it to leave the country to make $30,000.” “So just to play and to keep her name out there, she signed up to play against the Globetrotters,” he continued. “It was just a show, but I guess you can say again that everything happens for a reason. If it had been a different time, we probably never meet and there is no T. J.”To that end, Lieberman knows her career misfortune was a personal blessing in disguise. She was at least spared a complex decision for a female athlete with earning potential.“To have children in your prime earning years, what you have to give up, at least for a while, is your body, and it’s your body that earns you the money,” she said. “Men can have it all. They don’t have to sacrifice their bodies and hope that it responds afterward.”Lieberman and Tim Cline divorced in 2001 but said they remained united in parenthood (Cline also has three children from a second marriage). In describing himself, T. J. said that he had his mother’s fire on the court but that “over all, I’m more like my dad, laid-back.” He was born into a basketball life, in tow on Lieberman’s road trips as a player and a coach in the W.N.B.A. and the N.B.A. Development League, and on her travels all over the map as a television analyst. Working in San Antonio during his early adolescence, she looked up to find her son rising to the basket in the Spurs’ layup line.“They told me I could,” he said when she raced to haul him away.Cline is not the first child of a well-known female basketball player to dribble across America’s television screens. JaVale McGee — the son of Pamela McGee, the second pick in the inaugural W.N.B.A. draft, in 1997 — was the first son of a former W.N.B.A. player to reach the N.B.A., in 2008.Without getting ahead of himself, Cline said he would not mind being the second player to make such a formidable leap. Challenges of having a child while still a professional aside, there figure to be more progeny of female stars drawn into the life, the way it has long been for men.If that doesn’t happen, he can pursue a marketing major, because his father’s sports marketing work interests him, too. Either way, he said, he’d consider it a no-lose proposition — far from his parents’ joint experience with the Generals.Advertisement