AdvertisementSupported byBy Karen CrouseINDIAN WELLS, Calif. — Serena Williams was conspicuously absent from the BNP Paribas Open for 13 years, so she could be forgiven for lingering in her return. Making her first appearance at the tournament since the 2001 final, Williams, the world No. 1, defeated Monica Niculescu, 7-5, 7-5, in 2 hours 3 minutes in front of fans so firmly behind her, their cheers were like a wind at her back.Williams had 13 aces, converted 5 of 10 break opportunities and sealed the victory on her fourth match point. She said afterward that the warm welcome was “overwhelming” and added that she was glad to be back to “create new memories.”It was the first meeting between Williams, who won her 19th major singles title at this year’s Australian Open, and the 27-year-old Niculescu. Williams, 33, started tentatively, producing a few second serves that registered in the 70s, which is the equivalent of an underhand toss for the owner of one of the fastest serves in the women’s game. Niculescu, ranked 68th, won the first two games and took Williams to deuce seven times in her second service game before Williams held. Williams needed an hour, but after she passed Niculescu with a backhand to secure the first set, the fans erupted in cheers.A few hours before Williams arrived for the match, a crowd began forming behind a railing several yards inside the entrance. Some of the fans were indiscriminate autograph seekers, hoping to catch whoever happened to stop before a match or after practice. Others, like the man holding up the sign for the television cameras that read, “Welcome Back, Serena,” had a carefully considered strategy.  So did Ryan Frampton, a junior tennis player from Montana, who wriggled his way to a spot directly behind the railing at 3:30 p.m., three and a half hours before the scheduled start of Williams’s match on Stadium 1. Around his neck, Frampton wore a lanyard that contained a ticket for the night session on that court. He was excited to see Williams play, but more excited at the prospect of flagging her down to sign a page in the black notebook he dug out of his backpack whenever a player he recognized came into view. Frampton, 12, had not been born the last time Williams played in this tournament. But he perhaps understood the situation that led to her boycott better than people three times his age.At junior events in Montana, Frampton said, he occasionally faces the most difficult draw of all when he is matched against his brother, Luke, who is two years younger. “I don’t like it, to be quite honest,” Frampton said.Their father, he said, likes it even less. And so, Frampton said, he and his brother take turns defaulting when they have to face each other. Was Frampton aware that a similar situation indirectly led fans to boo Williams, her older sister Venus and their father, Richard, at the 2001 event?The angry spectators suspected that the Williams family patriarch had encouraged Venus to default her semifinal match against her sister shortly before its scheduled start. They did not believe Venus’s explanation that she had tendinitis in her knee. The crowd reaction during the Indian Wells final, which Richard Williams said included racial slurs, prompted both sisters to boycott the tournament until Serena decided to play this year.Frampton nodded. He was familiar with the story. He said he saw snippets of Williams’s 4-6, 6-4, 6-2 victory against Kim Clijsters in the 2001 final here in a documentary on the Williamses that he said he found last year on YouTube.“You could hear the booing,” he said. “It was horrible.”On the court that day, Williams could hear the booing, too. She made that plain during the trophy presentation when she said, “You guys were pretty rough on me, but I love you anyway.”On Friday, when Williams returned to the court for the first time in match conditions, she received the opposite reception. As she emerged from the tunnel into the night lights, she slid her headphones around her neck in time to hear sustained applause from the crowd, which gave her a one-minute standing ovation. An African-American girl held aloft a sign that read, “Straight Outta Compton,” where the Williamses lived in California when they were her age.“It was overwhelming walking out here and everyone cheering,” Williams said.During the coin toss, the giant scoreboard camera zoomed in to show a close-up of Williams, who looked nervous. In a way, Williams was as much the defending champion as Flavia Pennetta — both won the last match they had played in the tournament.Earlier in the day, two ball girls spoke excitedly about having the chance to see Williams up close. The WTA Tour used to have regular stops in San Diego and Los Angeles, but they have pulled up stakes. In the years Williams boycotted this tournament, she played five tournaments in Southern California, including four in Los Angeles, near where she spent her childhood.One of the ball girls, Katie Tavasoli, a 14-year-old from Thousand Oaks, in Ventura County northwest of Los Angeles, said Williams was her favorite player. Why?“She’s confident,” Tavasoli said. “She doesn’t care about what people think of her.”By choosing to return to this tournament, Williams was effectively asserting her independence from her father and her sister Venus, who stayed away. With every swing she made Friday, Williams sent a strong message that she was her own person, no matter what the people closest to her thought.Advertisement