AdvertisementSupported byBy Tom PedullaBrandon Marshall hopes to make the Jets the fourth and final stop of a career marked by a surprising amount of movement for a wide receiver of his caliber.“Being a one-hit wonder or a rental definitely affects you emotionally,” he said Friday. “I don’t want to go through that again.”Marshall, 30, may well be on a one-year trial with the Jets. They acquired him from the Chicago Bears in exchange for a fifth-round draft choice last Friday in what amounted to a fire sale for a wideout who has been to the Pro Bowl five times. He is owed $24.3 million, including $7.7 million this season, over the final three years of his contract. But the last two years are not guaranteed, providing the Jets with an easy exit if they sour on Marshall the way three previous teams did.Marshall said that he was more mature now than when he broke in with the Denver Broncos in 2006 as a little-known fourth-round draft choice from Central Florida who quickly attained stardom. “I didn’t cope and deal the right way with things my first couple of years,” he said, admitting that he “got kicked out of Denver.”Denver traded him to the Miami Dolphins in 2010. He spent two years in Miami before he was sent on to Chicago. He spent the last three years with the Bears and developed a strong relationship with the quarterback Jay Cutler, who has come to be viewed as a polarizing figure within that organization. Marshall said he and Cutler treated each other as if they were brothers.During his time in Miami, Marshall also developed an admiration for Todd Bowles, then an assistant with the Dolphins and now in his first year as the Jets’ coach. “He’s a man’s man,” Marshall said, adding, “We had a great rapport, and I’m looking forward to building on that.”Marshall has said he has borderline personality disorder; his charitable efforts in recent years have revolved around mental health. Marshall has been arrested twice in domestic abuse episodes, but charges were dropped in both cases.Marshall has the potential to end the Jets’ search for a premier wide receiver if he rebounds from last season. He was slowed by injuries and finished with 61 catches — his fewest since his rookie year in Denver — 721 yards receiving and 8 touchdowns. His streak of 1,000-yard seasons ended at seven. Simply by his game-changing presence on the field, Marshall should ease defensive pressure on fellow receivers Eric Decker and Jeremy Kerley as the Jets learn a new offense under the first-year coordinator Chan Gailey. “I do believe there is going to be a big piece of the offense for me,” he said. “But if you look at Coach Gailey’s history, he does a great job of getting matchups. Everyone gets the ball and everyone eats, so I’m excited about that.”In another development Friday, the Jets officially signed Marcus Gilchrist, a free-agent safety, to a four-year deal. Gilchrist, 26, had been with the San Diego Chargers, breaking in as a cornerback before making the transition to safety two years ago. He will be paired with Calvin Pryor, the team’s first-round draft choice last year.Advertisement