By ZACH SCHONBRUN and BRENDAN PRUNTYMARCH 13, 2015
There was disconsolation in the Providence locker room, and frustration, and certainly a little simmering anger, and then there was Kris Dunn, who seemed to wipe away the dejection of a 2-point loss like sweat from his brow.“That was the type of game people came to watch,” Dunn said.The hint of a smile crossed his face when he mentioned that this was Carmelo Anthony’s home court, Madison Square Garden, and Dunn’s performance almost certainly would have drawn a compliment from any N.B.A. starter. After a sensational 38 minutes, he ended just shy of recording only the second triple-double in Big East tournament history. His 22 points, 9 assists, 7 rebounds and 2 steals were memorable nonetheless.But they came in a loss to Villanova, the top seed, after a difficult foul call in the closing seconds allowed Ryan Arcidiacono to score the go-ahead points at the free-throw line. A desperation heave by LaDontae Henton went long, and the Wildcats survived, 63-61, to reach the Big East tournament final for the first time since 1997. “I think that was the Big East championship game right there,” the freshman center Ben Bentil said, overlooking the Saturday night title matchup between Villanova and Xavier.It was Bentil who committed the blocking foul on Arcidiacono with 2.4 seconds left, although he said afterward that he disagreed with the call. His coach, Ed Cooley, and most of the Providence bench seemed to echo that sentiment, heading into the locker room in a huff as the buzzer sounded.Advertisement“I think I played the right defense; I was in the right spot,” Bentil said. “The call didn’t go my way.”AdvertisementProvidence trailed by 61-56 with just over a minute remaining, and the Friars were giving up points at the free-throw line. But with 16 seconds left, Dunn scorched through the paint for a lay-in to cut the lead to 2, and the subsequent inbounds pass was stolen by Bentil, who got the ball to Dunn under the basket for the tying layup.In the timeout after that play, Villanova Coach Jay Wright said, his team was not panicking.“Not this group,” Wright said. “They’re more calm than I am.”Villanova started 1 of 6 from 3-point range, but in a flourish toward the end of the first half, the Wildcats put in three in a row, stretching a 20-17 lead to 31-20.Again, for the second consecutive game, Josh Hart acted as the focal point, scoring 10 points off the bench in the first half.After picking up two early fouls, Dunn almost single-handedly kept Providence in the game, scoring 11 points with 5 rebounds, 4 assists and 2 steals in the half and closing the gap to 33-28 with a steal and an acrobatic basket with 56 seconds remaining.“He is big time,” Wright said. “I would say he’s the toughest guy we’ve guarded in pick-and-roll defense.”An 11-1 Wildcats run made the score 47-34 with less than 14 minutes remaining. Providence stretched out its defense, and even played a lot of zone, but it was hard to contain Villanova’s scorers. The Friars also had difficulty getting a consistent handle on Daniel Ochefu, Villanova’s active and agile 6-foot-11 center, who scored 15 points with 13 rebounds.AdvertisementBut Providence is a gritty, relentless group. Last year, the Friars were willed to a title here — and to an automatic N.C.A.A. tournament bid — on the shoulders of the frenetic senior point guard Bryce Cotton.On Friday, Dunn filled that role, but in an almost entirely different way, silky smooth and astoundingly athletic, a Kobe Bryant to Cotton’s Allen Iverson. Dunn’s ability to break down the defense with his dribbling was certainly Cottonesque, and his beautiful pass to Bentil for a dunk brought the Friars to 47-44 down with 8:52 left.The score was 56-53 as the clock dipped below three minutes, and Villanova had missed its last four shots from the field until a 3-pointer by Hart ended the Wildcats’ scoring drought.Providence switched into a matchup-zone defense, focusing on Darrun Hilliard in the middle of the paint, but he spun around and drained a jumper over Dunn to push the Wildcats’ advantage to five points with 1:06 remaining.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“It was a great defensive scheme, they just made some key shots,” Dunn said.Pittsburgh’s Ricardo Greer scored 23 points with 12 rebounds and 10 assists in 1998, recording the tournament’s only triple-double. Dunn came close to matching it in his second career Big East tournament game.“He’s the best player in the league,” Cooley said. “I don’t think it’s a close second to his overall talent.”XAVIER HOLDS OFF GEORGETOWN One year ago, Xavier was a newcomer to the Big East, an established program trying to find its way in a new conference, with new opponents and new styles of play. One year later, the Musketeers seem to have adjusted. Now they hope their learning process will result in a championship.“We didn’t come here to beat Butler,” Xavier guard Dee Davis said. “We didn’t come here to beat Georgetown. We came here to win a Big East championship.”Xavier will have that chance on Saturday night by virtue of its 65-63 escape against No. 23 Georgetown in the tournament semifinals. But getting to its first championship game as a league member did not come easily — although for the first 33 minutes, that seemed likely. Ahead by as many as 21 points in the second half, Xavier watched, seemingly helpless, as Georgetown chipped away at its lead.AdvertisementThe Hoyas appeared headed for another early exit from the tournament until one technical foul.The tenor of the game changed after a technical was called against Musketeers forward Jalen Reynolds. While going for a loose-ball rebound under the Georgetown basket, Reynolds and Hoyas forward Jabril Trawick got tangled up, and then they got physical.Reynolds pushed Trawick to the floor, an action that drew a technical and a personal foul.It gave the Hoyas four free throws — they made three — and possession of the ball, which they used to add 2 more points, on an Isaac Copeland jump shot. Suddenly a 20-point lead with 7:53 to play became a 15-point margin, and the Hoyas had hope.“It certainly changed the game,” Xavier Coach Chris Mack said.From that moment, Georgetown, the tournament’s No. 2 seed, sensed an opening and began applying pressure. Seemingly cruising to Saturday’s championship game against Villanova, Xavier suddenly could not make a basket.In an attempt to extend the game, the Hoyas began fouling the sixth-seeded Musketeers. Xavier, which went 5 for 7 from the free-throw line in the first half, missed 10 of its 24 free throws in the second half, allowing the Hoyas to creep closer.Still, the Musketeers managed to not completely lose their focus.“We just wanted to make sure that we kept our team calm,” said Xavier center Matt Stainbrook, who led all scorers with 20 points. “"We were in control. And although we didn’t have the best leadership by us — it’s something we’re working on — I think we were able to handle it.”BRENDAN PRUNTYA version of this article appears in print on March 14, 2015, on Page D4 of the New York edition with the headline: Disputed Foul Helps Villanova Reach League Final, Ending Drought.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.