AdvertisementSupported byBy Leander SchaerlaeckensA few players at a time, New York City F.C. trickled into Yankee Stadium, which was receiving a power wash and a good scrub on Friday afternoon. Two days ahead of the home opener for N.Y.C.F.C., one of Major League Soccer’s two new teams, nearly all the players were getting their first peek at the club’s home for the next three seasons — and perhaps longer. Down on the field, about two dozen men laid the final pieces of sod over the infield and parts of the warning track. They raked it and fussed over it, dropping to their hands and knees at times, and took particular care with the seams where the strips of temporary grass covering the basepaths met the permanent stuff. There was no pitching mound, nor any backstop netting, nor any sign of the Yankees themselves, who will not play here until early April. Until then the ballpark will be a soccer stadium, so on Friday the stadium’s digital signage and its towering scoreboard in center field displayed the logo of N.Y.C.F.C. and the words “Welcome to the club.” In something of a marriage of convenience, N.Y.C.F.C. will couch-crash with the Yankees, who are minority owners of the team, until a suitable spot is found and their own stadium is built. For the short (and possibly long) term — no announcement of a deal for a soccer-specific venue appears imminent — Yankee Stadium will unfurl a soccer field every few weeks, fitting it from first base to the left-field wall. The time share between a soccer team, which will slide and tackle and crash about the grass, and a baseball team, which prefers its playing surface as smooth as a pool table, is causing some angst. Fans and Yankees players have grumbled about the arrangement, though it has gone off without a hitch for annual midsummer soccer exhibitions in recent years. (Concerts do far more damage to the playing surface, according to Yankees players and officials.)The clubs insist the damage and the disruption will be manageable, though at this point they have little choice: The conversion, which takes several days, will happen at least 17 times, given that the Major League Baseball season falls within the March-to-October calendar of the 34-game M.L.S. regular season.In an attempt to make the stadium feel like a home during this lengthy stay, N.Y.C.F.C. has sought to personalize it wherever possible. The visiting baseball clubhouse will be the soccer team’s base for its home games, and on Friday, team officials added light blue touches before the players arrived. A circular rug with the N.Y.C.F.C. logo emblazoned on it had been placed atop the drab permanent carpet, and an employee from the team’s parent club, Manchester City of England’s Premier League, arrived early to tuck commemorative shirts, scarves and hats into lockers that still awaited the players’ nameplates. For many of them, including midfielder Mix Diskerud, who grew up in Norway, Friday’s glimpse of the locker room and the field would be their first.“We’re fortunate, because the Yankees are part of N.Y.C.F.C., so we feel that there is a bit of a home for us here as well,” the team’s sporting director, Claudio Reyna, said. “Every situation where you’re ground-sharing is a bit different. There’s different factors — you don’t have your own locker room. Here it’s been totally different; we feel really welcome.”Reyna and Coach Jason Kreis understand the value of putting the players at ease. Both played in M.L.S. during the league’s formative years, but neither ever got to play for a club with the type of soccer-specific stadium now common in the league. Instead, they had to settle for football facilities. That experience was partly why, when he became manager of Real Salt Lake and the club moved into its own stadium, Kreis had the team’s colors and slogans plastered above the lockers. His new team has sold more than 15,000 season tickets, which places N.Y.C.F.C. behind only Seattle, Toronto and Portland among M.L.S. teams. And the team announced this week that it would open the entirety of the stadium’s seating for Sunday’s home opener, creating room for about 45,000 fans. (As of Friday, the team said, almost 40,000 tickets had been sold.) For a typical regular-season game, the upper deck will be closed, and capacity will be capped between 27,000 and 28,000 fans.“When we play, we want to make it feel and look as much as possible like N.Y.C.F.C.’s home,” Reyna said. “We want to, as a club with our team and our fans, make this a really difficult place to come play and win, and that’s the most important part of it.” The visiting team will use the auxiliary locker room, the third and last in the stadium. Still, when another baseball team comes to town, N.Y.C.F.C. will have to clear out of its temporary home. The Yankees’ locker room will remain off limits. “The clubhouse is the clubhouse; we got the next home locker room,” Reyna said before adding with a chuckle, “We got the next-best thing.”Advertisement