AdvertisementSupported byBy Tim CaseyFor most of Virginia Commonwealth University’s 70-67 victory over Richmond on Friday afternoon in the Atlantic 10 conference quarterfinals in Brooklyn, Briante Weber sat in a chair next to the V.C.U. bench and leaned against the scorers’ table. At times, Weber stood and cheered his teammates, but he made sure to exhibit caution. After all, he was wearing a brace on his right knee and had crutches by his side. He did not want to aggravate an injury that ended his college career but did not dampen his enthusiasm for the university or the basketball program.Still, Weber almost seemed ready to compete. He wore his game shorts, sneakers and a V.C.U. warm-up jacket. He also clutched a gold Rams towel. During some timeouts, using his crutches he walked over to the team’s huddle.After the game, Weber hung around the Barclays Center concourse speaking with his mother and other family members and posing for photographs with fans.“I’m definitely happy with the outcome,” Weber said. “I can’t help the team out, but I try to help with my voice. That’s all I can do right now is be another coach out there.”Instead of a cheerleader, Weber was supposed to be the catalyst for a team that seemed capable of making a deep run in the N.C.A.A. tournament before his injury.Late in the second half of a home loss to Richmond on Jan. 31, Weber jumped and made a pass. When he landed, he could not get off the court without help. He had torn the anterior cruciate ligament and the medial collateral ligament in his right knee. The Rams, ranked No. 14 at the time, lost their first Atlantic 10 game that night and fell to 17-4 over all.Weber, a 6-foot-2 senior point guard, had six steals in 26 minutes against Richmond and finished 12 steals shy of breaking the N.C.A.A. Division I record of 385 career steals, which is held by the former Providence guard John Linehan. Weber was leading the nation with 3.9 steals per game and was the key to the Rams’ full-court pressure defense, known as Havoc.Despite missing V.C.U.’s final 10 regular season games, Weber was named the Atlantic 10 defensive player of the year for the third consecutive season.“It was tough, but it’s bigger than me,” Weber said. “The season wasn’t over, so I had to make sure my team had their heads up.”The day after Weber’s injury, he met in his room with the sophomore JeQuan Lewis, who was replacing him as the starting point guard. They spoke for 30 minutes.“He was just telling me he’s here, but he’s not going to be on the court with me anymore,” Lewis said. “He needed me to mature and grow up a little bit and be the vocal leader that he knew I could be. I’ve taken pride in that because I look up to Briante like a big brother. He’s been there with me every step of the way.”With Weber out, the Rams have gone only 7-5, but four of their losses were close. They lost by 2 points to St. Bonaventure, by 4 points to Dayton and in double overtime against La Salle and Richmond. The only lopsided defeat occurred on March 5, when Davidson crushed V.C.U., 82-55. On Saturday, the No. 5-seeded Rams (24-9) have a chance to avenge that defeat when they face No. 1-seeded Davidson (24-6) in the semifinals. In Friday afternoon’s first quarterfinal, the Wildcats overcame a late 9-point deficit and defeated La Salle, 67-66, when Tyler Kalinoski made a shot at the buzzer.Weber has been with the team for most of the games since his injury, but he was not at the previous game against Davidson. He also missed the loss to Dayton.“I’m not blaming the games on that, but it definitely hurt not having him there in terms of his impact,” V.C.U. Coach Shaka Smart said. “He set the tone for our team as a player.”Smart added: “He thinks he’s better than everyone in the whole country. We don’t really have anyone else like that. He can rub off on the guys a little bit with that from the bench. Obviously it’s not the same as him being out there on the court.”During warm-ups on Friday, the V.C.U. players wore long-sleeve T-shirts with “#2’s Up” across the front, a nod to Weber’s uniform number and influence.After the sophomore guard Doug Brooks made a 3-pointer with 1:37 remaining to put V.C.U. ahead by 62-60, Weber stood, waved the towel and raised his arms in celebration toward the V.C.U. cheering section behind the Rams’ bench. It was the first lead for the Rams since early in the second half. V.C.U. never trailed again.Since Smart arrived in 2009, V.C.U. has become one of the nation’s most consistent programs. The Rams have made the N.C.A.A. tournament in each of the past four seasons. The streak began in 2011, when they became only the third No. 11 seed to reach the Final Four. V.C.U. has not advanced past the second round since then and lost in the first round to Stephen F. Austin last March.The Rams are projected to make the N.C.A.A. tournament again when the brackets are revealed on Sunday. They will play without Weber, but he will be there contributing as much as possible.“We’d love to have him on the court,” Smart said. “But we’re glad to have him as an assistant coach.”Advertisement