
Sports of The Times By                     
 JULIET MACUR
 
MARCH 13, 2015
GREENSBORO, N.C. — This wasn’t exactly the way Justin Anderson envisioned returning to the VirginiaCavaliers after a monthlong layoff with injuries.In the waning minutes of Friday night’s Atlantic Coast Conference basketball tournament semifinal, his team had fought back from a 13-point deficit against No. 19 North Carolina and was close to tying the game, or going ahead. Anderson was open when he caught the ball behind the 3-point line and aimed.At one point earlier in the season, before Anderson broke his left pinkie, then weeks later needed an emergency appendectomy, the shot would have met nothing but net. His basket might have led the Cavaliers to their second straight A.C.C. tournament final, and perhaps their second straight title. That was the way he had envisioned things unfolding at this tournament, where he rejoined the team after 32 days away from it.But now, in only his second game since early February, his shot met nothing but — air. As in air ball. Anderson didn’t come close to making the shot that once was nearly a given for him, the highflying swingman and the team’s leading scorer.Advertisement“I’m not blaming the tape on my finger, or my injuries, or anything, because I don’t like to make excuses,” he said afterward. “I wanted to win for my teammates so bad. Man, I just wanted to will the team to win, but it didn’t happen.”AdvertisementWhat did happen was that the No. 3 Cavaliers came out sluggish and suffered their second defeat in the past three games, falling to North Carolina, 71-67. Because of those recent losses, there’s a chance that Virginia also won’t be a No. 1 seed in the N.C.A.A. tournament.Virginia, a team that is usually well rounded and without a steady star scorer dominating the game, needed guard Malcolm Brogdon to score 18 points in the last eight and a half minutes to even have a chance against North Carolina.And that wasn’t enough.But the Cavaliers aren’t crushed — and they shouldn’t be — because it’s hard to keep them down, just as Anderson is hard to keep down.Anderson, a 6-foot-6 junior, bounced back from his appendectomy in less than a week, shooting and jogging two days after entering the hospital last week.“I think the only time I saw him down, ever, was a day after the surgery, but that’s only because he was on a whole bunch of drugs,” forward Anthony Gill said, referring to Anderson’s painkillers. Gill laughed, but he was serious.Now the Cavaliers have to take Anderson’s lead, and there’s a good chance that they will.Just look at how they reacted after Anderson broke his left pinkie last month. They didn’t falter; they just kept winning.The proof of their resiliency is that Virginia was 7-1 without Anderson, in a tough conference. The Cavaliers remained mostly at No. 2 or No. 3, tucked just behind unbeaten Kentucky. Lesser squads might have unraveled after losing their top scorer.AdvertisementFor Virginia, it was nothing more than a hiccup in the season, just as the team hopes its recent losses, which dropped them to 29-3, are just hiccups.CreditTony Bennett, the coach, for creating a system that can survive, and even thrive, without one of his top players. His guidance is surely one of the reasons his team will be among the deepest in the N.C.A.A. tournament this year and will most likely be a Final Four contender, despite looking shaky lately.This is how Bennett, the son of a coach who knew his way around the N.C.A.A. tournament, has planned it.“You show up as a freshman knowing that you’re not going to be the guy, because Coach makes it clear that no one is going to be the guy,” the junior center Mike Tobey said. “We’re all considered equal. That’s one big reason why this team works.”But it’s not a perfect plan, and can’t be when so many parts make up the machine, which is why the team faltered on Friday. For a team to have no star, every player must contribute, at least a little. And of course, Anderson can’t shoot air balls when his team needs him the most. He knows that, and will probably keep thinking about that, especially when watching the conference final on Saturday.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“That’s going to be painful watching the game, more painful than anything I’ve been through recently,” he said.He’ll get over it. As will his team. While Virginia might not be flashy, it is steady and old-school, and has the patience to right its ship.After what Anderson has been through in the past month or so, he’s not about to complain much about hardships, like losing to North Carolina. He got a glimpse of much worse in the hospital last week while walking the hallways.“I saw a lot of people who were more unfortunate than me,” he said. “So I thought: Oh, well, you mess up your finger; you move on. You need surgery on your appendix; you move on. That’s life. It’s not perfect.”A great lesson in perspective. If he ever forgets it this month, as the team faces much tougher tests than it did on Friday, he has three tiny scars on his belly and another on his pinkie to remind him.Email: juliet@nytimes.com A version of this article appears in print on March 14, 2015, on Page D5 of the New York edition with the headline: A Returning Star Falls, but It’s Hard to Keep Him Down.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »