By MARC TRACYMARCH 13, 2015
NASHVILLE —  Crowds swarmed through a light drizzle toward Bridgestone Arena, the site of the Southeastern Conference men’s basketball tournament.Some wore Arkansas cardinal and others South Carolina garnet. Some were clad in Tennessee orange, and a few, perhaps coming straight from campus about a mile away, wore Vanderbilt black.But a strikingly dominant majority of the fans on Thursday evening formed a sea of blue — Pantone 286, to be precise — signifying their allegiance to Kentucky, the top-ranked team in Division I men’s basketball, which is going for the first undefeated year at that level since 1976.Kentucky’s stark preponderance among the fans might have been only a little remarkable but for the fact that Kentucky was not even playing until Friday.Advertisement“They get money, take loans, and they go to the tournament because they can’t get in here,” said John Calipari, Kentucky’s coach, last week, referring to Rupp Arena, Kentucky’s home court in Lexington.On Thursday, at a news conference in Nashville, he added: “They’re nuts. But it makes them what they are.”Wherever the SEC tournament is, that land is annexed Wednesday to Sunday, a temporary exclave of Big Blue Nation.Part of the explanation for Wildcat fans arriving before their team lies in the tournament’s structure. Most tickets are bundled — one buys a “book” for several or all games. (The tournament was sold out by mid-November, according to its website.) The top four seeds receive double byes.Add it all up, and there were a lot of Kentucky fans with a lot of tickets to a lot of games that did not involve Kentucky.Advertisement“We don’t care,” said Tammy Kenny, 42, a Wildcat fan who came from southern Ohio, outside the arena Thursday. “We’re here to support them — we’re going to see them tomorrow.”Kentucky fans are driven both by fanaticism and by the law of supply and demand. Specifically, they demand to see the Wildcats in person, and the supply at Rupp Arena is too small.Kentucky’s home court fits more people — 23,500 — than Bridgestone Arena, the home of the National Hockey League’s Nashville Predators, which tops out for basketball games at 19,395.But because of season-ticket holders and a sizable student section, the effective number of tickets available for a Kentucky home game is much smaller. The Wildcats sold out all of their conference home games this year, according to their website, as well as their games against Texas and North Carolina. Through a spokesman, the head of Kentucky’s ticket office declined to be interviewed for this article.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Henry Duncan, 70, who sat on a stoop a block away from Bridgestone Arena on Thursday night, said, “There’s no tickets available at Rupp — unless you buy them on the street corner.”And that can be expensive. The average ticket to a Kentucky home game this season on the secondary market cost $130, said Connor Gregoire, a spokesman for the ticket search engine SeatGeek. That was second in the country to Duke’s $306, and Rupp Arena has two and a half times the capacity of Cameron Indoor Stadium. For conference home games, the price jumped to $163, Gregoire said.Not that the SEC tournament was cheap. According to Gregoire, a “full strip,” with tickets for all games, resold for an average of $916, much higher than more competitive tournaments like the Big 12 ($674) and the Big East ($671).But the SEC tournament may have been the wiser bargain. After forking over nearly $1,000, fans can watch as many as three Kentucky games — and 13 total games, if they like.Larry Noble, 43, said he was a Kentucky fan who nonetheless was attending all five days. “I’m a fan of the game,” he said.AdvertisementWhen Kentucky’s players took the floor for warm-ups before their Friday afternoon game against Florida — a 64-49 victory — the crowd cheered. When Aaron Harrison made a shot for the first points of the game, the crowd erupted. When Florida forward Chris Walker appeared to travel while scoring and the referees did not call it, the crowd booed.“It’s crazy,” said Dakari Johnson, a sophomore center, after the game. “We knew they were going to travel like this, though. This is the best fan base in America, so that’s no surprise.”According to StubHub, a plurality of sales by state for the final three rounds of the SEC tournament came from Kentucky.“When more tickets become available for the tournament at a neutral venue, especially on the secondary market, and it’s a short trip to Tennessee, fans jump at the opportunity,” said Alison Salcedo, StubHub’s head of consumer public relations.It’s true: It probably does not hurt that Nashville, in north-central Tennessee, is a little more than a three-hour drive from Lexington. The geography will stay relevant, as eight of the next 10 SEC men’s basketball tournaments are scheduled here.Wanda Thomas, 65, said that her home in Cadiz, Ky., was closer to Nashville than to Lexington.Then again, Thomas has also attended SEC tournaments in Atlanta and New Orleans.“Kentucky fans have got to follow them,” she said.A version of this article appears in print on March 14, 2015, on Page D5 of the New York edition with the headline: SEC Tournament Is Awash in a Sea of Kentucky Blue.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.