By RICHARD SANDOMIRMARCH 13, 2015
The discrimination accusations made last year by a former Mets executive portrayed the team and its chief operating officer, Jeff Wilpon, as intolerant of a pregnant, unmarried woman.In her federal lawsuit, against the team and Mr. Wilpon, Leigh Castergine, a former senior vice president for ticket sales, quoted Mr. Wilpon as saying, “When she gets a ring, she’ll make more money and get a bigger bonus.”After complaining about Mr. Wilpon to the team’s human resources department, she said, she was fired.The Mets denied her accusations and said she had been fired last August for “legitimate business reasons that have nothing whatsoever to do with her gender, marital status, pregnancy or leave.”AdvertisementNow, there will be no trial. The two sides said in a joint statement that they had agreed to “resolve” the case and later filed a court document saying they had jointly agreed to dismiss the case — a required filing that follows a private settlement. No terms were announced. Ms. Castergine had sought unspecified damages in her lawsuit and earnings denied her through “discriminatory and retaliatory treatment.”AdvertisementThe decision to jointly end the lawsuit differs from Madison Square Garden’s decision in 2006 to fight a sexual harassment and discrimination case filed against it and Isiah Thomas, the team’s president, by Anucha Browne Sanders, a senior marketing executive. The testimony at that trial was highly negative for the Garden. A jury verdict found for Ms. Browne Sanders; she settled for $11.5 million in damages.Anne C. Vladeck, who represents Ms. Castergine, was part of the legal team for Ms. Browne Sanders. She was unavailable for comment, as were the Mets.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In the statement, Ms. Castergine and the Mets said the lawsuit “has brought more attention to the workplace environment for women in sports and will result in the organization being more attentive to the important issues raised by women in sports.”Ms. Castergine was hired after the 2010 season and said in her lawsuit that she had modernized the team’s ticket-selling operation and received raises of $50,000 in 2010 and 2012 and $125,000 in 2013.As the senior vice president, she said, she “excelled” in the face of “extraordinary challenges,” most notably, the franchise’s failure to “field a winning team in six years, including 2014,” and “a series of public relations blunders.”She described a rise at the team that stopped when she announced her pregnancy. She claimed that Mr. Wilpon said he was “morally opposed” to having a baby without being married.In their response, the Mets said that Ms. Castergine had had conflicts with her immediate supervisor, Lou DePaoli, the team’s chief revenue officer, and other executives before her pregnancy was known. “DePaoli ultimately terminated plaintiff, despite the longstanding support that plaintiff received from Jeff Wilpon,” the team said.A version of this article appears in print on March 14, 2015, on Page D3 of the New York edition with the headline: Mets Resolve Suit With Executive They Fired When She Was Pregnant and Unmarried.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.