AdvertisementSupported byBy Tim RohanPORT ST. LUCIE, Fla. — The Mets decided years ago to build their team around elite young pitching, a strategy that carried some inherent risk. Strong and vibrant pitchers are lost to arm injuries every year, so general managers almost have to walk around with their fingers crossed, hoping for the best. The Mets are no exception. They essentially passed on the 2014 season when Matt Harvey sat out after Tommy John surgery. This year, his comeback is the biggest story of their spring training, but three other pitchers have injuries that will cause Mets fans to hold their breath.Zack Wheeler, whom the Mets consider nearly as important as Harvey, will miss his next start because of elbow tenderness and a blister on his index finger. Josh Edgin, the team’s top left-handed reliever, is considering Tommy John surgery. Vic Black, one of the team’s top setup men, is having his right shoulder examined. The Mets announced the news about Wheeler on Friday, and General Manager Sandy Alderson insisted that the injury was not serious. He said that Wheeler experienced the same thing at times last season, managed the problem, then had it examined over the off-season. The Mets seemed satisfied with the results, because Wheeler started the spring with no public restrictions.Alderson pointed out that Wheeler was spectacular in the second half of the 2014 season. Over his last 15 starts, he compiled a 2.80 E.R.A. and averaged more than a strikeout an inning. His fastball was among the fastest in the National League. “We don’t think it’s serious because it’s something that he’s experienced before,” Alderson said. “It’s sort of an intermittent issue that he has to manage. At this point, we don’t expect it’s going to be a major issue.”Alderson expected Wheeler to miss just one start.Black was sent Friday to have a magnetic resonance imaging test on his right shoulder. But Alderson did not seem too concerned about him, either, calling the test precautionary. Alderson indicated that the problem was tendinitis.Edgin’s injury appeared to be the most serious. The Mets previously said he had a stretched elbow ligament and was given a choice: Have Tommy John surgery and miss the season, or try to rehabilitate the injury. Before Edgin decides, he will get a second opinion from Dr. James Andrews, an orthopedic surgeon.Advertisement