By JOE LEMIREMARCH 13, 2015
As a youth hockey player in Boxford, Mass., Rangers forward Chris Kreider was always the fastest skater on his team. Even as he shot up to what he is today — a 6-foot-3, 226-pound menace — he has maintained his superlative speed.His teammate Carl Hagelin earned the title of the N.H.L.’s fastest skater in the skills competition during the 2012 All-Star weekend, and an article in October on the website PowerScout Hockey, which uses optical tracking cameras to log puck and player movement, indicated that Hagelin had logged the league’s fastest recorded speed, 23 miles per hour.But that small sample of games did not include Kreider, and the question of who is the fastest Ranger has been hotly debated since Kreider joined the team in 2012 after winning a national title at Boston College.“I might be, maybe, the quickest, but I don’t know on the full ice who’s faster,” Hagelin said.AdvertisementAsked who would win a race between them, Kreider said: “I don’t know. He’s pretty quick.”He paused, then pointed at himself and smiled.AdvertisementSpeed alone does not win hockey games, of course, but the Rangers have used it to produce one of the N.H.L.’s most dangerous offenses. The talent and tactics built around speed helped carry them to the Stanley Cup finals last season and have vaulted them into first place in the Eastern Conference this season, even as they weather the long absence of the injured goaltender Henrik Lundqvist.The Rangers are the N.H.L.’s second-highest-scoring team at even strength, netting 2.39 even-strength goals per game, with the best even-strength goal differential, at plus 45.“Our biggest strength when we’re playing really well is we play good defense, we transition quick and we’re a fast hockey team,” center Derek Stepan said.Take, for instance, the Rangers’ crucial third goal in a 3-1 victory over the Washington Capitals on Wednesday night. With Washington pressuring for the tying goal late in the third, Kreider anticipated a Capitals pass from point to point and charged ahead, intercepting the puck while accelerating. Neither Washington defenseman had a chance to catch him. Martin St. Louis joined him for a side-by-side rush up the center of the ice and scored on Kreider’s pass. The play took five seconds.The transition system was on display in producing a third-period goal against the Vancouver Canucks on Feb. 19, when the puck moved from Hagelin in the defensive face-off circle to Stepan in the neutral zone to St. Louis down the far wing and into the back of the net. The play lasted six seconds and included two passes, traversing the length and width of the rink.“I try to be pretty consistent with my lines so that the guys create a little bit of chemistry,” Coach Alain Vigneault said.Had the play not worked, the Canucks would have had to go the length of the ice, making that type of gamble worth it for the Rangers.AdvertisementPierre McGuire, an NBC hockey analyst, said he viewed the Rangers as a top-five or top-six team for pace and speed, a valuation that was unthinkable two years ago under John Tortorella, the coach at the time. But Vigneault has earned a reputation as an aggressive, offense-oriented strategist. It was not always that way, though.In 2006-7, his first season in Vancouver, the Canucks won the Northwest Division despite ranking in the bottom third of the league in goals.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“We did it on sheer defense and Luongo,” Vigneault said, referring to goaltender Roberto Luongo.After the Canucks failed to make the playoffs the next year, ownership hired a new general manager, Mike Gillis, who urged Vigneault to make improving his offense a priority.“To his credit, Alain did a really good job becoming much more aggressive offensively and cultivating basically his own hockey style,” said McGuire, who was an assistant coach, as was Vigneault, for the Senators in 1995-96.Vigneault, who deflects credit as well as Lundqvist deflects pucks, noted that it was Gillis who had brought in new personnel.“That enhanced skill level permitted us to play a faster game, and that’s when we started to take off,” Vigneault said. “The system itself really didn’t change much.”Vigneault, who scored two goals in 42 career games as a defenseman with the St. Louis Blues in the early 1980s, emphasized playing hard at both ends: The transition game starts with a defensive stop and then a quick rush down the ice, turning the neutral zone into a blur. A key component is for the defensemen to pursue.“Some of them are rush goals, using our speed, and that’s because we’ve been able to break out clean,” said defenseman Ryan McDonagh, the Rangers’ captain. He added, “It’s helped our forwards being real close in support.”While Hagelin and Kreider are the Rangers’ fastest north-south skaters, Rick Nash, who is second in the league with 39 goals, is speedy with the puck, and several others have quick bursts.Advertisement“Their speed comes in a lot of different ways,” McGuire said. “It can be manifested through the neutral zone with just unbelievable passing skill and straight-ahead speed, or it can be in confined areas off the cycle,” with players like Derick Brassard and Mats Zuccarello.Maintaining such pace requires depth, and the Rangers use all four lines and emphasize short shifts. Hagelin said it was hard to keep his speed up once a shift extended to 42 to 45 seconds. When presented with that estimation, Stepan laughed and said, “I’m probably closer to 27 to 30.”The Rangers average the fourth-most shifts per game, according to Stats L.L.C., suggesting that they churn through their lines quickly.“No one wants to be out there when you’re tired,” Hagelin said. “If you try to limit your shifts to 40 seconds, you can do something good in every shift.”For the Rangers, that is the rule: Play hard and fast.A version of this article appears in print on March 14, 2015, on Page D7 of the New York edition with the headline: Speed Propels Rangers To Front of Pack in East.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.