
On Pro Basketball By                     
 HARVEY ARATON
 
MARCH 13, 2015
LOS ANGELES — For a voice of experience on how a very bad N.B.A. team can quickly be transformed into a formidable one, Byron Scott should be your man.Not Phil Jackson. Not Derek Fisher. Neither of the Knicks’ new leaders has ever been a part of a ground-up rebuilding in the way that Scott was as coach of the Nets when the team, with its architect Rod Thorn and newly acquired point guard Jason Kidd, doubled its victory total to 52 and made it to the N.B.A. finals in 2002.But Scott, who has since lived through three job changes and a whole lot of losing, seems to have forgotten all about it.“Turnarounds don’t happen overnight,” he said Thursday before the Lakers, now 17-47, lost to the Knicks (13-51) by 101-94 at Staples Center. “They take a few years, and everyone has to understand that.”AdvertisementThe tricky subject of reinvention was on most minds as the teams from the N.B.A.’s biggest markets met for the final time in a mutually lost season. For a meaningless game that actually benefited (for draft purposes) the losers, we could pretend it was an occasion because Jackson, president of the Knicks and longtime companion of the Lakers co-owner Jeanie Buss, attended; because Fisher won five titles here as Kobe Bryant’s sidekick; and because once upon a time — really, truly — the Knicks won two championships, defeating the Lakers in the finals each time.AdvertisementSince the Knicks’ second of those franchise high-water marks, in 1973, the Lakers have hung 10 banners, the last of which was in 2010, under Coach Jackson (whose mantra these days is, My triangle offense was title worthy a mere five years ago).As both teams are anticipating much salary-cap space over the next two seasons, the Knicks and the Lakers seem likely to be in competition for the very same free agents as they race for renewed relevance. Here is a breakdown of which team seems more capable of getting there first.PERSONNEL The combined payroll of the two teams for this season is about $157 million, yet one would be challenged to identify five players from the two active rosters as suitable role players on a serious contender.Each has an injured franchise player, though Bryant is six years older than Carmelo Anthony and has plans to retire — he would not guarantee it this week — after next season. But with a virtual blank slate (and assuming Bryant does quit in 2016) and cap space expected to soar throughout the league, that would seem to make the Lakers more appealing to the 2016 class of free agents, which could include Kevin Durant and LeBron James.From Wilt Chamberlain to Kareem Abdul-Jabbar to Shaquille O’Neal, Los Angeles has long been more of a draw for superstar free agents or for those angling for a trade than winter-weather-challenged New York. In some respects, it’s all about the beach.If the Lakers are positioned for a top-five pick in the June draft, they will not have to surrender it to Philadelphia.They will also have power forward Julius Randle returning next season after a broken leg ended his rookie year early. It’s hard to say what Randle will be, but Kentucky players have generally been very good at the N.B.A. level.AdvertisementThe Knicks, too, should land one of the top picks this summer, though in an interview with reporters Thursday, Jackson warned not to expect much from a rookie after a year of college ball.“We know what the first-round pick is going to mean to us,” he said, “but we also know we’re going to build our team with free agents.” When he added that he was hoping for a quick turnaround, he fueled immediate speculation that he might be interested in dealing the pick to accommodate Anthony’s ticking career clock.No harm in gauging the market, but if Jackson is banking on the Knicks’ curb appeal to land free agents, it is fair to wonder how attractive a tag-team partner Anthony will be next summer as he approaches his age-31 season, coming off knee surgery and with an unremarkable playoff history. And then there is the unknown component of how free agents will view fitting into a system not practiced anywhere else.All things considered, edge to Lakers.OWNERSHIP, MANAGEMENT AND COACHING Jim Buss has endeared himself to almost nobody besides Bryant since he assumed operating control of the Lakers after the death of his father, Jerry. However, he has a way to go and a lot more to spend before he challenges the track record of James L. Dolan during his Knicks reign of error as executive chairman of Madison Square Garden.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Buss also has, in Mitch Kupchak, a proven general manager, whose mentor in the front office was the great Jerry West.For all his fanfare, Jackson is a 69-year-old, 11-championship coach learning new tricks, and his first hire was another novice in Fisher.On his fourth N.B.A. head coaching job, Scott seems like a journeyman, but he has had success in New Jersey and New Orleans.Edge to Lakers.WORK ENVIRONMENT Sympathetic to Fisher, Scott said: “He’s in a tough situation, a tough city. I think the New York fans are just like our fans: They say they’re going to be patient, but they’re not.”The Knicks’ fan base has patiently waited and continued to fill the Garden through a decade and a half of mostly collapsing, much less rebuilding. And the cliché that New York is the most demanding market to play in because of its evil news media somehow fails to explain how the Yankees won five World Series in the Derek Jeter years and the Giants have claimed two Super Bowls since 2008.AdvertisementMight the better explanation for the “tough situation” be the organization’s toxic and destabilizing conditions over the past 15 years?Say this much for the renovated Garden: It is more elegant than the Staples Center, which, like many of the 1990s multiple-purpose buildings, has the feel of a giant space station. The Lakers do have Lawrence Tanter and his wonderful baritone voice as their public-address announcer — perhaps the last nonshouter in the N.B.A. — and what sensible star would not want his name regularly announced by him?His shrill Knicks counterpart, especially after an Anthony basket, sounds like a 12-year-old taunting his kid sister. It is unbecoming for the equivalent of basketball on Broadway. But much worse, in comparison with the Lakers, are those two lonely championship banners hanging in the rafters. Look up at Staples Center and you will see the 11 banners the Lakers have hung since moving here from Minneapolis in 1960.“You’re talking about two very proud organizations, so I don’t expect it to last too much longer, either,” Scott said of the Lakers’ and Knicks’ positions at the bottoms of their divisions.Both teams are well on their way to the worst records in franchise history (for the Lakers, in Los Angeles), but the Knicks’ championship pride has also been dormant for more than four decades. Does past have to be prelude? Not necessarily. But if it comes down to which franchise has the better drawing power for the stars, how can we argue against Hollywood?Overall edge to Lakers.A version of this article appears in print on March 14, 2015, on Page D1 of the New York edition with the headline: Facing Steep Climb, Lakers Are Rungs Ahead of the Knicks.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »