By TIM ROHANMARCH 13, 2015
PORT ST. LUCIE, Fla. —  When batting practice ended on Tuesday morning, Ruben Tejada stuck around the field for extra work. Kevin Long, the Mets’ new hitting coach, wanted him to try a new drill that Long had developed.Long placed a tall net beside home plate, across from Tejada, a right-handed hitter, to form a wall parallel to him. He instructed Tejada to stand in the box and measure the distance to the net; he had to be exactly a bat’s length away.Long explained that he would toss Tejada a pitch, underhand, on the inner part of the plate. He wanted Tejada to focus on his stance and on keeping his swing tight to his body. If his hands drifted too far out, his bat would hit the net. Long usually reminds players that it is a pull drill; it is useless trying to hit the ball the other way.Tejada took his place in the box, and Long started tossing. Tejada roped one line drive after another down the left-field line. A few went over the fence. Long did not give Tejada much more instruction. He just kept tossing pitches.Advertisement“Look at how true that ball flies!” Long shouted. “Perfect!”Long calls the exercise the net drill, and it is an essential part of his coaching. For one, it gives players confidence that they can hit the inside pitch. It also forces them to keep their hands in tight, and with tighter swings, they can produce more force and bat speed. Long says the drill gives players their most explosive swings.AdvertisementBut it is not a drill he uses every day or with every player. He uses it as a corrective, when a player’s swing looks off or his hands start drifting. To Long, the beauty of the drill is that he does not have to say much. The player senses the net, takes a few swings and can correct his action himself, in just one session.“The drill really takes care of itself,” Long said. “They’re like, ‘Wow, there it is.’ ”Before the net drill, players would stand next to fences and take swings in the air to correct their strokes. In the early 2000s, when Long was coaching the Class AA Wichita Wranglers, the manager, Keith Bodie, suggested that they put a net next to the plate, to act as the fence, and toss balls to the players to see real-time results.Players fell in love with the exercise. They started calling it the home run drill, for all the homers they hit doing it. Long swore by its effectiveness and used the drill for years in the minors and throughout his eight-year tenure as the Yankees’ hitting coach.Perhaps no player loved the drill more than Robinson Cano did. Long said that when he started coaching Cano, he had trouble hitting the inside pitch. The drill helped fix that, and it became something Cano sought out.After hitting a home run in a game, Cano would ask Long to do the drill the next day. Then he would hit another home run.“We’re doing it again,” Cano would tell Long, somewhat sternly.Once, Long said, they ran the drill four days in a row.AdvertisementThe drill is not for everyone, though. Derek Jeter, for instance, hit to the opposite field so often and so well, Long said, that his drill would not have helped much.Only a few Mets players have tried the drill so far. Long is still getting to know the players and their swings, and he is introducing it slowly. He spent his off-season studying hours of footage on each Met, breaking down areas for improvement, taking notes. He watched some players’ footage two, three, four times.It helps Long’s cause that he is a bit of a celebrity. He has helped a team win a World Series. He used his drills on star Yankees, including Cano and Mark Teixeira. Alex Rodriguez posed for the cover of his book.“He’s one of the best at his job in the league,” the Mets’ David Wright said of Long. “He commands respect from Day 1. He’s an attention grabber. As hitters, we tend to gravitate toward him because he’s worked with some of the best players in the game.”The Mets already have Long working on a few projects.The team wants Juan Lagares to increase his plate discipline and potentially be the leadoff hitter, so Long has him doing vision drills. In one drill, the numbers 1 to 7 are written on a set of baseballs, which are then pitched to Lagares. He is instructed to swing at only Nos. 5 and 6 as a way to learn how to track pitches.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Mets also want Lucas Duda to hit better against left-handed pitchers. Long, who is left-handed, can throw Duda batting practice and soft toss, challenging him with different arm angles. The more pitches Duda tracks from the left side and the more angles he sees, Long said, the more comfortable he will be.Those drills worked for another left-handed batter, Curtis Granderson.When the Yankees traded for Granderson before the 2010 season, he had a reputation for struggling against left-handed pitchers. Long threw Granderson batting practice, fixed his mechanics and pushed for him to play more against lefties to put their work to the test.Then, whenever Granderson’s swing looked off, Long had him complete the net drill. In 2011 and 2012, Granderson hit a combined 84 home runs, the most in the majors in that period. Thirty of those homers were against left-handed pitchers.The Mets signed Granderson and expected some of that power to carry over. But he started last season slowly. A few times during the year, when his swing felt off, he set up the drill without Long and asked whichever coach was available to toss baseballs to him. When the Mets hired Long in the off-season, they knew Granderson would benefit.After years of working together, Long and Granderson have become close friends. Granderson may be the best example of the impact Long can have. Whenever Granderson’s father, Curtis Sr., sees Long, he reminds him, “You know you’re still welcome for Thanksgiving.”A version of this article appears in print on March 14, 2015, on Page D3 of the New York edition with the headline: Mets Hitters and New Coach Start to Mesh, With Help From a Net.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.