AdvertisementSupported bySpecial Report: Rolex Australian Grand PrixBy Brad SpurgeonIn 1994, one of the most dramatic and controversial seasons in Formula One history ended with a race that was equally dramatic and controversial. The Australian Grand Prix at Adelaide that year was the series’s first title-deciding, final-race showdown in eight years, and 21 years later it continues to divide opinion. Early in that 1994 season, Roland Ratzenberger and Ayrton Senna had died at the third race, the San Marino Grand Prix in Imola, Italy, the first driver deaths at a Grand Prix since 1982. Senna, a Brazilian, was Formula One’s biggest star at the time, a three-time world champion who was favored to win a fourth title that season.But his Williams had aerodynamic problems as the season began, and it was Benetton’s Michael Schumacher who won the first two races, with Senna failing to score any points. Then at Imola, the Brazilian crashed and died at the age of 34; Schumacher won the race. At the next race, in Monaco, Schumacher dominated again. It looked like the young German, who had joined the series in 1991, won his first race the following year and then another in 1993, would clinch the title midway through the season without any competition. But then he and his team began to face a barrage of penalties from the International Automobile Federation for various — sometimes innocuous — rules infractions. In all, Schumacher was disqualified or suspended from four of the 16 races. The British driver Damon Hill had been thrust into the leading role at Williams after Senna’s death. He delivered when it was needed, winning six races, including ones from which Schumacher had been disqualified. He was just one point behind the German for the lead of the championship heading into the final race, with a car that was performing better. Not only most of Britain was rooting for him, but fans of the Williams team, which had been through such a tragic year, were also hoping he would win. Hill was on edge. Having been hired as the team’s second driver, his salary reflected that status, and before the race he had said he wasn’t motivated to drive hard “for the sort of money you pay someone with no experience.”For the first time since Senna died, he was beaten in qualification by his teammate, Nigel Mansell, who at 41 had returned from IndyCar racing to drive in a few races and now scored pole position. Schumacher was on edge as well. During the Friday qualifying, he had crashed chasing Mansell’s provisional pole. He ended up qualifying second; Hill was third. At the start of the race, Mansell spun his wheels, and Schumacher immediately took the lead, while Hill slotted into second position behind him. The two fought it out through almost the first half of the 81-lap race, with Hill pressuring Schumacher throughout. On Lap 36, Hill had dropped back slightly as he passed a straggler, while Schumacher, pushing the car hard at Turn 5, lost control slightly and went off the track, hitting the wall.“I got caught out on a bump when the car stepped out and went sideways, and I caught it,” Schumacher said later. “Then I went over the grass and touched the wall, but continued.”Hill had not seen what had happened, and so wasn’t aware that Schumacher had potentially damaged his car. When he suddenly found the German going slowly, he decided it might be his only chance to pass him and took the inside line into the next corner. But Schumacher then turned in, and their cars collided. The Benetton was launched up in the air sideways, and almost flipped, sending Schumacher out of the race. Hill continued slowly, but his front suspension was bent. He made a long pit stop. If the team took the time to replace the suspension, it would be impossible for him to finish in the points.“I saw the opportunity and thought I had to go for it, but it didn’t happen,” Hill said later of his move on the corner. “In retrospect, I would have let him go.”Schumacher maintained that his own turn inside was a normal racing incident. Hill decided to keep quiet, but his team maintained that Schumacher had hit Hill on purpose.“We at Williams were already 100 percent certain that Michael was guilty of foul play,” Patrick Head, the team’s technical director, told F1 Racing magazine in 2006. “He was about to drive his stricken Benetton up the slip-road when he spotted Damon’s Williams about to pass him and abruptly veered across the track to prevent that happening.”The F.I.A. race stewards examined the accident from various camera angles and decided not to penalize Schumacher. Williams, after such a difficult year with the loss of Senna, chose not to file a protest. And while they had lost the drivers’ title, they nevertheless won the constructors’ title, thanks to Mansell winning the race. Hill finally won the title in 1996. And in 1997, at the season-ending showdown with Jacques Villeneuve in a Williams, when Schumacher, now in a Ferrari, again led the series by a single point, the German again ran into his challenger. But Villeneuve continued to the end and won the title, while Schumacher was judged guilty and disqualified retrospectively from the championship. Advertisement