AdvertisementSupported bySpecial Report: Rolex Australian Grand PrixBy Brad SpurgeonAs the 2015 Formula One season begins this weekend with the 20th edition of the Rolex Australian Grand Prix in Melbourne — and the 30th in Australia, since it began in 1985 in Adelaide — the series continues to expand its global presence.This season, Formula One has race dates on every continent except Africa (and Antarctica), regardless of politics or popular opinion with only a twofold goal in mind: The series seeks to live up to its name as a world championship, while continuing to enhance the financial benefits for its owners and the 10 teams that provide the show.“As a business it has gone where the money is and shunned where the money isn’t,” writes Mark Gallagher, who has worked in Formula One in various capacities for 30 years, in his book “The Business of Winning,” published last year. “The internal customers of the sport, the sponsors, the brands that require a return on investment as never before, have also demanded more events, new markets and fresh audiences.”Last year’s new market was Russia, with an inaugural Grand Prix in Sochi added to the calendar. This season the series adds Mexico, where it has not raced since 1992. There are now four Grands Prix in the Americas, four in Asia, two in the Middle East, seven in Western Europe, two in Eastern Europe and one in Australia.But since the acceleration of Formula One’s worldwide expansion began a decade ago, so-called racing purists have bemoaned the loss of traditional tracks in countries where the series has deep historic roots and fan bases. A close look shows, however, that since its founding in 1950 the elite racing series has had a tradition of expanding to new countries, and in the process it has dropped almost none of the so-called traditional venues.Over all, only 31 countries have ever hosted a Grand Prix. This season there will be 20 races for only the second time. (The other 20-race season was 2012.) The 11 Grands Prix that have been dropped, at least for now, are Argentina, France, India, Morocco, the Netherlands, Portugal, South Africa, South Korea, Sweden, Switzerland and Turkey. There is often talk of a return for France, India, South Africa and South Korea, and maybe Portugal, but only France — where Grand Prix racing was born early last century and where 59 Formula One races have been run, the last in 2008 — can be called a mainstay.More potential host countries are being considered, including Azerbaijan and Qatar. A race in Africa remains perhaps the most glaring absence.Australia, although not geographically in the series’s West European cradle, is very much a traditional Formula One country, its race having existed through nearly half of the sport’s history. Malaysia, which has staged races every year since 1999, is rarely considered a traditional country, even though its total of 18 races places it 18th in the all-time list and 14th among the countries on the 2015 calendar. This may be the last race for Malaysia, though, as it is weighing whether to renew its contract with Formula One.Belgium, Britain, Italy and Monaco are the only races on the calendar this season that were also part of the first Formula One season, in 1950. There were just seven races that year, including the Indianapolis 500, which counted for the championship.Throughout the following three decades, new races were added (sometimes dropped) including some that are still present today: Australia, Austria, Brazil, Canada, Germany, Japan, Mexico, Spain and the United States. In 1986, a year after Australia joined, Hungary provided the series with its first race in what was still the Soviet bloc.No other new country joined until the Malaysian Grand Prix was added in 1999. There then followed a vast, global expansion unparalleled in the history of the series, with races added in China in 2004, Turkey in 2005, Singapore in 2008, Abu Dhabi in 2009, South Korea in 2010, India in 2011, a return to the United States in 2012, and Russia last year.“Each new territory brings with it multiple benefits,” Gallagher wrote. “New audiences, more media, potential new sponsors from among the domestic, regional and global brands and the increased prestige that comes with the cumulative effect of racing in the largest economies combined with the most important developing ones.”The Australian Grand Prix is one of the sport’s most popular races. Despite having paid its highest amount ever in public funding for the 2014 race — an estimated 60 million Australian dollars, or $46 million — the country last year extended its contract until 2020.While attendance is always high in Australia, other races are struggling. Among them is the German Grand Prix, which is experiencing difficulty even though a German team — Mercedes — is world champion and the German driver Sebastian Vettel is a four-time world champion. Last year attendance fell drastically: The Hockenheim race drew only 52,000 spectators, compared with 122,000 for the British Grand Prix two weeks earlier at Silverstone.It has not been confirmed which track — Nürburgring or Hockenheim — will stage the race scheduled for July 19, and it could be cancelled if the German organizers are unable to pay the host’s fee.Meanwhile, some newer races, such as those in Abu Dhabi and Singapore, are among the most popular. The Singapore Grand Prix provides a night-time race experience, in a major Asian financial hub with plenty of off-track action and spectators from around Asia. With its street track running through the city, the race is sometimes called the Monaco of the East.“The whole point of the Singapore Grand Prix is that it takes place right in the heart of one of the most dynamic and most vibrant cities in the world,” said Colin Syn, the Singapore Grand Prix deputy chairman in an article in the International Automobile Association’s Auto magazine.Singapore has renewed its contract to hold the race until 2017. The Singapore Tourism Board said the race and related tourism bring in 560 million Singapore dollars, or about $404 million, to the local economy. The Grand Prix draws roughly 400,000 spectators, the board said, 40 percent of them from other countries.Mexico has for years been seeking a return to the calendar as the country has undergone rapid economic growth. The Mexican billionaire Carlos Slim has helped fund the careers of Mexican drivers, including Sergio Pérez and Esteban Gutiérrez, and is backing the return of the Grand Prix in Mexico City.A real test of tradition will be whether Monza, the home of the Italian Grand Prix since the 1920s, signs an extension with Formula One beyond the end of its contract this year. The Italian promoters are facing a local tax issue that could cost them millions of dollars, and Ecclestone has spoken of a possible loss of the race.“Monza is the oldest circuit in Formula One, a record that we don’t want to lose,” Angelo Sticchi Damiani, the president of the Automobile Club d’Italia, said last month. “The matter is complex and difficult. There is no room for mistakes.”Advertisement