AdvertisementSupported bySpecial Report: Rolex Australian Grand PrixBy Brad SpurgeonAfter 12 days of winter testing in Barcelona in February, there is one thing on which the 10 Formula One teams lining up in Melbourne on Sunday for the season-opening race are likely to agree: The Mercedes team, winner of the 2014 world driver and constructor titles, is still the strongest on the grid.The Rolex Australian Grand Prix qualifying runs are likely to once again be a duel between the Mercedes drivers Lewis Hamilton and Nico Rosberg, and the race itself will probably pick up the battle where the two left it last season: The teammates fought until the end, with Hamilton beating Rosberg to the title in the final race in Abu Dhabi.While the shape of the pack behind them may well be different than it was last season, the teams most likely to challenge are again Williams, Red Bull and Ferrari.Especially Ferrari. The Italian team had one of its worst seasons ever last year, failing to win any races, but it has since made excellent progress, particularly on the engine. The prospect of the battle between its drivers, Kimi Raikkonen and the new recruit Sebastian Vettel, a four-time world champion, will be one of the season highlights.At Red Bull, Vettel’s departure made way for the 20-year-old Daniil Kvyat to race alongside Daniel Ricciardo, who dominated Vettel last year. The question now is whether Kvyat can reduce Ricciardo in the same manner.Williams remains the team most likely to give the biggest challenge to Mercedes. While Williams was one of the strongest teams in winter testing, Mercedes was so much faster that few people, even at Williams, expect a huge change in the order from last year.“Like most people, I was quite surprised at the lap time that they did,” Pat Symonds, the Williams technical director, said of the Mercedes results. “I thought we had a handle on where they were up until that point, and the gap was really quite similar to the end of last year.”“But let’s see,” he added. “I certainly don’t think we’re in a bad position — and I think maybe by the time we get to China or Bahrain we’ll start to know where we are.”Some of the most interesting story lines this season are likely to develop farther back on the grid. One of the most exciting could come from Sauber, which last year did not score a single point, suffering its worst season in Formula One since its debut in 1993. But with improvements made in its Ferrari engine, Sauber set some of the fastest laps during the winter, and the car ran for 5,708 kilometers, or 3,538 miles, over the 12 days, the second-highest total of the 10 teams. Only a contractual dispute with one its drivers from last year, Giedo van der Garde, has darkened its pre-season.At Lotus, after 20 years and three constructors’ titles powered by a Renault engine — in a few of those years the engine was listed as a Mecachrome — the team changed to Mercedes power this year, with an immediate improvement in speed and reliability in testing.“We’re cautiously optimistic,” said Nick Chester, the technical director of the Lotus team. “We have what looks to be a solid car, we’ve got the same power unit as the reigning champions — so we know its potential — and we’ve got every opportunity to start the season well.”“Certainly we want to be fighting regularly in the top 10,” he added. “It’s fair to say it’s going to be very difficult for any team to regularly take the battle to the reigning champions as they were so far ahead of the opposition last year — and they are unlikely to have forgotten what made them fast — but there are still good opportunities. There’s likely to be a good chasing pack, and we expect to be right in the mix with this.”Also likely to be in that mix is Force India, which also uses the Mercedes engine. Although the team was hampered by starting winter testing late, in the final days, the car was fast and reliable, and its solid drivers, Nico Hulkenberg and Sergio Pérez, were both pleased.“It’s no secret that we have some catch-up to do, but I am optimistic,” Pérez said.The most riveting stories to follow may be those of the second-oldest, second-most successful team in Formula One, McLaren Honda, and the youngest and least successful, Manor Marussia.Manor Marussia is built on the base of the Marussia team, which declared bankruptcy near the end of last season. Having fought throughout the winter to find financial backers and succeeding only at the last minute, it has yet to test its car.McLaren has a new partnership with Honda, its engine provider during the team’s glory days of the 1980s and 1990s. While the chassis appears good, the engine has had problems, breaking down regularly in testing.“This year’s car is really different to last year’s,” said Kevin Magnussen, who replaced Fernando Alonso for the final test and will fill in for him in Melbourne, after the Spaniard suffered a concussion in a crash during testing on Feb. 22. “It feels much more consistent; it’s more predictable and driver-friendly. It’s not fast enough yet.”Advertisement