By ZACH SCHONBRUNMARCH 14, 2015
It had been so long that nobody really knew how to get the postgame celebration started, so all the players stood sheepishly in a huddle, as if they were at a junior high school dance, until Villanova Coach Jay Wright nudged a walk-on, Kevin Rafferty: “Come on, get up there.”So Rafferty climbed the ladder first, snipping his piece of the net. JayVaughn Pinkston was last. The only person to abstain was Wright.He has done so much in 14 years in the Big East that there would seem to be few brass rings left for him to strive for. Yet when his team entered the league’s tournament this year, he emphasized, repeatedly, how much it would mean to him to win.It had been 20 years since Villanova last claimed the ultimate bragging rights in a conference now so closely aligned with Wright. With an all-out effort that unfolded from the opening tip, top-seeded Villanova ruled Madison Square Garden again, beating Xavier handily, 69-52.Advertisement“To win it, I can’t even tell you,” Wright said. “I don’t know if it’s really sunk in yet.”AdvertisementVillanova’s blanketing performance was symbolized by a darkened segment of the digital advertising board below the scorer’s table, kicked out by Xavier Coach Chris Mack in a fit of frustration late in the second half.“They’re the true definition of a team,” Mack said.The Big East was deeper and better this year, but the Wildcats were so seasoned, versatile and unselfish, and did so many different things well, that they consistently stood apart from the pack.On Saturday, eight players scored at least 3 points, and eight recorded an assist, with 27 points coming off the bench and 24 in the paint. Ryan Arcidiacono, one of the Big East’s players of the year, scored only 3 points, but he gladly ceded the spotlight to Dylan Ennis (16 points) and Josh Hart (15), who was named the tournament’s most outstanding player, the first time that honor has gone to a reserve.“That is our strength,” Wright said. “That balanced scoring.”On Friday, Mack described Villanova as a “very simple team” in terms of how it runs its offense as opposed to the varied and complex set-driven attacks employed by teams like Butler and Georgetown.“The New England Patriots are simple,” Mack said in a quiet moment outside Xavier’s locker room on Friday. “They’re also the best team in football.”He added: “It’s not the play; it’s the players. They have a lot of trust in the scheme, and I would, too.”Villanova’s shooting prowess is hardly accidental. It is the product of a dutifully fashioned approach to even the basest elements of shot-making.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.For 10 to 15 minutes at the beginning of each practice, Wright asks his players to work exclusively on their shooting technique.AdvertisementIt is the same now as it was in October. Players stand around the basket, within the lane, holding the basketball in one hand. Focus on the lift, the release, the wrist action, the follow-through, the landing.“It’s not about making or missing,” Arcidiacono said. “It’s about perfect technique.”That emphasis on perfection, down to the grainy details, is a Wright hallmark, and it should come as no surprise to anyone who has seen the way the dapper Wright dresses, pocket square always neatly aligned.Not surprisingly, the Wildcats shot 50 percent from the field on Saturday, making nine 3-pointers, while holding the sixth-seeded Musketeers to 38 percent shooting.Xavier’s semifinal on Friday did not end until after midnight, which might have contributed to some sluggishness. The Musketeers started 6 of 18 from the field, missing their first four 3-point attempts.Matthew Stainbrook, Xavier’s leading scorer, hit just one of his first five shots, and toward the end of the first half, Villanova got hot. A 13-2 run, with three 3-pointers, helped the Wildcats increase their lead to 30-16 with 3 minutes 31 seconds left in the half.Villanova then opened the second half on an 8-0 run, which ultimately proved devastating. After a dunk by Daniel Ochefu with 6:30 remaining, keeping Villanova’s lead at 20 points, Mack threw his hands in the air as if in surrender and sat down.Xavier, which had already lost to Villanova twice this season, led for a grand total of 23 seconds on Saturday.The Wildcats were the top seed in last year’s tournament, too, but they left early. It bothered them. And it pushed them on.“We felt like we missed an opportunity last year,” the Villanova assistant Baker Dunleavy said.Vince Nicastro, Villanova’s athletic director, said: “We wanted to be, and we felt like we’d be in position to be, one of the leaders in this conference. We’re fortunate to have a great program at this moment in time.”A version of this article appears in print on March 15, 2015, on Page SP5 of the New York edition with the headline: Selfless and Relentless Effort Lifts Villanova to Big East Title.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.