By JERÉ LONGMANMARCH 14, 2015
PHILADELPHIA —  It was a throwback game played in a throwback gym, Harvard’s spellbinding 53-51 victory over Yale on Saturday, a sublime relic of dusty yearning and desperation.The Ivy League remains the lone holdout with no conference tournament, awarding its automatic N.C.A.A. tournament berth to the regular-season champion and, when there is a tie, employing an antiquated yet hypnotic solution: a one-game playoff, winner take all.With Harvard and Yale even at 11-3 in conference play, an Ivy playoff took place for the ninth time on Saturday, summoning the twitchy, taut days, pre-1975, when only one team from any conference was permitted into the N.C.A.A. tournament.It was a flawed but enthralling game at the Palestra — muscular, ferociously back and forth, with shots fiercely contested, soaring rebounds collected, bodies diving to the floor for the ball, the outcome undecided until the final buzzer.AdvertisementThe 6-foot-5 Harvard guard Wesley Saunders, who stirred for 18 of his game-high 22 points in the second half, made his final, decisive maneuver an assist. Spinning inside, probing the Yale defense, sensing it collapse around him, Saunders passed to his teammate Steve Moundou-Missi above the free-throw line.AdvertisementMoundou-Missi is the Ivy League’s defensive player of the year, but on Saturday, with time expiring, he remained composed and accurate with his jumper, feathering in the winner with 7.2 seconds remaining.“I was wide open,” Moundou-Missi said. “All I had to do was make the shot.”Yale had a chance to force overtime as guard Javier Duren hurried up the floor and launched a short, running left-hander.“I was scared,” Moundou-Missi said.Duren felt assured.“I thought it was in,” he said. “It’s hard to get a better look.”The ball hit the backboard and then the rim but rolled off. A Yale player tried to tip the ball, but it fell away again, securing an N.C.A.A. tournament berth for Harvard (22-7) for the fourth consecutive year. Students rushed the court jubilantly, one of them shirtless, his back covered in glitter.Yale’s players were stunned, left holding their hands behind their heads. For a second consecutive weekend, the Bulldogs (22-10) had felt excruciating defeat. The surrender of a 5-point lead to Dartmouth in the final 35 seconds last Saturday had necessitated the playoff against Harvard. And now Yale’s chance at an appearance in the N.C.A.A. tournament will remain unfulfilled for a 53rd year.Before the collapse against Dartmouth, a berth had appeared within easy grasp. Instead, Yale will go uninvited as it has since 1962 — the year of the Cuban missile crisis, the year Johnny Carson became the host of “The Tonight Show” and Walter Cronkite became the anchor of “CBS Evening News,” the year of Bob Dylan’s debut album and the premiere of “The Beverly Hillbillies.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Yale fought hard,” said Saunders, the 2013-14 Ivy League player of the year. “We were able to stay together and fight through their runs. Games like this, you can talk about X’s and O’s, but when it comes down to it, it’s who has the will to win.”With 14 minutes 50 seconds remaining, Duren kissed a shot off the backboard, and Yale took a 32-27 lead, matching its biggest margin. Forward Justin Sears, the current Ivy player of the year, had asserted himself late in the first half. But just as the Bulldogs seemed to be sturdiest, they were at their most vulnerable.AdvertisementA 13-0 run by Harvard gave the Crimson a 40-32 lead. Eleven of those points were delivered by Saunders, with a driving bank shot and a free throw, two 3-pointers and a pair of free throws. Earlier, Saunders had been hesitant, and he was urged by Coach Tommy Amaker to be more aggressive as Yale sagged, giving Saunders space.Yale made a fierce recovery and took a 49-48 lead on a jumper by Makai Mason. But Saunders inserted himself into the pivotal moments down the stretch.With 1:27 left, Saunders vaulted inside for a basket that the officials waved off, and then allowed, on a continuation play. Saunders was fouled on the play, and his free throw put Harvard up by 51-49.Then, with 33.2 seconds left and the score tied at 51-51, Moundou-Missi missed a shot, and Saunders hustled to the rebound. The ball went out of bounds and remained in Harvard’s possession.“You just hope,” Yale Coach James Jones said, that both of those calls “don’t go against you.”He added, “Those were the difference.”With seconds left, Saunders stabbed into the lane and found Moundou-Missi, and the Crimson were headed to the N.C.A.A. tournament.“I’ve always said about Wesley like I said about Jeremy Lin: It’s not about the points he scores; it’s always about the points he’s responsible for,” Amaker said. “He put us on his back and carried us in stretches.”A version of this article appears in print on March 15, 2015, on Page SP5 of the New York edition with the headline: Late Shot Extends Harvard’s Run and Yale’s Drought.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.