AdvertisementSupported byM.L.B. RoundupBy Tim Rohan and Peter KerasotisPORT ST. LUCIE, Fla. — Throughout his young career and without the public’s knowledge, Zack Wheeler, the Mets’ right-handed starter, has pitched at times with tenderness in his right elbow. Last year, it flared up more than usual, but he still made every start, threw every bullpen session and had a fine season. When the Mets announced that Wheeler would not start Saturday’s Grapefruit League game because of his tender elbow and a blister on his index finger, Mets fans were naturally disappointed. But Wheeler had dealt with both problems for some time. He assured everyone that if this had been a regular-season game, he would have pitched.“Every pitcher pitches through pain at some point,” Wheeler said Saturday. “It’s just a matter of dealing with it. It wasn’t affecting me all that much — I could go out there and compete like I wanted to.”Manager Terry Collins said that Wheeler had two magnetic resonance imaging tests on the elbow during the off-season and that both had come back clean. Wheeler had another test on Saturday, but Collins said, “We don’t expect any damage.“The Mets expect him to rest for a few days before rejoining the rotation. He has not received a cortisone shot for his elbow, and he said he did not receive one last season.“He has such tremendous torque in his arm, there’s always going to be issues,“ Collins said.Asked whether he worried about his elbow becoming a problem, Wheeler said: “For sure. I mean, you always have that in the back of your head. But you try not to change anything you’re doing — arm angle, mechanics, all that kind of stuff.“You just do what you’ve been doing and trust it.”Meanwhile, Vic Black, one of the Mets’ top setup men, will also take a day to rest his shoulder. Black had one M.R.I. test on the shoulder in January and another on Friday, and neither showed structural damage. He described his injury as shoulder fatigue and said that he expected to be throwing again soon.Josh Edgin, the Mets’ top left-handed reliever, is still considering whether to have Tommy John surgery or to try to rehabilitate his stretched elbow ligament. DUDA RETURNS TO LINEUP Lucas Duda, who has been recovering from an injury to an intercostal muscle for much of spring training, made his Grapefruit League debut. He went 1 for 4 as the designated hitter and struck out twice. He said it would take him about two weeks to regain his timing. Opening day is just over three weeks away. CONSIDERING SIX-MAN ROTATION The Yankees continue to mull the idea of a six-man rotation, but not necessarily in order to go easy on Masahiro Tanaka, who incurred a slight tear in the ulnar collateral ligament in his right elbow midway through last season after he had established himself as the staff ace.“It’s not just Tanaka; it’s all of our guys,” Manager Joe Girardi said. “You get in these long stretches early in the year, and you worry about guys bouncing back. The goal is 30 to 32 starts, so we don’t want to wear them out early on.”Still, the notion of a six-man rotation even into the heart of the season intrigues the Yankees.“If we saw that our guys are somewhat fatigued early in the middle of the summer, we might call a guy up to make a spot start to give him an extra day’s rest,” Girardi said. “It’s mostly in the first couple of months we’ve talked about doing it. And if it works, we might continue to do it every once in a while, sub someone in.”  PETER KERASOTISSOLID OUTING FOR RODRIGUEZ Alex Rodriguez impressed again at the plate, lining a single off the base of the wall in right-center field in a split-squad road game against Toronto in Dunedin, Fla., that the Yankees lost, 1-0. In his other at-bats, he struck out swinging and flied out to right. He also played third base.“Anytime I can be on time and put the ball in the air, especially to the big part of the field, that’s a good sign,” Rodriguez said. “Putting the ball in the air, specifically to right-center, is a good sign.”  PETER KERASOTISPINEDA IMPRESSES VS. TIGERS Michael Pineda, who the Yankees hope will be a top-of-the-rotation starter, pitched three impressive no-hit innings against Detroit in a split-squad game in Tampa. Pineda threw strikes on 24 of his 34 pitches, striking out four batters and walking one in a 4-1 win for the Yankees. He also picked off Andrew Romine to end the third inning.  PETER KERASOTISPUIG OUT WITH ILLNESS Dodgers outfielder Yasiel Puig was scratched from the lineup for a game against the Cleveland Indians because of an illness. Dodgers Manager Don Mattingly said Puig had arrived at training camp on Saturday feeling sick to his stomach.“We sent him home,” Mattingly said.Puig was scheduled to be the designated hitter against Cleveland. Yasmani Grandal replaced him. Puig, an All-Star last year, is batting .214 in six spring games with one home run and three R.B.I. (AP)MARINER HAS BROKEN WRIST Mariners infielder Chris Taylor is expected to miss four to six weeks because of a broken right wrist.The Mariners made the announcement on Saturday.Taylor was hurt Friday on what was ruled a foul ball. He told the team that the pitch had hit him. Taylor stayed in the game and singled on the next pitch against Milwaukee, but was pulled for a pinch-runner. (AP)Advertisement