By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSMARCH 14, 2015
A third-period goal by Keith Yandle helped lift the visiting Rangers to a 2-0 win over the Buffalo Sabres on Saturday night.Martin St. Louis added an empty-net goal, and Mackenzie Skapski made 20 saves for his first career N.H.L. shutout and his second N.H.L. win.“I didn’t even digest the win yet, let alone the shutout,” Skapski said.Yandle’s goal was his first since the Rangers acquired him from Arizona on March 1, and it gave the Rangers their fourth straight win, each on the road. The Rangers have allowed just two goals during the streak.Anders Lindback made 32 saves for the Sabres.DEVILS 4, COYOTES 1 The Devils scored three times in the third period to defeat host Arizona and avoid a winless trip.AdvertisementAdam Henrique opened the Devils’ scoring 18 minutes 3 seconds into the second period, and Jordin Tootoo, Mike Cammalleri and Stephen Gionta added goals in the third. Cory Schneider had 30 saves for the Devils.AdvertisementShane Doan scored his first goal in 15 games for Arizona in the third period, and Mike Smith made 25 saves.BRUINS 2, PENGUINS 0 Tuukka Rask stopped 30 shots, and Boston won at Pittsburgh for its fifth victory in a row. The Penguins were missing Sidney Crosby and Evgeni Malkin for most of the game.The shutout was Rask’s third of the season.Crosby, who leads the Penguins with 70 points, was a surprise scratch after he participated in the warm-up.“I would say it’s not an injury,” Penguins Coach Mike Johnston said. “He didn’t get himself injured in the warm-up. He just wasn’t feeling well and went to see the doctors.”Malkin, second on the team with 68 points, left after a hit by Boston center Chris Kelly 1:29 into the first period. Malkin returned only briefly.Johnston did not specify the nature of Malkin’s injury, but he said that Malkin and Crosby might be able to play Sunday against Detroit.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.BLACKHAWKS 6, SHARKS 2 Patrick Sharp ended a 19-game scoring drought with two goals, and Duncan Keith halted an 18-game drought to help Chicago beat host San Jose.Brandon Saad broke a tie in the third, and Bryan Bickell and Marian Hossa also scored for the Blackhawks, who have won six of their last eight games. Corey Crawford made 33 saves.AdvertisementMelker Karlsson and Joe Thornton scored for the Sharks.WILD 3, BLUES 1 Nino Neiderreiter and Kyle Brodziak scored 17 seconds apart late in the third period to give Minnesota a win at St. Louis.Devan Dubnyk made 40 saves for the Wild.JETS 2, LIGHTNING 1 Drew Stafford and Blake Wheeler scored in the third period as visiting Winnipeg rallied to beat Tampa Bay.Ondrej Pavelec made 15 saves for the Jets, who are in the mix for a Western Conference wild-card spot.Nikita Kucherov scored for the Lighting, who dropped to 2 points behind Montreal, which leads the Atlantic Division. CANUCKS 4, MAPLE LEAFS 1 Derek Dorsett had a goal and two assists for the first three-point game of his career, and host Vancouver beat Toronto.Chris Higgins, Jannik Hansen and Shawn Matthias also scored for Vancouver, and Eddie Lack made 28 saves. Jonathan Bernier made 31 saves for Toronto.PANTHERS 2, HURRICANES 0 Dan Ellis made 22 saves for his first shutout of the season, and Brandon Pirri scored in the second period to lead Florida to a victory over host Carolina.Dave Bolland added an empty-net goal for Florida, which is 6 points behind Boston and Washington for the final wild-card spot in the Eastern Conference.FLYERS 7, RED WINGS 2 Brayden Schenn scored two goals for host Philadelphia in a rout of Detroit. Wayne Simmonds, Nicklas Grossman, Pierre-Edouard Bellemare, Matt Read and Zac Rinaldo also scored for the Flyers, who ended a four-game losing streak.A version of this article appears in print on March 15, 2015, on Page SP2 of the New York edition with the headline: Two Newcomers Make Their Mark as Rangers Put Away the Sabres.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.