AdvertisementSupported byBy Jeff ArnoldCHICAGO — Coach Tom Izzo’s voice is comfortably in late-season form, sounding as grizzled and raw as ever.The coarse nature of his speech is as much a rite of spring as is the selection of his Michigan State Spartans for the N.C.A.A. basketball tournament. Set to embark on their 18th consecutive appearance, the Spartans own the nation’s third-longest active string of tournament berths, trailing only perennial postseason participants Kansas and Duke.This season’s run has not been easy. Izzo acknowledges that five months of coaxing success out of a young team that has battled inconsistency and discovered baffling ways to lose games has taken a toll. Late-game breakdowns and miscues have sent Izzo into ballistic fits of sideline rage, which then give way to valuable teachable moments.When the Spartans sat at 13-7 and were 4-3 in the Big Ten after a loss at Nebraska on Jan. 24, Izzo contemplated whether the streak was nearing an end.“I was trying to put it in the back of my mind,” he said. “But it was creeping toward the front, there’s no doubt about it.”When concern reached critical stages, Izzo reminded the Spartans what could be in jeopardy if they did not right the ship. He invited former players to deliver messages of what tournament longevity meant to Michigan State basketball. “It’s kind of what we do,” the former forward Andre Hutson said.Izzo motivated his way through adversity, striking a balance between remaining patient with a roster with only two seniors and using the N.C.A.A. berth as the calculated catalyst for improved play. Izzo continually returned to the same question: Did this team want to go down as the one that snapped the string?“Some coaches might ignore it and not add that pressure,” the senior guard Travis Trice said after Michigan State’s 76-67 win over Ohio State in the Big Ten tournament quarterfinals.The Spartans advanced to the tournament final Sunday against Wisconsin with a 62-58 victory over Maryland in Saturday’s semifinals. The Spartans, who have now won six of their last eight games, trailed by as many as 16 points before making a late run. Wisconsin, which defeated Michigan State, 68-61, two weeks ago in the teams’ only meeting, overcame a 5-point halftime deficit and outscored Purdue, 41-16, in the second half to cruise to a 71-51 victory in the other semifinal.Trice said that Izzo’s message to the players combined a cautionary “you’re flirting with not getting into the tournament” and an encouraging “if you look at some of the games we’ve lost, we’re right there on the edge of being a great team.”The space between the two keeps Izzo up at night. His team’s fragile nature means he cannot treat this squad as he treated his past teams. Izzo struggled to pinpoint the best solution. He wondered how much pressure to apply and how difficult to make the workload. At times, he considered lightening up. But Izzo knew he could not pamper players without surrendering the toughness required to win during a season when 10 of his team’s games were decided by 6 points or fewer.Having overcome an early rash of injuries to key players, the Spartans often doomed themselves with a Big Ten-worst 62.7 free-throw percentage, which only intensified Izzo’s stress level. To maintain sanity, Izzo branched out. He called Texas Coach Rick Barnes and reached out to the former Spartans coach Jud Heathcote, along with a close friend, the former N.F.L. coach Steve Mariucci. He leaned on the Spartans’ football coach, Mark Dantonio, who simply reminded Izzo to stay the course.But Heathcote, who guided the Spartans to the 1979 N.C.A.A. championship, sensed that Izzo — for all of his success, including a national title in 2000 and five other Final Four appearances in 20 years at Michigan State — was in the midst of one of his toughest coaching jobs.“I just don’t think he has the caliber of players that can win consistently in a conference as tough as the Big Ten,” Heathcote said. “But he’s done it this year.”The free-throw futility cost Michigan State four games, casting the Spartans’ postseason hopes into uncertainty before they won six of their final eight regular-season games to slide off the bubble. Entering their Big Ten semifinal against Maryland on Saturday, the Spartans had a record of 22-10. Through it all, adversity has given way to perspective.“I’m trying to make them realize that we have been a good team — we haven’t been a great team,” Izzo said. “But I’ve taken good teams far into the tournament that weren’t even as good as this one.”The return mission now complete, Izzo embarks on another march toward another national championship. He is unsure of what his young team is capable of achieving or how long the tournament run will last. But one thing is certain: The legacy of these Spartans won’t be one of breaking the bond that connects the present with the past, preserving the defining characteristic of Izzo’s program.“We just don’t expect to make it to the tournament — that’s not what Michigan State is about,” the junior guard Denzel Valentine said. “We make it to the tournament every year. It’s about what are you going to do once you get into the tournament.”Advertisement