AdvertisementSupported byBy David WaldsteinFORT MYERS, Fla. — Missing out on the Red Sox’ World Series championship in 2007 was particularly agonizing for Hanley Ramirez. The Red Sox were supposed to be his team, and he was supposed to be the star shortstop with a World Series ring, maybe two.But Ramirez received no ring, and he is not credited with winning a World Series. There was no duck boat parade for him, and his legacy in Boston became about what might have been, for good or bad. Before the 2006 season, the Red Sox used Ramirez as bait to acquire Josh Beckett and Mike Lowell from the Florida Marlins, and a year later those two players were integral parts of Boston’s Series-winning team. Ramirez might not see it this way, but he really did contribute to that championship.“I hope he feels that way, because he definitely did,” said Ben Cherington, Boston’s general manager, who helped engineer that trade as a member of the front office.On Nov. 24, 2005, the Red Sox took a huge risk by trading Ramirez, one of baseball’s elite prospects at the time, to the Marlins. He was 21 and about to become a star and the National League’s rookie of the year. But the trade worked out perfectly for Boston. Even after Ramirez proved to be a career .300 hitter and put together years like 2009, when he batted .342 with a .954 on-base plus slugging percentage, the Red Sox would not have taken the trade back. But Ramirez would have, and did, in a way.Nine years plus one day after the trade, Ramirez fulfilled a long-held desire by signing a four-year, $88 million contract with the Red Sox as a free agent. After nine seasons as a shortstop and third baseman with the Marlins and the Dodgers, Ramirez has returned to Boston as a left fielder. He has never played the position but was willing to do so to sign that lucrative deal and get back to Boston.“I feel like I’m back with my family,” Ramirez said Saturday morning at his locker in Fort Myers, which is in a row that includes his friends and teammates Pablo Sandoval and David Ortiz. “I was 21 when they traded me, and it was hard. I got mad. But at the same time, it worked for both of us. They won, and I felt like that should have been me. But it made me hungry. That’s why I came back.” Ramirez may have missed the Red Sox all those years, but Boston hardly missed him. Yes, he was a dangerous hitter and a gifted fielder. But at times he frustrated teammates, managers, fans and even opponents with his seeming lack of interest. In 2010, Fredi Gonzalez, then the Marlins’ manager, benched Ramirez after he booted a ball at shortstop and did not hustle after it, costing the Marlins three runs. This spring, during an outfielders’ meeting, Shane Victorino, Ramirez’s teammate with the Dodgers in 2012 and now with the Red Sox, kidded Ramirez about that incident, which was not humorous at the time. “You know, he kind of lollygagged after it, and I told him, ‘I bet you will never do that again,’ ” Victorino said. “I said it as a joke, but he agreed with it. I saw growth from him right there. He made mistakes, but he learned, and so far he’s been great. I see him working hard to learn the outfield and trying to fit in. Guys love him. I love him.”There was never a time when Victorino was not impressed with Ramirez’s talents. But he was one who wondered why Ramirez sometimes looked something other than fully engaged.One day when Victorino was with the Phillies, he was standing on second base in a game against the Marlins, and he asked Ramirez: “What’s going on? Where is it? You don’t understand, as an athlete, as a competitor against you, it makes me upset because for me to be great, or good, I have to work my butt off every day.”Later, when Victorino was with Ramirez in Los Angeles, he said, Dodgers Manager Don Mattingly asked him to help get in line Ramirez and some of the other Dodgers players whose attitudes frustrated the team. But Victorino insists that will not be necessary in Boston because Ramirez is surrounded by mentors and friends like Ortiz, Sandoval and Dustin Pedroia, who was Ramirez’s teammate in the minor leagues. For his part, Ramirez says he has grown since his youthful days.“You learn through the years,” he said. Cherington was the farm director when the Red Sox traded Ramirez, a decision the organization did not make lightly. Cherington recalled a day in 2002, when Ramirez was 18, that a contingent of Red Sox executives went to Lowell, Mass., to watch Ramirez play and were struck at how much he stood out from the others with his talent, athleticism and charisma, and particularly by how hard he hit the ball.“That was the day we all kind of agreed that he could be really special,” Cherington said.When it came time to sign Ramirez this off-season, Cherington wanted to know only two things: Did Ramirez really embrace a return to Boston, and was he willing to play left field?“I knew Hanley 10 years ago, and for the last four weeks,” Cherington said. “That’s all I can judge, and he’s been great — his effort, his attitude and his energy.”The transition to left field has been mostly smooth. Ramirez has had only a few opportunities to make plays there, but the Red Sox say he has been a dedicated learner. He showed up in spring training looking bulked up. No longer needing the catlike reflexes he did at shortstop, he got bigger to add more power to his game. The Hanley Ramirez whom the Red Sox traded away was lithe, nimble and at times mercurial. The Hanley Ramirez who returned is bigger and, the Red Sox hope, more mature.“You have to remember,” Cherington said. “He was on the cover of Baseball America when he was 18. He had a lot of attention on him. There were some bumps along the way. But the guy I see now is mature and hard-working. “I think he realizes where he is in his career, and knows he has a chance to come back here and redefine the perceptions some people have of him.”Advertisement