AdvertisementSupported byBy Seth BerkmanBefore Davidson’s first season in the Atlantic 10, the conference’s preseason poll forecast the Wildcats to finish 12th out of 14 teams.Davidson Coach Bob McKillop understood that the landscape had changed from the Southern Conference. As he said early last week, in homage to his New York upbringing: “You’re on an entirely different stage. You’re on the national, Broadway stage, not in summer stock.”To prepare for the spotlight, McKillop and his staff had homed in on a secret weapon. They did not recruit an unknown European marksman or a graduate transfer, but a math professor and a group of students infatuated with basketball statistics.Davidson’s small-school basketball program has continued to flourish with a combination of old school New York City fortitude and new-wave analytics. Davidson (24-7) won the A-10 regular-season title and entered the conference tournament ranked 24th nationally. The Wildcats fell to Virginia Commonwealth (25-9) at Barclays Center in Saturday’s conference tournament semifinals, 93-73, but will probably be selected for the N.C.A.A. tournament. V.C.U. has made the A-10 final in each of its three years in the conference.“I’ve got wide-open eyes when it comes to improving our program,” McKillop, 64, said. “I’ve been doing this for 43 years and I’m still learning.”Matt McKillop, an assistant coach at Davidson and Bob McKillop’s son, remembered as a child seeing his father regularly scribbling ideas on a notepad, tinkering with ways to improve his team. But when Tim Chartier, a professor in Davidson’s mathematics and computer science department, approached the coaching staff with an idea, there was uncertainty that the unorthodox partnership would pan out.Chartier and his students presented a way to show the efficiency of every five-man lineup that Davidson used in games. As Chartier explained, a player may not produce individual statistics that indicate he is making an important contribution on the court, but by looking at the players in a group, their role becomes clearer. “It kind of blew us away,” Matt McKillop said, “and when they explained the way we could look at lineups and see how we were most efficient offensively and defensively, it really opened our eyes up to the possibility.”Today, Bob McKillop considers Chartier and his group an integral part of the staff.“I think it’s a great statement about our college community, everyone feels they’re on the team,” he said. “There’s a sense, when Davidson does well, everyone in Davidson does well.”Chartier’s group also provided the coaches with “heat maps” that show a player’s shooting efficiency from certain areas on the floor. Without high-tech cameras, Davidson math students watch games on television or from the sidelines and estimate the locations.Students also provide the coaching staff with scouting reports on the next opponent, which are ready almost immediately after each game. The math department’s work with the basketball team has gained recognition outside of Davidson. Miles Abbett and Ford Higgins, two managers for last season’s basketball team who were influential in introducing analytics to the Wildcats, now work for N.B.A. teams: Abbett for the Chicago Bulls and Higgins for the Philadelphia 76ers.Throughout his career, Bob McKillop has cultivated players from obscurity into stardom. At Davidson, he had Stephen Curry, and at the high school level he coached Bill Wennington and Matt Doherty.He also embraced the importance of analytics early in his career. Using criteria of 15 categories — like field-goal percentage, if his team scores first in each half, and if it outscores an opponent in the final four minutes — he keeps track of his team’s pursuit of what he calls “the perfect game.” There has never been a perfect game at Davidson. As an example of how hard it is to achieve, on March 7 Davidson defeated Duquesne by 107-78, but met only 6 of 15 standards.Growing up in New York, McKillop did not crunch many numbers, but he developed a basketball philosophy by battling Coach Jack Curran of Archbishop Molloy and by closely observing the coaching styles of St. John’s Lou Carnesecca and Fordham’s Digger Phelps.“You develop a schoolyard, playground mentality — in order to survive you have to win, you have to win to stay on the court,” McKillop said.The combination of grit and math efficiency played out at important moments in Davidson’s quarterfinal game against ninth-seeded La Salle on Friday.Trailing by as many as 18 points and shooting uncharacteristically poorly from the free-throw line, the Wildcats were behind for the game’s first 39 minutes. After a missed free throw by Davidson’s Jack Gibbs, La Salle called a timeout with 1 minute 6 seconds remaining. Facing a 66-65 deficit. McKillop and his staff went to their stat sheets produced by the math department.After a quick examination, the next step was clear: a 1-3-1 zone.The scheme forced La Salle into two missed 3-point attempts on its final possession and gave Davidson 16 seconds to pull off a comeback.Matt McKillop acknowledged that the math team’s work had influenced “why we chose that play at the end.”After the defensive stop, Tyler Kalinoski drove to the basket and laid up a shot with his left hand, which went through the net as time expired. Watching from the stands, Chartier gave an impromptu analysis.“I was very worried about the way we were so cold from the line,” he said of the Wildcats’ 5-for-13 free-throw shooting. “You could tell they had played and we had not yesterday, you could see that just in the warm-up.“But math is not a part of making that last shot. That’s just amazing.”DAYTON REACHES FINAL In Saturday’s second semifinal, Dayton (25-7) defeated Rhode Island (22-9), 56-52. Dyshawn Pierre and Jordan Sibert combined for 22 points after each scored only 2 points in the first half.Advertisement