Compiled by THE NEW YORK TIMESMARCH 14, 2015
Rallying Around The AstrodomeTo the Sports Editor:Re: “Game Over for the Astrodome, ‘Stadium of the Future,’ ” March 8: Houston, we have a problem. Michael Beschloss’s column rightly captures the significance and innovation of the Astrodome in its early years, but it calls the end to the stadium’s future prematurely. While the roar of the Astrodome’s crowd is gone today, Houstonians’ passion for the city’s iconic landmark remains, and the national effort to revitalize and reuse the stadium continues to gain momentum.This month, an Urban Land Institute Advisory Services Panel report will offer recommendations on how Houston can reimagine the Astrodome as a civic space that will celebrate and honor both the cultural heritage of the Dome and the city’s can-do spirit. When this panel — which includes experts in architecture, land use, and real estate development — met in Houston in December to explore the feasibility of reusing and redeveloping the Astrodome, it enthusiastically supported saving the historic venue. Tearing down the Astrodome would rob Houston of one of its most beloved landmarks, and a structure that, if given the opportunity, still has a bright future.Let’s not give up on this iconic structure and miss a historic comeback.STEPHANIE K. MEEKS, WashingtonThe writer is president and chief executive officer of the National Trust for Historic Preservation.The Exploitative Side of FootballAdvertisementTo the Sports Editor:Re “Struggling in the Streets: Amid Former College Player’s Decline, Questions About Role Football Played,” March 8: Ryan Hoffman is the poster child for all the young men who continue to be exploited by college football. While the top-tier universities and their coaches make many millions, men like Hoffman are chewed up and spit out, essentially used as cannon fodder to generate massive TV audiences, alumni donations and institutional recognition. This sad state of affairs is especially true for a vast majority of players who do not go on to the N.F.L. and receive no ongoing insurance benefits or support for injuries sustained while playing for the old alma mater. I would encourage you to continue to chronicle and quantify the extent of this gross injustice until the institutions that reap so many benefits — universities, TV networks, sponsors, etc. — step up and do the right thing.WALTER B. ROSE, San Anselmo, Calif.Let’s Get Back in the GameTo the Sports Editor:Re “Your Move, Grandmaster. (To the U.S., Please),” March 11: That the United States is trying to entice Italy’s top chess player with “a large sum” of money to cross the sea and play for us in the World Team Chess Championship had me wondering, does this speak to a larger problem? With a population of only 143 million, Russia can fill long rosters with world-class chess players. We have 318 million people, yet we are struggling to find five internationally competitive players. This is a barometer for intellectualism; we have fallen behind while Russia has put us in check. I applaud efforts to keep chess alive in the United States. Let’s reclaim the intellectual curiosity, prowess and tenacity on which this country was founded. Could we, perhaps, start with a game of chess?AdvertisementALETHEIA DONAHUE, BrooklynA version of this letter appears in print on March 15, 2015, on Page SP6 of the New York edition.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.