AdvertisementSupported byEssayBy Jennifer EggersMy father, Michael Eggers, was an N.C.A.A. Division I men’s basketball official for 41 years. Few, if any, officials have been able to say the same, or ever will. After having officiated more than 2,000 games, he worked his final one, Southern California at U.C.L.A., on March 4. My family was in attendance, wearing black and white, of course. In February 2008, I joined my father on the road for an especially grueling stretch of games: three states and three conferences in three days. There was Texas A&M at Missouri, then Arizona State at Arizona and finally Pepperdine at Portland. I secured press credentials and, with his permission, documented what happened away from the ball. This trip was my attempt to understand what it was like to go from arena to arena: the charge that comes on the court, the aches from sprinting with athletes 30 years younger, the composure required in the clutch of a call, and the long stretches of monotony in between the final buzzer and the next tipoff, from the showers to the airport shuttle to another city, again and again. What I found is that there are long, lonely stretches punctuated by a few hours of high adrenaline. After all, the best officials are invisible. And they are independent contractors. No one wonders how they got there, or where they are going next. They have no home court. It is easy to vilify referees as arrogant and unfeeling, brazenly screwing up calls and shining their shoes to a cavalier gleam. But that is certainly not the dad I have.From early November through late March, for my entire life, my father was on the road — calling home to Danville, Calif., from Spokane one night, San Diego the next. To him, officiating was the ultimate responsibility, and one he never took lightly. As the game has changed over the years — the introduction of a shot clock, the addition of a third official and the advent of instant replay, among other changes — his approach stayed the same. He felt strongly about maintaining the flow of the game, keeping the emotion on the court in check and doing his best on behalf of the student-athletes. I once saw him pat a player’s back on senior night and say, “It was an honor to watch you play.” The time he made his most damaging wrong call, he could not sleep for months. While there was nothing that could be done to fix it, his remorse was deep and sincere. As a child of a referee, you know the many merits of a Fox 40 whistle. Most of all, they are loud. Like a junior high jock, he would blow his in the house to announce he was home or surprise my sister and me when we were doing our homework. My sister and I are identical twins, but he always treated us like two teams on the court, as if following an N.C.A.A. handbook. We instinctively knew better than to ever say, “That’s not fair.” Because it always was. His games were a huge part of our lives. In the days before e-tickets, we would wait to see which airplane ticket arrived in the mail — the official sign of which N.C.A.A. tournament games he had been assigned. (When teams are being picked for March Madness, officials, too, are going through the same heartbreaking selection.) Whenever we were in the stands, we followed his strict instructions: no wearing either team’s colors and no cheering. Surrounded by a swell of collegiate pride, among rival mascots, dueling brass sections and explosive T-shirt guns, we would sit unmoved. We would spend the ride home repeating all the insults people yelled, and Dad loved hearing them all. He has been hanged in effigy at Oregon. In the late 1970s, his beloved brown Datsun 240Z was put on blocks. The advent of the Internet introduced a lazier and less creative outlet for mean-spirited fans; for a time, he received hate mail from an anonymous ihatepactenofficials@hotmail.com email account. But none of that ever fazed him. He knows the fastest route from the airport to the back entrance of each arena by heart, along with the personnel who line the concrete hallways outside locker rooms as well as longtime fans who line the courts. If there is a best hamburger spot in town, he knows that, too. From observing my father on the court, I have learned about tolerance and composure. Like how to use a little bit of humor to get someone (like a disgruntled coach) back on your side; how to stay focused in the midst of distraction; and how to acknowledge a bad moment and move past it. Throughout the years, especially after I moved across the country, I have watched countless games on TV just so I could catch a glimpse of my father and feel a little closer to home. During our trip together, I wanted to capture his legacy and show my appreciation, too, for the example he set. Even when he did not know I was watching, I was. One thing was apparent, though: I could hardly keep up with him. The writer is a strategic brand consultant who lives in New York. Advertisement