By ALLAN KREDAMARCH 14, 2015
UNIONDALE, N.Y. —  Brian Engblom was looking forward to one last visit to Nassau Coliseum, even if it meant wedging himself into a corner of the Islanders’ bench.Engblom was part of the NBCSN broadcast team Saturday night for the Islanders’ game against the Montreal Canadiens, which the Canadiens won, 3-1. It was the first national broadcast from the Coliseum in its final season before the Islanders move to Brooklyn. Engblom is usually in a glassed-off area between benches when he works games, but one of the quirks of the 43-year-old Coliseum is its short benches, which cannot accommodate the network’s “Inside the Glass” person.“Like Maple Leaf Gardens and the Montreal Forum, Nassau Coliseum is special and I will miss it,” said Engblom, a defenseman on Montreal’s Stanley Cup-winning squad in 1979. “There’s so much history, and the fans are so loud, since they are close to the ice. It was fun to play here, and it’s fun to broadcast here.”NBC did not initially schedule any Islanders home or away games on its networks, even though last year’s worst team, Buffalo, was to be shown 11 times. But with the Islanders vying for the league’s best record, they are tough to ignore, even if they play in an antiquated building with space-challenged announcing spots and less-than-optimal camera positions.AdvertisementJohn McGuinness, who was to produce Saturday’s game against the Canadiens, said he hoped it would not be the network’s last appearance on Long Island before the Islanders move.Advertisement“Coming back for a playoff series against the Rangers would be great,” he said. “It would be a nationwide story, one of our ‘A’ games for sure.”A challenging television environment is not the only oddity in the bench area during a game at the Coliseum, which is expected to begin renovations this summer once the team’s lease expires.Because the visiting team’s bench is short on legroom, the opposing backup goalie usually watches the game perched in a runway leading to his squad’s dressing room.In full uniform, the netminder is surrounded by security guards, ice cleaning crews and sometimes Sparky the Dragon, the arena mascot. He can become a lightning rod, even if most of the ribbing from nearby fans is good-natured.“It’s crazy down there; you definitely hear a few things you don’t hear on the bench,” said Rangers goaltender Cam Talbot, who backed up Henrik Lundqvist on Jan. 27 when the Islanders won, 4-1. “The fans know you’re there. It’s a fun atmosphere.”Brian Schneider, a security guard at the Coliseum for 18 years, stands watch in a bright yellow windbreaker usually looking up at the crowd from along the glass at the end of the runway. He has seen his share of peculiar goalie moments. Many seem to involve snacks.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“John Vanbiesbrouck liked to hide a pretzel in his glove during games, and Dominik Hasek once spilled hot dog mustard all over his jersey,” Schneider said. “But for the most part, we have laughs and the goalies usually go along with the fun of being near the fans.”The former Islander goalie Chad Johnson, traded to Buffalo this month, has also been a backup for the Rangers and the Boston Bruins. He said his strategy involved staying as still as possible to become almost invisible.Advertisement“The first period is tame, but after fans have a few beers, during the second and third, you really start hearing the chatter and the chirping,” Johnson said. “Once you move and they see a flash of your white jersey, that’s it.”Talbot noted that the visiting goaltender also had to sit apart from the team bench at Montreal’s Bell Centre in a cubicle across the ice, which at least is not as exposed to fans.Engblom said that Anaheim’s Honda Center also did not have room between its benches, so he found himself on the Ducks’ bench during games.The idiosyncrasy of standing exceptionally close to coaches and players during a game must be handled with care, said Engblom’s NBC colleague Pierre McGuire.“You have to be really mindful of where you are — that you’re in someone else’s workplace — and not betray any trusts,” McGuire said. “You try to stand as far away from the bench as you can and not get in anyone’s way.”Engblom added that his mission remained the same whether he was behind or beside a row of resting skaters. It does not matter if he is amid the vastness of a modern arena or cramped in the old-school Coliseum.“My job is to observe and watch the game from the players’ level without snooping,” he said. “Plus, you can almost never hear what’s going on anyway because the music in every arena is so loud.”A version of this article appears in print on March 15, 2015, on Page SP2 of the New York edition with the headline: Coliseum Offers Little Room for TV Crews or Visiting Backup Goalies.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.