AdvertisementSupported byOn SoccerBy Christopher ClareyPresumably even the credulity-straining organization that is FIFA would have voted for a host other than Qatar if it had been clear the 2022 World Cup was to be held in November and December.But FIFA’s plans, like FIFA’s ethics, are nothing if not adaptable, and it now appears — despite all the chest-bumping and smartphone-rattling — that the Cup really is going to happen in November and December instead of in January or May or even in the traditional window of June and July, which would have felt like a traditional brick oven in Doha.FIFA’s executive committee is expected to approve the new dates — most likely Nov. 21 to Dec. 18 — when it meets Thursday and Friday in Zurich.This is hardly the ideal-world solution, which would have been to withdraw the Cup from Qatar and stage a revote. Instead, it is an attempt to make the best of a compromised situation that is completely FIFA’s own fault.“Playing in winter is not a good solution, everybody knows it, but it’s the least bad of them all, and it’s above all the one that protects the physical integrity of the players,” Philippe Piat, president of FIFPro, the international professional players union, said last month.So what would a November-December World Cup really mean to a game as global as soccer?It means major headaches and potentially major financial hits for professional leagues and competitions in Europe, Australia and elsewhere. It means a sigh of relief at International Olympic Committee headquarters, where the Winter Olympics, to be held in February 2022 in Beijing or Almaty, Kazakhstan, can be organized without being overshadowed by world sport’s 800-pound gorilla.It means teeth gnashing for broadcasters in North America, where the 800-pound gorilla is football (the North American version), which will be in full swing during the 2022 World Cup. It means celebration — dignified, of course — at Wimbledon, where soccer’s move should mean that the world’s oldest major tennis tournament can grab more market share than usual in a World Cup year.“I think it would be fair to say that while it would make no difference to our on-site attendance, which tends not to be affected by FIFA World Cups, such a move would almost certainly assist our global reach and exposure to broadcast and digital audiences,” said Johnny Perkins, a spokesman for the All England Club, which stages Wimbledon.There is upside and, more often, downside to the unconventional dates in just about every region, but the region with the biggest upside appears to be Asia.“Most of the football leagues in Asia run from March to November, so there’s a natural break in November and December anyway,” said Andrew Georgiou, the chief operating officer for the sports management agency Lagardere Unlimited, who was long based in Singapore. “So actually for Asia, it works quite well.”It is much more problematic for Australia, where the shift would disrupt the domestic soccer league schedule. But the timetable for the matches should work well for the region as a whole. Southeast Asian fans are well accustomed to rising (or staying awake until) the middle of the night to watch Champions League matches or evening World Cup matches from Europe. But 5 p.m. in Doha is 9 p.m. in Jakarta and 10 p.m. in Singapore and Hong Kong.“Asia usually gets a raw deal in terms of timing,” Georgiou said. “But I think in Qatar, it will be much more accessible to Asia. And so I think you can expect a pretty big uplift in audiences for the 2022 World Cup, especially if it happens in November and December, because there’s not much else on.”The proximity to Christmas and the new year also presents commercial opportunities globally.“I think a lot of marketers would argue a November-December window for marketing and selling their products is a lot more attractive than June-July,” said Michael Payne, former marketing director of the International Olympic Committee.Zenith Optimedia, a marketing agency, recently estimated that shifting to the winter could generate 12 million pounds more additional revenue for British television than in the summer (£50 million, or $73.7 million, instead of £38 million).That is partly because more viewers are home in the winter, although seven years from now, the pace of technological change could mean people — at home or away — may not be gathering much at all around traditional television sets.But the digital community — and the screens that accompany it — will continue to proliferate.“I don’t see the calendar change negatively impacting the FIFA digital audience,” Ciaran Quinn, chief commercial officer for Paris-based Deltatre, said in an email. “FIFA said that they had a ‘digital stadium’ audience of one billion for Brazil 2014. I am sure that it will be much greater for 2022, probably at least three billion fans engaging digitally one way or another.”The World Cup, in many markets, is simply too big to fail, even with a parent like FIFA.“It’s still going to be the best football competition in the world, so I think product probably carries the day there,” said George Pyne, a former president of IMG Sports and Entertainment who now runs the investment firm Bruin Sports Capital.The Asian Cup and Africa Cup of Nations, which would both have been staged in January 2023, will surely be forced to move, perhaps into the Northern Hemisphere summer. Despite the collective grumbling in Europe, the Champions League and major domestic soccer leagues will surely be suspended for the duration of the monthlong World Cup, leaving a dearth of other major sports programming to compete against.But the United States will be different. Its domestic league, Major League Soccer, which typically finishes its season in early December, is a niche player. The World Cup, which would overlap with the Thanksgiving holiday, would thus run smack into the meat of the N.F.L. and college football regular season and also compete with the N.B.A. and N.H.L.“I think it’s a disaster for the U.S.,” Georgiou said. Which clearly helps explain why FIFA extended Fox’s broadcast rights for all FIFA competitions through 2026 without calling for other bids.Fox, if it hangs on to the rights to major events like the World Series and N.F.L. games, will be able to cross-promote to increase awareness of its World Cup coverage. But that does not mean American viewers are going to take the hint.“Fox is a cross-promotion machine, and they have got to do the best they can to make that Cup work without it being so over the top you start to alienate your N.F.L. viewers,” said David Carter, executive director of the Marshall Sports Business Institute at the University of Southern California.Though some advertisers might be more eager to spend with the first quarter of the fiscal year looming, there also will be more traditional competition for their business.“If I’m an advertiser, to what extent am I already booked solid?” Carter said.Questions. So many questions. But Payne and others still see the winter of 2022 as potentially a global win for the sport in terms of reach if not in terms of internal harmony.“From a commercial standpoint, I would say there is probably upside on this with the exception of the challenges faced for the U.S. broadcasters or one or two other broadcasters,” Payne said.The downside, of course, is that no soccer fan or television executive would have had to worry about any of this if FIFA had made the smart, right decision in the first place.“What a mess,” Carter said. Advertisement