
On Baseball By                     
 TYLER KEPNER
 
MARCH 14, 2015
PEORIA, Ariz. — Lloyd McClendon has a figure in mind for the Seattle Mariners, a dream that has eluded this franchise in each of the last seven seasons. McClendon, the Mariners’ manager and a former hitting coach, wants his team to score 700 runs.“If we stay healthy, I think we should be a club that should be able to score 700 runs,” McClendon said in his office here Friday morning. “Every playoff team last year was 700 or better. We didn’t quite get to that number. I think that’s the magic number.”Actually, with the industry starved for runs last season, only eight teams scored more than 700 runs, with five making the playoffs. But let’s not discourage McClendon from the goal.It is about time this franchise start scoring again. Every other American League team has cleared 700 runs (4.32 per game) at least once since 2007, the last time the Mariners did it. Now they are serious about doing it again. They fell 66 runs short last season.Advertisement“It’s going to be fun,” said Austin Jackson, the center fielder and leadoff hitter. “We definitely have the confidence in this team, and we definitely look the part.”AdvertisementThe engine of the offense will be a middle of the order that might be the most dangerous in the majors: second baseman Robinson Cano, designated hitter Nelson Cruz and third baseman Kyle Seager. These players should get used to one another; Cano is signed through 2023, Seager through 2021 and Cruz through 2018, with contracts that total almost $400 million.Most of that goes to Cano, who left the Yankees for a 10-year, $240 million deal that exemplified how desperation drives the free-agent market. The Mariners had lost more than half their fan base since 2002, the year after their last playoff appearance. They had struggled to develop their own hitters. They overwhelmed Cano and found their cornerstone.“You bring a guy like Cano, who’s had success and played on championship teams, with his demeanor, his calm confidence that we’re going to get the job done — it’s a great combination, and it rubs off perfectly,” Seager said. “There’s no stress in his game.”The Mariners showed progress in Cano’s first season, improving by 16 games, to 87-75, and contending for a wild-card spot until the final day. Seager made his first All-Star team, won a Gold Glove and earned a $100 million contract. Felix Hernandez sparkled as the pitchers led the A.L. in earned run average, at 3.17.Cano hit .314, and enjoys the headliner status he never had as a complementary star in New York. He has something like a suite in the spring training clubhouse, which narrows as it reaches Cano’s nook, with its black leather couch, wooden bench for a sound system, and empty stalls on either side of his locker. The player dressing closest to him is Cruz, whom he helped recruit this winter.“I tell him the way they embraced me when I signed here — teammates, fans, the organization,” Cano said. “I was very impressed. I told him, Here, they treat you like family.”Cano’s new team won more games last season than his old team, and seems like a better bet to do so again. He praised the front office for following through on its pledge to build around him, though the Mariners might have made the playoffs last season had they pursued Cruz more aggressively.AdvertisementCruz, who was coming off a suspension for performance-enhancing drugs, signed with Baltimore for one year and $8 million. He led the majors in homers, with 40, and helped the Orioles to the A.L. Championship Series. One winter after a tentative negotiation with Cruz, the Mariners made him their top priority.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Without a doubt,” said General Manager Jack Zduriencik, who signed Cruz, 34, for four years and $57 million. “We had a list of priorities that we wanted, and No. 1 was to try to find a middle-of-the-lineup hitter, preferably a right-handed power hitter. We just think, and everyone in baseball would tell you, that’s the one thing this club lacked.”Of the 10 Mariners with the most plate appearances last season, eight were left-handed hitters. The right-handed Jackson arrived in a trade last July, and Zduriencik traded for another right-handed outfielder, Justin Ruggiano, in December.“You think about our lineup, we can go left-right-left-right quite a bit, with very good hitters,” McClendon said. “It creates problems as far as matchups are concerned, particularly late in ballgames.”Other newcomers, like Seth Smith and Rickie Weeks, give the Mariners more veteran depth than their offense has had in years. But much of the burden will fall on Cruz, who has hit just nine homers in 52 career games at Safeco Field, where fewer runs were scored than at any other A.L. park last season.“It doesn’t matter where you play,” Cruz said. “If you’re able to drive the ball different places, it’s going to be tougher to play defense against you. For me, just try to square the ball up as much as you can, and you’re going to be more likely to find a hole.”Cano averaged 28 homers in his last five seasons with the Yankees, playing his home games in the cozy new Yankee Stadium. Last year he hit just 14, but he still ranked seventh in the majors in offensive wins above replacement, as measured by Baseball-Reference.com.He also delivered on his mandate to make the Mariners relevant again. After three consecutive years drawing fewer than 2 million fans — their first such stretch since 1988 to 1990, before the franchise had ever had a winning record — the Mariners crossed that threshold last season.“They were there till the end,” Cano said. “That’s something that I really learned. I didn’t know there were huge fans in Seattle, like the way they supported us and the way they cared about the players. That’s something I really appreciated.”Now, the Mariners believe, they are poised to break another barrier: 700 runs scored. If they do that, they should find their way to the postseason.A version of this article appears in print on March 15, 2015, on Page SP7 of the New York edition with the headline: Seattle’s Magic Number for Playoffs? 700 Runs, Manager Says.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »