

 Benjamin Hoffman
 

KEEPING SCORE
MARCH 13, 2015
Christian Laettner is not a member of the Basketball Hall of Fame as an individual. But an objective look at a player whom fans loved to hate says he should be.For the 1992 Olympics, USA Basketball wanted the greatest sports team assembled. Unchained from its amateur past and looking to rebuild the American advantage in an increasingly international game, the organization felt there was no player too famous or too talented for what came to be known as the Dream Team.Magic Johnson and Larry Bird, the game’s biggest rivals, would play on the team. Michael Jordan, at his peak, would, too, as would Charles Barkley, Patrick Ewing and Karl Malone. The team had size and talent in the frontcourt, brilliant shooters on the outside and point guards capable of finding an opening against any defense. But in a nod to the amateur roots of the Olympics, it was decided that the team should have a college player to go with the 11 superstars.Shaquille O’Neal was considered, and it seems odd now that he was left out. But at the time, the best possible choice for that 12th roster spot was Laettner.AdvertisementAs the 2015 N.C.A.A. tournament approaches, it will again be time to watch the highlight reel of Laettner’s storybook career, which earned him a place alongside Johnson, Bird and Jordan. You will see the smug expressions, the vicious elbows, the furious dunks and the turnaround jumper against Kentucky in 1992, one of the most memorable basketball moments at any level of the game. There will be praise from some, and scorn by others. But no one will question his talent.“There are very few players in the history of the game that can match his college career,” said Jay Bilas, an ESPN analyst who played at Duke and was an assistant coach during Laettner’s time there. “You’re talking Walton, Alcindor, Elvin Hayes. He had one of the greatest college careers in the history of the game.”Despite the attention Laettner receives around tournament time, he holds an unusual distinction: Of the 12 members of the Dream Team, he is the only one who has not gained induction into the Basketball Hall of Fame as an individual. (The Dream Team was inducted as a unit in 2010.) In fact, according to the Hall of Fame, Laettner has not been nominated. This despite a process in which anyone can put together a package of information for the screening committee to consider.AdvertisementThe Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame, in Springfield, Mass., is unlike the institutions associated with Major League Baseball and the National Football League, which mostly consider the pro careers of athletes. The basketball committee would look at Laettner’s contributions as an amateur and a professional and to the national team. But Duke, for which he won two national titles, and the Atlanta Hawks, for whom he was an All-Star — not to mention fans, boosters and other teams — have never completed the process to propose him for the game’s highest honor.“I don’t think it’s anything that signals that there’s any hesitance,” Bilas said. “I think it’s just a question of time.”When Duke was contacted about not having nominated Laettner, associate sports information director Matt Plizga responded that the university had never nominated an individual, allowing others to recognize the accomplishments of its athletes.“With that said, I am sure we will re-evaluate that practice and be more proactive in the nomination process with the knowledge that the Basketball Hall of Fame is more reliant upon our input than anticipated,” Plizga said in an e-mail.Bilas noted that other players whose pro careers were less successful than their college careers — Ralph Sampson, for example — have often waited a considerable time before finding their way into the Hall of Fame. But there is something about Laettner, who has been eligible for induction for five years, that can still enrage a large segment of the population and may come into play.That will be evident Sunday when ESPN begins showing a new documentary, called “I Hate Christian Laettner.” With a disparate cast of people, including the retired basketball player Jalen Rose, the professional wrestler Ric Flair and the actor Ken Jeong, speaking about the public perception of Laettner (who also weighs in), the documentary explores why people feel things so deeply about someone who was largely free from controversy in a long career.In consideration of Laettner as a player, rather than as a personality, it is hard to come up with any way he should not be a Hall of Famer.In his four seasons at Duke, he never failed to reach a Final Four. He won two national titles and was the team’s unquestioned leader, relegating the future N.B.A. star Grant Hill to sidekick status. He scored nearly 2,500 career points and was the college player of the year in 1992, setting numerous tournament records along the way.The perception that he followed his career at Duke by being an N.B.A. bust is off the mark. In 13 seasons, he averaged 12.8 points and 6.7 rebounds a game. He never recaptured his collegiate dominance, but after a disappointing start in Minnesota, he found a bit of a groove for the Hawks and was an All-Star reserve in 1996-97.AdvertisementLaettner’s time as a pro was not bad enough to hold against him, in the way the modest statistics of, say, Bill Bradley did not hold back his enshrinement in 1983 after his legendary college career at Princeton. Bradley, at least, had the advantage of two N.B.A. titles to bolster his résumé. Coaches like Rick Pitino, who was inducted in 2013, and John Calipari, who is a finalist this year, are given a free pass for outright failure in the N.B.A. in comparison with their body of work in college basketball.And for all the abuse Laettner’s pro career has taken over the years, it resulted in 64.9 career win shares, a statistic tabulated by Basketball-Reference.com to estimate the number of wins contributed by an individual. While some were primarily coaches, and others were elected largely based on their play overseas, there are 45 Hall of Famers who played in the N.B.A. and contributed less overall production in terms of win shares than Laettner, including big names like Bill Walton, Sweetwater Clifton and Pete Maravich.“I think he is a Hall of Famer,” Bilas said. “To me, it’s not a question of his N.B.A. career. His college career alone is Naismith Hall of Famer.”But in the documentary, Flair, the professional wrestler, who like Laettner often relished playing the part of the heel, summed up the way so many people feel about Laettner regardless of his impeccable credentials.“You need a good guy and a bad guy,” Flair said. “It is what it is.”A version of this article appears in print on March 15, 2015, on Page SP3 of the New York edition with the headline: Player With Sharp Elbows May Merit Slap on the Back.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »