

 Scott Cacciola
 

NOT THE KNICKS
MARCH 13, 2015
ATLANTA —  The Hawks’ practice gym has bare walls, some cardio equipment crammed behind a baseline and patchwork flooring, a result of a recent leak. Most N.B.A. teams have gleaming, multimillion-dollar facilities. The Hawks spend their time in something that looks straight out of the Cold War.“You know, I kind of like it,” said Kenny Atkinson, an assistant coach. “It almost feels like we’re in a ‘Rocky’ movie.”The gym, which sits beside the team’s locker room at Philips Arena, safely hidden from public view, fits its style. It could be argued that no other team in the league has more effectively maximized its resources. Get them a couple of functional hoops, and the Hawks, with their lunch-pail roster, will take care of the rest.“It’s as important as anything we do,” Coach Mike Budenholzer said of the team’s emphasis on player development.AdvertisementSpend some time around the Hawks, and one word continues to surface: vitamins. It is a metaphor for their philosophy, and it helps explain their record, 51-14 through Friday. They take their vitamins when they hit the cold tub for treatment. They take their vitamins when they lift weights. They take their vitamins when they study film and watch their diets. Above all, they take their vitamins when they head to the gym for individual skill sessions with Budenholzer’s assistants.Advertisement“It’s that daily nourishment that your body needs,” said Budenholzer, 45, who was hired before the start of last season after spending 19 seasons with the San Antonio Spurs, the last 17 as an assistant under Coach Gregg Popovich.Budenholzer, who acknowledged appropriating the vitamin concept from a fellow assistant with the Spurs, seeks consistent improvement. In Atlanta, he has his players spend as much time working one-on-one with members of his staff as they do in traditional team practice settings. He wants opportunities for Paul Millsap to hone his outside shooting touch and for Jeff Teague to identify passing angles and for Kyle Korver to add a floater to his repertoire.“I think the league is really trending toward shorter practices and more quality individual time,” Atkinson said. “It’s the difference between being in a class with 30 other kids and getting one-on-one tutoring for 20 or 30 minutes.”Before the Hawks faced the visiting Sacramento Kings on Monday night, the public-address announcer revved up the crowd by shouting: “Some still do not believe! Do you believe?” What followed was another clinic in a season full of them. All five starters reached double figures in scoring early in the third quarter. The Hawks assisted on 42 of 53 field goals. They set a franchise record by making 20 3-pointers. And they won by 25.The win was only minutes old when Budenholzer began thinking about the work that still needed to be done. His staff soon joined him in a theater room at the arena. Budenholzer really likes meetings. He meets with his coaches before practices and after games, when they remove their ties and make plans for the next day.“They’re probably up there right now, deciding whether we should have vitamins or not,” small forward DeMarre Carroll said after Monday’s game. “There will be some coaches fighting for us to get rest, and there will be some coaches fighting for vitamins. So they go in their little room and sort it out.”Once the coaches decide on the schedule — they try to form a consensus, although Budenholzer has veto power — they debrief Wally Blase, the head athletic trainer, who sends late-night text messages to the players with the various times they are expected to report to the arena. Blase also lets the players know which coaches have been assigned to work with them for their vitamin sessions. Typically, no two players have the same schedule, so communication is vital.Advertisement“We do everything but send smoke signals over their houses just to make sure they know what’s going on,” Atkinson said.In addition, each assistant receives a sheet that details his day: his allotment of vitamin sessions, along with the material that the coaches have agreed to cover. The message is uniform, and the coaches try not to overload the players with information.“It’s not like we say, ‘Here’s 10 things for you to work on,’ ” Atkinson said. “No, here’s one or two.”For Kent Bazemore, most of his vitamin sessions have centered on his reconfigured shooting stroke. Not long after Bazemore signed with the Hawks last year, he began working with the assistant coach Ben Sullivan, who picked apart Bazemore’s mechanics. Bazemore had an elongated motion, and the ball tended to come off his ring finger and pinkie.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Ben’s a very forward guy,” Bazemore said. “He pretty much said, ‘I’ve been looking at your jumper, and I honestly don’t know how you make shots.’ ”Sullivan and Bazemore worked on tightening his form. Once Bazemore improved his consistency, he began to shoot against defenders. In February, Bazemore graduated to pull-up jumpers. He felt confident enough to attempt one against the Miami Heat on Feb. 28.“Every day, it’s film,” said Bazemore, who was shooting 40.7 percent from 3-point range this season through Friday. “If you miss one, you go back and look at your form. Maybe your feet narrowed. Or maybe you drifted. Once you understand all those little things, the rim gets wider.”At the same time, there are shades of the Spurs — an organization that has set the standard for player development — in nearly everything the Hawks do.Last season, the coaching staff wanted Carroll to focus on getting to the corner for spot-up 3-pointers and used Bruce Bowen, the former Spurs forward, as a model. This season, Budenholzer set out with the goal of adding slashing and pick-and-rolls to Carroll’s game, citing the effectiveness of San Antonio’s Kawhi Leonard.AdvertisementCarroll has become an indispensable part of the Hawks’ starting five, averaging 11.9 points and 5.1 rebounds while shooting 39.4 percent from 3-point range. Darvin Ham, an assistant coach, described Carroll as a “poster child” for the team’s player development program.“He’s become better at everything,” Ham said.The players have bought in, changing their games and even their bodies. Shortly after Budenholzer was hired, he met with his staff to talk about Mike Scott, a 6-foot-8 power forward whom the Hawks drafted in 2012. Did the Hawks want Scott to add bulk and become a consistent post presence, or did they want him to slim down and become a more versatile player who was capable of stretching defenses by developing his 3-point shot?“Oh, it was a war, and I’m not going to say who said what,” Atkinson said. “But there was a debate among the coaches: What do we do with him?”Ultimately, the Hawks opted to turn Scott into a more agile forward. The thinking, Atkinson said, was that Scott would struggle at his height to overpower post defenders, no matter how much bulk he added. So Scott began the process of shedding 18 pounds from his 255-pound frame. It was not easy.“Because I’m fat at heart,” Scott said. “I had to cut down on my snack habits. I ate a lot of Whole Foods. I ate Whole Foods until I didn’t want to eat it no more.”At the same time, Scott concentrated on improving his 3-point shot — fairly new territory for him, given that he had made just six of them as a senior at Virginia. With the Hawks this season, Scott has made 59 3-pointers while averaging 7.5 points off the bench.In Atlanta, where the Hawks have shaped themselves into contenders, there are no secrets.“We’ve just made an enormous commitment,” Atkinson said.Articles in this series are chronicling Scott Cacciola’s sabbatical from covering the woeful Knicks. He will check out some of the good basketball around the country, recommended by readers of The New York Times.A version of this article appears in print on March 15, 2015, on Page SP3 of the New York edition with the headline: Key to Hawks’ Team Play: Nourish the Individual.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »