AdvertisementSupported byBy Jonah Engel BromwichEvery week, The New York Times will choose one essential game to watch, highlighting hot teams, winning and losing streaks and statistical intrigue in the N.B.A.Atlanta at Golden State, Wednesday, 10:30 p.m. Eastern, ESPNThe last time the Atlanta Hawks and the Golden State Warriors played, on Feb. 6, it was one of the season’s most highly anticipated matchups. It turned out to be one of the more exciting games of the year. And still, somehow, it was not on national television. Thankfully, the schedule makes more sense this week as the Hawks, the Eastern Conference’s top team, and the Warriors, the top squad in the Western Conference, face off for the second and final time this regular season. The Hawks, playing at home, came out on top in the February game, 124-116. They were better on defense, with point guard Jeff Teague frustrating his Golden State counterpart, Stephen Curry, and they were better on offense, shooting 55.6 percent from beyond the arc to the Warriors’ 36.4 percent. Golden State gave up 72 points in the second half and allowed seven Hawks to finish with at least 11 points.That kind of porousness is out of character for the Warriors, who lead the N.B.A. in defensive efficiency; the Hawks’ success is a testament to Atlanta’s ability to pass the ball and shift opponents from side to side. In fact, the only team that has racked up more assists than Atlanta is Golden State.Such statistical similarities come up a lot in discussions of the Hawks and the Warriors. The two teams, each the class of its conference for nearly the entire season, are evenly matched. But the matchup’s intrigue goes beyond the standings. Atlanta and Golden State have long been mired in mediocrity. Their success this season is indicative of a league in flux; changes across the N.B.A. in the way teams play have increased the value placed on 3-pointers while the value of star players seems to be in decline. The league also seems to be experiencing parity like never before. Forget about predicting the eventual finalists — it is difficult enough to select the 16 teams that will make the playoffs. Amid this strange and exciting season, Atlanta and Golden State have emerged to lead the charge into the N.B.A.’s next phase. First, though, they must prove they can stay on top. Each finds itself threatened by more traditional contenders. The Hawks have already clinched a playoff berth, but the Cleveland Cavaliers are stealing headlines and turning heads in the East. As of Sunday morning, their record was a hair better than the Hawks’ since the All-Star Break. And when the two teams played in Atlanta this month, the Cavaliers were favored (although the Hawks went on to win and clinch the season series, three games to one). Atlanta seems vulnerable because the Cavaliers’ strengths highlight the Hawks’ weaknesses, namely that the team has no star to turn to when its shots are not falling. Cleveland has two, with Kyrie Irving’s 57-point performance against the San Antonio Spurs last week demonstrating his ability to perform in crunch time. The Hawks were 19-5 against Western Conference teams this season entering Sunday, but as long as they continue to play without a superstar, many will doubt their ability to make it out of the East.The Warriors’ stiffest competitors in the West similarly expose the team’s vulnerabilities. The Memphis Grizzlies, for instance, have toughness and size in their frontcourt; Golden State uses a less-than-traditional lineup. More threatening to the Warriors than any one rival, though, may be the chaos that the Western Conference bracket appears sure to provide. Competition will be fierce in every round.Any N.B.A. fan can recite the conventional wisdom about the playoffs. The game slows down. Defense beats offense. Experience matters. Superstars win championships. If those maxims hold true, then the Warriors and the Hawks will be remembered like Mike D’Antoni’s Phoenix Suns: wildly entertaining teams that were not built to win championships. Wednesday’s contest is likely to be thrilling, not to mention the N.B.A’s last chance to hold the basketball spotlight before the college game takes over for a couple of weeks. But as exciting as the teams have been, there is no guarantee that the game represents a preview of this year’s finals. If the Warriors and the Hawks are truly revolutionary, they will have to prove it in the playoffs. Everything else is simply prologue.Advertisement