By BEN SHPIGELMARCH 15, 2015
MONTREAL —  Compared with the rest of the N.H.L., the Canadiens do not score much, or shoot much, or control the puck much, which would seem to make it awfully difficult for them to win much — let alone 43 times, second most in the league — if not for a very important detail.There is only one Carey Price, and he is theirs. The fans at Bell Centre thunder his name before the national anthem and during play and after games, even losses, paying homage to a goaltender compiling one of the finest seasons in years.Price’s performance has rendered reality indistinguishable from hyperbole, spoiling this city and its fabled team, blessed at the position by the likes of Jacques Plante, Ken Dryden and Patrick Roy, as almost never before.After stopping 35 shots in a 3-1 victory against the Islanders on Saturday night, Price leads the league with a .936 save percentage and a 1.91 goals-against average. Only one other goalie has played to that standard across at least 50 appearances, according to Hockey-Reference.com: Dominik Hasek (.937, 1.87) in 1998-99. Hasek did not win the Hart Trophy, awarded to the league’s most valuable player, but Price is considered the leading contender this year.Advertisement“Whether you’re playing with Carey or against him, you almost know that nothing’s going to go in,” said Minnesota Wild left wing Thomas Vanek, who joined Montreal at the trade deadline last year. “When I was there, he was the best goalie in the league, and in my eyes, he still is.”AdvertisementVanek has a worthy perspective. He plays with Devan Dubnyk, whose statistics in 27 games since joining the Wild actually outpace Price’s, and in a division featuring three of the N.H.L.’s stingiest goalies in Pekka Rinne, Brian Elliott and Corey Crawford. Rinne, in a recent interview, said that he had so much respect for Price that he tried to watch him whenever his schedule allowed.Price is 6 feet 3 and 216 pounds, angular with powerful legs, but there is a certain elegance to his game — how patient he stays as he tracks the puck, how coolly he distributes it to his teammates, how gracefully he skates around the crease, never a hint of panic or anxiety. It takes effort to make absurd saves look effortless, and Price’s nightly displays of technical mastery reveal a man who, at 27 and in his eighth season, is grasping the game’s subtleties.The former N.H.L. goalie Marc Denis, who played part of one season with Price, credited his blooming to three factors: Price’s dominance with Canada at the Sochi Olympics; the Canadiens’ goalie coach, Stephane Waite, who has instilled in him the importance of focusing only on that next game; and a maturation that has come after playing more than 400 games.Denis said he sensed this before the trade deadline, when Montreal was flush with left-handed centers. When freezing the puck, Price would make certain he did so on the off side — if necessary, he would move — to bolster his centers’ chances of winning the face-off.“There’s a level of managing the game that comes with experience that cannot be achieved otherwise,” said Denis, an analyst for the Canadian French-language sports network RDS. “He’s gone to that level this season.”For Price, his success this season is less a revelation than a logical continuation of the brilliance he displayed over the final three months of last season, after leading Canada to a gold medal in Sochi and before the Rangers’ Chris Kreider barreled into him in Game 1 of the Eastern Conference finals, knocked him out for the series with a right knee injury.Price’s absence dazed the Canadiens, and dented their confidence. They lost in six games.“It sucked the life out of us,” Vanek said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Price was not available for an interview last week, but teammates said his presence alone gave them a psychological edge and inspired a confidence and a calmness that permeated the locker room. Over 17 seasons, Daniel Briere has played with dozens of goalies, from Sean Burke to Ryan Miller to Semyon Varlamov, but it was not until he arrived in Montreal last year, he said, that any projected the swagger that Price did.Advertisement“He wouldn’t say anything,” said Briere, who now plays for Colorado, “but it was almost like he was challenging us: ‘Guys, look, I got your back, go get me a goal.’ We felt it.”Sometimes, though not often, Price transfers that swagger to the ice. Early in the Canadiens’ playoff series against Boston last May, Bruins defensemen Dougie Hamilton and Torey Krug posited that Price was susceptible to high shots — a claim that Price, diplomatically, dismissed. The next game, after saving a Krug one-timer from the right circle with his glove, Price skated out of the crease and tossed the puck toward him.“We all saw it, and we all knew,” Briere said. “That was his way of telling them, and telling us: ‘They don’t know what they’re talking about. I’ve got this.’ ”Teammates said they detected a subtle change in Price after Sochi. Canadiens defenseman P. K. Subban, who played there with him, called the experience pivotal in Price’s evolution, for reasons extending beyond hockey. After spending time with some of the sport’s most respected players — Canada’s roster boasted seven N.H.L. captains — Price better understood how leaders portrayed confidence. Having allowed three goals in five games, including none in the semifinals or finals, Price returned to Montreal transformed.“A lot of people don’t understand it’s taken Pricey seven years to get where he’s at,” Subban said in an interview. “It didn’t happen overnight. It didn’t happen in his first couple years in the league. It took time. That’s hard work. That’s mental toughness. Especially to get there in this city, it ain’t easy.”Every dazzling outing strengthens Price’s candidacy for not only the Vezina Trophy, awarded to the best at the position, but also the Hart, which has not been won by a goalie since Jose Theodore of Montreal in 2002.James Mirtle, a reporter for The Globe and Mail, seeking to assess Price’s value, calculated that if the Canadiens, who through Saturday ranked 22nd out of 30 teams in scoring (2.55), had been playing this season with even a league-average goalie — think of Jimmy Howard of Detroit or Antti Niemi of San Jose — they would have a negative goal differential. Of the 11 teams that have allowed more goals than they have scored, none began Sunday closer than 5 points from a playoff berth.“This is a middle-of-the-pack team,” Denis said. “They wouldn’t be fighting for first in the East. They wouldn’t be considered one of the contenders. It takes a Vezina and Hart type of season to take them here.”It takes a Carey Price.A version of this article appears in print on March 16, 2015, on Page D2 of the New York edition with the headline: He Has Montreal Fans in the Palm of His Glove.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.