By ANDREW KEHMARCH 15, 2015
Just before 3 p.m. on Sunday, Mike Carroll emerged from the D train at 161st Street and embarked on a footpath to Yankee Stadium that he has practiced and perfected over countless baseball seasons.“I like riding this car because it opens right at the stairs,” Carroll said as he zipped across the platform.Carroll, 33, who attends more than 40 Yankee games a season and has a tattoo of the team’s logo on his back, was making his first trip to the stadium this year. The Yankees, however, will not play their first home game until April 6 — a fact Carroll laughed about as he made his trip from his home on the Upper West Side. Instead, he joined an announced crowd of 43,507 at Yankee Stadium to see the first home game of New York City F.C., an expansion club in Major League Soccer.The Yankees are part owners of N.Y.C.F.C., which will play its home games at Yankee Stadium until it can build its own stadium somewhere in or around the city. And so on Sunday the team and its fans, temporary guests in the ballpark, began the process of trying to make themselves at home.AdvertisementThe day at once had a familiar and a fresh-out-of-the-box feel. There were countless Yankee sights and sounds — just a little different. To start, the stands beyond the right-field wall — Bleacher Creature territory — now served as some of the building’s most enviable seats, perpendicular to the soccer field’s midfield line.AdvertisementThe cushioned seats behind home plate offered an awkward vantage point and were not even made available for sale.In the upper concourse of the stadium, two women working at the Wholly Guacamole concession stand — where those inclined could still get a baseball helmet full of chips and nacho cheese — wore N.Y.C.F.C. caps with the tags still dangling off them.The retail spaces around the concourses were turned into N.Y.C.F.C. pop-up shops hastily stocked with soccer merchandise, and fans endured long lines to get to them. Two men at the end of a line on the lower concourse, wrapped in blue scarves, passed the time taking selfies next to a statue of Derek Jeter.Sunday was only N.Y.C.F.C.’s second game of the season — a 2-0 victory against the New England Revolution — and its fan culture remains in its infancy.Two hours before the game, several dozen people were congregated on the sidewalk outside Billy’s Sports Bar on River Avenue. They periodically broke into songs and chants as dance music carried out of the open doors. It was slightly more subdued, but no less crowded, at Stan’s Sports Bar down the street, a longtime gathering spot for Yankee fans. Portraits of Babe Ruth, Lou Gehrig and Mickey Mantle gazed out over the room as soccer fans in knit caps sipped their beers.It will take time to see the extent to which the stores and bars in the stadium’s vicinity embrace the soccer team.There was not a hint of the N.Y.C.F.C. colors, for instance, at Stadium Souvenirs, a store on the southeast corner of 161st Street and River Avenue that stocks Yankee merchandise from floor to ceiling.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“We have nothing for them — zero,” Mo Abdullah said from behind the store’s counter. “It’s only the first day. We’ll see how it goes and then decide what we will do.”AdvertisementMike Hong, who owns D&J Variety Store, a souvenir shop around the corner, was already selling one N.Y.C.F.C. item — a small pin commemorating the inaugural season — and said he was planning to get more.“I didn’t expect to see so many people,” said Hong, who was hopeful that the team would keep attracting crowds to bring more people into his store.The stadium was perhaps not quite ready for the crowd, either. Scores of fans were still waiting to get inside as the game was beginning, leaving patches of empty seats around the lower bowl. Once inside, they found a lively, if slightly hesitant, atmosphere.Mayor Bill de Blasio appeared with players on the field before the game. The singer Ashanti performed a rousing rendition of the national anthem that crackled over the public-address system. It was a chilly night, reminiscent of an autumn postseason baseball game.The crowd seemed unsure of itself. This was new to them, after all. At one point, a segment of fans started to chant, “Let’s go, Yankees.”But the fans dutifully erupted when David Villa scored the first goal of the game in the 19th minute, making a smart run into the penalty area and twirling a skillful shot into the lower corner of the goal. Villa jogged toward the dirt around home plate, blowing kisses toward the fans along the way.“They’re also learning to work together as a team on the field,” Claudio Reyna, the team’s sporting director, said of the fans as he praised their energy.In the 84th minute, Patrick Mullins added to the lead. As the stands bubbled with applause again, the stadium announcer said, “New York City F.C. goal! Scored by Patrick —”Apparently, fans were supposed to fill in the blank and yell the player’s surname, but if anyone did, it was not audible.AdvertisementThere will be plenty more games to perfect the call and response. Traditions have to start somewhere. It can take time to get comfortable in a new home.A version of this article appears in print on March 16, 2015, on Page D10 of the New York edition with the headline: New York City F.C. Earns Its First Victory as Fans Forge Culture in Temporary Home.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.