AdvertisementSupported byMidwest PreviewBy Marc Tracy and Zach SchonbrunNASHVILLE — In Willie Cauley-Stein’s first season, the Wildcats lost to Robert Morris in the first round of the National Invitation Tournament after the star freshman Nerlens Noel tore his anterior cruciate ligament.Last year, Cauley-Stein watched from the bench with an ankle injury as the Wildcats lost in the national title game to Connecticut.Now, Cauley-Stein is a junior and the only upperclassman among those playing serious minutes as Kentucky sets its sights on its second national championship in four seasons and the first undefeated season in Division I men’s basketball since 1976.No one player deserves too large a portion of credit for Kentucky’s success — not even Cauley-Stein, a Kansas native who was named the Southeastern Conference’s defensive player of the year. A modified platoon system has eight players who each are on the court for about half the game. It was telling that the SEC’s player of the year, the Arkansas sophomore forward Bobby Portis, did not come from the conference’s best team.In terms of pure talent, Cauley-Stein’s fellow big man on the starting Blue Platoon, Karl-Anthony Towns, is the one expected to be a top-three N.B.A. draft pick in June. But the player closest to indispensable is probably Cauley-Stein. He is second in rebounds and blocks per game and is third in minutes. He leads the team in Sports Reference’s defensive win shares calculation (and is fifth in Division I). On offense, his effective field-goal percentage of 58.8 ranks him first on the Wildcats, according to the analysis site KenPom.com.Most important is what Cauley-Stein’s versatility allows Kentucky to do on defense. Like Towns, he is as tall and long-armed, but he is also quick. When opponents draw him out to the perimeter, he is not a liability: Kentucky can stay in its man-to-man defense while Cauley-Stein keeps up with players a half-foot shorter, occasionally finishing with a brutal block.For this bracket, the more unusual that your picks are, the more points you’ll receive — so long as those picks are correct.“He can guard one through five,” the assistant coach John Robic said, adding, “It’s a luxury we have.” Coach John Calipari said, “He’s that one guy who can do stuff that a normal player can’t.”Off the court, Cauley-Stein has served as den mother to his slightly younger teammates. “Dudes are learning how to play the college game,” he said last month. “Dudes are going to get more mature playing.”Kansas and Wichita State have not played each other since 1993, and Kansas Coach Bill Self has said he has no interest in scheduling the intrastate rival. But the Jayhawks and the Shockers could meet in the round of 32. The last time they played in the tournament, in 1981, Wichita State won, 66-65.Bobby Hurley was breeding horses in Florida just a few years ago before being pulled into coaching. Now, in his second season at Buffalo, Hurley led the Bulls to their first N.C.A.A. tournament appearance. A former Duke legend, Hurley has energized a dormant program; the Bulls were one of the only teams to lead Kentucky at the half this season.Texas vs. Butler could be a war of attrition, with two teams that struggle to score. But the Longhorns’ late scramble to reach the tournament has them playing better. Their huge front line will be troublesome for Butler, which does not have much size.1 Kentucky (34-0) versus 16 Manhattan (19-13)/ Hampton (16-17)8 Cincinnati (22-10) versus 9 Purdue (21-12)5 West Virginia (23-9) versus 12 Buffalo (23-9)4 Maryland (27-6) versus 13 Valparaiso (28-5)6 Butler (22-10) versus 11 Texas (20-13)3 Notre Dame (29-5) versus 14 Northeastern (23-11)7 Wichita State (28-4) versus 10 Indiana (20-13)2 Kansas (26-8) versus 15 New Mexico St. (23-10)Fastball velocity reached last summer in the Baltimore Orioles’ farm system by Pat Connaughton, who is averaging 12.8 points and 7.4 rebounds for Notre Dame this season. Connaughton was a fourth-round pick in the 2014 major league baseball draft.Advertisement