By TIM CASEYMARCH 15, 2015
Bracketology began with two die-hard college basketball fans in a tiny office watching games, eating junk food, drinking caffeinated beverages, working around the clock and wishing the weekend would never end.Today, Joe Lunardi and Charlie Creme are ESPN’s bracketologists: Lunardi projecting the N.C.A.A. tournament field for men’s basketball and Creme for women’s. They have been with the network for more than a decade and are familiar faces to many fans who follow the sport closely. To them, though, their part-time job is more a labor of love than a demanding occupation.In the mid-1990s, before the proliferation of sports websites, Lunardi, 54, was the editor of the Blue Ribbon college basketball yearbook when he decided to publish an N.C.A.A. tournament guide and include detailed information on each team. He predicted which teams would make the field by analyzing data and figuring out what the selection committee members valued. That way, Lunardi, Creme and other contributors could start writing before Selection Sunday and finish the guide in time to send to subscribers and employees of ESPN and CBS Sports, who used the book as a resource.Creme, 44, and Lunardi were living near Philadelphia at the time, so they and a few colleagues would get together during the weekend heading into Selection Sunday. They worked out of Lunardi’s office at St. Joseph’s University, where he has been a full-time employee since graduating in 1982. Creme was a staff writer for The Sports Network, a wire service that provided college and professional sports news mainly to radio stations.AdvertisementCreme and Lunardi bonded immediately over their shared obsession with college basketball. They also enjoyed giving each other a hard time about their alma maters, Catholic colleges and rivals in the Atlantic 10 conference. Creme had recently graduated from St. Bonaventure, where he worked on a student newspaper staff that included the New York Post columnist Mike Vaccaro; the Yahoo Sports and Fox Sports 1 N.B.A. reporter Adrian Wojnarowski; and Jeff D’Alessio, a former editor in chief of The Sporting News.Advertisement“I still have this vision of Charlie sitting on a carpeted floor in my office at St. Joe’s with his back up against a chair in front of this big old color TV that I had inherited from my wife’s grandmother,” Lunardi said. “He would just sit there and watch games and write about the teams as they ended. He was just a machine at cranking out copy.”Even after Creme accepted a sports anchor job at the ABC television affiliate in Bangor, Me., in 1996, he sometimes made the trip to Lunardi’s office and helped out his old friend. He remembered the two of them working until 4 a.m., falling asleep for a few hours and returning to their duties. Their diet consisted of cheesesteaks, chicken cheesesteaks, Coca-Cola and coffee.“It was the best,” Creme said. “I knew I was going to be massively sleep-deprived and nutritionally deprived, but it was all basketball working next to this guy who maybe felt even more strongly about the sport, the game and the excitement around this time of year than I did. I wouldn’t have traded it for anything.”Around a decade ago, ESPN asked Lunardi to project the N.C.A.A. women’s field. By then, Lunardi had established himself as an authority at predicting the men’s teams, but he declined the additional duties because he was busy working his St. Joseph’s and men’s bracketology jobs and raising a young family. However, he knew the right man for the position: Creme.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Although Creme was by then a pharmaceutical sales representative, he embraced the opportunity to take on the part-time bracketology job and pursue a lifelong passion. Growing up in Canastota, N.Y., 25 miles from Syracuse, he would tape two pieces of poster board together and make his own brackets that he attached to his closet door and filled in as the tournament progressed.“Honestly, I didn’t have any expectations,” Creme said. “I looked at it as ‘I get to play with brackets again, I get to have ESPN next to my name and I get to be someone intimately involved in women’s basketball.’ I didn’t even think about anything else.”Through the years, Creme’s ESPN role has expanded. At first, he was strictly a bracketologist and did not reveal his initial projections until February. Now, the first bracket is published in November and is updated each Monday starting in early January. By late February, he begins updating the women’s field every day until it is announced Monday, a day later than the men’s field. Last year, Creme correctly predicted all the at-large berths.Creme also helps plan ESPN.com’s women’s basketball coverage and writes analysis articles, including accounts on site at the women’s Final Four. He also writes scouting reports for ESPN.com’s Insider service on the Big 12, Pac-12 and Mountain West conference teams that appear in the men’s tournament. He occasionally appears on radio and television, too, although not as frequently as Lunardi.Advertisement“Charlie Creme resonates with women’s basketball fans just as Lunardi does on the men’s side,” said Melanie Jackson, who has been ESPN.com’s women’s basketball editor since 1999. “And that’s not to take anything away from Joe. Joe absolutely should be credited for the model, and I know Charlie says he learned everything he knows from Joe. But I think Charlie’s done a great job of making this his own for women’s college basketball.”Since Creme moved in 2003 to Las Vegas, where he continues to work in pharmaceutical sales, he has not seen Lunardi in person. Still, they exchange emails, remain fond of each other and reminisce about their days two decades ago when they huddled in Lunardi’s office.“It was closed quarters and it was bracketology in its formative days,” Lunardi said. “One of these years before I quit all this, I’m going to do that again, get all those guys together, and we’re going to spend that weekend together watching games and eating bad food. We’re just not going to do the work part.”A version of this article appears in print on March 16, 2015, on Page D4 of the New York edition with the headline: Bracketology’s Birth: Filling In the Blanks, Running on Caffeine.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.