By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSMARCH 15, 2015
Tony Clark, the executive director of the Major League Baseball Players Association, said Sunday that the union has no issues with Alex Rodriguez.Rodriguez rejoined the Yankees this spring after serving a one-year drug suspension. During his appeal of the ban, Rodriguez filed — and later dropped — lawsuits against his own union, Major League Baseball and the Yankees’ team physician.“There were challenges throughout,” Clark said after his annual spring training meeting with Yankees players. “Everybody has come out the other side. He’s part of the fraternity. The guys I have spoken to, a lot of guys have moved forward. The commentary I’ve heard this spring has been very positive.”“Guys will be watching to see how he carries himself,” Clark added. “Guys will be watching to see what impact he wants to have going forward.”AdvertisementRodriguez, a three-time American League most valuable player, will turn 40 in July, and he has not played a full season since 2007 because of the suspension, operations on both hips and other injuries.Advertisement“The opportunity to see him back out on the field, I’m happy for him,” Clark said. “Seeing him in the shape he’s in, I’m happy for him. It was a difficult stretch. I’m glad to see him back on the field.”On Sunday, Rodriguez grounded out and walked in a split-squad 3-2 victory over the Philadelphia Phillies. Rodriguez is 6 for 17 (.353) with four walks overall this spring.SCHERZER LOOKS STRONG Max Scherzer pitched four shutout innings in the Washington Nationals’ 3-2 loss to the Houston Astros in Kissimmee, Fla.“This is a chance to see where you’re at,” Scherzer said. “I went out there with the mentality of giving them everything I’d give them during the regular season, plus I know these guys a little bit from pitching in the American League.“I was really focused on the results today rather than just going out and working on things,” Scherzer said.Making his third start for the Nationals after signing a seven-year, $210 million contract in January, Scherzer gave up one hit and one walk while striking out three. Scherzer, the 2013 American League Cy Young Award winner with Detroit, used all of his breaking pitches, some in crucial counts.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Those are the type of things you need to be able to succeed during the year,” he said. “If you’re facing a divisional opponent, you don’t want to show them everything you’ve got, especially when you’re facing the Mets and the Marlins and Braves down here in Florida. I don’t want to let them get a free look at it when it doesn’t count.”REDS OUTFIELDER SIDELINED Cincinnati Reds outfielder Jason Bourgeois will miss four to six weeks with a fracture in his left shoulder.AdvertisementBourgeois, 33, has been trying to win a job as the Reds’ fourth outfielder.Bourgeois left the game against the Rockies on Saturday in Goodyear, Ariz., after a successful sacrifice bunt. He collapsed, holding his arm a third of the way down the first base line.Manager Bryan Price said Bourgeois felt something in his shoulder in the Reds’ first Cactus League game on March 2. He was held out a couple of days and treated.Brennan Boesch, who can play all three outfield positions, now has the inside track to win a spot on the Reds’ bench.SNEEZE CREATES A STRAIN Toronto Blue Jays outfielder Kevin Pillar has been sidelined — by a sneeze.Pillar is expected to miss a week to 10 days with an oblique strain sustained while sneezing on Saturday morning.Pillar, who is in contention for a starting spot, said he sneezed and felt a sharp pain in his right side, but he decided not to tell team trainers about it until after he was pulled in the fifth inning of Toronto’s win over a Yankees split squad. After treatment, Pillar was advised to rest.He did not play Sunday.“I don’t think this is a big deal,” Pillar said, adding that he had been prepared to play Sunday. “But they’re being very respectful about it and willing to give me a little bit of time,” he said. Pillar is batting .269 this spring.A version of this article appears in print on March 16, 2015, on Page D3 of the New York edition with the headline: Union Chief Glad to See Yankee Back on the Field.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.