AdvertisementSupported byOn BaseballBy Tyler KepnerGOODYEAR, Ariz. — As the actor Will Ferrell skipped merrily from camp to camp last Thursday in a madcap Cactus League odyssey, the best pitcher in the American League worked stoically on a back field at the Cleveland Indians’ training complex. No numbers on the scoreboard, no paying customers, not even an umpire.Corey Kluber might smile if he watched Ferrell’s slapstick comedy. Kluber, his teammates insist, is a witty prankster. Last May, he wore a chicken costume in the outfield during batting practice.“Oh, he’s very sneaky,” Indians pitcher Zach McAllister said. “If there’s something going on, he’s probably got his hand in it somehow.”But after Thursday’s simulated game — a controlled setting to build innings, without the stress of competition — Kluber revealed nothing. He wore no expression. He looked neither happy nor irritated, speaking to a few reporters in monotone, the personification of the nickname some teammates wear on a T-shirt: Klubot.Kluber, 28, earned the A.L. Cy Young Award last season with robotic, methodical efficiency. A right-hander, he finished 18-9 with a 2.44 earned run average, 269 strikeouts and better advanced metrics than the runner-up, Felix Hernandez of the Seattle Mariners. He got the award at a banquet in New York in January.“It’s just sitting on a desk in my office,” Kluber said. “I haven’t found a good spot for it.”Yet Kluber has reason to be proud. He became the third Cleveland pitcher to post a season of at least 18 victories and 260 strikeouts and an E.R.A. below 2.50. The others were Bob Feller and Luis Tiant.That is impressive company for any pitcher, especially one in his first full major league season who was not even ranked as a top-10 prospect in the San Diego farm system in 2010. That was when the Indians acquired him in a three-way trade that sent pitcher Jake Westbrook to St. Louis.“I don’t worry about what people predicted my career path to be,” said Kluber, who was drafted in the fourth round from Stetson University. “That’s kind of a waste to do that. I think it’s better off to just focus on what you can do now to improve in the future. I don’t think looking back makes much sense.”Looking forward did not interest him much, either, beyond generalities, but the Indians do not pay Kluber to talk. They pay him — not very much, actually — to pitch, and they thought he was intriguing enough to pluck from the Padres’ Class AA team for Westbrook. (San Diego got outfielder Ryan Ludwick from the Cardinals.)“What we try to do is identify those attributes that we think have a chance to lead to success,” said Chris Antonetti, the Indians’ general manager. “In Corey’s case, he’s a big, physical starting pitcher with good stuff, had a track record of success in terms of missing bats — he was leading the league in strikeouts at the time — and our reports were really good on his makeup and work ethic.”Kluber, who is listed as 6 feet 4 inches, advanced to Class AAA soon after the trade but struggled there the next season, with a 5.56 E.R.A. and more than four walks per nine innings. He relieved three times for Cleveland in September 2011, but he began the next two seasons in the minors.Kluber refined his skills on the farm, working diligently on a sinking two-seam fastball that one day would devastate major league hitters and make his cutter and curveball even more effective. But mastering the pitch took time.“Guys are in the minor leagues for a reason, and his was fastball command,” said Mickey Callaway, the Indians’ pitching coach and their former minor league coordinator. “And with stuff like that and throwing the ball over the plate, you don’t know when that’s going to come. It could be four years. It could never come.”Success came for Kluber midway through the 2013 season. He went 8-1 in his final 16 starts, and last spring Manager Terry Francona predicted a breakthrough. Kluber had gotten on a roll, and Francona believed his competitive drive would sustain it.As last season went on, Francona said, Kluber rarely shook off a sign from catcher Yan Gomes. He had total trust in the two-seamer.“When you have that good stuff and you throw it with conviction, even if it may not be the right pitch, it probably is,” Francona said. “He went one outing where Gomer wanted to establish his fastball, and he was locating it. I don’t think he threw an off-speed pitch until the ninth hitter of the game. And he just said: ‘I never really thought anything. Gomer put it down, so I threw it.’ ”Francona said he was pleased to see a younger Indians starter, Trevor Bauer, finding a similar rhythm with Gomes this spring and pouring strikes into the zone. Bauer is one of several starters in the Indians’ boom-or-bust rotation who could be poised to blossom, and he is using Kluber’s two-seamer as a template.At one point last season, Bauer asked Kluber if he could stand behind him in the bullpen and film his practice session. Kluber agreed, and Bauer — who chose his angle to best view Kluber’s release point — said he captured his teammate in 240, 480 and 1,000 frames per second.Bauer watched the film, and other clips he collected of Toronto’s Marcus Stroman, who has a similar two-seamer, and studied the footage as part of his off-season routine, watching it on a loop three out of every five days once he started throwing on Nov. 1. Bauer said Kluber’s two-seamer, which averages 93 miles an hour, veered eight inches down and in to a righty, and he spotted it with such precision that it perfectly set up his curveball, if hitters got that far.“He puts a lot of pressure on the hitter to swing the bat,” Bauer said, “because I noticed toward the end of the year, a lot of guys were going up there and swinging really early in the count, almost like they were in defensive mode from the beginning. There was an intimidation factor you could see.”Bauer said his own version was a work in progress — inconsistent, but coming along. For years, that also described Kluber’s career, and his late development has kept him from cashing in on his Cy Young Award.Kluber was not eligible for salary arbitration this season and will make only $601,000 on a one-year deal. The Indians traded their last two Cy Young winners — C. C. Sabathia and Cliff Lee — before they reached free agency, getting outfielder Michael Brantley for Sabathia and starter Carlos Carrasco for Lee. They are in no rush to move Kluber, who cannot be a free agent until after the 2018 season.“I’m not talking about that,” Kluber said when asked about the possibility of a long-term contract, and the answer was predictable. The Klubot is not programmed to discuss such matters, or to elaborate on much of anything.He is programmed, simply, to dominate. It was a long-running script, but it is finally up and running.Advertisement