
On Baseball By                     
 TYLER KEPNER
 
OCT. 1, 2015
The Yankees were the very first American League wild-card team, 20 years ago, when they advanced directly to a division series. Now they are the latest, finally clinching a playoff spot on Thursday with a 4-1 victory over the Boston Red Sox at windswept Yankee Stadium.The Red Sox have been pests this week, a dipping, darting fly the Yankees could not quite swat for three days. Now they have done it — with the 10,000th victory in franchise history, no less — and return to the postseason after a two-year absence.“It feels good feeling the Champagne burn your eyes,” outfielder Brett Gardner said. “I saw a couple of guys with goggles earlier, and I made them take ’em off. It’s a big accomplishment, and we’re excited about this opportunity.”The format is different now, of course, from what it was when the Yankees first won the wild card. Their prize is a one-game showdown on Tuesday with the other wild-card team, who is still to be determined. One more win, or a loss by the Houston Astros, and the Yankees will play the game in the Bronx.AdvertisementNot that home-field advantage matters much. In the six wild-card games since baseball introduced this format, in 2012, the home teams are 2-4. In the first A.L. version, Texas sent Yu Darvish to the mound against Baltimore’s Joe Saunders, who had been 0-6 with a 9.38 E.R.A. in the Rangers’ home ballpark.AdvertisementNaturally, Saunders beat Darvish, 5-1. No one ever said this stuff made sense.So Masahiro Tanaka’s shaky outing on Wednesday, when he gave up four runs in five innings against Boston, may not be a cause for the Yankees to worry. Unless it is. Once next week begins, nobody knows anything, and every team is good enough to go far.“I think there’s a formula and methodology to getting to the postseason, but once you’re in it, there’s too much left to chance,” Stan Kasten, the chief executive of the Los Angeles Dodgers, said last month.Kasten, whose Dodgers will face the Mets in the first round, ran the Atlanta Braves when they had Greg Maddux, Tom Glavine and John Smoltz in the rotation, yet won just one championship.“I lost a World Series in Game 7 on a base-running error,” Kasten said, referring to a Lonnie Smith blunder in 1991. “We had one play when a fielder ran into an umpire, in 1996. We could have won those. I don’t think there’s anything specific to win in the postseason. You’re going to need to be set up, you’re going to need to have health and you’re going to need the breaks, because in such a short series breaks are really important.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.When it is only one game, and not a series at all, those breaks might matter even more. Good fortune was the first factor mentioned by Torey Lovullo, Boston’s interim manager, who won a championship as a Red Sox coach in 2013.“A little bit of luck — and a lot of pitching,” Lovullo said. “That’s where it falls for me. If you’ve got the horses that are going to stand up on the mound and execute a game plan the way you need it to be executed, you’re going to win some baseball games.”Tanaka would be the Yankees’ horse on Tuesday. If he pulls up lame, they will need options to protect themselves. Adam Warren, an occasional starter who fired three scoreless innings Thursday to get the game from C. C. Sabathia to Dellin Betances, could be an important weapon.Advertisement“Maybe you go to your bullpen a little bit earlier, and you do the things that you need to do, because you’ve got to move on,” Manager Joe Girardi said after clinching. “You’ve got to win that game. There is no tomorrow. Tuesday, you have to win.”With home-field advantage almost assured — and a gloomy forecast threatening their weekend games in Baltimore — the Yankees can give ample rest to Justin Wilson, Betances and Andrew Miller, the threesome that will join Warren as the critical relievers on Tuesday.With the St. Louis Cardinals in 2012, Carlos Beltran saw his team use five relievers to get the final 10 outs of a wild-card victory in Atlanta. The Cardinals beat Kris Medlen, who had gone 9-0 with a 0.97 E.R.A. in his last 12 starts that season.Again, anything can happen.“It’s crazy, my friend,” said Beltran, the Yankees’ right fielder. “It’s a lot of tension, no doubt about it. It could go super right or it could go super wrong, because any momentum is important, every pitch is important, every at-bat is important, every play that you make in the outfield is important.”The Yankees’ path could begin with a matchup against Dallas Keuchel of the Astros or Garrett Richards of the Los Angeles Angels.Keuchel, who would be pitching on three days’ rest Tuesday, has beaten the Yankees twice this season, with 16 scoreless innings. Richards, though, allowed six runs, five hits and two walks and could not survive the first inning in the Bronx on June 6.And what about the Minnesota Twins, who are tied with the Angels at one game behind Houston and have an impressive rookie, Tyler Duffey, who has never faced the Yankees?The opponent is a mystery, but the Yankees are in — and that means they have a chance.“We’ve had our ups and our downs, but it doesn’t really matter how you get there,” Gardner said. “It matters that you’re there.”A version of this article appears in print on October 2, 2015, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: Better to Be Lucky Than Good in October .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »