AdvertisementSupported byV.C.U. 71, Dayton 65By Seth BerkmanMelvin Johnson grew up on West 125th Street in Harlem, dreaming of following in the footsteps of local basketball legends like Kemba Walker and Felipe Lopez by playing at Rice High School.For three seasons, Johnson wore the green and gold jersey of the Raiders, which, in his neighborhood, was about as prestigious as wearing the Knicks’ blue and orange. Then, in May 2011, Johnson received a letter saying that Rice was closing. He would have to go elsewhere for his senior year.“It was devastating,” said Johnson, a guard who ended up at St. Benedict’s Prep in Newark and went on to Virginia Commonwealth. “One of my biggest accomplishments growing up in Harlem, I thought, would be graduating from Rice.”On Sunday, Johnson, now a junior at V.C.U., and Dayton’s Scoochie Smith, another Rice product, carried the legacy of their fallen high school onto the Barclays Center court. Smith led the second-seeded Flyers (25-8) with 16 points, but Johnson’s fifth-seeded Rams (26-9) secured a 71-65 victory that gave the team its first Atlantic 10 tournament title and an automatic N.C.A.A. tournament bid.For this bracket, the more unusual that your picks are, the more points you’ll receive — so long as those picks are correct.Johnson and Smith, who have stepped into pivotal roles for their teams this season, remain close friends. They keep track of their former teammates, including another former Rice player at this year’s A-10 tournament, the St. Joseph’s freshman guard Shavar Newkirk. Two other former Raiders, Emmy Andujar and Tyler Wilson, led Manhattan to an N.C.A.A. tournament berth. Johnson called Rice basketball “a brotherhood.”“My freshman year, I feel like, was the best year of high school for me,” said Newkirk, who graduated from Cardinal Hayes in the Bronx. “I kept shirts, ties, my student ID. I still have a pin from when I was on the honor roll.”Today, Rice’s brick building, at West 124th Street and Lenox Avenue, is operated by Harlem Village Academies. The outlines of its windows are still painted green, but the Rice signs have long since been taken down.“I don’t look at the building now and see that school,” Newkirk said. “I look at the building and say that’s where I had my freshman year, where I had good memories, where I kind of came into my own as a basketball player. That’s what I miss.”For years, Rice students heard rumors that the school would be closing. An endowment of $3 million dwindled during the late-2000s financial crisis, as did student enrollment. But many thought there would never be any weight behind the threat of closure.“When I got there in 2000, I heard it was closing,” Rice’s former coach Dwayne Mitchell said. “In 2011, I believed it’s still not going to happen.”In the school’s last year, all of Rice’s graduating seniors were accepted to college. Walker, a Rice graduate who led the Connecticut Huskies to a national championship a month before his high school closed, said he received an unparalleled education there. “Rice raised me,” said Walker, now a guard for the Charlotte Hornets. “Rice turned me from a boy into a man.”Once players accepted Rice’s demise, they had to scramble to find new homes. After initially choosing St. Benedict’s Prep, as Johnson did, Smith settled in at Putnam Science Academy in Connecticut. Smith said the culture change and the international student body at Putnam helped him later adjust to Dayton. But his heart remained in New York.“We all know at the end of the day, that’s where we’re from, and if things wouldn’t have went the way it went, most likely we would have been alumni,” Smith said.He has become one of the Flyers’ top defensive players, contributing four steals on Sunday.“He’s turned into a terrific player,” Dayton Coach Archie Miller said. “Scooch was really, really responsible in a big way, how we had some success.”At V.C.U., Johnson was able to adjust quickly to the Rams’ intense, pressure-oriented defense because that is how Rice practiced. He has become a team leader in the absence of the injured senior Briante Weber, and he led V.C.U. with 23 points Friday in the A-10 quarterfinals as the Rams defeated Richmond for the first time this season, 70-67. Johnson scored 6 points off the bench on Sunday for V.C.U., which had lost the A-10 final in 2013 and 2014, its first two seasons in the conference.Mitchell, who now coaches at Monsignor Scanlan High School in the Bronx, described the pride he had in watching his former players continue to have success with lessons they learned at Rice.“The sad part about Rice closing, it wasn’t the basketball — it was a school that provided education for a certain community of people,” Mitchell said. “Kids came by like, if it wasn’t for Rice, I’d either be dead or in jail. It saved a lot of kids.”Advertisement