

 Marc Tracy
 

ON COLLEGE BASKETBALL
MARCH 15, 2015
NASHVILLE — CBS broadcast Maryland’s team at the moment the Terrapins learned where they would be seeded in the N.C.A.A. men’s basketball tournament. The looks on their faces conveyed a mix of punch-drunk disbelief and dread. They had been placed in Kentucky’s quadrant.The Wildcats, at 34-0 and with their sights set on becoming the first Division I men’s basketball team to have a perfect season since Indiana in 1975-76, are the favorite. And in the days leading to Selection Sunday, it seemed as though avoiding the Midwest Region — and having a chance to make it to the Final Four without having to face Kentucky — was a greater prize than even a No. 1 seed.In the order in which the committee ranked them, the four top seeds were Kentucky (of course), Villanova, Duke and Wisconsin, with Virginia, Arizona, Gonzaga and Kansas earning No. 2 seeds.“One of the challenges was we felt like there were six teams that had a résumé worthy” of a No. 1 seed, Scott Barnes, Utah State’s athletic director and the head of the selection committee, said on a conference call Sunday night. He was referring to the four No. 1s plus Virginia, which went 29-3, and Arizona, which improved to 31-3 by winning the Pacific-12 championship Saturday night.Advertisement“Arizona is a terrific team,” Barnes said.Kentucky is six wins away from perfection, and what would be an unprecedented 40-0 season. The team and its coach, John Calipari, maintained all season that the ultimate goal was not perfection, but a national title. Now, though, the goals are identical.AdvertisementKentucky’s players were frequently asked in recent weeks if it might not be better to lose a game to take the pressure off. That line of thinking died Sunday with a victory here over Arkansas in the Southeastern Conference championship game.“If you lose, you’re done,” the junior Willie Cauley-Stein said after the game. “There’s no relief about it.”Asked how a team could beat the Wildcats, Cauley-Stein shook his head. “I don’t know,” he said. “I couldn’t tell you.”
                For this bracket, the more unusual that your picks are, the more points you’ll receive — so long as those picks are correct.            Kansas, seeded in the Midwest with Kentucky, is the weakest No. 2 seed — according to the committee and to most observers. Yet Kentucky was not let off easy: It could also face the red-hot Atlantic Coast Conference champion, Notre Dame, or underrated Wichita State in the round of 8 and, even before that, the Terrapins, who finished the regular season ranked eighth in the Associated Press poll.“The selection committee did Kentucky no favors,” the analyst Grant Hill, a former Duke Blue Devil, said with a smile on CBS on Sunday afternoon.Also done no favors by the committee were the first four left out, who are the four No. 1 seeds in the N.I.T.: Colorado State, Temple, Old Dominion and Richmond.Barnes confirmed that Temple had been closest to the final at-large bid.The last four in were Mississippi, Brigham Young — a reward for beating Gonzaga — Boise State and Dayton, which will open with a play-in game Wednesday on its home court in Ohio.AdvertisementAlthough Wisconsin fans may have held their breath as Michigan State forced overtime in the Big Ten championship game Sunday afternoon — only to watch the Badgers win by 11 points — Barnes said that Wisconsin had been set to receive its first No. 1 seed in university history no matter the outcome.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Curious about which No. 1 seed faces the “least headwind,” as the CBS analyst Clark Kellogg phrased it? He ranked Villanova’s East Region as the easiest, then Kentucky’s Midwest, then Wisconsin’s West and finally Duke’s South, which has Gonzaga and the Big 12 champion, Iowa State, as its No. 2 and 3 seeds.Several analysts wondered whether giving Georgetown and Louisville No. 4 seeds was too generous, especially in the case of the Cardinals, who have not looked the same since they dismissed guard Chris Jones after a rape accusation.The analysts also wondered why Texas and U.C.L.A., traditional powers having lukewarm seasons, were included at all.“I’m frankly disappointed that the committee gave such a benefit of the doubt to power conference teams that have harder schedules built in,” the analyst Doug Gottlieb said on CBS.With Texas, the Big 12 placed a remarkable seven teams out of 10 in the tournament. Also placing seven teams was the 14-team Big Ten, while the Atlantic Coast Conference placed six, as did the new-look Big East, which placed Villanova as the No. 2 overall team.“I thought the conference was really strong this year, maybe a bit undervalued in the public national discourse,” Kellogg said.He added in reference to the Final Four in Indianapolis: “I think Villanova’s got a chance to get to Indy. I would love to see Butler and Notre Dame match up, and I think that’s going to happen.”St. John’s announced Sunday — and told the committee Saturday night — that it had suspended junior center Chris Obekpa for two weeks for a violation of team rules. The Red Storm play San Diego State on Friday in Charlotte, N.C.Advertisement“I think that’s a comfortable matchup for the Johnnies, even without Obekpa,” Kellogg said.One team outside any region’s top four seeds that looks poised to make a run is Wichita State, the seventh seed in the Midwest, which could play its in-state rival Kansas in the round of 32.“They’ve got a core group of guys that know the pressure of being undefeated,” Kellogg said, referring to the 34-0 record the Shockers took into the tournament last year.There is some evidence that the tournament is having its own “Moneyball” moment. At several points during his conference call, Barnes referred to “other metrics” the committee used, and when pressed, he said these included advanced ratings put out by the analysts Ken Pomeroy and Jeff Sagarin.The best team that did not make the tournament, according to KenPom.com, was Florida. The Gators, who were the overall No. 1 seed in last year’s tournament, are near the very bottom of another advanced metric that Pomeroy calculates, simply called Luck. Certainly it does not require math to see that having to play Kentucky three times this year was not fortuitous.A version of this article appears in print on March 16, 2015, on Page D1 of the New York edition with the headline: In Rarefied Air.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »