AdvertisementSupported byLynx 69, Fever 52By Pat BorziMINNEAPOLIS — The championship celebration in the Minnesota Lynx locker room Wednesday night started in dignified fashion. Players sipped Champagne from plastic flutes, and a few brandished unlit cigars. Then the Lynx executive vice president Roger Griffith dropped the big news: After a reception in a nearby restaurant, limos would take everyone to Paisley Park, home of the pop star Prince, who was hosting a victory party.A cheer went up, and moments later, the spraying of Champagne commenced. By then, the night was already special. The Lynx had wrapped up their third W.N.B.A. title in five seasons by beating Indiana, 69-52, in Game 5 at Target Center before a towel-waving, franchise-record crowd of 18,933, about 400 short of a sellout. “This was an unbelievable experience,” said the Lynx star Maya Moore. “I don’t even have words to describe it.”Not since the Houston Comets won the first four W.N.B.A. titles from 1997-2000 has a team had such a prolonged stretch of success. Center Sylvia Fowles, who sat out the first half of the season to force Chicago to trade her to Minnesota, spurred the Lynx with 20 points and 11 rebounds to win the Most Valuable Player Award for the series.“I’m just excited to do it with all these girls,” Fowles said. “Nothing against Chicago. I fulfilled my contract and wanted to step out and try something new. Minnesota just so happened to be the team.”At the buzzer, Fowles joined the Lynx veterans Lindsay Whalen, Rebekkah Brunson, Seimone Augustus and Moore in a group hug under the Indiana basket as confetti tumbled gently from the ceiling.Indiana held the dynamic Moore to 5 points on 1-for-8 shooting, but Fowles, Augustus (16 points) and Brunson (14 rebounds, 10 points) provided more than enough.Lynx Coach Cheryl Reeve said that if someone had told her before the game that Moore would make only one basket, she would have predicted a 20-point loss.“What a testament to this team,” said Reeve, her hair dripping with Champagne. “That’s our story. We don’t do anything easy.” Though the first four games were decided by 6 points or fewer, the Lynx — known for their defense and rebounding under Reeve — wrapped up the game by the opening minute of the fourth quarter. Minnesota limited Indiana to 4 points in the second quarter, a record low for a W.N.B.A. finals game, and 8 in the third while bursting to a 48-29 lead. In that stretch, the Lynx forced 17 turnovers and held the Fever to 4-for-23 shooting (.174). “They outplayed us in every single way,” Indiana Coach Stephanie White said. “They’ve been one of the premier teams in this league for a long time, and tonight you saw a reason why.”Indiana fell short of winning a second championship for Tamika Catchings, 36, its emotional leader, who plans to retire after next year’s Olympics. Catchings, who had 18 points and 11 rebounds, visited the Lynx locker room to congratulate her United States Olympic teammates Moore, Augustus, Whalen and Fowles. She scooted out before Whalen, brandishing a Champagne bottle, could douse her.“She’s someone who has been so good for so long that you can hardly imagine what it would look like without her being one of the leaders of the W.N.B.A.,” Moore said. The Fever took a stressful path to the finals, losing the opening game of their first two series before winning decisive Game 3s on the road. Advertisement