By HUW RICHARDSMARCH 15, 2015
CARDIFF, Wales — This year’s Six Nations championship will go down to the final weekend, with three teams still having a chance at the title.England (3-1) has the advantage, and not just because it has a small edge over Ireland (3-1) and a larger one over Wales (3-1) in the tiebreaker, points difference. England will be playing at home next Saturday, after its rivals have finished their games.England, looking to win its first title in four years, will play France at the end of the day. Wales will play first, against Italy in Rome, followed by Ireland taking on Scotland in Edinburgh. Since each of the contenders has three wins, the championship cannot be settled until England has played, and there is a good chance it will be decided on points difference.The tournament was opened up Saturday when Ireland, the reigning champion and the last unbeaten team this season, lost, 23-16, to Wales here in Cardiff. It was only Wales’s third home victory over the Irish in 32 years.AdvertisementWales won because of a record-breaking defensive effort. In the 15 years since the Five Nations was expanded to Six with the admission of Italy, only one team had exceeded 200 tackles in a match — Italy, when it made 245 against Ireland last year.AdvertisementWales’s total against Ireland on Saturday was 289. Luke Charteris, its massive, 6-foot-9 lock forward, made 37, breaking the previous Six Nations record of 27 by a single player.Sam Warburton, the back-row forward who is the Welsh captain, also exceeded that mark with 30 tackles, even though he missed 10 of the 80 minutes when he was yellow carded.“The reason for those tackle totals is that they kept the ball so well and kept on and on coming back at us,” said Warburton, who was named Man of the Match.Wales’s defensive effort peaked in an eight-minute second-half siege of its line by the Irish that saw at least four try-saving tackles.“Those defensive sets in the second half were perhaps the most exhausted I have ever been,” said Warburton.The roar from the home crowd when Wales finally won the ball after an Irish assault that covered 32 attempts was of a volume more usually associated with winning tries — and with good reason. Had Ireland scored at that point, when it trailed 15-9, it would very likely have gone on to win, which would have meant playing for the Grand Slam next week in Edinburgh.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Instead it was Wales that claimed the decisive try five minutes later when the replacement center Scott Williams sliced through a gap in the Irish defense to score. Ireland resumed its pressure soon after, was awarded a penalty try with 10 minutes to go and pressed until the end, but it could never quite recapture the intensity shown in the eight-minute siege.Besides its defense, Wales was also left feeling grateful for its quick start, which led to Leigh Halfpenny kicking four penalties in the first 13 minutes.Advertisement“It was a result which could have gone either way, and it helped that we got off to a good start,” said Wales Coach Warren Gatland. He called it “a test match which had everything.”Ireland lacked the precision it had shown in previous matches, particularly in the lineout, a crucial ball-winning set piece that is usually one of its greatest strengths. “We didn’t help ourselves, although a lot of credit has to go to the Welsh defense,” said Ireland Coach Joe Schmidt. “We let ourselves down a little. We probably had enough possession to win.”That England would beat Scotland at Twickenham on Saturday was the most predictable result of the Six Nations season. Scotland has won only four times in 104 years of visits to England’s stadium and not at all since 1983. It arrived last in the standings and winless after three matches.It duly left with an 0-4 record, but not before it had led 13-10 at halftime and stayed in contention until winger Jack Nowell put England out of sight with five minutes to go. The five points for his try gave England a winning margin of 25-13, just enough to squeeze Ireland out of first place in the standings.“We know we’ll need to be more clinical if we’re to get the job done against France,” said England Coach Stuart Lancaster, looking toward next week’s match. “We probably left three or four tries out there. We were creating chances, but we didn’t take them.”The chances that England did take before Nowell’s score came from center Jonathan Joseph, who consolidated his place as the championship’s top scorer with his fourth try in four matches, and flyhalf George Ford, who added 10 points on kicks.Scotland’s try came from its lively rookie center, Mark Bennett. It has played some of the most attractive rugby by any team this season, but it will finish at the bottom of the standings unless it beats Ireland next week. “The guys played with a lot of spirit and a lot of courage, so we’ll take those positives from the game,” said Scotland Coach Vern Cotter.A version of this article appears in print on March 16, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.