By ROB HUGHESMARCH 15, 2015
LONDON —  When Barcelona paid a lot of money to buy Luis Suárez last summer, many outsiders asked how was that going to work?Suárez’s talent is unquestioned. His temperament is debatable. But with Barcelona still in the process of fitting together Lionel Messi and Neymar, the addition of a third top striker was seen by many as overloading the attack.The challenge was compounded by the fact that Luis Enrique, a young coach unproven at this level, had only just begun his first season in charge of the troubled Catalan giant.With FIFA imposing a transfer ban on Barcelona for the next 18 months, prosecutors accusing the club of tax fraud over the Neymar signing and Messi’s family under investigation over allegations of unpaid taxes, some people felt the last thing the club needed was Suárez.AdvertisementHe would miss the opening two months of the season as a punishment for biting the shoulder of Giorgio Chiellini of Italy at last summer’s World Cup.AdvertisementAll yours, Coach Enrique. Just get the attack working, sort it out and restore Barcelona to a leading team in the style expected by the 90,000-plus aficionados at the Camp Nou.Seven months after the acquisition, perhaps against the odds, Barcelona is back on top of La Liga. This weekend, Enrique could afford to leave seven regulars out of the starting lineup, and still the team cruised to a 2-0 win at the Basque club Eibar. This meant that Barcelona was able to conserve its energy before two games at the Camp Nou that could define its season.It is favored to finish off Manchester City in the Champions League on Wednesday after it won the first leg in Manchester, 2-1. Barça then awaits a visit by Real Madrid in the Clásico next Sunday.Two wins — even two draws — will sustain its status among the leading teams in Europe this season. It is possible that some of those who doubt the merits of Enrique and the men who appointed him will then step back and let him manage.The team has undergone considerable transition from back to front. Victor Valdés, the goalkeeper, left of his own volition after last season. Carles Puyol, the captain and defensive rock, retired after repeated knee surgeries. Xavi, the playmaker of the marvelous period under Coach Pep Guardiola, is not getting any younger. He is 35 and played his 750th game for Barcelona on Saturday.But still, even with all the changes in every department on and off the field, the accommodation of Messi, Neymar and Suárez was the toughest of the tricks to pull off.It is working — to the score of 126 goals by Barcelona in all competitions this season, compared with 28 conceded. In the Spanish league alone, Barcelona has hit 78 goals — of which Messi has 32, Neymar 17, and Suárez 7.AdvertisementThat last figure is the telling one. Last season as a Liverpool player, Suárez was king of everything. He scored or created goals in just about every game. And he did so because Liverpool’s team was built around him.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.To be sure, Luis Suárez was the omnipotent player. He ran after lost causes and shot from improbable angles. He fed off his team and off the adulation of a Liverpool crowd that had seen nothing quite like him since Kenny Dalglish in a previous era.And then, as Suárez does, he fell in love with another suitor. Barça wanted him, and he wanted a move to be close to Barcelona, where his wife’s parents had moved after leaving Uruguay.Common sense suggested that there would have to be give and take to fit him into the lineup. Neymar had arrived a season earlier, and as fine a player as the Brazilian is, it had taken a whole year to adapt his game to Barcelona.Skill is obviously the first requirement of any professional player. But in a team sport, adaptability runs a pretty close second. Slowly, Neymar grasped that he was not the outstanding individual who would be served the way that he was with his boyhood team, Santos, in Brazil.He was, and is, an admirer of Messi, whom Neymar still speaks of as the best player in the world.I rate Messi first, Neymar second and Suárez third in terms of ability. But Suárez has managed the transition in half the time that it took Neymar.This may in part be because of experience. Neymar turned 23 in February, and Barcelona is his second club. Suárez is five years older and has played in four countries.The three stars have in common that they all are South Americans and share an intuitive appreciation of attacking play. Messi adapted his game this season as he moved deeper and wider on the right without compromising his ability to score the lion’s share of goals.Neymar plays on the left, despite his right foot being his leading weapon.And Suárez? Adaptable as a chameleon, he darts here, there and everywhere, starting from a central position, making moves to create opportunities for others.AdvertisementAt Eibar on Saturday, there was never a question that Barça would win. The only quandary was when the goals would arrive and at which point would the team effectively declare its effort finished, allowing it to plan ahead to the Manchester City and Real Madrid games.Eibar was not a pushover. Its plucky team has come up through two promotions in two years. Its supporters raised cash to ensure that the modest club complied with Spanish minimum financial regulations, despite its tiny stadium, the Ipurua, having room for just 5,250 spectators.Camp Nou could fit in nearly 20 times as many fans, and Eibar’s entire payroll would not buy a leg of any Barcelona player, let alone Messi, who scored both goals on Saturday, the second with a header.Reports of a rift between the coach and Messi have subsided. “The situation we’re in,” Enrique said recently, “is the fruit of our collective effort. The front players have chemistry; it helps the team that they get on well together off the pitch.”A version of this article appears in print on March 16, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.