By TOM PEDULLAMARCH 16, 2015
RaShawn Stores often prayed alone. At other times, he prayed with family members. They all sought guidance, unsure how to respond when a dream collided with harsh financial reality.Stores yearned to play Division I basketball. He was convinced he belonged as a point guard. Others were not so sure. He did not have scholarship offers after he graduated from All Hallows High School in the Bronx and spent another year in prep school.It appeared that his best opportunity was to serve as a walk-on at Manhattan College, with the hope that he could convince Coach Steve Masiello, a former walk-on at Kentucky, that he was worthy of a scholarship for the remaining years.The gamble would cost around $30,000 in tuition and expenses, money not readily available to a family living in the beleaguered Soundview section of the Bronx.AdvertisementAfter his mother, stepfather, grandmother and two uncles pooled their resources, the 5-foot-10 Stores went on to earn the scholarship he needed to continue as a student-athlete.AdvertisementAnd, as Masiello said, “The rest is storybook.”Stores, a senior and a team captain, helped lead Manhattan (19-13) to the N.C.A.A. tournament for the second consecutive year and only the eighth time in the history of the program. The 16th-seeded Jaspers will face Hampton (16-17) in a play-in game Tuesday night in Dayton, Ohio, for the dubious opportunity to face Kentucky (34-0), the top seed over all, in the Midwest Region on Thursday night in Louisville, Ky.Stores’s loved ones plan to be in the stands, knowing that an extraordinary set of circumstances made their bonds even stronger. “I would not be here without them,” Stores said.His mother, LaTrebia Stores, said of the family’s financial support: “It was not easy, but it was not hard. RaShawn is a great young man. I am so proud of him.”But those who questioned whether Stores would develop into a solid scorer were right. He averages 6.3 points per game; his shooting percentage, .380 (52 of 137), is lacking. But that does not keep him from having a profound impact on the Jaspers.“He means everything,” Masiello said. “He’s an extension of me on the court. He’s got the greatest I.Q. of anyone I’ve seen. He’s as tough as they come. He makes big shots. He’s not afraid of the moment.”Stores embraced the pressure as Manhattan defended its title in the Metro Atlantic Athletic Conference tournament this year. He finished with 10 assists and only one turnover for the tournament as the Jaspers swept past Marist and St. Peter’s before avenging two narrow regular-season losses to Iona with a 79-69 victory in the championship game.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Stores scored 9 points, handed out 5 assists and did not have a turnover in helping to topple the Gaels, an explosive 26-win team.Emmy Andujar, a 6-6 senior forward who leads Manhattan in scoring (16.5) and rebounding (7.6), credits Stores with much of the program’s recent success. Manhattan has reached the championship game of the M.A.A.C. tournament in each of Stores’s three years of eligibility — academic issues sidelined him as a freshman — and proved to be an extremely tough opponent in last year’s N.C.A.A. tournament. The Jaspers led Louisville, then the defending national champion, by 58-55 with less than four minutes to play before bowing, 71-64.Advertisement“He’s a great leader,” Andujar said of Stores. “He might not be the best player on the court, but he knows what it takes to win. He keeps the team together. He’s the glue guy on the team.”Stores, with the confidence that he can overcome long odds, embodies what the program at Manhattan has long been about. Louisville did well to avoid what would have been a huge upset in 2014.Florida was not so fortunate when the Jaspers made their previous N.C.A.A. appearance, in 2004. Manhattan dispatched the Gators with ease, winning by 75-60, but fell just short against Wake Forest, losing by 84-80.Masiello recruits locally, often finding himself with players who have been overlooked or unwanted. Eight players have New York ties. Masiello, a former understudy of Louisville Coach Rick Pitino’s, relies on full-court pressure and a frenetic pace that tends to bring out the best in his local players, reminding them of the freewheeling nature of playground ball.“We have blue-collar kids who roll their sleeves up, who are not afraid to mix it up with you,” Masiello said. “It might not always lead to victories, but we want to make sure that our brand and our style is there consistently.”Stores will play the next game as if it will be his last. Then again, he has performed with that kind of urgency since he was a walk-on.“We’re going to come out and fight and anything can happen,” he said.Regardless of the outcome, Stores knows his greatest triumph will not come on the court. A business major, Stores is on course to graduate this spring. He wants all of the young people in Soundview to know that.“I’m a big role model there,” he said. “This is my way to show them that we grew up in a neighborhood that is not good, but there is always a way out. College is big. School is big. That is the key to surviving.”A version of this article appears in print on March 17, 2015, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: With Hustle and Grit, Manhattan Player Inspires by Defying the Odds.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.