By DAVID WALDSTEINMARCH 16, 2015
So extensive is the growing list of Mets pitchers who have needed Tommy John surgery in recent years that even their general manager had difficulty recalling all of them on Monday.“I don’t have all the cases in front of me,” the general manager, Sandy Alderson, said on a conference call with reporters, “but the four I can think of are deGrom, Matz, Wheeler now and Harvey. As well as Hefner, I guess, will be five.”More formally, the five are Jacob deGrom, Steven Matz, Matt Harvey, Jeremy Hefner and Zack Wheeler, who is the latest Mets pitcher found to have a tear in his ulnar collateral ligament, that tiny bit of sinew in the elbow that has cost so many pitchers at least a year of their careers.Alderson did not mention four other past and present Mets pitchers of note — Jenrry Mejia, Mike Pelfrey, Bobby Parnell and Josh Edgin — who have required the operation since 2010, with the team announcing Sunday that Edgin would have it this week. That makes for nine Mets pitchers in all — or 10 if you factor in that Hefner has had the procedure twice — a total that seems excessive even as teams across baseball lose more and more pitchers to elbow injuries.Advertisement“You can always look at your practices in developing pitching,” Alderson said during the conference call. “Also look at mechanics and whether mechanics are clean or not clean, velocities, types and assortments of pitches. We will certainly continue to look at what we’re doing. But this is an industrywide problem, and there is some suggestion this goes back to pitching loads and things that predate even college. So it’s something baseball has to continue to look at. We do as well.”AdvertisementBecause there is no real consensus on why so many pitchers are tearing their elbow ligaments, Alderson and the Mets will have a hard time figuring out whether they have simply been victims of bad luck or whether practices within the organization need to be addressed.“It does seem as if the Mets are consistently dealing with this issue,” said Dr. Craig Levitz, the chairman of orthopedic surgery at South Nassau Communities Hospital on Long Island. “It could be some of the things they are doing, it could be the pitchers that they pursue, and it could just be bad luck. It’s very hard to know.”After Harvey hurt his elbow in 2013, the Mets looked into pitch counts and rest days but made no substantial changes regarding the way their pitchers were treated, Alderson said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Caution is the best thing one can learn from any of these,” he said.Still, the Mets did not act more cautiously with Wheeler in camp this year than they did with other pitchers, Alderson said, citing advice from the team’s medical staff. Wheeler had pitched with elbow discomfort in 2014 and had magnetic resonance imaging tests on his elbow in September and January.“If the doctors had felt that we needed to treat him in a different way, we would have,” Alderson said.Levitz, who has worked alongside Dr. James Andrews, the orthopedic surgeon widely regarded as the leading expert on Tommy John surgery, has not examined Wheeler but followed his case in recent days through published reports. Levitz said Wheeler’s injury — a full tear of the ligament, as detected by an M.R.I. over the weekend — almost certainly did not come out of nowhere in the last week. In all likelihood, Levitz said, the two previous M.R.I.s missed a small partial tear in Wheeler’s elbow that eventually became a full one.Had the full tear occurred several months from now, in the middle of the season, it might have been independent of the elbow tendinitis that Wheeler was feeling last year, Levitz said. But the fact that he felt discomfort after only one spring training start indicated that it was related to his problems from last season.M.R.I.s sometimes give false negatives, especially when they are used without a dye that can help expose even the smallest tears, Levitz said. But Levitz, citing the three M.R.I.s the Mets gave Wheeler in seven months, said it was clear that the team’s doctors had been suspicious of something.“It was probably ulnar collateral ligament stuff that masqueraded as tendinitis because the M.R.I. was normal,” Levitz said. “Ulnar collateral ligament tears are very difficult to diagnose sometimes. It could have been a very small tear that didn’t show up, and even if it did, you might have followed the same protocol for the player that they did.”A version of this article appears in print on March 17, 2015, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Bad Luck or Bad Practices? It’s Tough for Mets to Tell.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.