AdvertisementSupported bySports of The TimesBy Juliet MacurSOUTH ORANGE, N.J. — On her way to helping Seton Hall earn its first berth in the N.C.A.A. women’s basketball tournament in two decades, Daisha Simmons had to make a few stops. Literally.Many days this season, she drove her brother, Chaz, to and from his dialysis treatments as he struggled with end-stage renal disease. On other nights, often after 11 p.m., she also picked up her mother, Christena, from work at Target, a crucial timesaver because Christena otherwise relied on public transportation and had an early morning job delivering mail for the Postal Service.That was on top of Simmons’s basketball commitments and, of course, her schoolwork at Seton Hall. A graduate student at her third university, she is chasing her master of business administration degree in hope of someday opening a gym in her old Jersey City neighborhood near the Holland Tunnel, where she grew up on the basketball courts and stayed out of trouble in a place where there was a lot of it.Simmons, a 24-year-old guard, is so busy, she said, that she can hardly keep things straight sometimes. But she wouldn’t have had it any other way. “This is my life, and it’s exactly how I want to live it,” she told me this month. “This, all this, is what I was fighting for.”And all this is exactly why Simmons last year became what she calls “the poster child for all that is wrong with the N.C.A.A.” She wanted to be busy this year. Very busy. It’s just that the N.C.A.A. and her former team, Alabama, were standing in her way.Last fall, as Simmons was entering her final year of eligibility at Alabama, she decided to transfer because she hadn’t been accepted into Alabama’s business school and because she wanted to be closer to her family. Christena Simmons was battling several chronic diseases, and Chaz had serious kidney problems. Her family needed her help, and she wanted to give it. The problem was that Alabama refused to let her go, saying she had waited too long to request a release from her scholarship. The N.C.A.A. said she could transfer, but only if she sat out a year. That battle sparked a very public debate over how much control the N.C.A.A. and its members should have over student-athletes, but also over the unfairness of denying a compassionate reprieve to a student with a legitimate hardship. Before long, #FreeDaishaSimmons was trending on Twitter, the start of a social media call to arms. Under public pressure, Alabama granted Simmons her release, but not before her case highlighted the heartlessness and absurdity of a college system that sometimes holds such a tight grip on its athletes that it nearly strangles them.Alabama did not respond to requests for an interview with Kristy Curry, its women’s basketball coach. In doing so, Curry passed up the chance to explain what makes it all right for her to leave any college for another to further her career, even as students like Simmons are prevented from doing the same.“Daisha has been such a huge help to our family, and I don’t know what we would’ve done without her,” said Christena Simmons, a single mother who raised four children of her own, and four of her sisters’ children, too. “For the N.C.A.A. to have so much control and basically determine how an athlete is going to live their life, and for Alabama to be so cruel and insensitive, I think that’s just horrible.”Daisha Simmons won’t bad-mouth Alabama; it seems against her nature. But she did tell me that she had told her coaches, again and again, “I just want to play basketball and get my M.B.A., so I could move on and not waste a year of my life.” A thousand miles away, Tony Bozzella, Seton Hall’s coach, was eager for Simmons’s transfer to go through. Naturally, he had a vested interest — Simmons was an experienced player who would help the Pirates. But he said the principle at stake counted more. “We all lose sight, at times, that this is an educational process, first and foremost,” he said, calling Alabama’s treatment of Simmons “disgusting.” He added: “It’s up to you — personally, ethically and morally — to do right by your players. You promise their families that. Daisha’s case highlighted that, and should be a constant reminder of that.”The resolution of the case should have been a relief to Simmons, but for the first couple of games, she played tentatively, afraid of “stepping on anyone’s toes” after so many weeks of being the squad’s reluctant star. “To tell you the truth, I had been feeling so much pressure for so many weeks, and I just didn’t want the attention anymore,” she said. By late November, Bozzella had had enough of Simmons the wallflower. He took her aside and said, “Look, we didn’t go through all of this for you to have you just pass the ball.’ ”Shoot it, he told her, and when she started doing that, she and the Pirates took off.Simmons is now averaging 16.9 points, and Seton Hall, which won a share of the Big East regular-season championship, is 28-5. The Pirates, the ninth seed in the N.C.A.A. tournament’s Albany Region, will play eighth-seeded Rutgers (22-9) on Saturday in Storrs, Conn.The best part for Simmons is that her mother has been to all her home games. Chaz has come, too, and earlier in the season, the team hosted a fund-raiser for kidney disease.It’s how it was meant to be, Simmons said, and in hindsight, it was worth all the trouble.“I’m an example of how the N.C.A.A. and universities do what’s best for them, and not what’s best for their kids,” she said. “I hope people at least learn from what I went through. Something like this shouldn’t happen again.”Email: juliet@nytimes.com Advertisement