AdvertisementSupported byAnalysisBy Zach SchonbrunIt has been 20 years since Rebecca Lobo led Connecticut to the undefeated season that started it all for Coach Geno Auriemma and the Huskies. On Saturday, UConn will begin its quest for a 10th title over that span.The bracket for the N.C.A.A. women’s tournament, announced Monday night, revealed the Huskies as the No. 1 seed of the Albany Region for the ninth consecutive year. Just as men’s teams around the country plot ways to foil undefeated Kentucky’s path to a national title, so, too, does it appear as if the women’s tournament will run through Connecticut yet again.Auriemma, who would tie John Wooden of U.C.L.A. with 10 national titles as the most in a career, saw his team’s 47-game winning streak end in an overtime game against Stanford in November, but the Huskies remained dominant from then on, winning games by an average of 42 points.The biggest surprise of the bracket was the low seeding of the undefeated Ivy League champion, Princeton, which drew a No. 8 seed and will face Wisconsin-Green Bay in College Park, Md., on Saturday.As the selection show was broadcast on ESPN, the Princeton players wore “30-0” T-shirts. Despite being only the 15th program to enter the tournament undefeated (and only the fifth from outside a major conference), Princeton was dealt a lower seeding than some had predicted.Charlie Creme, the ESPN bracketologist, had Princeton as a No. 5 seed in his final prediction. He said in a conference call last week that when the selection committee revealed its top 20 seeds in early February and the Tigers were not among them, it gave him a good indication of how the committee thought of them. “I think a lot of people were thinking they could be in the top 16, they could be hosting,” Creme said. “But that release told me the committee did not necessarily feel that way.”Women’s N.C.A.A. bracket.With only three of its wins against teams ranked in the top 50 in rating percentage index, and ranked 12th itself by that index, Princeton, which has never won an N.C.A.A. tournament game, had trouble convincing the committee it was one of the best teams entering the tournament. If the Tigers win, there could be a matchup with top-seeded Maryland, which stormed through its first Big Ten season as the first team to finish the conference’s regular season and tournament unbeaten since Purdue in 1999. Those Boilermakers wound up winning the national title.After the graduation of Alyssa Thomas, Maryland’s career scoring and rebounding leader, who helped them reach the Final Four a season ago, the Terps have only one senior on this year’s team, Laurin Mincy. “Her leadership has been so valuable for this team,” Coach Brenda Frese said on the ESPN telecast. “We’re playing for her. She leads us. It’s her pulse.” Another top seed, for a second straight year, is South Carolina, which has blossomed from a 10-18 team in Coach Dawn Staley’s first season, in 2008-9, to a legitimate national title contender. With the No. 1 recruit in the nation entering this season, A’ja Wilson, coming off the bench and routinely hitting big shots, the Gamecocks spent much of the regular season ranked first over all — until a loss to Connecticut in early February flipped the two teams in the rankings.Notre Dame, the final No. 1 seed, sits atop the Oklahoma City Region and certainly knows the feeling of losing to the Huskies. The Irish are 68-1 the last two seasons against teams other than Connecticut. Notre Dame went undefeated last year before losing to UConn in the national title game. When the teams met in February, the Huskies won by 18 points.In its first-round game, UConn meets St. Francis of Brooklyn, making its first N.C.A.A. tournament appearance after winning the Northeast Conference tournament despite an overall losing record. From there, Connecticut would face the winner of an intriguing matchup between No. 8 Rutgers and No. 9 Seton Hall, a turf war between New Jersey programs.The Pirates are making their first N.C.A.A. tournament appearance since 1995, helped enormously by Daisha Simmons, the transfer whose struggle to be released by Alabama made national headlines last fall. Simmons finished third on the team in scoring (16.9 points a game).Advertisement