AdvertisementSupported byBy John BranchLAS VEGAS — The locker room was empty except for the Utah men’s basketball coach, Larry Krystkowiak, who reached into his bag and pulled out what appeared to be a short section of braided rope. It was black on one end.“I try not to burn it on the road too much because I don’t know about the smoke alarms and fire alarms,” Krystkowiak said. “At U.C.L.A., they came in and told me we had to extinguish whatever we were burning in there.”Krystkowiak calls it sweet grass, but it is actually a blend of four sacred plants — sweet grass, cedar, tobacco and sage — from the Blackfeet Indian Reservation in Montana, near where Krystkowiak was raised.Before each game, before the final pep talk, Krystkowiak lights the rope, spreading the scent and giving Utah the sweetest-smelling locker room in college basketball.“I’m pretty spiritual, so to me it’s the visualization of the smoke going up, a way to carry your prayers,” Krystkowiak said. “And I want our guys to find the symbolism with the smell. You don’t smell it anywhere else. It’s the symbolism that this is a special time, and let’s go try to do something special.”For Utah (24-8), it is the recaptured smell of victory. The Utes, a national power under Rick Majerus 20 years ago, are going to the N.C.A.A. tournament for only the second time in a decade, and the first time since 2009. They were ranked eighth in the Associated Press poll in January, but with four losses in their last seven games, they are entering the tournament as an unpredictable No. 5 seed. They will play Stephen F. Austin (29-4), a No. 12 seed, on Thursday.One of Utah’s recent losses was to Arizona, a national title contender. Two were to Oregon, one of the country’s hottest teams; the latter defeat came on a last-second 3-pointer in the Pacific-12 Conference semifinals.Utah is unlikely to reach the national title game, as Majerus’s team did in 1998, but Krystkowiak has returned optimism to Salt Lake City for the coming years, if not days and weeks.A slender 6 feet 9 inches, Krystkowiak is a physical Laurel compared with the rotund Hardy of Majerus, who died in 2012. Krystkowiak is an intimidating presence on the sideline. His mouth, surrounded by a blond goatee, is often creased in a snarl. He glares, with his hands on his hips, and sometimes stamps his feet at officials. He paces like a caged cat.For players, though, the feeling is one of positive reinforcement. During a conference quarterfinal game against Stanford on Thursday, the freshman Brekkott Chapman took a hard charge, and Utah’s star, Delon Wright, followed with a 3-pointer. Stanford called a timeout, Utah fans were delirious, and Krystkowiak rushed the floor — not to high-five Wright, as most players did, but to wrap Chapman in a hug.“I think it’s the best play in basketball, myself,” Krystkowiak said later, referring to drawing a charge. He added, “The momentum change — for him to do that, that was a big deal.”Off the court, Krystkowiak, 50, is straight talking and startlingly funny, comfortable and confident in the manner of someone who has circled the basketball world and seen it all.His childhood in Shelby, Mont., was not easy. His mother died of Hodgkin’s disease when Krystkowiak was in grade school. His strained relationship with his father, a railroad worker, and his stepmother led Krystkowiak to move in with an older brother. (Krystkowiak, married with five children, goes back to Montana regularly, but he said he had not seen his father in several years.)He starred at Montana and was a second-round N.B.A. draft choice in 1986. Krystkowiak played for six teams over nine seasons, sticking in Milwaukee for four years. He finished with career averages of 8.2 points and 4.9 rebounds per game and a better understanding of family bonds.“Basketball, to me — and not to get into the childhood and some of the growing-up experiences — the basketball team was always my family,” Krystkowiak said. “The teammates were like my brothers; the coach was often like my dad.”His coaches included Del Harris, Jerry Sloan and Phil Jackson, the Zen master of championship teams who burned sweet grass at Chicago’s United Center when Krystkowiak played for the Bulls in the 1994-95 season. That gave Krystkowiak the idea to do it when he became a coach, although he had first encountered the burning smell at a record shop back in Montana.His favorite teammates included Jack Sikma, Scottie Pippen and Luc Longley — “certain guys that get what it’s like to be a teammate,” Krystkowiak said.He and his wife, Jan, even intended to name their first child Luc.“But we were in the hospital, and Luc was playing for the Phoenix Suns, and he laid an absolute egg in the first game of the playoffs — I mean, just a horrible game,” Krystkowiak said, referring to a May 8, 1999, loss to Portland, when Longley was 1 of 6 from the field. “Jan and I said, ‘This can’t exist.’ So he got Cameron.”Cameron was a family name. The next son was named Luc.“Luc knows that story,” Krystkowiak said, referring to Longley. “I don’t know that we’ve talked to our kids about it.”Krystkowiak became an assistant coach at Montana, then its head coach, leading the Grizzlies to two N.C.A.A. tournament berths in two seasons. He moved back to the N.B.A. as a Milwaukee assistant, then its head coach. He was an assistant with the Nets when the Utah job opened in 2011.“I don’t know that I would have gone and taken on the challenge if it hadn’t ever been done before,” he said. “But when you look at the landscape and go, Wait a minute — I remembered being there, and I remember watching Coach Majerus, and I know what a powerful state Utah was for basketball. And if it was done once, it can be done again.”Krystkowiak inherited a depleted roster, a dormant fan base and a program rising from the Mountain West Conference to the Pac-12. He surrounded three holdovers with players he scrounged together, mostly fillers until the next recruiting cycle.“We promised that we’d coach the heck out of them, and they’d be in the Pac-12,” Krystkowiak said. “It was about as much fun as you can have winning six games, really. I was surprised we were able to win that many, truth be known.”Four players transferred after the 2011-12 season and played for smaller universities, while several others ended their college careers after one season. Then Utah had its first true recruiting class under Krystkowiak — players who are now juniors and formed the foundation of the resurrection, like point guard Brandon Taylor and the swingman Jordan Loveridge. The win total has been rising yearly since.The key to this team, though, is Wright, a slender, smooth, 6-foot-5 scorer and the brother of the N.B.A. player Dorell Wright. A junior-college transfer, Delon Wright, now a senior, is the first Ute since the Majerus era named to the all-conference first team in consecutive seasons. He is an all-conference defender, too.The Utes are among the best defensive teams in Division I. They have size, experience, a star player and a coach who has been this way before.A month or two ago, they were considered a plausible Final Four contender. Now, some experts sniff a first-round loss. Either way, what comes out of the Utah locker room does not just smell good; it looks pretty good, too.Advertisement