AdvertisementSupported byBy Hiroko Tabuchi and Ken BelsonAdidas said Monday that it will not bid for a new contract with the N.B.A. when its deal expires in 2017, letting slip a high-profile partnership that has allowed it to outfit some of the country’s top athletes.According to a person familiar with the situation, the league informed Adidas last week that it was going to open up the bidding to other companies, and the N.B.A. is expected to announce a new partner by mid-April. The current deal ends after the 2016-17 season.Adidas’s withdrawal from the bidding could set the stage for a showdown between its archrivals, Nike and Under Armour, over the right to supply the league with its jerseys. Adidas, a German sportswear maker, paid about $400 million for its current 11-year deal to be the league’s official uniform and apparel supplier, but the new contract is set to be worth significantly more, analysts said.The move would also leave Adidas without a major sports league contract even as it seeks to turn around its United States business. Adidas has struggled to maintain market share in the face of a resurgent Nike, as well as Under Armour, a rising star that overtook Adidas in United States sportswear sales last year. Reebok, which Adidas acquired in 2006, still holds a contract to supply uniforms to the N.H.L.“It’s an enormously high-profile license,” Ira Mayer, a consultant to the licensing business and former owner of the trade journal The Licensing Letter, said of the N.B.A. license. “But once they did the math, it looked like it was going to be expensive.”He added, “I’ve got to think that given that the rest of the business has not been doing well, the pressure is that much greater to make sure this would have been a deal that made sense.”Analysts said they expected Nike and Under Armour to be serious bidders to replace Adidas as the N.B.A.’s supplier. Nike, especially, is likely to bid aggressively to buttress its dominance in basketball shoes, and to prevent Under Armour from gaining traction in that category, the Citi Research analysts Kate McShane and Corinna Van der Ghinst said in a note last week. Nike controls more than 85 percent of the basketball footwear market in the United States, they said.For Under Armour, an N.B.A. deal would propel its standing in the big leagues, allowing the company to go head to head with Nike. The N.B.A.’s growing international appeal would also be a boon to Under Armour as it looks to build its overseas presence, the Citi analysts said.Adidas has yet to detail how it intends to turn around its United States business. Its chief executive, Herbert Hainer, is set to retire in March 2017, just as the company’s contract with the N.B.A. runs out.“While we have enjoyed a successful long-term relationship with the league, we continually review our partner agreements to ensure they are meeting our investment and delivering on our brand and business needs,” the company said in a statement.It said it would invest more in youth basketball and expanding the roster of professional athletes it sponsors.Adidas trailed Under Armour and Nike in United States footwear and apparel sales last year, totaling $1.6 billion in the 11 months through early January, compared with $2.6 billion for Under Armour and $11.8 billion for Nike, according to data from Sterne Agee and SportScanInfo.Adidas hired a new North America chief last year, and it has vowed to spend more on marketing and investment in the United States. It is also opening a design studio in Brooklyn in a bid to stay atop American trends.Advertisement