By VIV BERNSTEINMARCH 16, 2015
GREENSBORO, N.C. —  Amid the academic scandals at Syracuse, North Carolina and elsewhere around the N.C.A.A., maybe it just seems unusual these days to find athletes who also happen to be high-achieving students. But consider Malcolm Brogdon, the redshirt junior guard who helped lead Virginia to the Atlantic Coast Conference regular-season title and a top-five ranking for much of this season — all while he was working on a master’s degree in public policy.Brogdon has said no to both Harvard and the N.B.A.“He’s unique,” said Virginia Coach Tony Bennett, who can thank Brogdon for both of those decisions.Brogdon has been one of the keys to restoring Virginia to a place among the A.C.C.’s top programs and inserting the Cavaliers into the national title conversation. Despite having lost to North Carolina in the semifinals of the A.C.C. tournament, Virginia (29-3) enters the N.C.A.A. tournament as the No. 2 seed in the East Region. The Cavaliers open against 15th-seeded Belmont (22-10) on Friday night.Brogdon averages 13.9 points per game to lead the Cavaliers while embracing the emphasis on defense that defines Virginia under Bennett.Advertisement“He’s poised,” Bennett said. “He just stays steady. I think that his demeanor shows that. He’s wise beyond his years. That maturity level — you look at him, this is a mature young man in every way.Advertisement“I think his leadership has probably been the thing that has really sets him apart this year even more than last year.”Fans saw that on Friday night, when the Cavaliers were about to crash out of the A.C.C. tournament with a double-digit embarrassment against the Tar Heels. Brogdon scored a career-high 25 points, including 22 in the second half, nearly leading Virginia to a comeback victory.“He’s first-team all-A.C.C. for a reason,” his teammate Justin Anderson said after the game. “He’s been doing this all year — just putting the team on his back and willing us. For the second half of the season, he’s just stepped up, stepped his game up.”Indeed, Brogdon has improved his game enough to be mentioned as a potential second-round pick on some N.B.A. mock drafts. But he is not going anywhere. Brogdon, whose mother is a psychology professor at Morehouse College and whose father is a lawyer and a mediator, chose Virginia over Harvard out of high school. And he has already decided to return next season even if he has an N.B.A. future.He said he was focused on earning his master’s degree. Besides, there is still work to be done in building Virginia into a program that can be mentioned alongside Duke and North Carolina in the A.C.C. every year.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Asked whether the Cavaliers were there yet, Brogdon said: “I’m not sure about that. I think we are a team that can always be competitive due to our style of play, the type of defense we play. And I think over the years Virginia will continue to get stronger and stronger with Coach Bennett as the coach and him getting better and better talent. I think that’s how it will work.”It is already happening. Bennett said his team’s improved performance had helped him sell his program to more talented recruits. Although his defense-first style depends on players staying long enough to learn his system thoroughly, he said he would consider one-and-done, top-level talent. And now some of those elite players might consider a program like Virginia, too.“Would I take a one-and-done?” Bennett said. “If there was one that was interesting in coming, sure, but I wouldn’t build a whole team full of them.”AdvertisementBy the time Brogdon leaves Virginia for his shot at the N.B.A., he might wind up helping the Cavaliers win not only titles but also the kind of recruits who define premier programs like Duke. In the process, however, it may become harder for student-athletes like him to have a chance to play substantial roles at programs like Virginia.“I think it could,” he said. “But I also think Coach Bennett is a guy that loves guys that stay in the program and that he can see mature and he can really develop. I think that’s what the system thrives on. I think that’s what will make it a very good competitive program down the road, is getting that.“One-and-dones would be great, but guys that stay and mature, who work their way up, are also great.”A version of this article appears in print on March 17, 2015, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Virginia Star Pursuing Master’s Ahead of N.B.A.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.