By ALLAN KREDAMARCH 16, 2015
The Rangers, who were already without goalie Henrik Lundqvist and defenseman Kevin Klein, said Monday that forward Martin St. Louis was expected to miss 10 to 14 days with a lower-body injury.St. Louis, 39, appeared to hurt his right knee late in the third period of Sunday’s 2-1 victory over Florida when he became tangled with Panthers defenseman Dmitri Kulikov behind the Rangers’ net. St. Louis flexed his right leg as he left the ice and did not return.The durable St. Louis is second on the Rangers in goals scored, with 20, and third in points, with 47. He had played all 68 games in his first full season with the Rangers after he was acquired from the Tampa Bay Lightning for Ryan Callahan last March. St. Louis primarily plays right wing on a line with center Derek Stepan and left wing Chris Kreider.Klein is expected to miss three to four weeks with an upper-body injury sustained when he blocked an Alex Ovechkin shot last Wednesday. The Rangers have been without Lundqvist, their top goaltender, since Feb. 2 because of a blood vessel injury in his throat.AdvertisementBut the Rangers (44-17-7) have excelled behind the backup goalies Cam Talbot and Mackenzie Skapski. With 95 points, they are tied with the Anaheim Ducks for the most in the N.H.L.St. Louis has missed only eight games since the start of the 2002-3 season. He had a streak of 499 consecutive games that was broken in December 2011 after he was struck in the face by a puck during the Lightning’s morning skate before a game at Madison Square Garden. Still, he missed only five games with facial fractures.AdvertisementHe also missed two games in the 2005-6 season and was a healthy scratch for last year’s regular-season finale.A version of this article appears in print on March 17, 2015, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: Sports Briefing | Hockey; Rangers’ St. Louis Sidelined.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.