
TV Sports By                     
 RICHARD SANDOMIR
 
MARCH 16, 2015
Bill Raftery’s summons to call his first Final Four for CBS and TBS next month came at age 73 — and was only 32 years in the making.“When you don’t expect something and it happens, I think fortunate is the word,” Raftery said in an interview last week. “You hang around long enough, someone says, ‘Let’s give that donkey a shot.’ ”That white-haired donkey probably deserved a shot before now. Raftery has been a popular analyst for years, a repository of witty and silly phraseology that almost always enlivens his analysis. But he had never called a tournament game for CBS beyond the regional finals largely because Billy Packer occupied the top spot at the network for 27 years until his retirement in 2008.Raftery insists that not being chosen to replace Packer, or his successor, Clark Kellogg, was O.K. with him. A former Seton Hall coach, Raftery has been happy to call college basketball on broadcast television (CBS) and cable (ESPN and now Fox Sports 1). He is not a pushy guy lobbying for better assignments.AdvertisementHis career management strategy has no Type A personality traits. “Keep your head down,” he said. “Mind your business and do the best job you can.”AdvertisementSo Kellogg replaced Packer, and when Turner Sports began to share tournament coverage with CBS, Steve Kerr joined Kellogg and Jim Nantz on the Final Four team. Greg Anthony then succeeded Kellogg, and Kellogg moved to the studio.“He never talked about it,” said Verne Lundquist, Raftery’s longtime CBS partner. “Not that he didn’t want to do it. He’d be less than human if he didn’t. But he never said, ‘I’ve enjoyed working with you, pal, but I aspire to a larger stage.’ ”But since last year’s tournament, circumstances turned in Raftery’s favor. Kerr left to coach the Golden State Warriors. And Anthony was arrested in January on a charge of soliciting a prostitute in Washington.Shortly after, Raftery took over for Anthony, while Kerr’s spot was taken by Grant Hill, who retired from the N.B.A. less than two years ago and has almost no college basketball television experience.Sean McManus, the chairman of CBS Sports, acknowledged that he had considered elevating Raftery in the past. But in retrospect, he said, “maybe we should have considered Bill more carefully.”The problem with promoting Raftery had been the effect of separating him from Lundquist, 74. “Keeping them together,” McManus said, “was more important than moving Bill up.”The two had been a team for 15 years, and with their friendship and Raftery’s signature phrases, they created a world unto themselves while having enormous fun doing it.AdvertisementLundquist said: “To walk into a semifull arena an hour before the game and some guy yells, ‘Onions!’ and another guy, from the balcony, yells, ‘With a kiss!’ is a really pleasurable experience.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Now that Raftery has the top job, he is destined to bring generous servings of onions, nylons, puppies, tin and kisses — a few of the staples of his basketball glossary — to CBS’s No. 1 team.“Nobody’s called to tell me to change anything,” Raftery said.Raftery, who has called the Final Four on radio since the early 1990s, is a rare sportscaster to wait until 70 or older to reach a television pinnacle. Vin Scully, who is entering his 66th season as the Los Angeles Dodgers’ announcer, called his first World Series at 25. Marv Albert, 73, and Al Michaels, 70, have announced some of the biggest events in their sports for decades. Dick Enberg, 80, called his first Super Bowl in 1981.One of Raftery’s contemporaries, Dick Vitale, has branded his career with his outsize devotion to college basketball and ESPN. Few other ESPN personalities are better known, including Jay Bilas, the network’s top college basketball analyst. But in a company that does not have United States rights to the N.C.A.A. men’s basketball tournament, Vitale must satisfy himself with calling the Final Four on ESPN International.Vitale, 75, saw a reduction in his portfolio this season: He was first taken off ESPN’s marquee Saturday night games, then was not assigned to call the Duke-North Carolina rivalry games he had worked for decades. A USA Today writer called it a disgrace that Vitale was not assigned to the first matchup, but ESPN did not budge.“Was I a little disappointed about Duke-North Carolina? Initially,” Vitale said by telephone. “Because it was something special to me. I did every game between them in the regular season on ESPN for 35 years. Maybe I missed one. So that streak was special to me. But I’ve got bosses who treat me well, who extended my contract. They pay me too well to be upset.”Although not in Chapel Hill, N.C., for the second Duke-North Carolina game, Vitale still made news that afternoon anyway. During the Virginia-Louisville game, and in a column on ESPN’s website, he gave his full-throated support of Syracuse Coach Jim Boeheim over the penalties imposed against him and his program by the N.C.A.A. Boeheim was guilty of trusting others and not much else, Vitale said.Raftery, a cooler head, preferred not to dive deeply into the Syracuse weeds, or place himself squarely in anyone’s camp.“I will say this about Jim: You’re responsible for everything,” Raftery said. “He’s a hands-on guy. He just wants to coach. So did stuff fall through the cracks? Did he know it? These are unknowns. I think he’s got a strong character, but having said that, was it expedient to look the other way? Is winning, in essence, the only thing?”AdvertisementIf not winning, the essence might be survival. Coaches like Boeheim, 70, and Larry Brown, 74, and announcers like Vitale and Raftery work well into their later years without a desire to leave the stage.Raftery was one of Nantz’s first analyst partners, for an Arizona-Miami game in 1986.“He was silver-haired like he is today,” Nantz said in an email. “Married with a bunch of kids. A retired coach. He seemed like an old sage to a guy in his mid-20s.” Nantz added that “he seemed old enough to be nearing retirement to a young broadcaster with a limited perspective.”Raftery, only 45 at the time, never went away or retired. And now, as he might say, he’s finally taking it to the tin.Email: sandor@nytimes.com A version of this article appears in print on March 17, 2015, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: At 73, a First TV Job at the Final Four.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »