By ANDREW DASMARCH 16, 2015
This is one of those weeks that build to a terrific finish Sunday. But there will be plenty to watch before then. The Times soccer editor, Andrew Das, a shameless Ajax supporter, suggests what to watch.Arsenal travels to Monaco on Tuesday (3:45 p.m. Eastern, Fox Sports 1) with the daunting task of overcoming a 3-1 deficit from the first leg. Manchester City visits Barcelona on Wednesday (3:45 p.m., FS1) down by 2-1. If neither advances, it would be the second time in three years that no English club reached the quarterfinals of the Champions League. Oh the horror.(If you’re thinking this might imperil England’s fourth Champions League spot in coming years, don’t. Here’s why.)Not a fan of hand-wringing? Try the two other Champions League second-leg ties: Atlético Madrid hosting Bayer Leverkusen (Tuesday, Fox Sports 2) or, better yet, Juventus’s trip to Dortmund (Wednesday, FS2). Dortmund fighting for its life at home promises a much better spectacle than even Premier League schadenfreude.AdvertisementIn recent years the Europa League was the place where Spanish and Portuguese clubs went to accomplish what they could not seem to do in the higher-profile Champions League. Don’t look now, but Italy seems to have adopted the model.AdvertisementThere are five Italian clubs in the round of 16, but only two have a solid chance to progress to the quarterfinals Thursday: Napoli hosts Dynamo Moscow with a 3-1 edge from the first leg, and Roma and Fiorentina will meet in Florence off a 1-1 tie (2 p.m., FS2). After that, Inter Milan plays Wolfsburg (4 p.m., FS1) in a game worth watching if only to check out Wolfsburg’s red-hot Dutch striker Bas Dost. Because how many times do you get to turn to someone and say, “I’ve got to cut out for a bit and go watch Bas Dost”?One non-Italian game of note in the Europa League: Ajax, the greatest club in the world and one you should consider supporting, is home to Dnipro Dnipropetrovsk after losing the first leg, 1-0, last week in Ukraine.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The entire week is merely a prelude to a power-packed Sunday lineup that could keep you on the couch all day.The day starts early, with Liverpool-Manchester United on NBCSN at 9:30 a.m. United is in fourth place in the Premier League, just ahead of Liverpool, but only the top four teams qualify for the Champions League next season. With Chelsea, Manchester City and Arsenal most likely locked in as the top three, this game then carries immense financial implications. If Liverpool beats Swansea on Monday, the Reds would be only 3 points back when they walk out at Anfield on Sunday — in position to catch United and make things really interesting down the stretch.You’ll need a breather after that one, but make it brief: Spain’s famed Clásico — Real Madrid at Barcelona — kicks off at 3:55 p.m. (beIN). Barcelona has found its stride lately, taking a one-point lead over its archrival in La Liga after a series of recent stumbles by Madrid. A clear winner Sunday will have the inside track on the title race. One treat? Ray Hudson’s bosses at beIN have flown him to Barcelona to call the game live for a change. That’s worth tuning in for all by itself.If that doubleheader does not wear you out, there is the weekly Major League Soccer twin bill to cap your weekend: This Sunday it begins with the Red Bulls’ home opener against D.C. United (5 p.m., ESPN2), which has the misfortune of kicking off during the Clásico.Sunday’s real crime is that, as of this moment, the game America is crying out to see — Bristol City versus Walsall in the Football League Trophy final at Wembley — will not be broadcast in the United States. We remain hopeful that Friend of The Times East End Shed Man can use his influence in powerful British media circles to address this, but time is running short.A quick note to readers: This feature is not meant to be a comprehensive list, and it leans toward games most readily available to United States viewers. It generally does not deal in hypotheticals, either; a match with a set time and TV window is more likely to be included than a matchup that isn’t set when this piece is published Monday.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.