AdvertisementSupported byOn BaseballBy Tyler KepnerTEMPE, Ariz. — Matt Joyce joined the Los Angeles Angels in an off-season trade, and his new teammates sometimes amaze him. Joyce made an All-Star team once, for the Tampa Bay Rays, but players like Mike Trout and Albert Pujols seem otherworldly to him in batting practice.“Trout will be like, ‘O.K., this is going to be a home run round,’ and he’ll hit like four out of five out,” Joyce said. “And you’re just like: ‘O.K., that’s not normal. It’s hard to do that.’ And then they get in a game, and nothing really changes. Guys like that, future Hall of Famers, it’s fun, man. I’m still a baseball fan. You’re kind of like a kid again.”Another Angel once inspired such awe from his peers. Josh Hamilton, in the 2008 home run derby at Yankee Stadium, when he was a Texas Ranger, confirmed his status as a superstar. He would go on to win a Most Valuable Player Award, star in two World Series, bash four homers in a game and earn a five-year, $125 million contract from the Angels.His background made his story more compelling. Hamilton, a former No. 1 overall pick, had missed three seasons in the minors because of drug abuse. The Angels embraced him, anyway.“I’m so happy to see and hear an organization say, ‘We’re so excited and happy we got you, no matter what the risk is,’ ” Hamilton said in December 2012, the day he signed his contract. So much has changed since then.Hamilton met with Major League Baseball officials in New York last month and admitted his latest drug-related relapse. A disciplinary decision is expected before opening day, and the union has said, in a statement, that it will “use every right we have under the collective bargaining agreement to make sure Josh gets the help he needs.”Trout said he had communicated with Hamilton through text messages, but had not pried about the details of Hamilton’s ordeal, hoping to take his mind off things. Trout said he considered Hamilton to be family.“When this came out, it was tough,” Trout said. “He’s got four girls. He’s a good person, he’s a good teammate, he’s a good friend of mine. I hope he comes out of it well. There’s nothing that we can control right now.”The Angels did not expect to see Hamilton this spring. He had surgery in early February to repair the acromioclavicular joint, or AC joint, in his right shoulder, which would have kept him out six to eight weeks, and he did not have a locker here. The Angels’ policy for years has been for players recovering from serious injuries to do so apart from the team, with a physical therapist. Hamilton has been recovering from the shoulder injury in Texas.The relapse has further clouded his future, and the Angels’ financial commitment to him. If Hamilton is suspended, the Angels will recoup some of his heavily backloaded contract. They owe him $25.4 million this season, and $32.4 million each for 2016 and 2017.The team would seem to be eager for a resolution. But Jerry Dipoto, the Angels’ general manager, said that because the decision was not up to the team, it was business as usual.“We’re preparing as if the season’s going to start without Josh, but that’s the way we were preparing once we understood he was having AC joint surgery,” Dipoto said. “So nothing’s changed for us. We’re going to remain patient. We’re going to do what we need to do to prepare for the season and let the chips fall where they do.”The human part of this story, of course, is paramount. Hamilton is genial, well liked by his teammates, open about his faith, honest about his addiction struggles.Starter Jered Weaver, an Angel for the last nine seasons, said he hoped Hamilton would soon return. “It’s one thing to talk about him as a baseball player, but Josh, as a person, is all of our friends,” Weaver said. “He’s a great guy for us.”On the field, though, the Angels have already learned to thrive without the best version of Hamilton, who turns 34 in May. In his last season with the Rangers, Hamilton hit .285 with 43 homers and 128 runs batted in. His two-year totals in Anaheim: .255-31-123, plus 0 for 13 in last October’s three-game playoff loss to Kansas City.That series obscured the season the Angels put together, largely without Hamilton, who played in just 89 games. They led the majors in wins, with 98, and runs, with 4.77 per game. Trout was the American League’s most valuable player, Pujols hit 28 homers and Kole Calhoun emerged as a catalyst atop the order.“I think we’re just as deep, or deeper, than we’ve ever been,” Dipoto said. “Hopefully, we’re elongating our window with younger, more athletic players, a lot of pitching depth and versatility. We’re excited about it.”The Angels — like the Yankees with Alex Rodriguez — have constructed a roster that does not depend, and perhaps does not even need, a highly paid star with a troubled past. Joyce was acquired as a designated hitter who could also platoon in left, with Collin Cowgill, if Hamilton’s shoulder problem worsened.It did, and then a much more serious problem resurfaced. Hamilton’s return date is unknown, but his teammates want to see him before long, whether or not they need him to win.“I think when Josh comes back, it will be a nice comfort zone,” Calhoun said. “This is a family. We’re a tight-knit group, and we’re all thinking about him.”Advertisement