AdvertisementSupported byBy Tim RohanFORT MYERS, Fla. — Just before Matt Harvey went for a pregame run Monday morning, preparing for his third start of spring training, he checked the Twitter updates on his cellphone and spotted the dismaying news. Zack Wheeler, one of the Mets’ top pitchers, had a fully torn ulnar collateral ligament in his elbow, which meant he was now facing the same Tommy John surgery that Harvey underwent in 2013 and the same long rehabilitation that would follow.For Harvey and the rest of the Mets’ organization, the Wheeler development was not just a blow to a pitching rotation that seemed to have the potential to be one of the best in baseball this season. It was also a blow to the Mets’ psyche. After six straight losing seasons, after a 2014 campaign in which Harvey, the Mets’ ace, did not throw one pitch, this was to be the season in which the Mets were going to be relevant again, with a real shot at the playoffs.That may still happen, but it will not be with any contributions from Wheeler, the tall 24-year-old right-hander who was expected to form an intimidating threesome with Harvey and Jacob deGrom, the 2014 rookie of the year in the National League.Instead, Wheeler, in all likelihood, will be aiming to make his return at some point in the 2016 season as he becomes the latest major leaguer to deal with an injury that has created a somber drumbeat throughout baseball and has particularly plagued the Mets. It was just Sunday that the Mets learned that Josh Edgin, their top left-handed reliever, would need Tommy John surgery to repair his elbow and would be gone for the season. Another key reliever, the right-hander Bobby Parnell, is working his way back from the Tommy John surgery he had a year ago; deGrom had the surgery in 2010, while a Mets minor leaguer; Jenrry Mejia, the team’s closer, had it in 2011. The full Mets list is even longer, and more disheartening.In the case of Wheeler, there were no indications that there was anything wrong with him until Friday, when the Mets scratched his scheduled start, citing tenderness in his pitching elbow and a blister on his finger.“We don’t think it’s serious because it’s something that he’s experienced before,” General Manager Sandy Alderson told reporters that day. But as it turned out, Alderson was engaging in wishful thinking. The Mets had monitored Wheeler’s health throughout the 2014 season because of ongoing elbow discomfort that was not made public. In several instances, Wheeler even skipped the bullpen sessions that pitchers normally make between starts.By the end of the 2014 campaign, the Mets were concerned enough to have Wheeler undergo a magnetic resonance imaging test on his elbow. No tear was found. He was examined again in November and given a platelet-rich plasma injection. When pain persisted, Wheeler was given another M.R.I. in January, with spring training just a month away. The second M.R.I. looked similar to the first. Still no tear. So the Mets proceeded with the hope that Wheeler would be a regular starter in 2015, and maybe a really good one, with a fastball that was one of the best in the National League. While his overall numbers for 2014 were not dazzling — an 11-11 record, a 3.54 earned run average — his performances had improved as the season went on, suggesting that he could deal with an elbow that barked, but at least was not torn.Still, Alderson acknowledged in a conference call with reporters Monday, the Mets remained on alert, “forewarned” by the team doctors that things might get worse, that just because there was no “ligament involvement” in the first two M.R.I.s, it did not mean it would stay that way.So it was not a good sign that Wheeler allowed six runs in less than two innings in his first spring start. Or that he told the Mets this past weekend, after the scratched start, that the area of discomfort in his elbow seemed to be expanding. On Saturday, the Mets decided to give him a third M.R.I., and this one showed the full tear that the team had always feared. “If there’s a silver lining,” Alderson said in the conference call, “we now have some certainty, and we know we have a solution for this, that he won’t have to manage the kind of pain that he had to manage over the course of last season. Ultimately, doing that over a career is just simply unsustainable.” Alderson was pressed on why the Mets did not treat Wheeler more cautiously this spring, since they were fully aware of everything he had gone through in 2014. Alderson’s response was that the Mets followed the advice of their team doctors and that if his elbow was going to blow out, it was going to happen regardless of how Wheeler was handled. Alderson sounded almost fatalistic as he spoke, but just two hours later, he was able to turn his attention to Harvey, who went to the mound in Fort Myers to take on a Boston Red Sox lineup that looked much like the one that will start the 2015 season. And Harvey quickly made everyone on the Mets feel better, Alderson included. Harvey threw four scoreless innings and struck out three batters. Dan Warthen, the Mets’ pitching coach, raved afterward about Harvey’s mechanics and posture and how he worked more efficiently as the day went on. In all, he threw 53 pitchesWarthen had asked Harvey to use Monday’s game to work on his slider, a pitch that puts a lot of torque on a pitcher’s arm. Before this spring, Harvey had not thrown it regularly in so long that he had forgotten the grip. Warthen had to reacquaint him. By Warthen’s count, Harvey threw 11 sliders Monday, and Dustin Pedroia swung so violently through one of them that he looked as if he might topple over.“It started in the zone and took off,” Pedroia said, shaking his head.When Harvey was done for the day, a small group of fans gave him a standing ovation. And afterward, he voiced confidence about a Mets rotation that will now be without Wheeler. “We’re going to be fine,” he said. “We can hold our own.”In addition to Harvey and deGrom, the rotation now includes Jon Niese and Bartolo Colon. Dillon Gee becomes the most logical candidate to step in for Wheeler, and Manager Terry Collins went so far as to say the job was his, although Alderson seemed more noncommittal.In the wings are two top prospects — Noah Syndergaard and the left-hander Steven Matz. Naturally, Matz has had Tommy John surgery, too, back in 2010, less than a year after he was drafted. For Mets pitchers, that increasingly seems to be a rite of passage. Advertisement