AdvertisementSupported byOn College SportsBy Marc TracyBOSTON — On a recent afternoon, snow fell on Boston College’s tidy campus in suburban Chestnut Hill, piling atop the upper stands of Alumni Stadium and the tennis-style bubble enclosing the football field.“We have spring practice,” Athletic Director Brad Bates said while looking out his office window, putting the emphasis on the word “spring.”Snow in New England may not be man-bites-dog stuff, but Boston College provided something more unexpected in January at the annual N.C.A.A. convention, held this year in Oxon Hill, Md. After hours of discussion and months of anticipation, the five most prominent conferences passed a great deal of legislation, including a measure allowing colleges to increase the value of a scholarship by a few thousand dollars to cover the federally determined cost of attendance. The result of the ballot among the 80 delegates — one representing each of the 65 universities in the five conferences as well as three athletes from each of those conferences — was 79-1. Boston College was the lone dissenter.“We clearly wanted people to pause,” Bates said, acknowledging that the college had known that the legislation would almost certainly succeed either way. “It was really more trying to put up a flag.”Passage had been seen as foreordained since August, when the Division I board of directors granted the so-called Big 5 conferences — the Southeastern, the Atlantic Coast, the Big 12, the Big Ten and the Pacific-12 — substantial governing autonomy. In a statement immediately after the vote, Boston College cited three reasons it opposed covering the full cost of attendance, saying it increased expenses, segregated athletes from the general student population and relied on a federal financial aid formula that was “sufficiently ambiguous that adjustments for recruiting advantage will take place.”Boston College’s dissenting vote was a reminder that disparities — in resources, in situations, in philosophies — existed not only between the Big 5 and the rest of the N.C.A.A. but also among the 65 universities in the Big 5.“Believe me, there’s not homogeneity with every one of them,” Oliver Luck, the N.C.A.A. executive vice president for regulatory affairs, said days before the vote. “Iowa State’s different from Alabama. West Virginia’s different from Cal-Berkeley.”Nathan Hatch, the president of Wake Forest and a leader in establishing autonomy, said universities faced huge cost pressures. “Even among the Big 5, there’s a huge difference in financial capacity,” he said.Boston College, one of only 12 private colleges in the Big 5, seemed a likely candidate for bucking the trend. In sports, it is most famous for ice hockey and a three-decade-old Hail Mary pass from Doug Flutie to Gerard Phelan to beat Miami in football. Its conference, the A.C.C., does not mint money like the Big Ten, the Pac-12 and the SEC — conferences with powerful cable networks. Boston College offers 31 varsity sports, a sizable and expensive number given that most programs outside football and men’s basketball run at operating deficits. (Alabama’s athletic department ran an operating surplus of $33 million last year, thanks partly to Crimson Tide football but also because it had a more modest 21 varsity teams.) Boston College routinely finishes near the top of the Big 5 in athletes’ graduation rates.Hatch, who was also the A.C.C.’s representative on the Division I board, said he had been aware of the university’s concerns. Alluding to Wake Forest, which like the Jesuit-affiliated Boston College is a private university, he said: “It is an issue private schools particularly face — the cost of our sports programs. Folks at Wake Forest had concerns about it.”Bates said ultimate responsibility for Boston College’s vote rested with the college president, the Rev. William P. Leahy, but Bates said he agreed with the decision.“We’re one of the few countries in the world that combines our sports with our educational system,” Bates said. “I think the ideology behind that is very noble because I think it views sports participation as developmental. But it’s also risky because it presents a context for potentially compromising values.”Although Boston College does not release its financial data, as public colleges must, Bates all but admitted that its athletic department did not run an operating profit, which is common.Critics note that some athletic departments that fret about finances have substantial revenue but also pay a significant amount in salaries to numerous administrators and coaches. Others argue that colleges use faulty accounting standards and that the out-of-pocket cost of a scholarship athlete’s education is frequently far less than the sum of tuition and other expenses.But Bates said, “Regardless of how you’re accounting for it, having athletic programs is an expensive enterprise, and anything we do to increase our expenses is really putting a lot of pressure on institutions to make really difficult decisions.”Boston College’s student-athlete advisory committee independently agreed with the nay vote, according to its president, Collin Fedor, who is on the track team.“We saw value in the opportunity B.C. provides to compete,” Fedor said. “If those opportunities are eliminated, what’s the purpose of college athletics?”Tyler Darlington, the starting center on Oklahoma’s football team and one of the 15 student representatives, disagreed. “I think the hesitation that B.C. brought to light is pretty valid,” he said.But he added, “I think the benefits outweigh the concerns.”Bates said he was partly informed by his own experience as a college athlete: He played football at Michigan under Bo Schembechler.Bates recalled that during his sophomore year, a classmate talked him into attending a campus lecture by the linguist and political commentator Noam Chomsky.“I remember sitting there and realizing, I’ve got the entire world at my fingertips,” Bates said. “I had a chance to be on a very successful football team with one of the great coaches in the history of college athletics, and be fully immersed in the intellectual scene in Ann Arbor.”By contrast, he said, giving athletes even more money “further contributes to a context that is almost antithetical to the original ideology of integrating sports with our educational system.”Now that the legislation has passed, however, Boston College may apply it to any of its sports (though it must comply with Title IX, the federal gender equity law that requires colleges to provide equal opportunities to women). Should any of the 65 universities decline to offer full cost to athletes on its most prominent teams, that would be even more surprising than Boston College’s vote. While others share its concern that full-cost calculations will be exploited to create a recruiting advantage — with some programs essentially trying to offer athletes more money — an even starker competitive imbalance would arise should a college not offer full cost at all.“You can make the assumption on which sports, for sure, will include that new legislation,” Bates said. Football, he said, will be one of them.Advertisement