By HUW RICHARDSMARCH 16, 2015
South Africa will be looking to end one of the strangest jinxes in all of sports when the Cricket World Cup quarterfinals start Wednesday in Sydney, Australia.The Proteas have the second-best winning percentage in the history of One Day Internationals, the format used in the World Cup. They also have the second-best record in World Cup group-stage matches, and in both categories they barely trail Australia.Yet despite reaching the playoff stages in five of the six World Cups it has entered — the exception was 2003, when it was host — South Africa has yet to win a knockout match. It has been just as unsuccessful at the World Twenty20 tournaments, too.In earlier World Cups, South Africa often was an unstoppable force in the group stage. This year it has lost to India and Pakistan in the group stage and only took second through the tiebreaker, net run rate, after inflicting massive defeats on weaker teams.AdvertisementIt seems unlikely that South Africa has peaked too soon, an accusation aimed at the team in some previous tournaments. On Wednesday, the Proteas will face a team with a long record of playoff success — Sri Lanka, the runner-up in the last two World Cups.Advertisement“I’ve been with these players for four years now, and we’ve come to so many big tournament matches where we have to win,” Sri Lanka Coach Marvan Atapattu told reporters Sunday. “I’ve seen people raise their game, and I’ve seen people raise the whole team. I see no difference this time, and because I’ve seen that, I have confidence in these guys doing it again. When it comes to pulling together and working toward a common goal, we’re among the best.”In an unprecedentedly high-scoring tournament, each remaining team has a batsman in remarkable form, with South Africa captain AB de Villiers being the most consistent of all. He hit 162 runs from 66 deliveries against West Indies and has scored more than 50 on two other occasions.Sri Lanka’s batting star is the veteran stylist Kumar Sangakkara, who has already set a single-tournament record with four innings of more than 100, scored in each of Sri Lanka’s last four matches.Both Sri Lanka and South Africa also have a dangerous fast bowler. The Sri Lankan Lasith Malinga creates challenges like no other bowler with his sling-like round-arm action, while South Africa’s Dale Steyn has been the dominant paceman of the last decade.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.It could be that spin bowlers will hold the key. Sri Lanka’s Rangana Herath injured his finger in a pool game against England and has sat out the last two games, but he is expected to be fit for Wednesday. Herath, 36, is deceptively effective; he is small and unathletic and rarely looks to be a threat with his bowling, yet he is one of the most consistent wicket-takers in international cricket.“Sri Lanka are a wonderful team,” South Africa’s opening batsman, Hashim Amla, told reporters Sunday. “You almost always know that at World Cups, they’ll compete very well and they seem to be playing very good cricket.”Amala is aware of the pressure that he and his teammates are facing.“It’s extremely important,” he said. “We’re well aware that we haven’t won one. And this serves as a wonderful motivation to make South African history. The guys are raring to go, really.”The winner in Sydney faces the toughest possible route to winning the Cup. It will head to Auckland, New Zealand, for a possible semifinal against New Zealand, which has been unstoppable so far on home soil.AdvertisementAustralia is favored on the other side of the playoff bracket. The final will be held in Melbourne, Australia.New Zealand, the one team whose bowlers have been consistently effective, will expect to beat West Indies in Wellington on Sunday. India, unbeaten in the pool stage, will similarly expect to beat Bangladesh, whose elimination of England resulted in the only real surprise among the playoff teams.“They will be the favorites, but the pressure is on them,” Pakistan captain Misbah ul-Haq said about Australia. “On a day the team which plays better can win, and in a one-day game, one spell, one good innings can change the whole course of the game. I think any team is beatable, especially in one-day cricket.”“Of course we can win the World Cup,” insisted Misbah. A thought shared, without doubt, by all the other remaining captains.A version of this article appears in print on March 17, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.