AdvertisementSupported byN.F.L. RoundupBy The Associated PressAdrian Robinson Jr., a former player for four N.F.L. teams who killed himself in May at 25, had a brain disease that has been linked to repeated blows to the head, researchers confirmed Wednesday.The diagnosis of the disease, chronic traumatic encephalopathy, was made by the Boston University-affiliated Concussion Legacy Foundation. Robinson, a Harrisburg, Pa., native, played for Temple and, in the N.F.L., with Pittsburgh, Denver, San Diego and Washington. A family lawyer, Ben Andreozzi, said Robinson had several concussions in his two N.F.L. seasons.Chris Nowinski of the Concussion Legacy Foundation said that 88 of 92 N.F.L. players whose brains had been tested there showed evidence of C.T.E., along with 33 others who played college or high school football. MORE HEAD TRAUMA CONCERNS Running backs Arian Foster of the Houston Texans and Bernard Pierce of the Jacksonville Jaguars were both on the field with potential head trauma in games last week.The N.F.L. said both teams properly handled the concussion protocol once they had the opportunity to do so or suspected possible head trauma.Pierce showed no symptoms of a concussion until he attempted a block instead of trying to make a tackle while playing on Jacksonville’s punt unit.Houston’s medical staff, including an unaffiliated neurotrauma consultant, was preparing to evaluate Foster when he left the bench and ran back onto the field for two plays.STEELER FINED OVER TRIBUTE Steelers defensive end Cam Heyward said he was fined by the N.F.L. for a tribute to his father.Heyward wrote on Twitter that the league penalized him for having the words “Iron Head” on his eye black during a game. His father, Craig Heyward, who had that nickname for his physical style of play, spent a decade as an N.F.L. running back. He died of cancer in 2006 at 39.“I’m just trying to draw attention to the disease that took my father’s life,” Heyward said.COLTS BRING BACK BRADSHAW The Colts signed running back Ahmad Bradshaw, who spent the past two seasons with Indianapolis but finished both years on injured reserve.PATRIOT OUT FOR SEASON New England Patriots offensive lineman Nate Solder was placed on season-ending injured reserve after injuring an arm against the Dallas Cowboys on Sunday.Advertisement