AdvertisementSupported byBy Ben StraussHours before men’s basketball players suited up and got the N.C.A.A. tournament underway, N.C.A.A. lawyers were in San Francisco asking a federal appeals court to overturn last summer’s landmark decision that said such athletes could be paid.Judge Claudia Wilken ruled last August in what has become known as the O’Bannon case that the N.C.A.A. violated antitrust law by prohibiting athletes from profiting from their names and images in TV broadcasts and video games. On Tuesday, in front of the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit, Seth Waxman, a lawyer for the N.C.A.A., called that ruling an overreach, inconsistent and misguided.Front and center in the N.C.A.A.’s complaint is a 31-year-old Supreme Court ruling, N.C.A.A. v. Board of Regents of the University of Oklahoma, to which the N.C.A.A. argued Judge Wilken failed to pay proper deference. In that case, the court stripped the N.C.A.A. of its right to control college football TV rights, but also issued a dictum that has become the bedrock of the N.C.A.A.’s legal defense over the years. “To preserve the character and quality of the ‘product,’ athletes must not be paid,” it read.Mr. Waxman contended that observation gave the N.C.A.A. the right to define amateurism and determine appropriate compensation.The N.C.A.A. and its members “must have the ‘ample latitude’ the Supreme Court said it has to have in the maintenance and preservation of the tradition of amateurism,” Mr. Waxman said, adding that colleges should make decisions regarding college sports, not an antitrust judge.Noting that college sports had changed drastically in the last three decades, Michael Hausfeld, the opposing counsel, said the case in no way “established an irrefutable, impregnable determination that no rule encompassing the rubric of amateurism can be challenged.”“That’s not what Board of Regents was about,” Mr. Hausfeld said. Mr. Waxman suggested players might not even have name and image rights to sell. He also took issue with a peculiar aspect of Judge Wilken’s decision; while rejecting the N.C.A.A.’s definition of amateurism and the organization’s rationale for prohibiting payments to athletes, Judge Wilken said she would allow the N.C.A.A. to cap such payments at $5,000 a year per person, money the athletes would collect after their college careers. “The antitrust laws are not concerned with setting different prices,” Mr. Waxman said.Each lawyer stood before the three judges — Sidney R. Thomas, Jay S. Bybee and Gordon J. Quist — for about 35 minutes in the hearing, which was live-streamed over the Internet. Mr. Waxman faced significantly more questions than Mr. Hausfeld, with the judges particularly interested in recent legislation passed by the five major conferences to increase the value of scholarships by several thousand dollars.“How does that differ from what Judge Wilken has imposed?” Judge Quist asked.Mr. Waxman said that new money was related to educational expenses, not a strict payment.The N.C.A.A. must overcome both Judge Wilken’s ruling in the O’Bannon case, named for the lead plaintiff and former U.C.L.A. basketball star Ed O’Bannon, and a previous defeat in front of the Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit. The same judges ruled against the N.C.A.A. when the former Nebraska and Arizona State quarterback Sam Keller brought a related case over the use of his likeness in a video game.At stake is a new world for college sports that is set to begin Aug. 1, pending the court’s decision. That is when universities may start offering recruits the trust funds prescribed by Judge Wilken, in a major departure from the decades-old rules.The N.C.A.A. has asked for an expedited ruling, and could appeal again to the Supreme Court.Advertisement