By PETER KERASOTISMARCH 17, 2015
TAMPA, Fla. —  C. C. Sabathia had not stood atop a mound in a major league game since last May, so there were manifold questions and concerns on Tuesday night: about his surgically repaired right knee, his arm strength, his control, his velocity, his stamina.And it was not surprising that Sabathia felt jittery.“I was really nervous, more so than normal,” said Sabathia, a former Cy Young Award winner and a six-time All-Star. “It was kind of weird.”Sabathia pitched two unspectacular innings for the Yankees against the Toronto Blue Jays, a stint he said was not long enough to calm his nerves.“I never really settled in,” he said. “I think it was just being a big league game again. Being out there with my teammates. I hadn’t been out there in a big league game in almost a year.”AdvertisementSince May 10, 2014, to be exact. It was after that start when a 15-day stint on the disabled list led to a 60-day stay that eventually led to season-ending arthroscopic knee surgery on July 23.AdvertisementSabathia’s first-inning performance was solid. He induced the leadoff hitter, Jose Reyes, to ground out to shortstop, struck out Josh Donaldson swinging and got Jose Bautista to also ground out to short.“I was really pleased,” Manager Joe Girardi said. “I liked the way the ball was coming out of his hand.”However, in the second inning, Sabathia unraveled. He yielded four hits, although the first was a grounder between third and shortstop that a younger Alex Rodriguez, who was playing third, might have had the range to get to. Sabathia surrendered three more hits, two of them doubles, which led to two earned runs.“I’m not worried about giving up runs,” Girardi said after the Blue Jays’ 4-2 victory. “He’s still working on things. This was a first step.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.A first step that Sabathia, aside from the nervousness, said he was pleased with.“I felt good,” Sabathia said. “No complaints. I want to work on my changeup a little more and get that down. I want it to be my No. 2 pitch instead of my cutter. My fastball command was pretty good.”His fastball, which once resided in the upper-90-mile-per-hour range, consistently registered 90 to 92 against the Blue Jays.“My velocity is what it is,” Sabathia said with a resignation in his voice that clearly conveyed he was weary of discussing the topic. “It’s going to be in the 80s some days, and some days, hopefully, it’ll be higher than 92. I don’t really care.”Clearly, Sabathia, who turns 35 on July 21 and has two years plus a vested year remaining on his contract, is not the pitcher he once was. His streak of six consecutive opening day starts for the Yankees — he has made 11 over all — will most likely end next month.Advertisement“I can’t say that’s going to make or break me,” he said. “I want to be there in September, or for Game 1 of any playoff series.”After Sabathia went 3-4 last season and appeared in only 46 innings, which was the first year he did not pitch 200 or more innings since 2006, it also is what the Yankees would like to see.INSIDE PITCHCenter fielder Jacoby Ellsbury sat out the game and was not expected to play Wednesday because of a mild abdominal strain. Neither Ellsbury nor Joe Girardi believes the injury is serious, though Girardi could not say when the center fielder would return to the lineup. ... Mark Teixeira hit his first home run of the spring, an opposite-field shot to left-center to lead off the bottom of the fourth. ... Before the game, the Yankees optioned  catcher Gary Sanchez to Class AA Trenton and reassigned him to minor league camp. ... After the game, the Yankees optioned the right-hander Domingo German to Class A Tampa and the right-hander Branden Pinder to Class AAA Scranton/Wilkes-Barre and reassigned both to minor league camp. They also reassigned the infielders Greg Bird and Kyle Roller to minor league camp.A version of this article appears in print on March 18, 2015, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: Sabathia Has Nerves but ‘No Complaints’.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.