AdvertisementSupported byBy Scott CacciolaIn an exercise that continued to defy rational human behavior, paying customers again filled Madison Square Garden on Tuesday night for the Knicks’ game against the San Antonio Spurs. It had been about nine weeks since my last visit to the Garden, and the Knicks were still entrenched in last place and still hoping to unearth some confidence and still trying to solve the riddles of the triangle offense.In some ways, the entire scene felt eerily familiar. Had I even been away?But there were differences, too. Carmelo Anthony did not miss a shot, but only because he did not play. Samuel Dalembert and Pablo Prigioni were no longer employed by the team. And what was this about Amar’e Stoudemire packing up his collection of bath wines and relocating to Dallas? And then there was the result itself as the Knicks — their lineup led by Alexey Shved and Lou Amundson — defeated the mighty Spurs in overtime, 104-100.In an otherwise moribund season, it was a victory for the Knicks to savor — and a sign, they hope, of better things to come.In January, my editors presented me with a rare opportunity: an indefinite sabbatical from covering the Knicks to find some of the good basketball that the country — and perhaps even the rest of the world — had to offer.It was clear by then that the Knicks, having traded J. R. Smith and Iman Shumpert to the Cavaliers amid a 16-game losing streak, were prepared to spend the rest of the season genuflecting at the twin altars of salary-cap space and the draft lottery. No less an eminence than Phil Jackson, the team’s president, acknowledged his project’s short-term failure — for the first time this season, and not the last. From his perch in the Garden’s lower bowl, he was beginning to look a bit like an undertaker.My escape from the Garden was aided by readers who sent their recommendations. There were suggestions to cover fifth-grade hoops, the Harlem Globetrotters and an upstart outfit on the West Coast that called themselves the Golden State Warriors. And why not check in on the New Zealand Breakers, the most dominant franchise in Australia’s National Basketball League? What was the secret to their homegrown success? I was happy to oblige, making 13 stops in all.The locales of the teams and the skill levels of the players could not have been more diverse. I traveled nearly 29,000 miles, visiting five college campuses, one church, three countries and more than 20 airports. But the common thread throughout was good basketball — an emphasis on teamwork and selflessness that was impossible to miss.“A good pass to us is as important as a good shot,” said Chuck Hornsby, a member of the longstanding pickup games at the McBurney Y.M.C.A. on West 14th Street in Manhattan.It is a philosophy shared by the men’s basketball team at Bellarmine University, a Division II program in Louisville, Ky. For years, Bellarmine has ranked among the nation’s leaders in field-goal percentage. Is it because the Knights are good at shooting? Or is it the result of something less obvious? Watching them practice for two hours was all it took to determine that they made shots because they attempted the best shots — pass after pass leading to layups and uncontested jumpers.“We practice it, and we take great pride in it,” said Coach Scott Davenport, whose team defeated Indianapolis, 81-72, on Tuesday night in a Division II regional final.My first trip of the series took me to St. Joseph, Mo., where the Emporia State Lady Hornets — another Division II power — had a road game against Missouri Western. Classes were not in session, which meant that the gym was quiet and the energy was low. For 39 minutes, the Lady Hornets crammed the box score full of turnovers and missed shots. Perhaps the poor basketball had followed me from New York like a toxic cloud.The game wound up hinging on the final play. With 1.2 seconds remaining, Emporia State needed to inbound the ball and run out the clock with a 1-point lead. Coach Jory Collins drew up a play for his team to lob the ball to midcourt, so that point guard Addie Lackey could secure possession. It worked, which was good news for both Emporia State and my series.“We want to learn from winning,” Collins, a practitioner of positive thinking, told his players in the locker room. “We don’t want to learn from a bad loss. So let’s take that attitude and that approach forward, all right? Good job. Let’s get something to eat.”On Monday night, after two more months of seasoning, the Lady Hornets advanced to the national quarterfinals, their dream of a championship intact. Collins stresses the importance of daily improvement. So does Karl Smesko, the coach of the women’s team at Florida Gulf Coast University. And so does Mike Budenholzer, the coach of the Atlanta Hawks.Good basketball often goes beyond the intertwined concepts of teamwork and chemistry, of course. Good basketball can be a great rivalry, as evidenced by the regular meetings between Hope College and Calvin College in Michigan. It can also be about camaraderie and friendship, as the octogenarians at the McBurney Y can attest.On Tuesday, the Knicks shared the court with a team that has set an example for the brand of basketball they hope to play someday. A model of consistency, the Spurs were back with the same cast of characters led by Tim Duncan, Tony Parker and Kawhi Leonard.“It’s not easy to keep coming back to a situation where things just don’t seem to be going right, and everyone is criticizing you and saying what you can’t do and what you’re not capable of,” Knicks Coach Derek Fisher said of his team. “So it takes a lot of character to keep coming back.”Amundson and Shved joined Langston Galloway, Andrea Bargnani and Lance Thomas in Fisher’s starting five, a hodgepodge lineup that was the sum of all the Knicks’ struggles, trades and injuries this season. But then, the unexpected: a thrilling contest against the league’s defending champion.The Knicks improved their record to 14-53.Advertisement