By TIM ROHANMARCH 17, 2015
PORT ST. LUCIE, Fla. —  Sandy Alderson, the Mets’ general manager, generally appears calm and measured when he addresses the news media, even when the questioning gets a little intense. He is, after all, both an Ivy League graduate and a former Marine who served in Vietnam.But on Tuesday, as Alderson faced more questions about the team’s handling of Zack Wheeler, who now faces Tommy John surgery to repair a torn ligament in his pitching elbow, he got testy at times, maybe even a little flustered.At the heart of the questions was whether the Mets could have taken precautionary steps last season, when Wheeler first complained of elbow discomfort but never came out of the rotation. By season’s end, he had started 32 games, pitched 185 innings, struck out 187 batters, walked 79 and thrown more pitches than anyone else on the club.The Mets had Wheeler skip a few bullpen sessions between starts, and at the end of season, he was given a magnetic resonance imaging test, which did not show a ligament tear. From there came a platelet-rich plasma injection in his elbow, another negative M.R.I. in January and finally a third M.R.I. this past weekend, revealing a full tear.AdvertisementSo could the Mets have done more last season to keep the tear from ever occurring?Alderson’s answer on Tuesday was an emphatic no.AdvertisementFrom his point of view, if Wheeler was going to sustain a tear, it was going to happen regardless of how he was treated. After all, pitchers are tearing elbow ligaments with regularity, and no one seems to have a preventive measure. So better to let Wheeler pitch to the best of his ability in 2014, rather than treat him so conservatively that he would not be a productive player.“If it blows out, it blows out,” Alderson said of Wheeler’s elbow. “The alternative is that you manage somebody to the point where he’s not useful to you.”Alderson noted that the Mets had treated Matt Harvey cautiously after he tore his elbow ligament in 2013 and had Tommy John surgery, with Harvey not being allowed to pitch again until this spring. So why, Alderson asked, would anyone think the Mets would be more cavalier with Wheeler, another highly valued pitcher?“That wouldn’t make any sense,” Alderson said. “We simply wouldn’t treat two guys that differently.”To Alderson, the elbow tear is almost a blessing in disguise for the 24-year-old Wheeler, because it does away with the possibility of having him try to pitch effectively in pain in 2015, as he did last season. That, Alderson suggested, would have been asking too much.“He’s done it to the best of his ability, probably beyond what any of us would have expected, even of ourselves,” Alderson said. “But inevitably, you can’t perform over an entire career with that level of discomfort.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“We’re not happy that this has happened. But I think, as I said earlier, the silver lining is that this elbow issue will be resolved, and he’ll be able to go on to a more pain-free, if not completely pain-free, pitching career.”As for Wheeler, he declined to take questions until he learned more. He was scheduled to travel to New York on Tuesday night and meet with team doctors Wednesday. The Mets were also forwarding his test results to Dr. James Andrews, the renowned orthopedic surgeon, and Wheeler may visit him, too.AdvertisementIn Wheeler’s absence, Dillon Gee becomes the fifth starter, at least for now. It was an interesting turn of events, because Alderson had shopped Gee during the winter, looking at him as a competent but expendable pitcher who would be making more than $5 million this season, a big figure for the frugal Mets. But Alderson did not attract an offer he liked, so Gee remained a Met, and now he is clearly more important than he was a few days ago.Gee, 28, is in his sixth season with the team and seems able to treat his ever-changing status with a good deal of poise.“I like to think of myself as a professional,” he said. “I’m just going to do whatever they ask me to do, the best I can.”Gee added: “This is not how I wanted to be in rotation. I told Zack yesterday, ‘I would rather be pitching in the bullpen than this happen to you.’ And I mean that from the bottom of my heart.”A version of this article appears in print on March 18, 2015, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: Alderson Defends Handling of Wheeler.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.