AdvertisementSupported byBy Ben RothenbergINDIAN WELLS, Calif. — Renewing a rivalry that fizzled when the bright hope began to fade, Serena Williams again asserted her brilliance Tuesday afternoon with a 6-7 (3), 6-2, 6-2 victory over Sloane Stephens in the fourth round of the BNP Paribas Open. “I’ve always said that I think that she can be the best,” Williams said in an interview on the court afterward. “I think she’s proven it time and time again. I have a lot of respect for her, she’s a really good player.”Stephens announced herself on the world stage by beating Williams in the quarterfinals of the 2013 Australian Open, igniting a breakout season in which she rose as high as 11th in the world. Williams won their other two meetings that year, the second one a competitive straight-sets victory en route to her title at the United States Open. While Williams, 33, has held the No. 1 ranking every week since, the once steadily rising Stephens has slipped, and she came here in danger of falling out of the top 50. But with victories over the former top-five players Angelique Kerber and Svetlana Kuznetsova in the second and third rounds, Stephens, 21, appears to have regained at least some of her old form. Williams has appeared drained at times during this tournament, which she is playing for the first time since a hostile crowd jeered her throughout her win in the 2001 final. This time the reception for her has been overwhelmingly positive, but the attention has consumed a lot of energy.Still, after her win Tuesday, Williams said: “I feel really good. Emotionally I feel ready, and I feel like everything is, you know, kind of behind me.” Stephens took an early lead, breaking Williams’s first two service games to take a 3-0 lead. Williams won the next four games to get back in front, and held a set point in the 10th game, but Stephens’s steadiness allowed her to take the set into a tiebreaker, which she won.Against Williams, Stephens displayed a high-quality game that she has often lacked during her slide, playing with a sharp offensive tilt and taking quick steps to the ball. She stayed positive, avoiding the negative body language she sometimes employs.Stephens began the second set by dumping three double faults in the opening game. That gave Williams an early advantage that she exploited, and her roll continued into the third set. After taking a 5-2 lead, Williams smacked a 128-mile-per-hour ace to give herself match point. Stephens challenged the call, but when the ball was shown to be in by inches, she gave a sheepish smile that Williams reciprocated. Stephens missed a forehand on the next and final point.After the match, Stephens spoke warily until a reporter asked her when she was going to win her first Grand Slam title.“I like that,” said Stephens, who has not reached a singles final at any tour-level event. “It’s not if, it’s when, right?”NOTESMaria Sharapova, the No. 2 seed, was defeated by the defending champion, Flavia Pennetta, 3-6, 6-3, 6-2.Advertisement