By SIMON AUSTINMARCH 17, 2015
Lance Armstrong recently met with a longtime nemesis, the head of the United States Anti-Doping Agency, in an effort to have his lifetime ban from sports overturned, according to a person familiar with the meeting.Armstrong, the disgraced former cycling champion, and Travis Tygart, the chief executive of Usada, met for the first time in more than two years near Denver International Airport last week. Their conversation was the first step in a potential rapprochement that could lead to the reduction of Armstrong’s lifetime ban for doping.Tygart, in an interview, would not confirm the meeting had taken place, and Armstrong’s lawyer, Elliot Peters, did not respond to a telephone message left at his San Francisco office. But Armstrong, 43, has confided to close friends that the meeting went well and that he was hopeful of further talks.Armstrong is eager to reach an agreement that would allow him to compete in top-level triathlons. Significant hurdles remain before that can occur, most notably Armstrong’s continued unwillingness to provide investigators with new, actionable information on agents, team officials and others guilty of doping offenses who still work in cycling.AdvertisementUntil now, Tygart has been the biggest obstacle to any Armstrong comeback.In 2012 Tygart, as head of Usada, compiled a 202-page dossier that accused Armstrong of running “the most sophisticated, professionalized and successful doping program that sport has ever seen.”AdvertisementThat led to Armstrong’s being stripped of his seven Tour de France titles. He was also barred from any sport that follows the World Anti-Doping Agency code, a punishment that effectively ended his career as an athlete.Armstrong responded by accusing Tygart of “an unconstitutional witch hunt” and of making “outlandish and heinous claims.” His legal team filed a lawsuit against both Usada and Tygart in Texas, and lobbied Congress to eliminate the organization’s funding. Both moves were unsuccessful.In December 2012, Armstrong and Tygart met, also in Denver, but that discussion ended bitterly, with Armstrong storming out.They had not spoken face to face again until last week.The new chief of cycling’s world governing body, Brian Cookson, initially tried to broker a meeting between Armstrong and Tygart. When he could not, Scott Mercier, a former rider for the United States Postal Service team, worked to arrange it. Mercier, who said he quit the sport in 1997 because of his refusal to dope, is a friend of both Tygart’s and Armstrong’s.While declining to confirm that the meeting had taken place, Tygart acknowledged that he was eager for the start of a process that could lead to a role for Armstrong in the fight against doping.“Our position has not changed,” Tygart said. “From the very beginning, our hope has always been that he would come in, sit down and have a full discussion.”Tygart praised Armstrong for meeting with a panel appointed by the International Cycling Union that recently released a report detailing doping in the sport. That panel, the Cycling Independent Reform Commission, was scathing in its criticism of how Armstrong’s influence led cycling officials to ignore drug use, and Armstrong’s critics noted that he once again failed to offer any new information.AdvertisementStill, Tygart said he was pleasantly surprised by Armstrong’s comment to the Cycling Independent Reform Commission, “that he was genuinely sorry for what had happened, and I think he has a lot to offer antidoping. So I am hopeful.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But Tygart was quick to add, “It is premature to talk about any sanction reduction.”Usada has the power to reduce Armstrong’s ban, but the WADA code stipulates that he would have to provide “substantial assistance” for that to occur. Tygart noted that in June 2012, his agency was prepared to offer Armstrong a six-month penalty similar to those given to the other riders who had helped its investigation. Armstrong refused, and has continued to do so, and Usada proved its case without him.“It was a huge missed opportunity,” Tygart said. Using the French acronym for the cycling union, he added: “It would have gotten rid of the leadership of the U.C.I. a lot quicker, and it would have gotten rid of other people in the system who were implicated in doping.“We are clearly in a different position now than we were then. A lot of what we hoped Lance could tell us then has subsequently been proven.”Tygart said that a lawsuit being brought by the United States government, which sponsored Armstrong’s Postal Service team and now accuses him of defrauding it by doping, could make it difficult for Armstrong to be candid, since he stands to forfeit millions of dollars if he loses.Tygart, who received death threats after exposing Armstrong’s doping in his 2012 report, said that he had no hard feelings against Armstrong.“Sure, you hate being called the things they called us, but it is never personal; we look at things objectively,” he said. “You have to remember all the hangers-on, all the money that was at stake, all these sponsors and people tipping champagne glasses after the Tour wins. That was where his team went over the top and bullied and abused people.”He added of Armstrong: “When you have never been held accountable, when you feel that you run the world, and the people close to you are telling you that you run the world, it can perhaps lead to a response like that.“The ultimate objective now is to get in a beneficial spot — for both antidoping and for Lance himself.”A version of this article appears in print on March 18, 2015, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: Armstrong Is Said to Meet Nemesis in Bid to Cut Ban.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.