By PAT PICKENSMARCH 17, 2015
GREENBURGH, N.Y. —  The list of Rangers who have played in every game this season is short, and it will shrink by one on Wednesday, as Martin St. Louis will not suit up against the Chicago Blackhawks because of a lower-body injury.Still, the Rangers, who have won five in a row, continue to roll.St. Louis, who is expected to miss 10 to 14 days, joins Henrik Lundqvist, Kevin Klein, Derek Stepan, Ryan McDonagh and Dan Boyle on the list of Rangers who have missed an extended length of time because of an injury.St. Louis had played in all 68 games this season, amassing 20 goals and 27 assists, including three points in the club’s last three games.“It’s kind of been the nature of our team since the first game, when Boyler went down,” McDonagh said, referring to the broken hand Boyle sustained in the season opener. “This is nothing new for us. The way we prepare for practice and in meetings, our approach to games, it doesn’t matter who is in the lineup. You know what your role is, you know what is expected of you, and Coach puts you out there in situations where he expects you to make plays and play strong, whoever it is.”AdvertisementThe Rangers may get a very important piece back soon. After practice Tuesday, the team announced that Lundqvist had been cleared by doctors to return to practice after missing six and a half weeks and 20 games with a blood vessel injury in his neck.AdvertisementThe resilient Rangers have found a way to navigate without him, soaring to the top of the N.H.L. standings. They have lost only twice in regulation, posting a 15-2-3 record, since Lundqvist was placed on injured reserve Feb. 6.The backup, Cam Talbot, has been exceptional, particularly this month, in which he has compiled a .967 save percentage and allowed six goals in six starts.“He’s always been one who trusts his skills, trusts his positioning, trusts his instincts,” McDonagh said of Talbot. “He’s out playing the puck. He isn’t afraid even late in the game to go outside his crease and make plays. That’s when we know he is just playing to his strengths.”In the wake of St. Louis’s injury, Coach Alain Vigneault experimented with new lines in practice, moving Rick Nash to right wing on the line with Chris Kreider and Stepan. Kevin Hayes was moved to left wing with Derick Brassard and Mats Zuccarello.“When Nasher missed one game, we used Kevin up with Zuke and Brass, and that line played well that game,” Vigneault said, referring to the club’s Feb. 24 victory over the Calgary Flames. “Last year, obviously, a lot of the season we used Kreids with Step and Nasher, so we just went back to that. We’ll see how it works out tomorrow.”James Sheppard will play center on the team’s third line, taking Hayes’s spot there with Carl Hagelin on left wing and J. T. Miller on the right. Sheppard has played only three games since joining the team in a trade on March 2 but looked especially strong in Sunday’s 2-1 victory over the Panthers.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“It’s kind of what I expected from him,” Boyle said of Sheppard, his former teammate in San Jose. “He’s a big body — holds onto pucks, very tough to knock off the puck once he has it. He can play anywhere from first line to fourth line.”Vigneault also tinkered with the power-play units, trying four forwards — Nash, Brassard, Kreider and Stepan — with the offensive-minded Keith Yandle in the first group. The power play is one of the few facets in which the team is scuffling, scoring just once in its last 21 chances.Advertisement“Our power play, even though in my estimation has gotten some good looks and real good opportunities, hasn’t produced for the last little while here,” Vigneault said. “With Marty out, I just felt it was time to take a look at different things.”In recent games, the Rangers have gotten offensive contributions from a variety of sources. Last weekend, Yandle and Sheppard each scored for the first time since joining the Rangers in separate deals near the deadline. Yandle netted the first goal in Saturday night’s 2-0 win at Buffalo, and Sheppard scored his first on Sunday against Florida. Matt Hunwick, who returned to the lineup after Klein was sidelined last week with an upper-body injury, scored the game-winning goal Sunday.Yandle has only one point in seven games since being picked up from the Arizona Coyotes, but fitting in with the Rangers has been seamless.“You have a mixture of older guys and younger guys, and great leadership from a guy like Mac,” Yandle said, referring to McDonagh. “The easy part for me has been fitting in, and these guys have just helped me get to that point and it’s been awesome.”A version of this article appears in print on March 18, 2015, on Page B16 of the New York edition with the headline: Injuries Leave Rangers Reduced but Not Diminished.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.