By ROB HUGHESMARCH 17, 2015
LONDON —  When thousands of fans got out of their seats before halftime and left the Stadium of Light in Sunderland, Gus Poyet must have known the game was up.His Sunderland team was being beaten 4-0 at home by struggling Aston Villa. And Poyet, a coach whose sideline demeanor betrays his every mood, had the look of a beaten puppy. “I am the one who is responsible,” Poyet said after the nightmare game ended.“I am one of the few in football nowadays who is honest. When things go right, I tell you I am responsible, and when things go wrong, I tell you I am responsible. I hate people when they pick and choose and they change; they have many faces.”And the fans who departed at halftime? “I would do the same,” answered Poyet. “What happened in the first half was unacceptable.”AdvertisementWhat followed was inevitable. Poyet took the team training on Monday, then was summoned to the front office to be relieved of his duties.AdvertisementBy nightfall, Dick Advocaat, a Dutchman who has coached in eight countries in Europe and Asia, was tying up a deal to take over at Sunderland until the end of the season. Advocaat’s task is stark: He must win more points in the remaining nine games of the season than Sunderland has managed since Christmas if the team hopes to avoid relegation.The Black Cats have won just once in their last 12 Premier League games. The atmosphere smells of failure.Players lose matches; coaches take the blame. It is no coincidence that three of the bottom five clubs — Queens Park Rangers, Aston Villa and now Sunderland — have changed managers since the start of the year.The financial consequences of dropping down a division are scary. Starting in 2016, each club in the Premier League will bank almost $100 million per season from broadcasting rights alone, in addition to income from ticket sales, sponsorship and merchandising. Despite Sunderland’s higher unemployment than the national average, the supporters usually fill the 45,000 seats in their Stadium of Light.Soccer matters that much to folks in England’s most northerly, and often coldest, region. It is a part of living to put on the red and white stripes of Sunderland or to wear the black and white of Newcastle United.Sunderland is one of five Premier League teams under American ownership, along with Manchester United, Liverpool, Aston Villa and Arsenal. In the last few years under owner Ellis Short, Sunderland managers have been as expendable as any other asset in his portfolio.Once the January trading window has shut, players are safe. They cannot be replaced, so there is no point in firing them, even when it appears obvious that some on Sunderland are just going through the motions and picking up a paycheck. Maybe Poyet, such a positive player when he was in the midfield for Chelsea or Tottenham Hotspur or his native Uruguay, lacks that hard edge to make complacent players fight for the jersey.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Advocaat will not be faulted in that department. The 67-year-old, whose appointment was confirmed Tuesday, is known to ruffle feathers and to shake up those who think they can rest on their laurels while the team is down.AdvertisementBut what short memories, and what fast triggers, the club owners have.Twelve months ago, Poyet was the master of escape, whose sheer drive and burning enthusiasm on the sideline somehow managed to cajole Sunderland out of the relegation mire.“Miracles happen, Gus” read one fan’s banner in the stands.Now they just say “Go, Poyet.”Seven managers have gone since Short acquired full control of the English club six seasons ago. The chairman, his board and his sporting director Lee Congerton pick the players (often discarded players from Manchester United and the like), then hire and fire the coaches when the scent of spring brings with it the whiff of fear of the drop.It cannot be denied that Poyet’s management style became erratic as the losses piled up since the turn of the year. He had held his nerve when the players lost, 8-0, at Southampton last October.That defeat, which bordered on a surrender, was somehow patched over by a lift in morale and team discipline that lasted until Saturday’s 4-0 home loss to Aston Villa. What compounded the defeat was that Villa — whose owner Randy Lerner is looking to sell and leave English soccer — had only scored four goals outside its own stadium all season, until Saturday.The sight of Aston Villa doubling that meager tally in just one half was enough for the fans, and enough for the owner. As Poyet drove away from the stadium,  Short posted a statement on the club’s website Monday.“I would like to thank Gus,” it read, “for his endeavors during his time at the club, in particular last season’s ‘great escape’ and cup final appearance which will live long in the memory of every Sunderland fan.“Sadly, we have not made the progress that any of us had hoped for this season and we find ourselves battling, once again, at the wrong end of the table. We have therefore made the difficult decision that a change is needed.”There was no acknowledgment that it takes 11 men to win games of soccer, that it takes guidance from the boardroom to run the club and support the coach, and that it takes an investment from the owner to strengthen a team that had one foot in relegation at this time a year ago.Advocaat is not the long-term solution. He has long wanted an opportunity to work in the Premier League, but he will know that his countryman, Louis van Gaal, needed months to get his ideas across at Manchester United.AdvertisementThe word is that Advocaat negotiated hard and long for a suitable bonus to be written into his nine-game deal should Sunderland still be a Premier League club at the end of it.A version of this article appears in print on March 18, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.