AdvertisementSupported byBy John BranchPORTLAND, Ore. — Shaka Smart will not fill out your tournament bracket, but four years after leading Virginia Commonwealth to the Final Four, he had some thoughts on what it takes to be the next small-name basketball program to last deep into March. “There’s so much attention paid to individuals, but it comes down to whichever team is better,” Smart said Wednesday, a day before the seventh-seeded Rams were to play 10th-seeded Ohio State. “For our guys, we’ve tried to hammer the point home that we must be connected around our team goals and that has to supersede anything individual.”It was an interesting response. Ohio State features the freshman D’Angelo Russell, a 6-foot-5 all-American who averages 19.3 points per game, nearly double the mark of any teammate. He is expected to be a first-round N.B.A. draft choice, perhaps among the first five players chosen. While many N.C.A.A. champions have had a singular talent — or, in Kentucky’s case, a cast of them — the rise of the so-called midmajors has depended mostly on a rather anonymous cast of players. George Mason was seeded 11th in 2006 when it reached the Final Four. Butler reached back-to-back championship games in 2010 and 2011, beating 11th-seeded V.C.U. in the national semifinals for its second appearance. Wichita State was a ninth-seeded Final Four team in 2013. Asked if there was a common formula, Smart said, “They had experience, some older guys that had been there before.” When V.C.U. reached the Final Four, Smart was in his second season as coach. The previous year, 2010, V.C.U. finished 27-9 and won the College Basketball Invitational, a third-tier postseason tournament featuring teams not invited to the N.C.A.A. tournament or the N.I.T. The Rams have won at least 26 games and been to the N.C.A.A. tournament each season since. They might be considered a candidate this season for another surprisingly deep run, part of a group that could also include Northern Iowa, Davidson, Stephen F. Austin, Buffalo and Wofford. Then again, maybe V.C.U. — and the N.C.A.A. tournament generally — has passed the point of surprise.Advertisement