AdvertisementSupported byBy John BranchPORTLAND, Ore. — Among the few constants in college basketball is the Southwestern Athletic Conference’s position at the bottom. The conference, consisting of historically black colleges, is perennially the lowest-rated league in the country. Of the 351 teams ranked in the Basketball Power Index, only one SWAC team is higher than No. 261. That is Texas Southern, seeded 15th in the West Region and matched against No. 2 Arizona on Thursday. And while it is unlikely that the Tigers (B.P.I.: 210) will become the first SWAC team since 1993 to win a round-of-64 game in the N.C.A.A. tournament, they have the attention of big-name programs. Coach Mike Davis coached at Indiana for six seasons, leading the Hoosiers to the 2002 championship game. This season, Davis’s third with the Tigers, Texas Southern beat Michigan State and Kansas State on the road, part of an intentionally brutal nonconference schedule intended to make up for the anchor effect of playing in the SWAC. “My vision for the program is to one day get it to the level of an at-large bid,” Davis said Wednesday. The nonconference schedule included games at Indiana, Tennessee, Southern Methodist, Baylor, Florida, Gonzaga and Auburn. That helps the strength-of-schedule component of the rankings, of course. But the goal is winning.“If you win, the whole country’s talking about it,” Davis said. “If you lose, it’s just a money game. You play Gonzaga; if you lose, just a money game. I kept telling my team, anything that could be done in college basketball can be done at Texas Southern, but you have to win. You have to win the game.”When Texas Southern beat Michigan State, 71-64, on Dec. 20, Davis received 500 congratulatory text messages, he said. Three days later, when his team lost by a point at Auburn, he received five. The Tigers have some advantages that other SWAC teams do not have — a location in talent-rich Houston, good facilities, a decent budget. “But I wanted to play the really, really good teams so we could set ourselves apart from everybody else in the SWAC,” Davis said. “There’s some very good coaches in the SWAC, very good coaches. But unfortunately, financially, the resources are just not there. The talent level, our guards in our league can play with anybody. Anybody.”Texas Southern has one starter taller than 6 feet 5 inches. Arizona, by comparison, has four starters taller than 6-7. But that victory at Michigan State? Arizona Coach Sean Miller saw it on television in December. His players know all about it. Davis revealed his scheduling strategy: Play the toughest games over the holidays in December — which is when Texas Southern beat Michigan State and Kansas State. The student sections are depleted, the crowds more sedate, the opposing players distracted.“Some of them are missing their girlfriends,” Davis said. “They want to go home for Christmas. We come in there, Texas Southern — they’re not really respecting us. They’re shooting around, talking, laughing, not really serious. So that’s a good time to play them. In November, we’re in trouble.”In March, too — probably. But if any SWAC team can surprise, it is this one.Advertisement