By VIV BERNSTEINMARCH 19, 2015
GREENSBORO, N.C. —  From 1997 to 2011, Duke and North Carolina combined to win 14 of 15 Atlantic Coast Conference tournament championships in men’s basketball. It was their league — good luck to any team that wanted a piece of it.But that storied history is just that: history. The last four champions of the tournament have been Florida State, Miami, Virginia and, this year, Notre Dame. Virginia is the only conference blue blood among them. Notre Dame? The Fighting Irish were not even in the A.C.C. three years ago.This is what conference realignment has wrought.“It is different to say Notre Dame won the A.C.C. championship,” North Carolina Coach Roy Williams said after his Tar Heels fell to the Irish, 90-82, in Saturday night’s title game here in the heart of A.C.C. country.North Carolina has lost four of the last five A.C.C. championship games; Duke is the other team to have lost in the final in that time.Advertisement“I think it’s just a change in culture,” Williams said. “I mean, my gosh, we have Texas A&M in the Southeast. We have West Virginia in the Big 12 or whatever it is. I mean, the landscape of college athletics — we’ve got Colorado in the Pac-10. We’ve got Notre Dame in the A.C.C.”AdvertisementNotre Dame had not won a conference tournament title before Saturday night. That is largely because the team was an independent for many years before joining the Big East (and then switching to the A.C.C.). Still, Irish Coach Mike Brey knows the history of the A.C.C. as well as anyone. He was an assistant under Mike Krzyzewski for years at Duke.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.All of which made Saturday night’s victory sweeter.“To win the title going through Duke and North Carolina on Tobacco Road, I think, is extremely powerful,” Brey said. “It’s really powerful for our program.”It also gives the Irish a boost going into the N.C.A.A. tournament. Notre Dame (29-5), the No. 3 seed in the Midwest Region, takes on 14th-seeded Northeastern on Thursday in Pittsburgh.“Our résumé is really strong, and we go into the tournament a very confident team,” Brey said.No matter what happens in the next few weeks, though, no one can take away the title Notre Dame already owns. And Brey plans to celebrate.“I remember Lefty when he won it,” Brey said of the famed former Maryland coach Lefty Driesell. “He said, ‘I’m going to bolt the trophy to the hood of my car and drive all over Tobacco Road.’ So if you see a Buick Enclave in June with this trophy going from Asheville to Wilmington, that’s me.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.