AdvertisementSupported byBy Tom SpoustaJACKSONVILLE, Fla. — The fight song “Ten Thousand Men of Harvard” blared across the court, setting a collegiate mood as the Harvard Crimson began a crisp and vocal practice Wednesday. “Make sure we talk; make sure we talk,” Coach Tommy Amaker urged players as they ran past him during fast-break drills. The 13th-seeded Crimson, matched against fourth-seeded North Carolina, might seem to have the potential for one of those classic N.C.A.A. tournament fairy tales. But Harvard is hardly a Cinderella. This is its fourth consecutive tournament appearance, and the Crimson have won their opening game the past two years, beating New Mexico and Cincinnati.There are plenty of subplots for Thursday night’s game between Harvard and North Carolina at Jacksonville Veterans Memorial Arena. Amaker was a Duke guard in the 1980s and played a part in the heated rivalry with North Carolina. He was not really recruited by North Carolina back then because the Tar Heels’ coaching staff — which included Roy Williams, now the head coach — coveted Kenny Smith above Amaker. “I try to honestly keep my history out of it,” Amaker said. “It’s not about me. But certainly they recognize, and we all do, the history and the tradition and the greatness of Carolina basketball.” North Carolina guard Marcus Paige said, “I don’t think Duke has got a whole lot to do with what’s going on with this game, but it’s an interesting side note.” Still, Harvard’s players can envision another Duke connection: The Crimson could assert themselves as this year’s Mercer, the No. 14 seed that knocked off the third-seeded Blue Devils last March. An Ivy League team has not reached the round of 16 since Cornell in 2010, and that is the only time it has happened since Penn made a run to the Final Four in 1979. Before Amaker arrived eight seasons ago, Harvard had not won an Ivy League title, and it had not been to the N.C.A.A. tournament since 1946, when it lost to New York University in the second round. Still Williams, North Carolina’s coach, did not sound as if he was taking Amaker or his team lightly, saying Amaker’s style always put the smart play ahead of the flashy move. “I loved Tommy when he was in high school,” Williams said. “I thought he was the most complete point guard in his class. He could score; he could defend; he was a coach on the court; he didn’t make silly mistakes. I see the same kind of things in his team.”Advertisement