By JAY SCHREIBERMARCH 19, 2015
It would have created a huge distraction for Major League Baseball — Roger Clemens on the witness stand in federal court in Brooklyn just as the World Series was being decided.To baseball’s relief, that is not going to happen. On Wednesday, lawyers representing Clemens and lawyers for his former trainer Brian McNamee reached a settlement in McNamee’s long-running defamation suit against Clemens, a seven-time Cy Young Award winner.As a result, McNamee will receive an unspecified payment from Clemens’s insurer, AIG, which also took part in Wednesday’s negotiations.Both Richard Emery, the lead lawyer for McNamee, and Rusty Hardin, the lead lawyer for Clemens, said that Clemens himself would not be paying any money to McNamee and that the settlement did not contain any admission of wrongdoing.Advertisement“We always took the position that Roger would never pay anything and would never participate in any settlement negotiations — and we didn’t,” Hardin said.AdvertisementThe payment, he added, will come from a homeowners insurance policy that Clemens has with AIG that covers defamation claims. It was the insurance company, Hardin said, that “made a decision about the cost of trying the case and decided it was cheaper to settle.”The settlement ends a long battle that began with the publication of baseball’s Mitchell report in December 2007. Among the report’s highlights were allegations from McNamee that he had provided both Clemens and Clemens’s Yankees teammate Andy Pettitte with performance-enhancing drugs.Pettitte quickly admitted his guilt, but Clemens was defiant, denying he had used either steroids or human growth hormone, as McNamee alleged.As the battle progressed, Clemens filed a defamation suit against McNamee that was ultimately thrown out. McNamee later a filed a suit of his own, which endured all the way to Wednesday.In his suit, McNamee contended that Clemens had damaged his reputation by accusing him of being a liar and mentally unstable.Clemens also had to repeat his denials under oath before a congressional committee; McNamee, who was also present, stated the opposite. In the aftermath of that televised hearing, Clemens was charged with perjury.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.That, in turn, led to a federal trial in Washington in which Clemens was acquitted in 2012. Clemens did not have to testify in that trial, and he did not. However, had the defamation case gone to trial in Brooklyn, matters would have been different.Clemens, Emery said in an interview last fall, would have been the first witness called to the stand. Emery predicted that a Brooklyn jury would find Clemens “completely delusionary” and would “not believe a word he says.”AdvertisementIn his comments Wednesday night, Emery was less confrontational.“Like any settlement, it’s not perfect, but it’s a good result,” he said. “It’s a good resolution of a long and rocky road.”He added: “It feels like it’s time that it’s over. Certainly, it’s time for Brian to move on.”Unlike Emery, Hardin was not present at Wednesday’s bargaining, as another lawyer, Chip Babcock, represented Clemens. But like Emery, Hardin expressed relief that an ending had been reached.“Is it nice to have it behind Roger and not have him testify again?” he said. “Yes.”Michael S. Schmidt contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on March 19, 2015, on Page B15 of the New York edition with the headline: Defamation Lawsuit by Clemens’s Ex-Trainer Is Settled.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.