By BILLY WITZMARCH 18, 2015
LAKE BUENA VISTA, Fla. —  When he was attending Wagner College, Andrew Bailey and a few buddies would occasionally take the Staten Island Ferry to Manhattan, hop on the train to Yankee Stadium and sit among the bleacher creatures.If Bailey harbored any dream of pitching for the Yankees then, it would not have been much more ambitious than the one he has now — making the team’s opening day roster.Bailey, a nonroster invitee, is trying to crack the Yankees’ deep and talented bullpen while returning from a rare type of shoulder operation.Bailey, a right-hander, took substantive steps Wednesday night, pitching in a game for the first time in 20 months as the Yankees beat the Atlanta Braves, 12-5, in an exhibition game.AdvertisementBailey allowed two hits and one run in his one inning, his fastball a steady 92 miles per hour. He might have had a perfect inning if second baseman Rob Refsnyder had not bounced a throw off a slow grounder. Then again, center fielder Mason Williams bailed out Bailey with a superb diving catch to end the inning.Advertisement“I was anxious, and it was great to have that feeling again,” Bailey, 30, said. “For me, it was about getting out healthy. I gave up a run — the best run I ever gave up in my life.”The Yankees planned to see how Bailey felt Thursday before deciding when he would pitch next. For all the power arms in their bullpen, Bailey has what nobody else does — experience as a closer, with 89 career saves. Andrew Miller and Dellin Betances, who are competing for the closer’s job, have one apiece.“It’s a flier,” General Manager Brian Cashman said of Bailey this month, adding, “It’s one of those things where we’re rooting for him to make it on the field, but the odds are against it from what he’s coming back from.”Cashman said Wednesday that Bailey had thrown exceptionally well in simulated games but that “he’s still behind the eight ball” because his first appearance came in the 17th game of the exhibition season. Bailey still must prove he can pitch on consecutive days, too.Sitting in the stands Wednesday — along with Cashman, the assistant general manager Billy Eppler and other Yankees talent evaluators — were Bailey’s wife, Amanda, and their two children, Theodora, who is 2, and Matthew, who is 5 months old. They have been in Tampa, Fla., for six weeks with Bailey and were there most of last summer when he was rehabilitating, hoping he would get a chance to pitch for the Yankees in September.“They’re my support system,” Bailey said.Bailey, a two-time All-Star, never figured on a career in baseball. Growing up in Haddon Township, N.J., just outside Philadelphia, he could not afford to travel to high school showcases and received interest from only one college program — nearby Rutgers-Camden. He contacted coaches at Wagner and other small Division I schools.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Between his senior year in high school and his freshman year at Wagner, Bailey grew four inches, and his fastball jumped from the mid-80s to the low 90s. He had developed into a prospect, but near the end of his junior season, he tore ligaments in his right elbow.Milwaukee drafted him in the 16th round anyway, but Bailey decided to return for his senior season — in large part because he was close to earning his degree in business administration.AdvertisementIt turned out to be a good baseball decision, too. Bailey rebounded well enough that Oakland drafted him in the sixth round in 2006. Three years later, he was an All-Star and the American League rookie of the year.Bailey injured his shoulder while pitching for Boston in 2013 and had surgery to repair a torn anterior capsule — an injury that diminished or ended the careers of Mark Prior, Johan Santana, Dallas Braden, John Maine and John Danks. (Chris Young is a rare success story, returning to win the American League Comeback Player of the Year Award last season for Seattle.)“It’s been very frustrating,” Bailey said. “My mind-set, and the Yankees’, too, was, what if I sail through rehab? But the reality is, the body needs time to heal. The surgeon gave me 18 to 24 months. If I had that in my mind from the start, it would have been less stressful, but as a competitor you want to be out there yesterday.”There was no such frustration after he pitched Wednesday — only possibilities.“I want to see where baseball can still take me,” Bailey said. “Hopefully I’ll have a chance to pitch in New York this season, whether it’s Day 1 or day whatever.”INSIDE PITCHJACOBY ELLSBURY had a magnetic resonance imaging test and was found to have a low-grade oblique strain. He is expected to return to baseball activities in about a week. ... MASAHIRO TANAKA, who was troubled by a tender elbow last season, had a second strong spring training start, allowing two hits in three and two-thirds innings. Tanaka, who threw 48 pitches, has not allowed a run in five and two-thirds innings.A version of this article appears in print on March 19, 2015, on Page B15 of the New York edition with the headline: Former Closer Takes Mound in Long-Shot Bid to Make the Yankees.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.