By ALLAN KREDAMARCH 18, 2015
The Rangers and Chicago Blackhawks are old Original Six rivals who came within an overtime bounce last June of meeting in the Stanley Cup finals for the first time.On Wednesday, the Rangers entered their home contest with the league’s best record while the Blackhawks — missing their injured leading scorer Patrick Kane — were cruising along at a pace within striking distance of the overall top spot as well.The Rangers had won six of seven entering the game, while the Blackhawks, fresh off a 4-1 pasting of the visiting Islanders on Tuesday, were winners of seven of their last nine.The former Ranger Brad Richards scored the game’s only goal as the Blackhawks (43-21-6) avenged a 1-0 Rangers overtime victory in Chicago on March 8.AdvertisementRichards spent three seasons with the Rangers, helping them reach the finals last spring and the Eastern Conference finals in 2012. Despite his leadership and important playoff contributions, the Rangers bought out his contract last summer because of salary cap issues.Advertisement“There’s nothing like playing in this building,” Richards said. “It’s exciting but also a little sad, but it had to end. Everybody knows how much I loved playing here. But it was pretty special to get one to win the game. They are great fans, passionate. I wouldn’t expect anything different coming in.”After a scoreless first period in which the Rangers held an 8-7 shots advantage, the teams played a similarly banal second period with both teams recording seven shots.The Chicago rookie Scott Darling made 25 saves for his first career shutout while Cam Talbot lost for only the third time in regulation in 19 starts since Henrik Lundqvist last played on Feb. 2.“I felt really good again,” Talbot said. “I felt like I was seeing the puck well. It’s tough when a guy like Richie gets that much time in the slot. He made a nice play.” Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Honored during the first period with a video tribute after which he waved to the Garden crowd, Richards had a chance to celebrate on his former home ice after he broke through at 7 minutes 19 seconds of the third, outfoxing the Rangers defense and Talbot for his 11th goal of the season.The Rangers (44-18-7) still lead the Metropolitan Division by 5 points over the Islanders and 7 points over Pittsburgh.And soon they will have Lundqvist back.Before the game, the goaltender spoke about his being medically cleared to return to full practice later this week. Lundqvist hasn’t played since Feb. 2 because of a vascular injury in his neck suffered when struck by a puck in the throat area against Carolina on Jan. 31.“I feel good — I’m excited to get back,” Lundqvist said. “It’s a big relief. I just want to play the game because I miss it so much.”AdvertisementThe 33-year-old Lundqvist offered no official timetable for when he would next play, saying that we could take the next week or so to assess his condition after several practices.“It’s not about me,” he said. “It’s about what is best for the team.”In Lundqvist’s absence, Talbot has been stellar with a 13-3-3 mark. The rookie Mackenzie Skapski also has two wins.Even with the loss, the Rangers have limited opponents to one goal or fewer in regulation in each of their last eight games.SLAP SHOTSThe Rangers were without the injured Martin St. Louis (lower-body injury) for the first time this season. ... Chicago scratched the former Rangers Daniel Carcillo and Michal Rozsival, and forward Kris Versteeg.An article in some copies on Thursday about the Rangers’ 1-0 loss to the Chicago Blackhawks referred incorrectly to Rangers goalie Cam Talbot’s losses since Henrik Lundqvist last played on Feb. 2. He has lost three times in regulation, not three times over all. The article also misstated Talbot’s record during that span. He is 13-3-3 — not 15-3-3, which is the Rangers’ record during Lundqvist’s absence.A version of this article appears in print on March 19, 2015, on Page B19 of the New York edition with the headline: Back at Garden, Richards Makes Himself at Home.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.