AdvertisementSupported byBy Patrick MaksDAYTON, Ohio — It is conceivable that Archie Miller has walked up, down, back and forth across the court at University of Dayton Arena hundreds of times. But during his team’s practice Tuesday inside this old but famed gymnasium off the banks of the Great Miami River, Miller, Dayton’s coach, casually paced about with his hands folded in front of him and surveyed his surroundings as if to inspect every square inch like a visitor.In a place that could be considered a classical ode to basketball — where the dim Daktronics scoreboards have grown outdated and the bottoms of creaky stadium seats have rusted — Miller approached the afternoon like a man in control of his domain, yet still in awe of it.The arena’s chambers are filled with memories, having served as something of the launching point of the N.C.A.A. tournament since 2001.The grandest spectacle in college basketball began here once again Tuesday night (and will do so each year until at least 2018) as Hampton outlasted Manhattan and Mississippi beat Brigham Young as part of the tournament’s first four games — a series of play-in bouts in which teams duel to assume a place in the field of 64. It was chosen to serve in such a capacity because of a long history of hosting postseason games and a passionate fan base regarded as one the most loyal in the country. Dayton has ranked in the top 35 in attendance since the 13,409-seat arena opened in 1969.The arena has hosted 107 N.C.A.A. tournament games, more than any other site, including basketball palaces like Madison Square Garden and the Palestra in Philadelphia. Because of this, Dayton — a southwestern Ohio city of about 140,000 people — often boasts that it is the epicenter of basketball.It is a bold statement, but consider the moments here. In 1970, Austin Carr, then a Notre Dame standout, scored 61 points, a tournament feat yet to be matched. Two years later, the 41-year reign of Adolph Rupp, the storied Kentucky coach, came to an unceremonious end in a loss to Florida State. In 2006, George Mason toppled Michigan State and North Carolina on its way to an improbable appearance in the Final Four.On Wednesday night, after Robert Morris beat North Florida, 81-77, in another play-in game, Dayton played in the N.C.A.A. tournament on its home court for the second time in university history.“First I thought it was a typo,” said Leon Hall, the coach of Dayton’s opponent, Boise State.So did many across the country when it was announced that the postseason quest of Dayton — a proud program that Miller has lifted back to national prominence, with a stirring run to the round of 8 last season — would start in its living room. The Flyers, who entered Wednesday with a 25-8 record, were expected to make the main field. Instead, they were the last at-large team selected, leaving them to survive the play-in game.Jordan Sibert, a redshirt senior transfer from Ohio State who leads Dayton in scoring, shrugged off the notion of being snubbed.“It’s just a blessing to have an opportunity to play in the tournament,” he said. “Some guys didn’t hear their name called at all.”Miller said: “First Four, last four — it doesn’t matter to me. I’ll never apologize for being in the tournament. It’s a special feeling.”The Flyers, however, were adamant that playing at home did not provide them with an extra advantage.“I just don’t want people to think that this is a cakewalk,” Miller said. “I don’t want people to think that this is going to be very easy.”For this bracket, the more unusual that your picks are, the more points you’ll receive — so long as those picks are correct.Hall, Boise State’s coach, also played down the notion.“We get to go play Dayton,” he said, “and just happens to be in Dayton.”Still, after Dayton’s stirring, 56-55 comeback victory, in which Sibert’s late-game star turn helped the Flyers remain undefeated here this season, there was something to be said about the crowd, which lived up to its billing as a buzzing den of blue and red. The din has been known to swallow opponents whole.“When we’re playing a home game, we have about as good of a home-court advantage as anyone does in college basketball,” Miller said. “And our fans are tremendous — they’ve been doing it for a long, long time.”During Tuesday’s practice, a smattering of especially devoted Dayton fans gathered in the arena’s lower bowl. Dispersed through the stands and wearing green in honor of St. Patrick’s Day, they took out phones and snapped photos and videos, seemingly in awe of the scene.When the session was over, Miller blew his whistle and summoned his team to half-court. A clap broke out. As those in attendance joined in, it sped up. Clap-clap-clap-clap-clap. The fans rose to their feet as the volume built. And then it stopped. Miller and the Flyers jogged to their locker room.“I’ve been in here for an N.C.A.A. tournament game with Ohio State — when I was an assistant there — and it’s a magical feeling in here on the N.C.A.A. tournament night,” said Miller, who was an understudy to Coach Thad Matta when the Buckeyes lost to Siena here in 2009. “And I remember sitting there during that game, thinking to myself, ‘Boy, I wonder what it’s like to play in here when they’re in here.’ ”Wednesday night offered a taste as the night ended in thunderous chants — a tribute to the collegiate celebration that can be found here year after year.Advertisement