By SAM BORDENMARCH 18, 2015
BARCELONA, Spain —  The moment that encapsulated the game came after about 40 minutes. Lionel Messi, Barcelona’s wizard in residence, had the ball near the sideline. James Milner, a sturdy Manchester City midfielder, approached.Messi caressed the ball with his foot. Milner tried to shuffle along. Suddenly, the ball was through Milner’s legs, Messi was off behind him and Milner collapsed onto his rear end, unable to stand up against Messi’s bag of tricks.Milner was far from alone. The image of a City player — an English one at that — felled by a superior European rival was an altogether fitting conclusion to the Champions League’s round of 16. Messi, the Argentine superstar, and Barcelona dazzled again. Manchester City is out again. And along with City’s hopes went those of the Premier League, which sent three of its four entrants to the knockout round only for all three to be summarily bounced.The score on Wednesday was 1-0, but the margin was deceiving. In terms of sheer dominance, Barcelona deserved a spread closer to 10-0, and without City goalkeeper Joe Hart delivering something close to the performance of his life, La Blaugrana might have had it.AdvertisementIn the end, the aggregate score was 3-1, Barcelona, over two legs. With advancement to the quarterfinals secured for the eighth straight season, Messi and his teammates can happily turn their attention to a league showdown on Sunday with Real Madrid.Advertisement“I’m enjoying the moment now,” Messi said.For Manchester City, refocusing on the Premier League is not very pleasant. Part of that is because Chelsea is well on its way to reclaiming the title, which City won a year ago. But for the moment at least, the larger feeling of shame is because of the familiar — some might even say expected — nature of another letdown against continental competition.City was also beaten by Barcelona last year. The two years before that, the Citizens exited after the group stage. In the seven years since Abu Dhabi investors took over the club, its performance in Europe has been the only significant area where the team has not delivered: Two league titles, a League Cup trophy and a runner-up finish in the F.A. Cup are strong, to be sure, but there has been no carry-over into matches against the rest of the European upper crust.Coach Manuel Pellegrini tried his best to be pragmatic on Wednesday. “I don’t see this as a failure,” he said before adding, “I am disappointed.”At this point, that distinction is little more than semantics. Chelsea and Arsenal could at least make cases for having had fair chances of advancing against Paris St.-Germain and Monaco, and their ousters were dramatic. By comparison, City’s departure lacked any significant verve. Barcelona ran roughshod during the first leg in Manchester and, back home for the return, delivered a performance that was so sweet it occasionally bordered on cloying.Messi, Luis Suárez and Neymar led a terrifying three-forward line that shredded Manchester City’s defense, constantly twisting and spinning the City defenders as if the Barcelona attackers were alternating turns with a yo-yo. The fans at Camp Nou, including the former Barcelona coach Pep Guardiola, were often brought out of their seats by a steady mix of stylish dribbling, probing passes and one-touch delicacy that was led by Messi, who seemed to constantly be on the ball.“It’s a luxury to watch Messi,” said Guardiola, who has taken his current club, Bayern Munich, to the quarterfinals.Guardiola watched Barcelona begin its throttling early. Neymar hit the post after just six minutes. Hart saved Messi’s close-range blast after 12 minutes. Messi and Neymar each nutmegged Fernandinho with artful dribbles through his legs. Messi set up a goal by Ivan Rakitic with an arcing cross that Rakitic finished with a gorgeous lob.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Chasing all night, City could never catch up. Even as its Middle Eastern investors have sunk money into the club since 2008, there has been little change in the starting lineup’s makeup over the last four years. That has left City as either a “win-now” team or, more bluntly, an old team that has an average age near 30 and several cogs, including the captain, Vincent Kompany, who sometimes appear to be past their primes.AdvertisementPellegrini has gone to great lengths to defend his players — he even trotted out the chestnut excuse of England’s not having a winter break as a potential explanation for the poor European performances by Premier League teams — but this defeat will only intensify the scrutiny surrounding his job. Unless City pulls off an unexpected rally to catch Chelsea in the league, Pellegrini may be out of a job in the summer.If Sergio Agüero had managed to score from the penalty spot late in the second half, “it would have been an interesting last 15 minutes,” Hart said, “but it wasn’t to be.”Agüero’s penalty was saved, and Pellegrini grimaced and spun away on the sideline.Yes, there was still time left; time enough at least for Hart to shine a bit more as he dived and sprawled and blocked and parried and, after one frenzied sequence, even accepted a quick pat on the shoulder from Suárez. By most measures, though, the contest was long over.Manchester City needed at least two goals and got none. Its best player in a game in which it desperately needed offense was its goalkeeper (who made 10 saves). Its fans, who sat high in the stands at Camp Nou, waited sullenly until the referee blew the final whistle.The gap between the clubs was obvious.“They’re a very good team,” Hart said afterward. “They’ve got a lot of belief in what they do.”He considered that for a moment, then added a corollary.“And,” he said, “they’ve got Lionel Messi.”A version of this article appears in print on March 19, 2015, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: Ready for Messi, or So They Thought.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.