
Sports of The Times By                     
 JULIET MACUR
 
MARCH 18, 2015
LOUISVILLE, Ky. — When the University of Alabama-Birmingham, citing rising costs, decided to drop its football program, fans there took to the streets to protest. They marched, waved signs and called for the university president to be booted off campus.They also, evidently, took out their frustrations on their men’s basketball team.For all but two home games this season, U.A.B.’s Blazers played in front of more empty seats at Bartow Arena than filled ones. The team’s home attendance fell by nearly 25 percent this season, down more than a thousand fans a game from 2013-14.The players can guess why.“Hey, what happened to football wasn’t our fault, but people were sort of acting like it was,” Chris Cokley, a freshman forward, said Wednesday as the team prepared for its opening game in the N.C.A.A. tournament. “None of us think that’s very fair.”But fans’ shunning of basketball games to stick it to the university for dropping football just shows the power of football, especially in the South. Even though there are 101 reasons to get out of the football business these days — including the inability of smaller universities like U.A.B. to keep up financially with those in power conferences and, of course, the issue of brain trauma — fans still want to see their precious, potentially budget-draining and often violent game.AdvertisementAt U.A.B., basketball became collateral damage. But right under everyone’s noses, the men’s team has been writing a happier ending to the story.AdvertisementTo those just tuning in, here’s an update: After starting the season at a crawl, U.A.B. has been gaining momentum. It is 19-15 and won the Conference USA tournament title to claim the league’s automatic bid. Now a No. 14 seed, the Blazers will play No. 3 Iowa State on Thursday. They are likely to lose, but just making it this far amid the chaos at U.A.B. should be cause for celebration. Just after the announcement of the demise of football in December, Coach Jerod Haase took to the phones to plead with fans, one by one, to come to games and cheer.“The trickle-down effect of on other sports was immense,” Haase said of the mood after the December announcement. “I had to do something, so I said to people: ‘Look, we’re going to be good. We’re young, but we have so much talent and potential. Please come out. Give us a chance. Just see what we can do.’ ”It wasn’t an easy sell.The Blazers had only four wins by Christmas, and they lost by 31 at North Carolina two days later to fall to 4-9. But Haase was right. His Blazers, with only two seniors, had a huge upside.The turning point came after the loss in Chapel Hill. There, in the heart of basketball country, the players saw more than 19,000 fans who cared about the game, and they returned to Birmingham motivated to make their fans care, too.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Without football, a lot of people relied on us to do good for the school,” the sophomore guard Tyler Madison said, “so we had a meeting and said: ‘Do we want to keep on being a team like this? No, we want to do better. We need to do better to boost the whole school.’ We really wanted to turn around people’s attitudes.”First, though, they had to turn around their play. To do that, Haase, a former Kansas star, fine-tuned the team’s shot selection. He adjusted the roles of several players and worked on improving his substitution patterns, and — voilà — the Blazers started winning. A three-game winning streak here, another one there, then another, then another and a final one in the conference tournament.Did those victories spur some U.A.B. fans to wake from their football stupor and turn up at basketball games? Not exactly.A crowd of 4,761 — the second largest of the season — was in the stands for the team’s final home game, a victory over Middle Tennessee.AdvertisementHaase said the team “never used football as a platform for a rallying call,” but several players acknowledged that football’s demise had been in the backs of their minds.Nick Norton, a freshman point guard, said the team wanted to give Birmingham something to be proud of because he knew that the city had “been down” about football.Cokley suggested that U.A.B. might someday even be known for its basketball, kind of like Duke or Georgetown. That might take five years, or maybe 10, he said, but he was sure that it would happen, adding, “That all starts here against Iowa State.”That would be something to see. It might be even more fun if the Blazers’ hometown went along for the ride.Email: juliet@nytimes.com A version of this article appears in print on March 19, 2015, on Page B16 of the New York edition with the headline: Moving Forward as Support Slipped.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »