AdvertisementSupported byBy Karen CrouseORLANDO, Fla. — Rory McIlroy’s repeated absences from the Arnold Palmer Invitational became a symbol of his divided loyalties. He turned down invitations from Palmer, the tournament host, for three years, including twice when he was ranked No. 1, to spend time with his globe-trotting girlfriend, the tennis player Caroline Wozniacki, who was competing in back-to-back events in California and Florida.After he broke off his engagement to Wozniacki last May, McIlroy said he wanted to make golf his main focus. Ten months and two major victories later, McIlroy’s renewed commitment to the sport has come into sharp relief.Instead of rushing off last week to the tennis tournament in Indian Wells, Calif., and practicing in between matches, McIlroy helped his father, Gerry, check off a bucket-list item with two father-son rounds at Augusta National Golf Club, had a surprise encounter with the N.F.L. quarterbacks Tom Brady and Peyton and Eli Manning, and engaged Jack Nicklaus in an unscheduled conversation about putting strategy in advance of next month’s Masters.With a victory at Augusta National, McIlroy would complete a career Grand Slam. He has one top-10 finish in six Masters appearances but has never has been as prepared as this year, when he has put in extra practice. The rounds last week, McIlroy emphasized, were not about preparing for this year’s tournament. “One hundred percent fun,” he said. “Zero percent serious. I didn’t hit any extra balls. I played one ball the whole time. Really wanted to go and enjoy it with my dad.”On the eve of his debut at Bay Hill Club and Lodge, McIlroy mentioned a dinner he had scheduled for Thursday night with Palmer, who said, “I think it’s nice that he has come.”McIlroy can learn much from listening to Palmer, just as he did from observing Brady and the Manning brothers. McIlroy crossed paths with them in the unlikeliest of places: the weight room on the Augusta National grounds.Before daylight last Friday, McIlroy said, Brady showed up, and was followed 15 minutes later by the Mannings. “That was my time to leave,” McIlroy joked.It left an impression on McIlroy to see the quarterbacks, who have a combined seven Super Bowl victories, working out as if they were unproven players trying to earn a roster spot.“They’re so dedicated and committed to what they do,” McIlroy said, adding, “To see them putting so much into it even after 15 successful years of a career, it was great for me to see, and it was inspirational in some ways.”A win at the Masters would give the top-ranked McIlroy a fifth major title before his 26th birthday, matching the pace set by the 14-time major champion Tiger Woods. With Woods on indefinite leave, McIlroy has become the face of the game, as evidenced by the announcement this week that he would replace Woods on the cover of EA Sports’s newest golf video game.“I wouldn’t read too much into it,” McIlroy said.Superstars never rest, as McIlroy’s encounter with the Mannings and Brady last week reminded him. So he has no doubt that Woods is putting in the work needed to return to championship form. McIlroy, who did not break 70 in six competitive rounds in his first two starts on the Florida swing, returned from Augusta and put in long hours with his coach, Michael Bannon. “The last five days have been really good work with him, just one-on-one, no else around,” McIlroy said.He said he had played well during one of his rounds at Augusta, but would not reveal his score other than to say that he broke 70.“I’m excited the direction it’s going,” McIlroy said, “and happy to be here and get one more competitive outing, and I guess really trying to get myself into contention and try and win a golf tournament before I turn my attention elsewhere.NOTESBubba Watson, the reigning Masters champion, withdrew after the death Tuesday night of a childhood friend. In a statement released by the PGA Tour, Watson, who lives a few miles from Bay Hill, said, “I have chosen to withdraw so I can attend the funeral and pay respect to my friend and his family.” Advertisement