AdvertisementSupported byBy Tim ChartierThe upsets are always the tricky part of the N.C.A.A. men’s basketball tournament. The methods we have developed at Davidson College often uncover several upsets in the first round, giving us leverage in the online bracket competitions we have participated in. But that is with standard bracket scoring, in which every accurately predicted game yields the same number of points in any given round. In The New York Times’s bracket, finding an upset that might be lost in the weeds of a season’s worth of games can propel an entrant ahead of the crowd.A new question arises: When might we want to go against the math? Our general method entails ranking the teams using our algorithms. We use mathematical techniques that inherently take strength of schedule into account. Beating strong teams is worth more than beating weak teams. We also give weight to predictive elements like the ability to win within a month of the conference tournament and thus come in with momentum. Even here, strength of schedule plays a role. Beating strong teams close to the N.C.A.A. tournament gives a team a bigger bump in our rankings.The Times’s bracket rewards the ability to see that potential upset and predict it. But again, how does one measure risk? For this bracket, the more unusual that your picks are, the more points you’ll receive — so long as those picks are correct.To help me, I recruited two Davidson students who had worked in sports analytics research. We devised 12 sensible ways to weight the season and run our algorithms. Then we looked at every round’s matchups and which team was predicted to win. For example, our bracket chooses Stephen F. Austin over Utah in the first round.  In our models, Utah won only a fraction of the time more than Stephen F. Austin. But Utah is worth fewer than half the points in The Times’s bracket. Given that Utah appears, at least mathematically, to be vulnerable to an upset — it would be the classic case of a No. 5 seed falling to a No. 12 seed in the first round — we let the expected number of points be the deciding factor.  With this type of thinking, we moved through the bracket, game by game and round by round. In the end, we had our choices. Of course, we raised new research questions along the way, talked about other ways we could approach the problem, and scribbled down a few notes for future research. Why? Because bracketology is what we do, and it allows us to apply math concepts to fields beyond sports. There are many applications in the world in which the payoff of an outcome is not the same in every case, and The Times’s bracket demonstrates that within the context of the sometimes random, unpredictable world of the N.C.A.A. tournament.In the end, we looked at our bracket much the way we did when we first applied our ranking methods, in 2009. We smiled and hoped for the best. In 2009, our bracket beat 97 percent of the more than four million brackets it was compared with. In 2010, our bracket beat 99.9 percent of more than five million brackets. In 2015? The tournament will tell. Maybe we will see that we have devised an effective method, and maybe we will see there is more research to do. Either way, my students and I win — exploring the math is part of the fun of the tournament and the inevitable madness that is yet to come. Tim Chartier is a math professor at Davidson College, where he leads a class on bracketology. He and his students also provide analytics for the basketball team. Advertisement