AdvertisementSupported byBy Tim RohanPORT ST. LUCIE, Fla. — Over the off-season, like any man on hiatus from work, Noah Syndergaard did not shave every day. He had some stubble when he came here in January to train with a group of Mets. Then he saw Bobby Parnell and Josh Edgin and their substantial beards, and Vic Black’s beard on social media, and he decided to commit to growing his own.He reported to camp with a scraggly beard that was about six weeks old. And he was not alone. At one point, about half of the players in camp had some type of beard. Several players said there were more beards this year than in the recent past.It mostly seemed like a coincidence, but for prospects like Syndergaard, having a beard represented something more — it was almost a rite of passage. For more than a decade, the Mets barred minor leaguers from growing beards. One of the perks for prospects who were invited to major league camp was the opportunity to wear their facial hair however they wanted. So when they were sent down to the minor leagues, it hurt all the more, because they would have to shave.“It gives you some extra motivation to get to the big leagues,” said Jack Leathersich, who has one of the fuller beards among the Mets prospects in camp.Several minor leaguers said the no-beard rule was enforced more stringently during spring training, probably to set the tone for the season. Many players grow beards in the off-season and think nothing of it. Kirk Nieuwenhuis recalled how, in one extreme situation, a Mets official pulled a pitcher off the mound and ordered him to shave.“I just had a baby face,” Edgin said, recalling his years in the minor leagues. “I didn’t feel comfortable without facial hair, you know. I would stretch the limits, see how far I could get before someone said something. They would let you have three- or four-day scruff. But once it got a little bit of a tint to it, they asked you to shave.”It is not uncommon for entire teams to grow beards together. Hockey players often grow playoff beards and vow not to shave until they win the Stanley Cup. The 2013 Boston Red Sox grew beards in solidarity, tugged on them for good luck, and won the World Series. The Yankees, of course, bar their players from having beards. The 2015 Mets are a sign of the times; their beards seem boundless.“There’s more interest in beards now than there’s been, I’d say, in the last 10, 15 years,” said Mark Anthony Green, an assistant editor at GQ magazine. “It’s cooler to look a little more rugged,” he explained.Syndergaard shaved his, anyway, because it looked “pretty terrible,” he said.Some veteran Mets are taking full advantage of their freedom. Parnell guessed that he had not been cleanshaven since 2010. He grew his beard particularly long over the past year or so as he recovered from Tommy John surgery, and he arrived in camp looking like a Civil War general.For his facial hair’s longevity alone, Parnell might be the team’s foremost beard expert. Black sought him out this spring for advice. Parnell warned him not to trim his beard on his own, saying that he had tried that once and cut a large chunk off the side. Black has had his beard trimmed twice this season at a local barber shop.One company was so impressed with Nieuwenhuis’s beard that it sent him beard balm, free. His teammates were impressed, too — position players typically do not have extravagant beards. Nieuwenhuis explained that Seattle, his off-season home, was particularly cold this year, and he had wanted to keep his face warm.“I look pretty normal out there,” Nieuwenhuis said.His beard is so long now — longer than it has ever been — that his wife makes him shampoo and condition it every day, so it does not irritate her face as much.He has not decided whether to keep it, but it might be bringing him good luck. This is perhaps the best spring he has had as a Met. He is batting .483 over his first 10 games, and he has a strong chance to make the opening day roster as an extra outfielder.If a prospect is not recognized for his performance on the field, he might be noticed for his beard. From afar, one minor leaguer, Cody Satterwhite, bears a resemblance to Lucas Duda because of his build, his height and, yes, his beard.“Every time I come out of the dugout,” he said, “I get called Lucas Duda.”But Satterwhite could not pitch as well as Duda hits. The Mets had their second round of cuts Tuesday, and Satterwhite was among them. He might not have to shave, though.In one of the first meetings of the spring, on the minor league side, the Mets announced that they were changing the rule: Minor leaguers would be allowed to have neatly trimmed beards. That meant no neck beards, and nothing too thick. They could not look like Parnell or Black. But it was a major concession.“Look, my attitude is: Major league guys are doing the same thing,” General Manager Sandy Alderson said about the rule change. “I don’t see any reason to treat our minor leaguers that much differently.”As the news sank in, the room erupted in cheers.Advertisement