AdvertisementSupported by30 SecondsInterview by Joe BresciaDuke is the top seed in the South Region in the 2015 N.C.A.A. men’s basketball tournament and may have a chance to derail Kentucky. While Christian Laettner made the Shot to defeat Kentucky in the 1992 East Regional final, he never would have had the chance without the Pass, an 80-foot inbounds toss from Grant Hill.Hill, who played for Duke, was the 1994 Atlantic Coast Conference player of the year, a two-time all-American and a two-time N.C.A.A. tournament champion. He was selected third over all by the Detroit Pistons in the 1994 N.B.A. draft and was a co-rookie of the year, with Jason Kidd. Though plagued by injuries later in his career, he was selected to an All-Star team seven times. He retired in 2013 after playing for four teams and 18 seasons. Hill, 42, is a basketball analyst for Turner Sports. (This interview has been condensed and edited.)Q. What are your picks for each region?East: I think the East is the easiest. To me, of all the No. 1 seeds, Villanova is the most underrated and the one nobody is really talking about. This is the best opportunity for them to make the Final Four in a number of years.South: I think Duke, the way they closed out the regular season, tough wins on the road, going to Virginia, winning big, sweeping Carolina and beating Notre Dame at home. They had some impressive victories. I’m not too alarmed that they lost in the conference semifinals. I think Coach K will get them regrouped and ready for a nice tournament run. I think Gonzaga is a potential tough opponent. S.M.U. and Larry Brown, can’t discount that. In the end, I think it’ll be Duke.Midwest: Kentucky is in the hardest bracket, the hardest region. You can look at Maryland as a potential Sweet 16 matchup. Maryland finished second in the Big Ten regular season, beat Wisconsin, a No. 1 seed. A potential matchup with Notre Dame, which won the A.C.C. tournament, beat U.N.C. and a No. 1 seed in Duke. Then Kansas, which arguably won the toughest conference, had the No. 1 R.P.I. Ultimately, Kentucky is just too good, too deep, too much for this region. They’ll have a tough game or two, potentially, but ultimately, I think they’ll prevail.West: At this point I’m not sure I can pick one. Wisconsin and Arizona could be a fantastic potential regional final. I think it’s a tossup.Q. Your choice for a team that can surprise?A. Wichita State could surprise some people and go further than expected.Q. Your pick to win it all?A. Any of those teams in the Final Four. If I’m picking one now, I’m totally guessing. Kentucky could run the table. They’re that good, that talented. If Wisconsin can get through, it would be a great matchup versus Kentucky. I like their experience, their discipline, their talent. And they lost to them up, with a minute left, in the semifinals. But I don’t want to crown a national champion just yet.Q. Why Duke, your alma mater, will or won’t be champion?A. The argument for why they will: They have great balance, interior play with Jahlil Okafor. A tremendous slasher or sort of utility guy that kind of does everything in Justise Winslow, and then great guard play in Quinn Cook and Tyus Jones. And then they got complementary pieces that stay within themselves but are productive. What they’ve shown in the last 12 games, including the loss to Notre Dame, they’ve been as good as anybody. I think what can hurt them is their youth. They’re young. They haven’t been on this stage, and nine times out of 10, experience plays a huge role in success throughout the tournament.Q. What decent college player have you seen who will flourish in the N.B.A.?A. There’s been a lot of talk about Okafor, Frank Kaminsky of Wisconsin and Willie Cauley-Stein of Kentucky, and rightfully so. Those three are fantastic, each in different ways, and will be great pros. Somebody that doesn’t necessarily get the attention of those guys, but has tremendous upside, is Karl-Anthony Towns from Kentucky. He has a chance to be pretty special.Q. You were a four-year college player. What are your thoughts about players who leave early?A. I’d like to see players stay at least one more year. I think it would help the N.B.A. game. Players would be more seasoned with another year of college. It helps the college game. As fantastic as some of these freshmen are, it would be nice to see D’Angelo Russell of Ohio State, Melo Trimble of Maryland, Karl-Anthony Towns and Jahlil Okafor one more year. Who knows, maybe those guys decide to stay one more year.Q. What’s the key to Coach Mike Krzyzewski’s success?A. His ability to adapt and adjust through the years. Every generation, every era is different. To be able to connect and resonate with these modern young players, continue to lead, coach, inspire, teach in multiple decades speaks volumes about his ability to change through the years.Q. Do people you meet realize you threw the pass to Laettner?A. People I meet think I’m Steve Smith (the former N.B.A. player and a Turner analyst). I had a different haircut back in 1992. I think once people realize who I am, they remember I threw the ball.Q. Do you have any advice for Derrick Rose, like you, another star player plagued by major injuries?A. The main thing is to just cut out all the noise and the chatter, and just focus on the task at hand. That’s the main thing. Just focus in like he has done, do all that he can, work hard, stay positive. Either he will get healthy, or he won’t. I still believe he has a lot of basketball left in him. The most important thing is for him to believe that, too.Q. What N.B.A. team not having a great season can go far in the playoffs?A. I know this may sound crazy, one, in terms of how they’ve been this year, and two, I don’t know if you can call them a dark horse, but San Antonio. They’ve had some injuries this season. They’ve been mentally and emotionally fatigued throughout the regular season. But if they’re healthy, with 10 games going into the postseason, Tony Parker can start to play better. The playoffs will help them mentally. Of course, you have Coach Gregg Popovich, who knows a thing or two about postseason play. It may sound odd calling the Spurs a dark horse. They’re used to being the favorites the past 15 years. But they’re a team that can surprise some people in the postseason.Q. Will Phil Jackson turn the Knicks around, or leave before his contract is up?A. I think he’ll turn it around, and I think he’ll get them into the postseason. One thing you know about champions, champions don’t quit. And he’s certainly embodied that spirit throughout his career. He’s up for the challenge. They’re going to have some flexibility. And it’s still New York City, still Madison Square Garden. You have Carmelo Anthony there now, so this will be an important summer for this team. And I would think in the next year or so, making the playoffs is a real possibility. And if the Knicks made the playoffs, they should have a ticker-tape parade in New York.Q. You played against Michael Jordan and LeBron James. Who is better?A. They’re both fantastic players and ambassadors for the N.B.A. I would probably give the nod to Jordan, nothing against LeBron, but I think Michael Jordan is in his own company, just a tremendous player. I think his game translates in any era and any generation. So, I have to go with the Tar Heel and Mr. Jordan.Advertisement