AdvertisementSupported byBy Bill PenningtonRoughly a year ago, at home in Colorado, Lindsey Vonn’s mornings were devoted to grueling gym sessions rehabilitating her twice rebuilt right knee. Vonn’s afternoons were spent with the leg enveloped in ice, a routine that had kept her out of consecutive racing seasons.Half a world away, at the 2014 Sochi Winter Olympics, the Alpine racing community had conspicuously, and it seemed symbolically, moved on without the once dominant Vonn.Her heir apparent, Slovenia’s Tina Maze, won two Olympic races and Maze’s younger rival, Austria’s Anna Fenninger, collected two Olympic medals. An 18-year-old American, Mikaela Shiffrin, became the youngest slalom champion in Olympic history.Vonn, 30, saw the handwriting on the wall but vowed to erase it.“The other girls are probably feeling pretty comfortable without me out there,” Vonn said on the eve of her comeback this winter. “I think they’ll see that they can’t be comfortable anymore. It’s a new generation coming up, but they’ll definitely realize that the veteran is not gone quite yet.”Wednesday in a women’s downhill at Meribel, France, Vonn won her seventh race this season, a victory that earned her the season-long World Cup downhill title. Vonn was awarded the crystal globe that goes with the championship, the 18th she has earned in her career, including her four overall championships.It is the most World Cup crystal globes won by a woman. Thursday, in the final super-G of the season, Vonn is among the favorites to win another World Cup title. If Vonn, who leads the super-G standings, wins that title it will tie her with Sweden’s Ingemar Stenmark, the record-holder for the most World Cup discipline and overall championships.“This is the most meaningful of the globes I’ve won,” Vonn said in the finish area Wednesday. “To be injured for the last two years and to come back from two major knee surgeries, it just feels amazing to be standing here.“I was happy to just get a couple of wins this winter, but to actually get a globe is more than I had hoped for. I’m thankful for all the support I’ve gotten from my teammates and from the many people who worked so hard to help me get back to this position. I couldn’t feel better right now.”Vonn’s winning time of 1 minute 29.87 seconds was 24-hundredths of a second faster than the time of Elisabeth Görgl of Austria. Görgl’s teammate Nicole Hosp was in third place, three-tenths of a second behind Vonn.Fenninger, who trailed Vonn by 35 points heading into Wednesday’s race, finished second in the downhill season standings. She was eighth Wednesday, nearly a second behind Vonn. Maze finished fourth.It was the 66th World Cup victory for Vonn, also a women’s record. Stenmark holds the career record with 86.Vonn, who has said she wants to continue racing until at least the 2018 Winter Olympics in South Korea, said Wednesday that she was trying not to think about records, even as she accumulates them.“I don’t know what the future is; I’m just going to keep trying to win as many races as I can,” said Vonn, who won six successive downhill titles from 2008 to 2013. “I’m trying to win as many globes as I can. I’m just going to keep going.”Vonn credited part of her success Wednesday to her decision to take a week off from the World Cup circuit last week. She did not participate in two technical races in Sweden to rest and to travel to France so she could acclimate to the snow conditions at Méribel, where she had not raced for two years.“Taking the time off was really a good thing to do because it left me fresh and feeling optimistic,” said Vonn, who waved her ski poles at the crowd after her first-place finish, pointing at a group of fans who held aloft a sign that read, “Congrats, Lindsey.”The pursuit of this year’s super-G title has been a tight battle between Vonn and Fenninger. Entering Thursday’s race, Vonn has only an 8-point advantage.Fenninger is also trying this season to become the first woman to win consecutive World Cup overall titles since Vonn won three in a row beginning in 2008. With three races left in the final week of racing this year, Fenninger has a 12-point lead over Maze in the standings.Vonn is not in the running for the overall title. She sat out several races this season as a concession to her recovery from her knee surgeries.The competition for the men’s World Cup overall title grew considerably more heated Wednesday when Norway’s Kjetil Jansrud won a downhill race held several hours before the women’s downhill at Méribel. Jansrud is chasing the three-time overall defending champion Marcel Hirscher of Austria, and his downhill victory cut Hirscher’s lead in the standings to 64 points.Jansrud, the Olympic super-G champion, gets a chance to overtake Hirscher in a super-G Thursday. But Hirscher’s best events — giant slalom and slalom — will be contested this weekend.Advertisement