AdvertisementSupported byBy Pat BorziKANSAS CITY, Mo. — At the end of a brief practice the day before the Big 12 tournament quarterfinals at Sprint Center here, Kansas forward Cliff Alexander, a freshman, left the court with his gray T-shirt drenched in sweat. Alexander, embroiled in an eligibility issue with the N.C.A.A., had no reason to hold back because he would not be playing in the tournament.Alexander watched the Jayhawks’ three games from the same place, the far end of the bench, never taking off his sweats. The Jayhawks still made it to the championship game without him and with forwards Perry Ellis and Landen Lucas playing hurt. But in the final, Kansas squandered a 17-point second-half lead and lost to Iowa State, 70-66.The loss stung.Earlier this month, Kansas (26-8) wrapped up its 11th consecutive Big 12 regular-season championship, tying the second-longest streak in N.C.A.A. history behind U.C.L.A.’s 13 Pacific-8 or Pacific-10 titles from 1967 to 1979. That was noteworthy because the Jayhawks had lost Andrew Wiggins and Joel Embiid to the 2014 N.B.A. draft, and Coach Bill Self was not sure whether the Jayhawks could win even 10 conference games. (They finished 13-5.)The loss to Iowa State aside, Kansas did enough to secure a 26th consecutive N.C.A.A. appearance, the nation’s longest active streak, and a No. 2 seed in the Midwest Region. That is what happens when you play the strongest schedule in the country and in a conference ranked No. 1 in the Ratings Percentage Index.For this bracket, the more unusual that your picks are, the more points you’ll receive — so long as those picks are correct.But the Jayhawks limped to the finish.Ellis, the team’s leading scorer at 13.8 points a game, sprained his right knee against West Virginia on March 3, missing the final regular-season game, at Oklahoma, and Kansas’ first Big 12 tournament game.Self suspended guard Brannen Greene, a sophomore, for the Oklahoma game for violating team rules. And Alexander, averaging 7.1 points and 5.3 rebounds a game, sat the last six games while the N.C.A.A. investigated a possible rules violation. Lucas played with hip and back soreness.“We need to get our team back,” Self said. “This isn’t an excuse, but we need to get back healthy.”Self is not counting on Alexander playing Friday when Kansas faces 15th-seeded New Mexico State (23-10) in a round of 64 game in Omaha, or in games beyond that. Kansas could face Wichita State (28-4) in the second round if the Shockers get by Indiana (20-13), a potential matchup of particular interest to Ellis, who grew up in Wichita.“It’s been the best inconsistent year I’ve had, probably, with our team,” Self said. “Of our 13 wins in-league, you can say we played pretty good in about seven of them. There have been times where we’ve not won and played better, and sometimes we’ve won and haven’t played as well. Hopefully, we can straighten that out when it counts the most.”Ellis wore a knee brace in the semifinals and finals. He shot 6 for 21 from the field (28.6 percent) and often settled for jump shots. He sat out the final 7 minutes 50 seconds of the semifinal after colliding with Baylor’s Lester Medford on the baseline. Ellis later insisted that he had banged his quadriceps, not his knee. He struggled in the second half of the final, managing 2 points and a rebound.“Perry obviously didn’t look himself,” said Iowa State forward Georges Niang. “He didn’t seem as aggressive as Perry usually is. One guy can’t really guard Perry Ellis. He’s a tough matchup. When he gets into the seam and puts pressure on the defense, you have to collapse, and then he kicks it out to other guys.”Ellis told reporters Sunday night in Lawrence, Kan., that his knee was improving with treatment. “I was glad to get out there,” he said. “It’s all about confidence and the mind-set. It’s getting better and better as time goes on.”Self hopes the six days of rest before Friday will permit Ellis and Lucas to heal. Guard Wayne Selden Jr.’s back-to-back 20-point games in the Big 12 tournament helped, but the Jayhawks most likely need a healthy Ellis to advance.The Jayhawks’ offense lacks inside presence without Ellis. Lately, Self has given more playing time to Hunter Mickelson, a 6-foot-10 junior transfer from Arkansas who can block shots.“We’re pretty resilient,” Mickelson said. “That’s kind of how we’ve been going the latter part of the season, kind of grinding out games that are pretty close, pretty tough. We can’t keep doing that. We have to start playing a whole lot better.”Yahoo Sports reported a link between Alexander’s mother, Latillia, and a financial firm that extends loans to athletes who have declared for the N.B.A. and N.F.L. drafts, based on a Uniform Commercial Code filing in Illinois. Such a loan to Alexander would violate N.C.A.A. rules. The family lives in Chicago.In a statement released to multiple media outlets last week, Alexander’s lawyer, Paul K. Stafford, said Alexander provided phone, text and bank records to the N.C.A.A.“Mr. Alexander has been ready, willing and able to be interviewed since March 2,” Stafford said in the statement, “yet he has been informed that the N.C.A.A. will not interview him until they receive additional documents that are not his documents, the content of which he has no knowledge, and documents which have never been in his control or possession.”Stafford did not immediately respond to an email seeking further comment.“It would be nice to get him back, but it’s out of our hands,” Self said. “I’m not asking every day where is it, because there’s no reason to. We’ll know if there’s any movement on it, and there’s been absolutely no movement.“It’s very frustrating for him, but he’s been a stud. This is what’s frustrating: He’s probably practiced better than he has all year long.”Advertisement