By BEN ROTHENBERGMARCH 18, 2015
INDIAN WELLS, Calif. — The International Tennis Federation and the United States Anti-Doping Agency announced Wednesday that the American Wayne Odesnik had been barred for 15 years after urine samples he submitted in December and January tested positive for multiple banned substances. It was Odesnik’s second doping offense in five years.Odesnik released a statement on Wednesday saying that he had “unknowingly ingested a contaminated over-the-counter supplement” and would retire.“Upon learning of my positive test results, I was immediately heartbroken as words could not describe my shock and disappointment,” he said. “Being the most tested American tennis player on tour, I would never knowingly have taken any chance of consuming a banned substance.”Odesnik, 29, was first barred in 2010 for two years after Australian authorities found eight vials of human growth hormone in his luggage at an airport in Brisbane. At the end of that year, Odesnik’s ban was reduced to seven months because of “substantial assistance provided by Mr. Odesnik in relation to the enforcement of professional rules of conduct,” although the details of that assistance were never revealed.AdvertisementDespite his shortened suspension, Odesnik remained a pariah in tennis. He often had trouble finding others willing to play doubles or even practice with him.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Antidoping authorities also remained wary of Odesnik, often targeting him even more than top players. (Odesnik is ranked 267th and has never been ranked higher than 77th.) In 2013, Odesnik was tested 14 times by Usada, more than any other player. Last year he was tested 10 times, which tied him for the most.AdvertisementOdesnik’s notoriety was renewed by the scandal involving Biogenesis of America, a now-closed South Florida clinic that illegally supplied performance-enhancing drugs to professional athletes. Odesnik’s name appeared 26 times in the company’s notebooks, sometimes next to dollar amounts paid, according to the 2014 book “Blood Sport.”Many at the BNP Paribas Open here reacted to Odesnik’s suspension with exasperation and vindication.“I think the thing that’s also disappointing is you hear, like, ‘Oh, I have learned from my mistake, blah, blah, blah, blah,’ ” Andy Murray said after his fourth-round win, adding, “It’s good that he’s off the tour now.”A version of this article appears in print on March 19, 2015, on Page B18 of the New York edition with the headline: Sports Briefing | Tennis; Wayne Odesnik Barred From Tennis After Second Doping Violation.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.