AdvertisementSupported byBy Zach SchonbrunA major figure in the N.C.A.A. report on infractions and academic misconduct at Syracuse gave up his job Wednesday, but it was not Jim Boeheim, the men’s basketball coach, who will remain on the team’s bench for three more seasons.Daryl Gross, Syracuse’s athletic director for the last 10 years, resigned Wednesday, less than two weeks after the N.C.A.A. implicated him in several transgressions it revealed about the behavior of the men’s basketball and football programs dating back more than a decade.But according to an email from the university’s chancellor and president, Kent Syverud, to the Syracuse community Wednesday morning, Boeheim, who was cited by the N.C.A.A. for failing to promote an atmosphere of compliance, will keep his position. He has agreed to retire after the 2017-18 season, concluding his tenure with the Orange after 42 years.“Coach Boeheim has also told me that he intends to retire as head coach in three years,” Syverud wrote in the email. “His goal in making this decision and announcement now is to bring certainty to the team and program in the coming years, and enable and plan for a successful, longer-term transition in coaching leadership. Coach Boeheim’s commitment to ensuring that the men’s basketball program remains strong even after his tenure is just one more example of his deep loyalty to our university.”The university plans to appeal the N.C.A.A.’s decision to vacate 108 men’s basketball wins since 2004 and to reduce 12 scholarships over the next four years. It has decided not to fight the N.C.A.A.’s other penalties, which included suspending Boeheim for the first nine conference games next season, placing the men’s basketball and football programs on probation for five years and returning all the money Syracuse earned through revenue sharing for its appearances in the N.C.A.A. tournament in 2011, 2012 and 2013.In his only public statement since the report, Boeheim, 70, denied any knowledge of the academic misconduct by members of his staff or the impermissible benefits distributed by two close affiliates of the program who worked at a nearby Y.M.C.A.Gross was implicated numerous times in the N.C.A.A.’s report on Syracuse’s transgressions, specifically with regard to the violations of its own drug policy. In its report, the N.C.A.A. wrote that Gross admitted following an “unwritten policy” with regard to allowing athletes back to competition after failed drug tests.The N.C.A.A. issued a 94-page report Friday on violations committed by the Syracuse athletic department.Furthermore, on Jan. 25, 2012, Gross convened a meeting with members of the athletic department, the faculty athletic representative and an associate provost to outline a strategy to get a pivotal basketball player, Fab Melo, back on the court after the N.C.A.A. had declared him academically ineligible.It was an unprecedented meeting tailored specifically for one athlete, the provost later told the N.C.A.A. According to Gross, Melo “needed basketball.” And Syracuse, which was 21-1 at the time, needed Melo.The group settled on a plan to get a grade in one of Melo’s previous courses changed, according to the N.C.A.A. The former director of basketball operations, Stan Kissel, was asked to assist Melo in making this happen, and he did, providing text, research and citations to the “extra work” that Melo submitted to a course he had taken the previous year.On Feb. 1, the professor raised Melo’s grade from a C-minus to a B-minus, and Melo returned to the court on Feb. 4.“The academic leaders (including the faculty athletics representative and associate provost) were convened by the director of athletics,” the N.C.A.A.’s committee on infractions wrote, “developed a game plan going forward and then left it to the director of basketball operations to get the job done.”Gross has been reassigned to a role as a vice president and a special assistant to the chancellor, and an adjunct professor in the David B. Falk College of Sport and Human Dynamics. Pete Sala, a longtime Syracuse athletics facilities operator, was appointed to serve as the interim athletic director while a committee begins a search for Gross’s replacement.Syverud and Elizabeth D. Liddy, interim vice chancellor and provost, met with deans, department heads and other faculty leaders Monday to answer questions about the N.C.A.A. report and the university’s academic integrity policy. The university’s board of trustees then met Tuesday, when it decided what appeals it would make to the N.C.A.A.Gross was responsible for moving Syracuse into the Atlantic Coast Conference in 2013, and his fund-raising efforts helped transform the university’s athletic facilities into a sprawling second campus, complete with the Carmelo K. Anthony Basketball Center, the Manley Hall of Champions and a recently opened indoor football practice center.Gross arrived in December 2004 after 14 years as an athletics administrator at Southern California and promptly fired the football coach, Paul Pasqualoni. His replacement, Greg Robinson, won 10 games over the next four seasons.Advertisement