
On Baseball By                     
 TYLER KEPNER
 
OCT. 14, 2015
CHICAGO — Before the third game of the Chicago Cubs’ division series Monday, their first at home in the postseason in seven years, Kyle Schwarber came out early and sat in the stands.A year ago, he had been playing in the instructional league, a newly drafted catcher from Indiana University. In a few hours, he would be stationed in left field in the playoffs, in front of the famous ivy wall at Wrigley Field, facing the mighty St. Louis Cardinals with more than 40,000 fans going wild around him. He took it all in before it happened.“I was just trying to visualize what it was going to be like tonight, kind of control the emotions and try to see what the atmosphere was going to be like in my own head,” Schwarber said after the Cubs had won. “The fans surpassed my expectations.”Those fans roared in Game 3 and roared even more in Game 4, until they sang along to “Go Cubs Go!” after the final out of the series. The players, having ousted the Cardinals, doused one another and bounced around the clubhouse before returning to the field to find their families and revel with the fans. It was their first postseason clincher in the history of Wrigley Field.Advertisement“I look around this field, and I think of all the millions of people that have given so much love to this team for so many years,” said Tom Ricketts, the Cubs’ owner and a lifelong fan of the team. “I don’t care about me. I just want to pay them back.”AdvertisementThese are the giddy days for the Cubs, not just because they are winning but because of how. For a franchise stalked by history — 107 years without a championship, 70 years without a National League pennant — everything feels new and fresh.“The pressure and the history doesn’t really bother these guys,” said Theo Epstein, the president of baseball operations. “They’re young, they’re innocent in a great way. You think they’re worried about history? They’re worried about getting their laundry done in time for Saturday.”The everyday players are mostly just starting their ascent on the field and up the salary structure. The hard roster questions — can they keep this player, and at what cost, before free agency? — are mostly years away. There are few, if any, prominent players on the downside, no creaky, broken-down bodies that used to be so full of life.From Schwarber to Kris Bryant, Anthony Rizzo to Jorge Soler, Addison Russell to Javier Baez, stars in their 20s are everywhere.“You’re telling me!” said David Ross, the 38-year-old backup catcher, who has played for seven major league teams. “I’m starting to have a complex, how bad I am, I’ll be honest with you. These guys are so darn good.“It’s nice for me, as an older guy, to feel like I’m a part of something special that’s growing. This is only going to get better. These guys, they’re figuring out how to win, and it’s fun to watch and be a part of.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Cubs won their last eight games of the regular season and now have won four of five in the playoffs, starting with a wild-card victory in Pittsburgh last Wednesday. Schwarber homered in that game and is 7 for 13 with three homers in the playoffs.The Cubs hit 10 home runs in their division series; in their past four first-round series combined (1998, 2003, 2007 and 2008), they hit seven. The power is by design, a lineup in the image of the Boston Red Sox teams Epstein once designed.Advertisement“We like the long ball,” said Epstein, who joined the Cubs after the 2011 season. “But it’s not just a raw power thing. I think what you saw the last couple of days is a testament to our approach. It was an unbelievable approach, laying off good pitches just off the zone and waiting for a pitch we could drive and then doing damage with it, getting the ball in the air.“That’s something we really stressed four years ago. We were known as a free-swinging, aggressive offensive organization. We wanted to turn that around, and it’s like turning around an ocean liner in the sea. It doesn’t happen overnight. It’s a little bit at a time. And you see our walk rate, our pitches per plate appearances, on-base percentage, everything increased a little bit each year, and now we’ve got the right approach.”Epstein recruited Manny Ramirez, the mercurial former Red Sox slugger, to help with that effort. Ramirez — who Epstein said had undergone a “genuine metamorphosis” as a person — suits up before games with one specific purpose: to help right-handed hitters resist breaking balls out of the strike zone.“He’s really good at articulating a calm, focused, disciplined approach in the box,” Epstein said, and the Cubs are seeing results in the progress of Soler. He came to bat 13 times against the Cardinals and drew six walks, with only one strikeout. When he swung, he did damage: 4 for 7 with two home runs and a double.“Right now, he’s not chasing, and I’ve been asking: ‘Those pitches that he’s taking for a ball, are they balls? What’s up with the umpires?’ ” Manager Joe Maddon said. “They said, ‘No, they’re borderline pitches that are balls that he’s taking.’ That’s a good sign. If you’re doing that, that means you’re seeing the ball well and you’re forcing the pitcher into your area.”The Cubs will play the first two National League Championship Series games on the road, then welcome the Mets or the Dodgers to their area — the bandbox on the North Side, bordered by sports bars and rooftop party decks, with baseball’s most imposing young lineup bringing the noise inside.“It was so loud in the ballpark,” General Manager Jed Hoyer said on the field after Game 4. “That’s a huge advantage for us. This place is going to be loud for a long time.”A version of this article appears in print on October 15, 2015, on Page B15 of the New York edition with the headline: Cubs, Full of Power and Promise, Shrug Off History’s Burden.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »