AdvertisementSupported byBy Harvey AratonLOS ANGELES — Spend a few moments with Austin Rivers, and it becomes clear soon enough that he is a chip off the old Doc.Like his father, Glenn, who is called Doc, he is chatty. He is feisty. He is not about to let others define him or his precedent-setting circumstances.“Everyone has an opinion about things they don’t know much about,” he said. “You just have to tune everybody out. No one can give you advice because no one has been in my shoes.”No one, he meant, had ever played for his father in the N.B.A. before Austin Rivers stepped onto the Staples Center floor against the Cleveland Cavaliers on Jan. 16. When the Los Angeles Clippers acquired him a day earlier in a trade from the Celtics — for whom he never played after being sent to Boston by the New Orleans Pelicans — Doc not only took on the challenge of coaching his son but also swung the deal in his other role as the Clippers’ president of basketball operations.In a separate interview, addressing the notion of nepotism versus opportunism, Doc Rivers said: “The one thing I’ve learned in life is that you can’t worry about what others say. If you think it’s the right thing to do, or say, you do it.”Had they rehearsed? Doc Rivers laughed along with the joke.Most people recognize him as the personable coach who guided the Celtics to a championship in 2008 and held the Clippers together last spring during the downfall of Donald Sterling, the owner at the time. But there has always been a tougher, unyielding side to the elder Rivers, who played point guard for 13 years in the N.B.A. and could best be described as greater than the sum of his pretty good parts.Even as a 31-year-old Knick, with a body in serious betrayal, he hounded Michael Jordan in the decisive Game 6 of the 1993 Eastern Conference finals, destined to lose but refusing to back down.He pawed at Jordan. He clutched. And after an official blew a whistle on Rivers during the fourth quarter, Jordan got in his face and profanely accused him of flopping.Rivers responded, “Maybe you’re a little frustrated,” typical piercing wit in the midst of a pro basketball war.In the Clippers’ locker room before a recent game against Minnesota, 22-year-old Austin Rivers was answering those — and he knows they are out there — who believe he is, first and foremost, a child of N.B.A. privilege.“I had to go through the same things that anyone’s son went through,” he said.He added: “And you know, there aren’t that many guys whose dads played who got to the league. I think a big part of that is that you’re born into a situation where you’re given a lot of things, your motivation to earn it may not be as great, or you feel a lot of pressure. I just never felt any of that stuff because my dad always kept me on my toes, always kept me hungry, and that’s why I’m here.”Before he got to Los Angeles, though, there was apprehension for father and son.“I know I had a lot,” Doc Rivers said. He added that when he called Austin to ask what he thought, Austin told him he needed a day to process the possibility.Doc Rivers said the notion of acquiring his son to fill a team need, as a rangy (6-foot-4) backup guard with defensive quickness, was first raised in training camp by Kevin Eastman, the Clippers’ vice president for basketball operations. Then Dave Wohl, the general manager, and Mike Woodson, who was hired this season as an assistant coach after his dismissal from the Knicks, weighed in.They reminded the boss that family considerations aside, and despite Austin’s struggles with injuries and adjustments to the pros after one season at Duke, he was still the 10th pick of the 2012 draft and only the age of a college senior.“They told me to think of it not as something just for now but as a long-term asset,” Doc Rivers said. “At first I didn’t want to hear it, but then we struggled out of the gate at that backup position.”He mentioned the proposed deal to a few of the players, including Chris Paul, who said he could use the defensive backcourt help.“I jumped on it,” Doc Rivers said.When the deal was made, Mike Dunleavy, who coached for 17 N.B.A. seasons, the last seven with the Clippers, explained to NBA.com why he had never moved to acquire his son of the same name.“I’ve had a great relationship with my son, and the only way to screw it up was to coach him,” he said.To the contrary, and notwithstanding Austin’s problem of when to call him Pops or Coach, Doc Rivers said having a son on his team had been much easier than playing against him.“This is more natural because when he plays well, you’re happy for him, and when he plays poorly, you can tell him and you can teach him,” he said. “When he was in New Orleans, I thought it would be cool when we played them, but I really hated it. It was awful.”Austin understood why. “When you play against your son, you have to game plan, pick someone’s game apart,” he said. “I’m sure that was weird.”Countless coaches have nurtured sons on high school teams. A fair number have done it at various levels of the college game. But this being pay-for-play, and Doc Rivers being the Clippers’ executive muscle, he has now taken ownership of Austin’s career with free agency looming after this season. His son has become part of his personnel record. And while his coaching ability is largely unquestioned, he has yet to prove himself capable of building a championship-caliber roster around Blake Griffin and Paul, the stars he inherited.In a competitive Western Conference full of deep teams, the Clippers’ shallow bench could turn this feel-good family story into one that is not so Nickelodeon if the team bows out of the playoffs too soon and the new owner, Steve Ballmer, decides to be more proactive with his $2 billion club.Late last month, Austin raised eyebrows by scoring a career-high 28 points off the bench in 26 minutes in a rout of Sacramento. Against Minnesota, he had 13 points and 6 assists in 22 minutes, coming off a 22-point showing in a loss at Golden State.Offensively, the results over all have been mixed; averaging just under 20 minutes and about 7 points per game, Austin has made almost 41 percent of his shots from the field.“At the end of the day, my role here is to play hard, defend, help score some,” he said. “Those are the things I can do.”In the final analysis, he said, joining the Clippers “was a no-brainer,” given the team’s need and, on a more personal level, the fact that all of his siblings — his sister, Callie, and his brothers, Jeremiah and Spencer, a freshman at U.C.-Irvine — live in the area.Family dinners might be awkward if the patriarch allowed them to be, which Doc Rivers said he most assuredly would not.“On a given night, Austin may have played well or he didn’t play well,” he said. “If he’s coming home for dinner the next day, I’m not going to sit at the table and start talking about it. I leave that alone.”Fine by him, Austin said.“There’s nothing — or very little — that’s personal about this,” he said. “It’s business.”It is also family business, which, under these professional win-or-else circumstances, would presumably be risky.Advertisement