

 Marc Tracy
 

ON COLLEGE BASKETBALL
MARCH 18, 2015
A word of caution to those excited for the N.C.A.A. tournament: Prepare to be a bit disappointed.The tournament, which begins in earnest Thursday, is still a three-week dopamine rush of buzzer-beaters and school pride. There is an overwhelming favorite (Kentucky), and inevitably a sleeper will emerge and put its university on the map with a stunning upset or a deep run. Millions of fans will fill out brackets, staking their pride — and probably a little something else — on out-predicting their friends and co-workers.But in many ways, Division I men’s basketball has never been less appealing. Scoring is down, as teams averaged 67.6 points a game through February, according to the N.C.A.A. If that average holds through the end of the tournament, it will be the second-lowest number since 1952 and part of a trend in which scoring has fallen from a peak of 76.7 points in 1990-91.The game is also as slow as it has ever been. Teams are averaging fewer than 65 possessions per 40 minutes, according to the statistics site KenPom.com. That is easily the lowest since 2002, and probably the lowest since at least the 1940s.“When the balance between offense and defense gets out of whack and the defense has more of an advantage than the offense, then I think the game’s not in the right place,” said Dan Gavitt, the N.C.A.A.’s vice president for men’s basketball championships. “I would argue personally that right now, we’re not in the right place. The balance is too much toward the defensive side of the ball.”AdvertisementBasketball is an unapologetically frantic and offense-first sport. Although stout defenses can be beautiful and, as the saying goes, win championships, fans like buckets, and players like to score them. Changes to the game’s rules — the shot clock, the 3-point line, the banning of certain defensive tactics — are almost always intended to boost scoring.AdvertisementBobby Hurley, a former Duke point guard, said his playing days shaped how he coaches his fast-paced Buffalo team.
                For this bracket, the more unusual that your picks are, the more points you’ll receive — so long as those picks are correct.            “I like playing in an up-tempo style,” he said. “I grew up on the playgrounds.”College basketball’s parched state of play has led to what is widely considered ugly basketball. Virginia’s opponents averaged barely more than 50 points this season. Last month, the score at halftime of a Utah-Oregon State game was 16-14. In late December, Loyola Marymount and Nebraska headed to overtime tied at 35-35.“Some people like Rembrandt, and some like Picasso,” said Paul Brazeau, the Atlantic Coast Conference’s head of men’s basketball operations. He defended sixth-ranked Virginia’s style of play, which aims to smother opponents with stingy defense and shorten the game with sloth-like offense.But just as baseball and football fans have shown a preference for high-scoring games, basketball fans, in general, seem to like seeing the ball go through the hoop a lot. In an exhaustive examination of the sport’s ills, Seth Davis of Sports Illustrated recently concluded: “College basketball is facing a crisis. It’s time for an extreme makeover.”Jay Bilas, an ESPN college basketball analyst, warned of the effects of complacency.“People are starting to vote with their feet,” he said.Average attendance at Division I men’s games has declined for the seventh straight season, The SportsBusiness Journal reported. ESPN, which dominates coverage of the men’s college basketball season, said its flagship network’s ratings were slightly down after three straight record-breaking seasons. (ESPN2’s and ESPNU’s were up slightly.)But, Bilas added, referring to men’s basketball in general: “The tournament will bail us out. We will make the same amount of money, and people will think it’s O.K.”Men’s basketball is the N.C.A.A.’s lifeblood. The tournament provides the vast majority of the association’s overall revenue, thanks in no small part to a 14-year, $10.8 billion television deal with CBS and Turner Broadcasting. (For the most part, revenue from the top tier of college football goes to colleges and conferences, not to the N.C.A.A.)The basketball revenue trickles down to the N.C.A.A.’s three divisions, serving as an essential unifier for an association that has never seemed more at risk of fraying. Its amateur model is under siege, and it is undergoing internal reform that rewards the most valuable conferences and sports.Advertisement“For all the challenges we’ve had, in terms of the diversity in Division I and getting everybody pulling in the same direction,” said Jamie Zaninovich, the Pacific-12 Conference’s deputy commissioner, “basketball’s the one thing that’s been the sinew.”And yet that sinew has also been a harness, restraining the enactment of popular proposed changes.“It’s systemic,” said Bilas, who is also an outspoken critic of the amateur model. “It’s the administration of the game.”Conversations with nearly two dozen current and former coaches, administrators, analysts and closely connected observers yielded many explanations for the low-scoring, slow-playing trends. They include the following:■ Top players depart after one season, draining rosters of talent and experience. (On the other hand, before the N.B.A. required players to be one year removed from high school to be eligible for its draft, Kobe Bryant, LeBron James and others never played in college.)■ Technology has enabled superior scouting, which favors defense.■ A shorter 3-point line, narrower lane and smaller restricted area than the N.B.A. (a semicircle under the basket in which defenders cannot take charges) discourage spacing on offense.■ College coaches enjoy more job security than their N.B.A. counterparts, encouraging tactical conservatism.Many also bemoan the length of games, which is extended by 10 available team timeouts and nine media timeouts and the endless endgames, in which trailing teams deliberately foul in an effort to get the ball back, often prolonging the final minute of playing time.The most obvious culprit for elongated possessions and low final scores is the 35-second shot clock. A 24-second clock is used in the N.B.A. and international men’s play, while it is 30 seconds in women’s Division I. (This season’s N.I.T. — a consolation tournament for teams left out of the N.C.A.A. tournament — will employ a 30-second shot clock as an experiment.)AdvertisementEven President Obama, speaking on ESPN while filling out his bracket on Tuesday night, said he favored a 30-second shot clock.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Kentucky Coach John Calipari said, “If you want more scoring, you’ve got to loosen up the game.” He added, “If there’s body-to-body contact that’s not obviously created by the offense, call a foul every single time.”Bilas, among others, said it did not help that referees were independent contractors, with less accountability and lower expectations than N.B.A. referees, who are full-time, salaried professionals.The fate of several changes enacted before last season makes a good case study of the barriers to reform.In May 2013, the N.C.A.A.’s Men’s Basketball Rules Committee announced that defenders who used their hands and arms to impede their opponent would be called for fouling. It also redefined the block/charge rule, mandating that defenders set themselves into “legal guarding position” earlier in the course of a play in order to avoid being whistled for a foul when a collision occurred. Similar to the N.B.A.’s version of the rule, the new definition was designed to force defenses to adjust and “allow for more offensive freedom.”The changes worked. At 71.02 points per game, teams scored the most last season since 2002.Last year, however, the rules committee changed the block/charge rule back, “in an effort to make this play easier to coach and officiate,” the committee chairman, Belmont Coach Rick Byrd, said, and scoring is back down. Referees generally are not calling the other fouls, and coaches are generally not complaining. But scoring is back down.Similar changes in the N.B.A. spawned a messy adjustment period but have since helped the pro game reach an offensive zenith, with teams like the San Antonio Spurs, the Golden State Warriors and the Atlanta Hawks zipping the ball around and scoring in creative fashion.“It was a heck of an adjustment,” said Iowa State Coach Fred Hoiberg, who played 10 seasons in the N.B.A. amid bans on various defensive tactics. “Games took three hours. But the players adjusted.”Last year, the N.C.A.A. created a Division I Council and, under it, a Men’s Basketball Oversight Committee, “to be more responsive and much more nimble,” said Dan Guerrero, U.C.L.A.’s athletic director and the oversight committee’s chairman. But Guerrero’s committee can only recommend, for example, shortening the shot clock. The change must be enacted by the Men’s Basketball Rules Committee and then approved by the Playing Rules Oversight Panel. Byrd, the rules committee chairman, said it was set to convene in May and consider several areas for potential change. The rules committee includes coaches and administrators from all three divisions. Out of 12 members, it currently has only one from the five so-called power conferences.Advertisement“The rules committee is now populated by Division I, II and III coaches,” Gavitt said. “Is it appropriate to look at the reorganization of rules committees?”To Bilas, who recently noted on Twitter that current rules committee members hailed from Erskine College, Caldwell University and the State University of New York-Cobleskill, top college basketball is too good to be governed by committee.Explaining why the N.B.A. has superior rules, he said: “That’s their business. We refuse to admit that we are selling it.”A version of this article appears in print on March 19, 2015, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: Attraction? Yes. Is It Pretty? Well ...  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »