By ROB HUGHESMARCH 18, 2015
LONDON —  Elimination from the Champions League is hard to bear. Going out after outclassing your opponent on his own turf deepens that pain considerably.That happened to Arsenal on Tuesday when it won, 2-0, in Monaco. It proved to be a pyrrhic victory. Monaco, which won, 3-1, in London in the first leg three weeks ago, advanced to the quarterfinals on the basis of having scored one more away goal than the Gunners.The reality was that Arsenal, which was knocked out of the Champions League in the Round of 16 for the fifth consecutive season, eliminated itself. A few members of its team imagined Monaco to be the easiest opponent to advance to the knockout stage — and a few is too many at this level.Arsenal paid the price for complacency. It is one of the finest teams in England’s Premier League, while Monaco is by no measure the best of Ligue 1 in France. But that 3-1 loss in London came back to bite Arsenal on the French Riviera. The goals from Olivier Giroud and Aaron Ramsey on Tuesday came in a contest so one-sided that Monaco did not have one shot on goal or one corner kick, had less than 30 percent of possession and allowed Arsenal to rack up 17 attempts on goal.AdvertisementAt the end, however, it was the Monaco players who cavorted around the field of Stade Louis II. And it was Arsenal who faced the TV cameras, full of confusion about why it was out.Advertisement“The best team went through,” said Per Mertesacker, the Arsenal captain, immediately after the final whistle. “We wanted to show a different face tonight, and we did that. But when you have one bad game in the Champions League, you are out.“Congratulations to Monaco, they deserved it.”When Arsène Wenger, the Arsenal manager was put on the same TV stand, he responded with incredulity to his captain’s remarks.“I don’t believe that,” he said. “Honestly, you cannot say that. The team who made the least mistakes defending their goal won.”And one by one, the Arsenal players — and even some from Monaco — put their own spin on a result that simply defied the gulf in quality between the two teams.Laurent Koscielny, Mertersacker’s fellow defender, summed it up:“We say the same thing at the same stage every year,” he said on television.“Our first game was a catastrophe. We have to put it right.”Commenting on the British network ITV, Emmanuel Petit, a French player who played under Wenger at both Monaco and Arsenal in the ’90s, observed: “Of course, you cannot compare Arsenal with Monaco. The only thing that is left now is the F.A. Cup, and for such a club as Arsenal it’s not enough.”Wenger, who built the so-called Invincible 11 that went undefeated in the Premier League in 2003-2004 but has not been able to replicate it in 11 seasons since, admitted to mixed emotions. He had returned to Monaco, a strange place with its strange stadium built on top of an underground parking garage and where he cut his managerial teeth more than 20 years ago.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.His players had won the game but not the cause. They eventually showed the clear difference between Arsenal’s talents and Monaco’s. They lost because at home, in the Emirates stadium that dwarfs the 18,000-capacity Stade Louis, it underestimated the opponent.AdvertisementLeonardo Jardim, the Portuguese coach following in Wenger’s footprints at Monaco, observed simply that every team remaining in the competition will be hoping to get Monaco when the quarterfinal draw is held Friday.The team that many will hope to avoid is Atlético Madrid.It came within a hair of winning the Champions League final against Real Madrid in Lisbon last May, losing there in extra time. Atlético was then plundered of some of its finest players, with three of them — goalkeeper Thibaut Courtois, fullback Filipe Luís and striker Diego Costa — moving to Chelsea.But Atlético still has its coach, Diego Simeone, and its amazing fans at the Vicente Calderón Stadium. And though it has been stripped of hard-to-replace stars, it still has that same fighting spirit imbued by Simeone and carried out to an exhaustive degree by players like Arda Turan. The bearded Turk was at the heart of Atlético’s running for 120 minutes at the Calderon on Tuesday.Starting the game a goal down to Bayer Leverkusen after the first leg in Germany, Atlético drew even with a wickedly deflected long shot by Mario Suárez midway through the first half. After that it was a question of both sides going toe-to-toe, and sometimes elbow-to-cheek, in a tough, unforgiving stalemate until, after two hours, only the dreaded penalty shootout remained to separate the winner from the loser.It was a wretched shootout in which tired and fearful players on both sides shot so high and so wide that it seemed scarcely credible that one team represented Germany, whose teams have won many competitions on unerring penalty kicks over the years.This time was different. Atlético missed two of its first four kicks, and Leverkusen did the same. It fell to Fernando Torres, whose career as a striker lost its way when he transferred from Liverpool to Chelsea four years ago, to show how it’s done.Torres’s penalty kick was cool, deft and so perfectly close to the post that goalkeeper Bernd Leno could get nowhere near the shot.Then, Stefan Kiessling stepped up for Bayer. Alas, poor Kiessling. He has amassed 160 goals in his career, but he approached the kick with nervous indecision, lofted it over the bar and then sank to his knees.Jan Oblak, the Atlético keeper, went to console him, telling him perhaps that it is a cruel game. Only then did the sporting Oblak join his teammates in celebrating their great escape with the fans.AdvertisementNobody will relish facing Atlético in the next round — or commit the error of overconfidence that befell Arsenal in this one.A version of this article appears in print on March 19, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.