AdvertisementSupported byBy Peter KerasotisPORT ST. LUCIE, Fla. — On a day when the Mets looked to plug one hole, moving Dillon Gee from the bullpen to the rotation, another leak emerged, albeit not one as major as losing starting pitcher Zack Wheeler to season-ending Tommy John surgery.In a split-squad game against the St. Louis Cardinals on Thursday, second baseman Daniel Murphy played half an inning before he was sidelined by tightness in his right hamstring. Murphy singled in the first inning and later scored on a sacrifice fly by John Mayberry Jr. But Murphy did not take his position in the bottom half of the first.“His hamstring tightened up when he came around first and he felt it at third before he scored,” Manager Terry Collins said. “He took off and felt it cramp up. He didn’t think it was serious.”While Murphy’s setback is considered minor, he does have a history of right leg problems. Last season, he was on the 15-day disabled list from Aug. 25 to Sept. 9 with a right calf strain. In 2010, he was on the 15-day disabled list with a mild strain of the medial collateral ligament. Later that season, he missed the final 90 days at Class AAA Buffalo when that same ligament tore.The Mets’ more pressing concern is the loss of Wheeler. In his stead, Gee, like Wheeler a right-hander, needs to build up his pitch count in what remains of spring training, a process he started Thursday in the Mets’ split-squad game at home at Tradition Field against the Houston Astros.After surrendering a scorching double to Jose Altuve on his first pitch — which, Gee admitted, was a grooved fastball to a player known to be aggressive — he settled in and threw three and two-thirds scoreless innings. Gee yielded only one other hit — a single to the last batter he faced. In between the hits to begin and end his outing, Gee walked two with no strikeouts. In all, he threw 47 pitches, 27 for strikes.“More than anything I was trying to work on all four of my pitches,” he said. “The last few outings out of the bullpen hasn’t afforded me the time to work on a lot of different pitches.”In relief, Rafael Montero, another potential fifth starter, also pitched three and two-thirds innings, giving up an earned run while striking out two and walking none.Gee’s outing was encouraging for the Mets, who have seen him perform at a high level, but who also tried to trade him in the off-season.In five seasons, Gee is 40-34 with a 3.91 earned run average. In 2011, he started the season 7-0 with a 2.86 E.R.A., the best start by a Mets rookie pitcher since Jon Matlack opened the 1972 season 6-0. From May 30, 2013, to July 9, 2014, Gee was 14-6 with a 2.67 E.R.A. But he struggled late in the 2014 season, which he finished with a 7-8 record and a 4.00 E.R.A. This off-season, Gee said he put in a lot of film work, trying to recapture the mechanics that made him a successful big leaguer. He said that the serious shoulder injury he sustained in 2012 — a clot in an artery — spooked him into wondering what caused it and how to prevent it from happening again.“I felt like I needed to change something,” he said. “I started really tinkering with my mechanics. When I do that, I’m all messed up. I’m a very feel guy. Mechanics are key for me. I was messed up mentally big-time.”He also found himself trying to overthrow to keep up with the plethora of power arms the Mets have.“For me,” he said, “being surrounded by guys who can throw almost 100 miles per hour, it was like, I want to try and hump up a little bit. But I’m not that guy. It took experience and failure for me to realize that’s not me, and I need to stick with what got me here.”In watching off-season film, Gee saw that his arm angle had become an almost complete overhead delivery, which caused his pitches to flatten. “So I went back and watched old film,” he said. “I went all the way back and watched film from when I was in college.”The lesson he learned is to be who he is, and also who he once was.“Be good at what you’re good at,” he said. “I learned that I shouldn’t try to be something that I’m not.”INSIDE PITCHCurtis Granderson, who is batting .381, hit his second home run of the spring, lofting a changeup away down the left-field line. ... The Mets sent Akeel Morris, a right-handed pitcher from the United States Virgin Islands, to their minor league camp.Advertisement