AdvertisementSupported byBy Marc TracySEATTLE — On Thursday afternoon at KeyArena, several Northern Iowa players gathered around a smartphone in a locker room to watch the end of the Baylor-Georgia State game. The tension built as the time passed and Georgia State mounted an improbable rally.With 2.6 seconds left, R. J. Hunter hit a shot from beyond the 3-point line to put the Panthers ahead, 57-56, and Northern Iowa’s players were so astonished that they practically fell over.“Oh my God!” said the junior guard Wes Washpun while jogging toward the showers. “How deep was that?”Both Baylor and Iowa State, which fell to Alabama-Birmingham, were No. 3 seeds from power conferences upset by 14th-seeded midmajors. Which made for an interesting dynamic in Seattle, where serendipity has sent the only two midmajor teams that are clear-cut favorites in the first round.For most midmajor teams, the victories by Georgia State and Alabama-Birmingham would be unequivocal sources of inspiration. But for second-seeded Gonzaga, which faces No. 15 North Dakota State on Friday, and No. 5 Northern Iowa, which plays No. 12 Wyoming, they are mainly cautionary tales.“It doesn’t surprise any of us anymore,” said Seth Tuttle, a senior forward for Northern Iowa. “We’re just hoping not to join that list.”Silas Melson, a freshman guard for Gonzaga, noted, “It’s March Madness, obviously.”“We don’t want to be one of those teams that gets upset like that,” he said. “We want to play our game, come in, just be successful.”Gonzaga might be particularly well-equipped to see these upsets as omens rather than outliers. After their improbable round of 8 run in 1999, the Bulldogs have become both the perennial little midmajor that could, with 17 straight N.C.A.A. tournament bids. However, they frequently disappoint. Despite having great teams and low seeds in the past, they have made it as far as the round of 16 only twice since 2001, and have not made it that far since 2009.Louisville Coach Rick Pitino offered the perspective of the power-conference favorite here: the Cardinals are a fourth seed from the Atlantic Coast Conference, and in the past, Pitino has won national championships with favorites from Louisville and Kentucky.“I always get the most jitters as a basketball coach, after 20 times being in the tournament, in the first round,” he said, explaining that the higher seed frequently comes in “fired up.”In the first round of the 1996 tournament, the No. 16-seeded San Jose State trailed his top-seeded Wildcats by only 6 at the half.“The emotional swing is dramatic,” he recalled.Gonzaga and Northern Iowa appeared to be trying to keep emotion out of it.“It’s fun watching all these fun college games,” said Gonzaga’s Kyle Wiltjer, a junior forward. “But we’re just focused on ourselves.”Washpun — who, like many of his Northern Iowa teammates, is a Hawkeye State native — extended only a little sympathy to the fallen Iowa State, though.“We know some of those guys,” Washpun said. “We kind of feel bad for them. But I’ve got to be honest. They’re competition.”Advertisement