By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSMARCH 19, 2015
JACKSONVILLE, Fla. —  North Carolina was supposed to be too big, too talented and too versatile, and at times the Tar Heels lived up to their pregame billing.It was just enough to squeak by Harvard, one tough out on Thursday night in the N.C.A.A. tournament.Justin Jackson hit a tying jumper in the final minute and then had a fast-break dunk to help the fourth-seeded Tar Heels edge Harvard, 67-65.“It’s the luckiest I’ve ever felt after a basketball game in my entire life,” North Carolina Coach Roy Williams said. “In saying that, I’m thrilled that we’re still here and we’re still playing.”The Tar Heels (25-11) wasted a 16-point lead in the second half and briefly trailed before Jackson came to the rescue.AdvertisementSiyani Chambers’s 4-point play put 13th-seeded Harvard ahead, 65-63, with 1 minute 15 seconds remaining. It was the only lead of the game for the Crimson, the Ivy League champions.AdvertisementJackson finished with 14 points, and Marcus Paige had 10.“Marcus made two big shots, and Justin made two big shots,” Williams said. “If we had played a little bit better, it may not have required that. But you’ve got to give Harvard credit for driving me whacko.”Chambers misfired on two 3-point attempts in the closing seconds, and the Crimson’s final chance for victory — Wesley Saunders’s shot from beyond the arc — bounced off the back of the rim.Saunders led Harvard (22-8) with 26 points. Chambers had 13.“Can’t say enough about the effort that our kids put forth, the battle to get back in it,” Harvard Coach Tommy Amaker said. “I thought we played with great poise. Wesley Saunders and Siyani, these guys are the two main guys that do everything for our ball club, carried us to put us in a position to have a chance.“I thought we did exactly what we tried to do from a game plan standpoint, but they’re certainly talented and worthy of victory.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.North Carolina will play fifth-seeded Arkansas on Saturday.The Tar Heels lost six of 10 games down the stretch, but have played considerably better in the postseason, beginning with three wins on the way to the championship game of the Atlantic Coast Conference tournament, where they lost to Notre Dame.Isiah Hicks, a reserve, played some key minutes in the first half for the Tar Heels, making all four of his shots and grabbing three rebounds in the first 20 minutes. His 3-point play restored a double-digit lead after Harvard trimmed what was once a 14-point deficit to 26-23.North Carolina led, 36-25, at halftime, and Jackson made a 3-pointer coming out of the break. It looked as if the Tar Heels might run away when they built a 16-point lead with under 17 minutes to go.But the Crimson kept their poise and clawed back into the game.Two free throws from Steve Moundou-Missi cut North Carolina’s lead to 1 with 3:39 left. Paige gave the Tar Heels some breathing room with a 3-pointer, but Harvard refused to crack.AdvertisementSaunders, a junior guard, hit a jumper and, with the clock winding down and Harvard fans urging Chambers to stop dribbling and shoot, he made a 3 and was fouled.Jackson answered on the other end with a jumper, and then scored the go-ahead basket with 22 seconds remaining after North Carolina rebounded Chambers’s miss.“I’ve got a guy that made his last two shots and should be on top of the world, and I was screaming at him and the whole bit,” Williams said.“I feel like I’ve won the lottery because Tommy Amaker did a much better job with his team than I did with mine,” Williams added. “We were extremely lucky.”A version of this article appears in print on March 20, 2015, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: N. Carolina Survives Scare by Harvard.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.