AdvertisementSupported byBy Scott CacciolaAfter nearly five months of futility, the Knicks and the Minnesota Timberwolves showed up at Madison Square Garden on Thursday night with matching records: 14-53, which qualified them as the two worst teams in the N.B.A.Several thousand people, who were either morbidly curious or seeking refuge from the cold, turned out to watch take Knicks another step toward cementing their status as the very worst. Zach LaVine hit two late free throws to help send the Timberwolves to a 95-92 victory in overtime.Langston Galloway led the Knicks with 21 points and 7 rebounds.If the result was tough on team morale, it at least boosted the Knicks’ prospects in the draft.Before the game, Coach Derek Fisher again addressed the notion — as he had for weeks — that winning games might not be in the Knicks’ best long-term interests. After all, the team that finishes the season with the league’s worst record has the best odds of winning the draft lottery. Fisher said it was important that the Knicks actually try to win.“We can’t control who plays for Minnesota, what they’re thinking about their future and their plans,” Fisher said. “That shouldn’t be on our radar. You can’t practice losing. So if at any point you embrace losing, I don’t think that works out very well for you.”If the Knicks have not necessarily embraced losing, they have gotten awfully good at it. After defeating the San Antonio Spurs on Tuesday in a seismic upset — Gregg Popovich, the coach of the Spurs, assessed his team’s performance as “pathetic” — the Knicks fell just shy of stringing together consecutive wins for the first time in nearly three weeks.The Timberwolves were in rough shape, with half their roster, including Kevin Garnett, sitting out with what the team said were injuries. To meet the league requirement that they dress eight players, the Timberwolves on Thursday signed Sean Kilpatrick from the Delaware 87ers of the Development League. His primary asset was his proximity to the arena.“We had to go find someone that was within a train ride away,” Coach Flip Saunders said before the game. “We’ll be undermanned. Guys that have complained in the past about playing time won’t have to worry about it tonight.”Kilpatrick wound up playing 10 scoreless minutes and missed his only field-goal attempt. Against the Knicks, it was good enough.Advertisement