AdvertisementSupported byBy Viv BernsteinGREENSBORO, N.C. — On the way to winning 29 games and a second consecutive Atlantic Coast Conference regular-season crown, Virginia has managed to help provoke one of the more fascinating academic discussions on the state of college basketball as we know it.The question: What’s wrong with the game today? The answer: Virginia — that’s what’s wrong.Apparently, the Cavaliers’ maniacal devotion to defense along with an excruciatingly deliberate offense are apocalyptic signs of doom for a sport that is seeing an overall decline in scoring. Among the insults hurled at Virginia’s plotting, plodding style this season, one notable writer actually referred to the Cavaliers as the “Cadavers.” “Nobody wants to see us succeed,” forward Anthony Gill said last week during the A.C.C. tournament. “Everybody hates our style of basketball. That’s just part of it. People don’t like to see a slow pace. They don’t like to see a great defense that we like to play; they want to see people getting up and down. That’s where the underdog comes in. Nobody wants to see us succeed, and that’s what we have to go out there and do.”That was a pep talk of sorts after Virginia (29-3) lost to North Carolina in the A.C.C. tournament semifinals last Friday night, a reminder that the Cavaliers need to double down on their so-called boring style and play a far less interesting game than the 71-67 loss to the Tar Heels if Virginia wants to have a shot at winning an N.C.A.A. championship this year.And at least one publication believes Virginia belongs in that discussion. Sports Illustrated put the Cavaliers on one of its covers because they are among the few teams with the kind of game that could challenge another defensive stalwart: Kentucky. That is if Virginia can get back to its roots after dropping a pair of games last week that cost the Cavaliers what seemed like a sure No. 1 seeding in the N.C.A.A. tournament. Instead, after a regular-season loss to Louisville followed by the A.C.C. tournament defeat to North Carolina, Virginia arrives in Charlotte, N.C., as the No. 2 seed in the East Region with a game against No. 15 Belmont on Friday.“Not much doubt, just a wake-up call — two wake-up calls in succession,” the junior guard Malcolm Brogdon said of the two losses, “so we’ve got to gear up and get ready.”Particularly with the possibility that Virginia could face No. 7 Michigan State in the third round if both teams advance in Charlotte. The Spartans knocked off Virginia in the round of 16 in last year’s N.C.A.A. tournament when the Cavaliers were a No. 1 seed.But Virginia figures it is a better team for having gone through that last season. “I think it’s really about maturity and experience,” Brogdon said. Add that experience to a scoring defense that remained the best in the country going into the tournament despite that North Carolina setback. The Cavaliers allow an average of 50.7 points per game. San Diego State was second at 53.1 with Kentucky third, allowing an average of 53.7.On the flip side, Virginia averages 65.3 points per game. That ranks 221st in N.C.A.A. Division I basketball. No wonder the Cavaliers focus on defense.“There’s a lot of teams that are struggling to score,” Coach Tony Bennett said. “There’s not as much scoring going on. I don’t know the exact reasons why. “Teams are getting better and better defensively and it’s hard to score. We really try to pride ourselves on being as good as we can offensively and defensively.”Instead of arguing whether Virginia’s defense is bad for the game, perhaps the more pressing question is whether that defense can win a championship for the Cavaliers. Bennett will tell you it is Virginia’s only hope.“I just believe you look at your team and say, what’s the best way to play and that gives us a chance to be good?” Bennett said. “You work as hard as you can to move the ball to get good shots and take care of it; defensively you work to make people earn to get shots and if that lowers our score, so be it, but it still comes down to being as successful as you can.”But even with that defense and a newfound perch among the leaders of one of the toughest basketball conferences in the country, Virginia is uncertain it belongs in the conversation with Kentucky right now.Or maybe the players simply know better than to talk about it.“I think only time will tell with us,” Brogdon said. “I think we have a system that can travel well on the road in terms of our defense and how we execute on the offensive end. But there are very talented teams. I don’t know. I hope we can continue our run, that’s all I can say.”And if the Cavaliers do make a run at the title? Expect the hand-wringing to continue.Advertisement