By RAY GLIERMARCH 19, 2015
LOUISVILLE, Ky. —  Playing without its coach and suddenly its leading scorer, No. 8 seed Cincinnati rallied in regulation and defeated No. 9 seed Purdue, 66-65, in overtime in a Midwest Region game Thursday night.Mick Cronin, the Bearcats’ coach, has not coached the team since December because of a nonlife-threatening vascular condition. He was here this week helping with game preparation, but was not on the bench, following doctor’s orders. The Bearcats (23-10) expected to play without him, but they also played the last 16 minutes 22 seconds of regulation, as well as overtime, without the 6-foot-10 forward Octavius Ellis, who was ejected for a flagrant foul.No matter. Cincinnati played its usual stifling defense, holding Purdue to 36.1 percent field-goal shooting. The Bearcats also got 13 points from the reserve Coreontae DeBerry, who took over the post scoring from Ellis and made five of nine shots.Cincinnati earned the right to play No. 1 seed Kentucky in the round of 32 on Saturday.“It’s just a basketball game,” the sophomore Troy Caupain said. “We’re not going to go in there nervous. We’re not going to go in there playing scared. It’s a chance that — not everybody gets a chance to do this, and we’re just going to go out and leave it on the floor. Cincinnati basketball is never known to back down from anybody, and I don’t think we should back down from them.”Farad Cobb led Cincinnati with 14 points in the third game at KFC Yum Center that was decided by 1 point on Thursday. The Bearcats trailed, 56-49, with 48 seconds left in regulation before storming back to tie the score, 59-59, on Caupain’s layup with one second left in regulation.A. J. Hammons scored 17 points to lead Purdue (21-13).A version of this article appears in print on March 20, 2015, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Short-Handed Cincinnati Rallies Past Purdue.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.