AdvertisementSupported bySports of The TimesBy Juliet MacurLOUISVILLE, Ky. — There was something about the way the University of Alabama at Birmingham’s men’s basketball team took the court here at midday Thursday that made me think that the Blazers fan holding a sign that said “U.A.B. Shock the World” might not be so crazy after all.The Blazers strutted onto the court, heads held high, looking not as if they were heavy underdogs — which they were because they were the No. 14 seed playing the No. 3 seed, Iowa State — but as if they owned the place.They kept their confidence, even when they started off poorly, quickly falling behind by 10-2, and at first that seemed amusing. I chalked it up to the team being young and cocky. Then, as the time ticked off the clock, their attitude turned brilliant.What did they have to lose? Not a thing. So they played as if they should win, and they did win, 60-59. The team was so overjoyed that its entire bench rushed the court and many players ended up in a joyful pile of green uniforms, hugging as if they had just won the national title.And that, right there, was the beauty of this tournament. Here, there is something that cannot be found in the regular season: an inexplicable and sometimes unwarranted confidence that gives some teams the edge when it counts the most. That confidence is why U.A.B. gave us the tournament’s first big upset. And it is why, about an hour later, in a different region, No. 14 Georgia State beat No. 3 Baylor, for the tournament’s second big upset. In that game, with 2.5 seconds to go, Coach Ron Hunter toppled backward off his stool as his son, R. J. Hunter, hit a 3-pointer from the next town over to win the game. Within minutes, video of the coach and his dramatic tumble spread around the Internet. Those two early upsets set off a chorus of crumpling brackets and served as a reminder that the little guys here should never be ignored. They are often out to prove everybody wrong, and that motivation can give them a powerful boost, especially against a higher-seeded team that expects an easy game.What did the U.A.B. sophomore guard Tyler Madison have to say about proving everyone wrong? “It was fun,” he said.How did the U.A.B. freshman forward Chris Cokley describe one highlight of the game, when he rose above the rim and dunked, prompting Blazers fans to cheer so loudly that the stands shook?“It was cool,” he said. Thursday’s upsets prove that it’s futile to spend hours filling out your bracket. This year, my 3-year-old daughter helped me with mine by choosing which mascots looked fiercer, and look how that turned out: I look like a basketball savant for picking Georgia State over Baylor. (A scary blue panther won out over an angry teddy bear.)Every year, there’s always a U.A.B. or a Georgia State. Or a U.C.L.A., a team that many people thought did not even belong in this tournament. On Thursday, the No. 11-seeded Bruins delivered yet another upset, beating sixth-seeded Southern Methodist, 60-59. With about 10 seconds left, Bruins guard Bryce Alford — son of U.C.L.A. Coach Steve Alford — shot a 3-pointer and the referees called goaltending. That came after Bryce had made eight earlier 3-pointers, for nine in all. A few of those 3s came from so far beyond the arc that he could have ordered a hot dog at the concession stand at the same time.“I think everybody comes in here knowing that anything is possible,” Bryce said. “That’s what’s so great about all of this.”His father said that the Bruins didn’t come in thinking they were underdogs, saying, “I’m not so sure we knew that or we accepted it,” and that “they had a chip on their shoulder because we felt that we earned this.”U.A.B. came in thinking the exact same thing. It didn’t matter that earlier this season, they had been trampled by Wisconsin, 72-43, and North Carolina, 89-58. That was then, the Blazers said, and this is now. “A totally different time,” said Robert Brown, a junior who scored a team-high 21 points against Iowa State. “Everybody turns a page when they get here.”Iowa State did. But they went backward in the book, from a good team to a sloppy and sluggish one.The Cyclones were outrebounded, 52-37, and several times players celebrated too soon by running downcourt with their arms outstretched, thinking a shot was good, when it clanked off the rim. On defense, they allowed the Blazers to shoot unimpeded, as if defense against a low seed was not worth the effort.A day earlier, the Blazers had told me they hoped to build a winning tradition of basketball, like the ones at Duke or North Carolina, now that the university has cut its football team. The Blazers’ basketball attendance dropped by nearly 25 percent this season, and Coach Jerod Haase and several players said fans were staying away to punish the university for slashing football.So the players on Thursday wanted to put on a show, in hopes of luring back some fans. If their victory on Thursday doesn’t accomplish that, nothing will. Their upset may not have shocked the world, as the fan’s sign said. But it definitely shocked people into reality: No top team is safe. Email: juliet@nytimes.com Advertisement