By BEN SHPIGELMARCH 19, 2015
PITTSBURGH —  By halftime, seven Villanova players had each scored at least 5 points. The only starter who had not, Ryan Arcidiacono, was the Big East player of the year.This is how the Wildcats earned the top seed in the East Region, and this is how they hope to dash through the N.C.A.A. tournament, overwhelming teams with perhaps the most balanced squad of Coach Jay Wright’s tenure.Villanova throttled No. 16 seed Lafayette by outmuscling the Leopards inside and outshooting them outside and outplaying them everywhere else. The Wildcats cruised, 93-52, at Consol Energy Center, where they will play No. 8 North Carolina State on Saturday.Either of those teams could trouble Villanova (33-2), but a loss would be unexpected, and devastating, for a program that considers itself a strong contender for the national title. As well it should, if the Wildcats can come close to replicating their success against Lafayette (20-13) — 63.2 percent field-goal shooting, eight turnovers committed (most in the waning minutes), six players in double figures — or at least adjust when the quality of the opposition improves.AdvertisementIn the meantime, Villanova can savor a performance as diversified as it was dominant. The Wildcats’ low-post tandem of JayVaughn Pinkston and Daniel Ochefu combined for 26 points, on 9-of-10 shooting from the field, and 15 rebounds. Complementing them were Dylan Ennis, a slashing guard who made three 3-pointers en route to leading Villanova with 16 points, and the long-range shooting of Arcidiacono (3 for 4) and the reserve Phil Booth (2 for 2).Advertisement“On the scouting report, usually I’m going to circle the really good shooters on the other team and you get two or three that you circle,” said Lafayette Coach Fran O’Hanlon, a former guard at Villanova. “When we were doing the scouting report on Villanova, I circled two that don’t shoot 3s.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Villanova led by at least 10 points for the final 29 minutes; by 49-26 at halftime; and by 39 points, at 73-34, with 12 minutes 34 seconds remaining. Lafayette, the second-best 3-point shooting team in Division I, made only 4 of 18.“We knew if we didn’t come in and kind of play defense the way we were supposed to, it could be an easy, closer game,” guard Darrun Hilliard said. “It was great to come out and kind of jump on them from the start.”The scope of the Wildcats’ victory was surprising given how tough the Patriot League, including Lafayette, tends to play them. Just last year, at home in the season opener, Villanova trailed the Leopards by 2 points at halftime.“So it was very easy for us to be motivated and very easy for us to really respect how they play,” Wright said. “It was easy to get these guys ready to play.”The last time they faced a Patriot League team in the first round, American in 2009, the Wildcats advanced to the Final Four, so perhaps this could be an omen. For this is the best — and toughest, Arcidiacono said — Villanova team Wright has overseen in some time, and soon enough the Wildcats will know just how good they really are.A version of this article appears in print on March 20, 2015, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Villanova Overwhelms Lafayette.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.