By KAREN CROUSEMARCH 19, 2015
ORLANDO, Fla. —  The starter on the 10th hole, Butch Cronon, took particular delight in announcing the first player in the final threesome of the morning wave Thursday at the Arnold Palmer Invitational. “From Fort Collins, Colo.,” Cronon intoned, “please welcome home, Sam Saunders.”Saunders, who grew up less than eight miles from Bay Hill Golf Club, is two generations removed from his grandfather Palmer’s long and popular reign as the king of golf. Saunders was ogled like a princeling before he knew his family was golf royalty.“I remember when he could hardly pick up a golf club,” Cronon, a longtime tournament volunteer, said of Saunders, who is making his sixth start in the event.A sea of familiar faces graced his gallery, and yet Saunders’s two-under-par 70 in the first round felt different. It was the first time he felt as if he truly belonged in his home-course tournament, and not because he was tied with the world’s No. 1 player, Rory McIlroy, and within range of the leader, Morgan Hoffmann, who carded a 66.AdvertisementFor the first time, Saunders felt as if he had made the field on his own merit. In his other appearances, Saunders, 27, played on an unrestricted exemption, which was akin to earning a spot in the Olympics because you are from the host country. This year he was one of two golfers to earn exemptions because of distinguished play last year on the Web.com Tour. The other was Blayne Barber, who carded a 72.Advertisement“I know it’s still an exemption here this week, but there’s a new sense of belonging,” Saunders said. “It’s a spot that technically I’ve earned in some way, and that feels a lot different for me.”Last year, Saunders was in contention here before tumbling down the leaderboard with a closing 77 to finish 13 strokes behind the winner, Matt Every. But even then Saunders had to shake off the sensation of being an interloper. After a slow start to his 2014-15 season, he is coming off his first top-25 finishes, a loss in a five-man playoff at the Puerto Rico Open and a tie for 24th at the Valspar Championship.“To come into this week feeling like I’m playing well and my game is at a point where I feel like I can contend to win a tournament is very important to me,” Saunders said.Saunders had not met many people who were not aware of his famous bloodline. Then he was introduced to his future wife, Kelly, in Boulder, Colo., through one of her friends who was dating a caddie. Kelly, who was raising a young son from a previous relationship and working as a pharmaceutical representative, grew suspicious when Saunders said he had to leave to play in tournaments in Omaha, Neb., or Wichita, Kan. Those did not sound like PGA Tour stops, so one day, about a month after they had started dating, she typed his name into a Google search field.Recalling the conversation that ensued, she said: “I told him, ‘I Googled you today.’ And he said, ‘Oh, yeah? And what did you find out?’ I said, ‘That you have a pretty famous grandfather.’ And he said, ‘Yes, and I love that it took you so long to find out.’ ”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.They married in November 2012, when her son Cohen was 3. In December 2013, Kelly gave birth to another son, Ace, which is Palmer’s pet name for Saunders.After Ace’s arrival, Saunders persuaded his wife to give up her job to be a stay-at-home mother. She admitted having misgivings, especially given Saunders’s struggles on the golf course in 2013. He made six cuts, and $27,156, in 19 starts on the Web.com Tour, golf’s minor league circuit. She promised Saunders she would quit her job if he regained his playing privileges at qualifying school, which he did.Saunders credits the support of his wife and a stern talking-to from Palmer for his turnaround. In the midst of his struggles in 2013, he visited his grandfather in Latrobe, Pa., where Palmer spends a few months every year. During a range session, Saunders confided that he was contemplating giving up golf because he had a family to support. According to Saunders, Palmer applauded his decision to move his home base from Florida to Colorado and encouraged him to stay the course.Advertisement“That meant a lot to me that he supported the decisions that I had made and that I had kind of gone out and done my own thing,” Saunders said.In 2014, Saunders collected five top-five finishes on the Web.com Tour and made the cut in 16 of 22 starts. He tied for seventh at the Web.com Tour Championship to secure his playing privileges on the PGA Tour.Two weeks ago in Puerto Rico, without his wife there, Saunders closed with a 68 to pull one stroke behind the co-leaders, who had a par 5 left. They made bogey 6s to force the playoff, and on the first extra hole Saunders hit his approach to eight feet. After Alex Cejka drained his 15-foot birdie attempt, Saunders missed his birdie putt.Palmer, who was following the action from his home in Florida, could not have been more proud of Saunders.“It isn’t easy for him to be my grandson and to carry on the way he has and do the things that he’s done,” Palmer said Wednesday, adding, “I have every confidence in him to play the Tour and play it well.”A version of this article appears in print on March 20, 2015, on Page B16 of the New York edition with the headline: A Descendant of Golfing Royalty Carves His Own Path.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.