AdvertisementSupported byWest: Ohio State 75, V.C.U. 72By John BranchPORTLAND, Ore. — D’Angelo Russell’s supporting cast at Ohio State did just enough Thursday to help him push the Buckeyes past Virginia Commonwealth with a 75-72 overtime victory. Keita Bates-Diop swished a 3-pointer from the right wing to break a tie midway through overtime. V.C.U. had a chance to tie the score with its final possession, but Treveon Graham’s 3-point attempt with about 10 seconds left bounced off the rim. Russell, an all-American, made two free throws to seal the victory for the Buckeyes. He finished with a game-high 28 points. Ohio State (24-10), seeded 10th in the West Region, lost four of its final eight games before the tournament, raising questions about its postseason prospects. Now the Buckeyes play second-seeded Arizona on Saturday for a berth in the round of 16.The game against seventh-seeded V.C.U. (26-10) promised an intriguing matchup between Russell, the smooth 6-foot-5 guard who is a likely N.B.A. first-round draft choice this spring, and V.C.U.’s high-pressure “havoc” defense. Russell averaged 19.3 points, 5.6 rebounds and 5.1 assists per game during the season. Against V.C.U., he added six rebounds and an assist. Shannon Scott, the senior point guard, had 10 of Ohio State’s 16 assists. V.C.U. guarded Russell mostly with a single defender, sending help when Ohio State tried to free him with picks, and the tactic worked for a while. Russell missed four of his first five shots, and V.C.U. led by as many as 12 in the first half. But V.C.U.’s best defender, Doug Brooks, sat for much of the first half with foul trouble, and a 3-pointer built Russell’s confidence. He finished the half with 12 points on 5-of-10 shooting, sparking Ohio State on a 16-5 run that pared V.C.U.’s lead to 30-29 at the intermission. V.C.U. shot just 29 percent from the field in the first half and 38 percent for the game. Ohio State, wanting to slow the fast-paced Rams, played patches in a zone defense. V.C.U.’s effort to quicken the pace in the second half backfired, as Ohio State turned short possessions into fast-break points. More 3-pointers from Russell in the opening minutes of the second half — one after he inadvertently bumped a teammate who was shooting, grabbed the loose ball and shot — gave Ohio State a 6-point lead. “If you create some angles for him, and give him a half second, he’s so good at making the right read,” Ohio State Coach Thad Matta said of Russell. The game slowed and tightened in the final 10 minutes. With 4 minutes 56 seconds remaining, after Russell caught an opposing elbow in the left eye that led to trickles of blood down his cheek, the teams were tied at 58-58. Russell returned with a black bandage on the corner of his eyebrow. Ohio State built a 4-point lead that V.C.U.’s Melvin Johnson erased with back-to-back 3-pointers. He finished with a team-high 17 points. The game entered the final minute of regulation tied, 66-66. Graham drove down the lane in the final seconds, but his shot missed. “Our best player, it’s a shot he’s made before,” V.C.U. Coach Shaka Smart said. “We’ll take that again all day. He just didn’t make it, and Ohio State was able to capitalize in overtime.”The game was a matchup between programs familiar with deep tournament runs. V.C.U., making its fifth straight appearance in the tournament under Smart, reached the Final Four in 2011. Matta’s Ohio State team was in the Final Four in 2012. Advertisement