By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSMARCH 19, 2015
JACKSONVILLE, Fla. —  Xavier’s inside-out duo was too much for worn-down Mississippi to handle.Matt Stainbrook scored 20 points, Dee Davis added 17, and the sixth-seeded Musketeers beat the 11th-seeded Rebels, 76-57, in the West Regional of the N.C.A.A. tournament on Thursday.The 6-foot-10 Stainbrook took advantage of his size in the post, making 8 of 10 shots in the paint and adding nine rebounds and five assists.Davis was nearly as good from the outside, hitting 4 of 9 shots from 3-point range. Coach Chris Mack pulled them to a rousing ovation with 1 minute 51 seconds remaining and the game in hand.Xavier (22-13) advanced to face 14th-seeded Georgia State on Saturday.Xavier’s duo was considerably better than Mississippi’s two-man guard tandem. Stefan Moody and Jarvis Summers finished a combined 5 of 26 from the field. Moody led the Rebels (21-13) with 14 points.AdvertisementMaybe they had tired legs. The Rebels exerted significant energy in overcoming a 17-point deficit to beat Brigham Young in a play-in game in Dayton, Ohio, about 43 hours earlier.AdvertisementOle Miss scored 62 points in the second half Tuesday night, boarded a flight to Jacksonville, got to bed about 5 a.m. Wednesday and spent the next 30 hours playing catch-up.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Rebels looked like a tired team against the Musketeers, who notched their first N.C.A.A. tournament victory in two years.Ole Miss missed 18 of its first 27 shots, with most of those by Moody and Summers.The Rebels showed signs of life in the second half, even cutting an 18-point deficit to 60-50 with about seven minutes to play. Xavier — no surprise — responded by going inside to Stainbrook. He backed down Dwight Colby and got an easy basket near the rim. Myles Davis followed with a 3-pointer that pushed Xavier’s lead back to 15 points.Mississippi spent much of the game complaining about fouls — what should and should not have been called.The referees let the teams play. But the Musketeers built a double-digit early behind five 3-pointers and a 9-1 advantage at the free-throw line.A version of this article appears in print on March 20, 2015, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Xavier, Big and Quick, Beats a Tired Ole Miss Squad.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.