By KATHARINE Q. SEELYEMARCH 19, 2015
BOSTON —  Public support for Boston to host the 2024 Summer Olympics was already on the downslope, but it has plunged even further in the last month.Only 36 percent of adults in the Boston region support hosting the Games, while 52 percent oppose doing so, according to the latest poll for WBUR, Boston’s NPR radio station.This is among the most anemic levels of support ever registered by a potential host city at this stage in the process and could doom the bid unless it is reversed.Public opinion will play an important role when the International Olympic Committee selects its choice in 2017 from an array of cities that is likely to include Paris; Rome; Hamburg, Germany; Istanbul; and Doha, Qatar.AdvertisementIn January, after the United States Olympic Committee selected Boston as America’s bid city, 51 percent of area residents supported the choice, according to the same poll. By February, support had slipped to 44 percent.AdvertisementNow, the numbers have dropped to the opposite of where the public started in January.The United States Olympic Committee responded to the poll Thursday.Scott Blackmun, the committee’s chief executive, said in a statement Thursday that “it’s still early in the process, and while we would be pleased to see full support across the board, we recognize that it will take time and effort to successfully answer the important questions being raised by Bostonians.”The decline in support coincides with a brutal winter in which Boston’s regional transit system, a linchpin in the proposed bid, collapsed as a record amount of snow fell on the city.“I wasn’t sure what we would see this time,” said Steve Koczela, the pollster for the MassINC Polling Group, which conducted the survey for WBUR. “One theory was that after February, once the snow melted and the trains revved back to life, you’d see support bounce back, that those numbers just reflected the winter grumpiness,” he said. “But that hasn’t happened.”That suggested that winter, or winter alone, was not to blame.“People have learned more about it and like it less,” he said of the bid.Chief among the concerns is that taxpayers will end up being saddled with overrun costs.Only 29 percent of the poll’s respondents believed the promise that the Games would be paid for with private money, while 65 percent said taxpayers would end up footing the bill.And they have a negative view of Boston2024, the group of business leaders, construction magnates and public officials who organized the bid. It has been criticized for failing to be transparent, announcing venues that were not verified with landlords, and paying officials extravagant salaries: Deval L. Patrick, the former governor, is to be paid $7,500 a day for his work as a “global ambassador” for the bid.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.After the WBUR poll became public Thursday, Patrick said in a statement that he would continue to promote the Olympics but would not take a fee. “I intend to take a full-time position soon and to forgo all outside consulting pay, including for Boston2024,” he said. “Because I think the Olympics could be good for the Commonwealth, I will continue to help as and when I can, but not for a fee.”AdvertisementOnly 19 percent of respondents said they had a favorable view of Boston2024, while 34 percent said they had a favorable view of NoBostonOlympics, the chief opposition group.Doug Rubin, a spokesman for Boston2024, said the committee knew it had work to do. But he added that as the committee gets feedback and is able to explain its ideas and goals, the bid is “gaining traction.”He said the plan was still fluid. “It will take six or nine months of working this through, but fairly soon we will come back with modifications to the plan, and people will say, ‘Hey, they listened to us,’ “ he said. He declined to specify any venue changes. “We want to avoid some of the mistakes we made early, and if we announce alternative venues, we want to make sure there’s significant community input beforehand,” he said.He also anticipated that support would grow.“We are going to continue to talk with people every day, solicit their input and advice and try to answer their questions,” he said. “And when we do, we are confident that people will support an Olympic bid.”In the group’s favor, the first detailed independent study of the bid, released Wednesday by the Boston Foundation and conducted by the University of Massachusetts Donahue Institute, said that hosting the Games would pump billions of dollars into the economy and create 54,000 temporary jobs; related construction would create more than 4,000 jobs a year from 2018 to 2023. But it also warned of the need to check potential cost overruns.The International Olympic Committee will conduct its own official polling starting in January 2017. One consultant who has been involved in three successful Olympic bids hewed to the notion that this poll reflected negativity brought on by winter and represented the nadir of public opinion.The consultant, who spoke anonymously because of his sensitive position, predicted the numbers would climb as spring blossomed. But he also said it was important for Boston2024 to settle on a strategic campaign and begin to execute it.“No one should be pressing the panic button yet,” he said. “North America is a discerning place, and I doubt you could ever see support over 70 percent because there will always be a hard core that is opposed.”But, he added, “Boston needs to start getting its act together.”The WBUR poll interviewed 504 registered voters from March 16 to 18 and has a margin of sampling error of plus or minus five percentage points.A version of this article appears in print on March 20, 2015, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: Anemic Support Greets Potential Bid in Boston.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.