By RAY GLIERMARCH 19, 2015
LOUISVILLE, Ky. —  U.C.L.A.’s Bryce Alford let his 3-pointer fly and immediately knew the ball was off line. It was veering right, he said. He just hoped a teammate might snatch the rebound and put the ball back in the basket with the Bruins trailing Southern Methodist, 59-57, with 13 seconds to play.Indeed, a hand went up in front of the rim, but it belonged to the 6-foot-11 S.M.U. center Yanick Moreira, who tipped Alford’s shot as it came down from its arc. There was a whistle, and an official rushed to the middle of the floor. Moreira, a senior from Angola, stood with his mouth wide open in the middle of the lane. The official called goaltending, and the N.C.A.A. tournament had an instant controversy.“I thought the ball was short,” Moreira said in the S.M.U. locker room. “I was trying to get the rebound so nobody could go get it. If the official say it’s a goaltend, it’s a goaltend; you can’t argue with the referee.”S.M.U. fumed on the bench, then regrouped and ran a play for the junior guard Nic Moore, who missed a 3-pointer from the right wing with four seconds to play. Moore got the ball back and took another 3-pointer that missed as time expired.AdvertisementSo, U.C.L.A., the 11th seed and a maligned tournament selection because of its uneven play this season, escaped with a 60-59 victory in the South Region game in the KFC Yum! Center and reached the round of 32.A pool reporter interviewed Antinio Petty, the referees’ crew chief, who said the goaltending call was based on an interpretation of the rule 9.3, parts 1 and 2. Petty said the ball was on a downward flight, which is part 1 of the rule. He said part 2 states that if the ball is above the level of the ring and has a possibility while in flight of entering the basket and is not touching the cylinder, the ruling is goaltending.The officials briefly stopped the game to check the video to make sure Alford, the son of U.C.L.A. Coach Steve Alford, was behind the 3-point line. The goaltending call was not reviewable, said Sam Hull, one of the officials.“I’m sad,” Moreira said. “I worked hard all summer to get here. To end up like this, I don’t think we deserved to end up like this. We had our shots to win the game; we let the referee make that call.”U.C.L.A. will meet 14th-seeded U.A.B. on Saturday.Alford was brilliant, finishing with 27 points on 9-of-11 shooting from behind the arc. He staged a terrific duel with the 5-foot-9 Moore, who scored 24 points and played all 40 minutes.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Bruins (21-13) led by 34-30 at the half and then clamped down on sixth-seeded S.M.U. during the second half, holding the Mustangs to 5 points during a stretch of nearly nine minutes. U.C.L.A. led, 44-35, with 9 minutes 42 seconds to play.AdvertisementThe Mustangs (27-7) suddenly came to life on a pair of 3-pointers by Moore. As U.C.L.A. went more than eight minutes without a point, S.M.U. roared ahead and led, 59-52, with 1 minute 26 seconds to play.Alford hit a 3-pointer and Norman Powell hit two free throws with 29 seconds to play to give S.M.U. a 59-57 lead. The Mustangs turned the ball over, setting up the decisive shot by Alford. He came around the left wing with Moore trailing him and launched the fateful 3-pointer.“I’m not saying it wasn’t goaltending,” said S.M.U. Coach Larry Brown. “I have no clue. But it was a five-second judgment. I don’t know. I just — it kind of blew me away. Again, you don’t look at one play. We had our chances to win, and it didn’t happen.”A version of this article appears in print on March 20, 2015, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: Shot Misses, but Call Dooms Mustangs.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.