AdvertisementSupported byBy Tom PedullaMike Maccagnan, the Jets’ new general manager, said he believed he upgraded the quarterback position with the newly acquired Ryan Fitzpatrick. Of his willingness to enter training camp with Fitzpatrick vying with Geno Smith for the job, he said, “As it stands right now, absolutely.”Maccagnan, speaking with reporters for the first time Thursday since he initiated a major overhaul of a 4-12 team, declined to offer opinions on the top quarterback prospects Jameis Winston and Marcus Mariota. Concerned that he might tip his hand, he would not give any insight into the Jets’ level of interest in Winston and Mariota. He attended Mariota’s pro day at Oregon and plans to be there when Winston showcases his abilities at Florida State on March 31.“You don’t really know who’s going to be available in the draft, so every time you have an opportunity to add to your team, you go ahead and do that,” Maccagnan said of acquiring Fitzpatrick, 32, from the Texans in exchange for a conditional late-round draft choice.Maccagnan noted that when he was working in the Houston Texans’ front office, he had spent a year with Fitzpatrick, and that Chan Gailey, the Jets’ new offensive coordinator, has an extensive background with him.“I was very impressed with his work ethic, his approach, his personality and his leadership skills,” Maccagnan said.Fitzpatrick continues to recover from a broken left leg that is expected to limit him throughout the off-season, leaving those repetitions to Smith and Matt Simms, who is third on the depth chart. Smith, a second-round draft choice in 2013, made some progress in his second season but lacked the consistency needed to secure the job on a long-term basis. Maccagnan said Fitzpatrick was expected to be ready for the start of training camp.The injury is not likely to represent a significant setback for Fitzpatrick, a Harvard graduate, because he played for the Buffalo Bills from 2009 to 2012 when Gailey was the head coach there and knows his system well. Fitzpatrick completed 60.3 percent of his passes and threw for 10,232 yards with 71 touchdowns and 54 interceptions while with Buffalo.Maccagnan defended his heavy spending on free-agent cornerbacks. After the A.F.C. East rival New England Patriots released Darrelle Revis, 29, rather than pick up a one-year option on his contract that was worth $20 million, the Jets, who drafted Revis in 2007, brought him back with a front-loaded five-year deal worth $70 million. The contract included $39 million in guaranteed money.“He’s played at a very high level and we thought potentially he could play at a high level for a number of years going forward,” Maccagnan said.The Jets brought back another of their former cornerbacks, Antonio Cromartie, with a four-year deal worth $32 million. They also signed cornerback Buster Skrine away from the Cleveland Browns. The Jets were scorched for 31 touchdown passes last season, most in the A.F.C.The three signings would seem to make Dee Milliner, drafted ninth over all by the Jets in 2013, expendable. But all indications are that the injury-plagued Milliner is not being shopped.“You never have enough good corners,” Maccagnan said. The Jets also made a significant addition when they acquired receiver Brandon Marshall from the Chicago Bears for a fifth-round draft choice.Maccagnan emphasized that the move was made only after an extensive background check. Marshall was twice arrested in domestic-abuse incidents; charges were dropped both times. “We are very excited about adding Brandon to the organization as a player and a person,” Maccagnan said.Maccagnan also expressed the desire to sign Muhammad Wilkerson, a mainstay at defensive end, to a long-term extension.“We do have the ability and the allocated resources to do that with him, but I don’t want to put a timetable on it,” he said.Maccagnan emphasized his commitment to the draft. He said of the free-agent activity, “We got off to a good start, but it is one small step in a long process.”EXTRA POINTSJames Brewer, a former Giants offensive lineman, has been signed to a one-year contract by the Jets. Brewer, who is 6 feet 6 inches and 330 pounds, plays guard and offensive tackle.Advertisement