By TOM SPOUSTAMARCH 19, 2015
JACKSONVILLE, Fla. — The N.C.A.A. men’s basketball tournament, that annual rite that delivers agony in the form of a bracket, has produced many darlings over the years. The one who emerged from a thrilling opening day Thursday might be the unlikeliest yet.Ron Hunter, the coach of 14th-seeded Georgia State, worked the sideline from a chair with wheels; he had injured his Achilles’ tendon in jubilation when his team secured a berth in the tournament. Unable to stand, he rolled left, he rolled right, shouting directions at his players.And then he fell out of his chair.Hunter’s son, R. J., had just made a 30-foot shot with 2.6 seconds left to defeat Baylor, knocking off a No. 3 seed that operates within an athletic department that has a nearly $100 million budget.The Panthers subsist on a roughly $20 million athletic budget at a university with 32,000 students. Mostly a commuter school, Georgia State was making only its third N.C.A.A. tournament appearance in university history.Advertisement“It’s one of those March Madness historic moments that everybody should be proud of,” the university’s president, Mark Becker, said. “Everybody wants to be part of a winning team. America loves a winner. Fans who don’t know anything about Georgia State are rooting for us.”When the Panthers secured their unlikely ticket to the tournament, Hunter, 50, put off surgery, and his left leg was placed in a cast. On Thursday morning, he awoke with swelling in his leg and could hardly move. A doctor and an athletic trainer used a saw and pliers to remove the top part of the cast and alleviate the pressure. He was devouring pain pills and feeding off the adrenaline and emotions of a moment he had vowed not to miss.“First of all, it was a great game,” Hunter said as he turned toward R. J., who was seated to his right. “But I’m not going to be a coach, I’m going to be a dad right now.”He continued, referring to the complicated relationship between a father and son who have struggled at times to balance the roles of coach and player: “This is my son. Proud of him, so I wanted to say that. I haven’t been able to do that for three years, so I just wanted to say I’m proud of him. Now to the game ... ”And what a game it was. Thursday’s bittersweet victory surely made the ups and downs along the way worth it as the Panthers advanced to face No. 6 Xavier on Saturday. About an hour earlier, the University of Alabama at Birmingham, another No. 14 seed, eliminated No. 3 Iowa State, 60-59. Now Iowa State, a trendy pick to win the tournament, will be home in Ames before the next round even begins.AdvertisementThere were close calls, too. Notre Dame, another No. 3 seed, was in a battle late against No. 14 Northeastern, but survived to win, 69-65, on clutch free throws. No. 13 Harvard, which made the tournament by winning a playoff game against Yale, kept its momentum going and nearly ousted one of the premier programs in college basketball, No. 4 North Carolina. The Tar Heels won, 67-65.A No. 3 seed losing its opening game is not uncommon: 18 have been beaten by No. 14 seeds in tournament history. But within one surreal hour Thursday, Georgia State and U.A.B. made it 20.Baylor Coach Scott Drew, whose brother Bryce pulled off a similar dramatic shot in 1998 as Valparaiso upset Mississippi, knows the highs and lows of the tournament well.“I’ve been a part of one of the best moments in college basketball in the N.C.A.A. tournament,” he said. “And I’ve been part of one of the worst that I’ll remember, R. J. hitting that shot.”Before Georgia State’s game, Hunter had his left leg propped on a four-wheel scooter, and he maneuvered around by pushing himself with his right leg. Once the game began, he put the contraption to the side, forgoing it for the now-famous rolling chair.Hunter, who took over at Georgia State in 2011, had entered Jacksonville Veterans Memorial Arena with a towel slung over his shoulder and his index finger pointed as if to say “We’re No. 1” as he passed several hundred fans and Georgia State’s band on his way to the bench. But the talent disparity between No. 3 and No. 14 seeds are easily blurred in these opening N.C.A.A. tournament games.Indeed, the gritty Panthers refused to buckle even after they hit a cold stretch that veered toward permafrost. With 2 minutes 54 seconds to play, they trailed, 56-44, and mounted an improbable rally in which Baylor would not score again. Georgia State finished the game with a 13-0 run, and R. J. Hunter, a 6-foot-6 junior who is projected as a late first-round N.B.A. draft pick, scored 12 of those points.As the closing seconds ticked down for Georgia State, R. J. Hunter eyed the shot clock and dribbled toward the top of the key. Around him, the Panthers looked uncertain and unorganized, but Hunter was undaunted.AdvertisementHe took a couple of calm dribbles and rose up about 30 feet from the basket, well beyond the 3-point arc, lifting Georgia State into N.C.A.A. tournament history.Ron Hunter was so elated he leaned back on his stool, caught his balance for a second, but then tumbled onto his right side. He hit the court with a huge smile on his face and slapped the hardwood in celebration as the athletic trainer scrambled to help him up. He was then loaded onto a four-wheel scooter that he promptly wheeled toward his celebrating players, waving a towel and pumping a fist as he pushed.“I saw him cannonball off his chair,” R. J. Hunter said as his father playfully slapped his shoulder. “They’ve got to get him a chair with a back or something because that wasn’t going to work.”The Hunters at last were able to relax and reap the rewards of an often complicated relationship.“There are a lot of coaches that get to the Elite 32 or the Final Four, but when you get to do it with your son, you can watch your son hit a half-court shot, I can’t tell you how I feel inside,” Hunter said. “That’s unbelievable. I wish every dad in America could have that opportunity, what I just experienced with my son.”A version of this article appears in print on March 20, 2015, on Page A1 of the New York edition with the headline: Huge Day of N.C.A.A. Upsets, Not to Be Taken Sitting Down.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.