AdvertisementSupported byUniversity of Alabama-Birmingham 60, Iowa State 59By Ray GlierLOUISVILLE, Ky. — Jerod Haase’s last game as a college player was in Birmingham, Ala., in 1997 in the N.C.A.A. tournament’s round of 16. His Kansas team was 34-1, with its only loss having come in double overtime against Missouri, but the Jayhawks were stunned by a nine-loss Arizona team in the tournament, 85-82. Haase knows all about the sting of defeat and the sudden, unexpected packing of bags in March.Here Thursday, coaching a team from Birmingham, Haase felt the euphoria that comes with being an N.C.A.A. tournament underdog that stuns a higher seed. His University of Alabama-Birmingham Blazers, a No. 14 seed, stunned third-seeded Iowa State, 60-59, as the U.A.B freshman William Lee outplayed Iowa State’s senior star Georges Niang in the crucial final moments of the game at the KFC Yum! Center.Haase, recalling his 1997 loss, said, “Arizona was really good, they won the championship that season, and it was a bitter loss for us.” He paused for a moment and added, “This is an unbelievable feeling.”U.A.B (20-15), a member of Conference USA, will play U.C.L.A., which defeated Southern Methodist, on Saturday here in the round of 32.Lee, a 6-foot-9 forward, turned down offers from larger schools to sign with U.A.B. and made the defining plays of this upset. He pulled up to hit a 15-foot shot over Niang with 23 seconds left to give the Blazers a 58-57 lead. At the other end, he blocked Niang’s shot off a spin move in the lane, then grabbed the rebound and was fouled.Lee sank both free throws for a 60-57 lead as the arena shook with anticipation of yet another N.C.A.A. tournament upset. Iowa State’s Naz Long missed an open 3-pointer from the right side on the Cyclones’ last possession.“He’s good, a really good player,” Niang said of Lee. Niang, an All-Big 12 forward, made 4 of 15 shots and finished with 11 points. The Cyclones led the Big 12 in scoring, averaging 78 points a game, but struggled with their offense on Thursday, shooting just 36.9 percent from the field.Lee finished with 14 points and 12 rebounds.Robert Brown, a 6-foot-5 junior, led U.A.B. with 21 points. The Blazers made just 3 of 18 3-point attempts, but they had numerous extra possessions because of 19 offensive rebounds.“They really didn’t like boxing out and that’s what we did, we went to the glass and got offensive rebounds and second-chance points,” Lee said.Haase said he went to the team’s dry erase board in the locker room before the game and wrote “scared” on the bottom of the board and “cocky” on the top. He asked his team where they thought they were on that scale and he said they were much closer to the top — and confident, not cocky.It was not just a win for the basketball program, the players said, it was a win for the campus and the city of Birmingham.The school  closed its football program after the 2014 season, and the mourning has continues in a state where football dominates.“We have to give U.A.B. something to cheer about, something to believe in,” Lee said.The Blazers noted the lack of belief in their chances against Iowa State, Big 12 tournament champion. It is hard to avoid the constant chatter of favorites vs. underdogs before the N.C.A.A. tournament, but U.A.B. played well the part of the righteous so-called mid-major.“They predicted us to lose 89 percent; we took that to heart,” Lee said. “Little bit of disrespect if you ask me.”Iowa State (25-9) had won five straight games after trailing by at least 10 points, but it had no remedy for the hustle of the underdog Blazers.“I think the difference was the glass,” said Iowa State Coach Fred Hoiberg. “They outrebounded us 52-37 and just kind of had their way on the offensive glass down there.“It’s just tough. It’s as tough a loss as I’ve ever been a part of. With what we had going, I thought the momentum we had coming into this tournament, and then just to go out there and not play very well.”Advertisement