AdvertisementSupported byBy Bill PenningtonLindsey Vonn bought a house last year in her longtime home, Vail, Colo. After moving in, she asked a contractor to build a trophy case above the fireplace for her collection of World Cup crystal globes, the hefty decorative awards given to the winners of season-long ski racing championships.With many of her globes stored in trunks in a closet, Vonn wanted a central display place. She was told that the trophy case, including lighting fixtures, could be designed to hold either 17 or 23 crystal globes.“I told them to go for 23,” Vonn said Thursday. “I think that will suffice, and if I win more, then we’ll make it bigger.”At the pace Vonn has set this week, an expansion might be necessary before the 2018 Winter Olympics in South Korea, where Vonn also plans to race.A day after she won the World Cup season-long downhill title, Vonn on Thursday capped her comeback from two career-threatening knee injuries by claiming another championship. Her first-place finish in the final super-G of the season at Méribel, France, earned Vonn her fifth World Cup super-G title.Vonn now has 19 World Cup crystal globes, 15 in specific events and four as the overall champion. That ties her with Sweden’s Ingemar Stenmark, who for more than 30 years had been the only skier with 19 World Cup titles.“Ingemar’s records have always seemed so unattainable,” Vonn said. “He is an amazing legend, and I never imagined I’d have this many globes. To tie him is pretty incredible.”Vonn, who won her 67th World Cup race Thursday by edging Austria’s Anna Fenninger by 49-hundredths of a second, can also now reasonably be considered in the chase for one of ski racing’s loftiest records: Stenmark’s record of 86 World Cup victories, established from 1975 to 1989.Vonn said Thursday that she had not set Stenmark’s World Cup victory record as a goal.“Mathematically, it’s definitely possible,” said Vonn, who won eight times this winter. “But I do better when I am not focused on records. I want to get as many wins as I can.”Vonn will be 33 at the 2018 Winter Games. But after two major operations in the last two years, Vonn said her knee survived the season without serious setbacks.“I feel really good,” she said. And for golf fans wondering about the health of Vonn’s sidelined boyfriend, Tiger Woods, Vonn also said this when asked about her summer schedule: “Hopefully, I’ll be at some golf tournaments.”Heading into Thursday’s race, Vonn held a narrow 8-point lead over Fenninger in the super-G standings. Skiing first, Fenninger took the early lead, knowing that if she held that advantage she would win the season-long title.Vonn pushed out of the start gate four racers after Fenninger.Vonn has one race remaining, on Sunday in the giant slalom, but she is out of contention for the event’s championship.Advertisement