By BEN SHPIGELMARCH 19, 2015
PITTSBURGH —  There is a perception about the Notre Dame men’s basketball program, and it is steeped in fact. It is that, come March, come the N.C.A.A. tournament, the Fighting Irish cannot figure out how to win.Their last two trips ended in upset losses in the round of 64, and they have not reached the round of 16 in 12 years. This team, after winning the Atlantic Coast Conference tournament last week, is different — or so Coach Mike Brey said — and on Thursday the Irish avoided further ignominy by toppling pesky Northeastern, 69-65, at Consol Energy Center.“We couldn’t get away from them,” Brey said.The Irish (30-5), seeded third in the Midwest Region, did not beat the No. 14 Huskies (23-12) so much as outlast them. Northeastern, which trailed by 12 points with about six minutes left, countered every Notre Dame outburst with a run of its own, drawing as close as 67-65 when Scott Eatherton put back a missed 3-point attempt by David Walker with 32.5 seconds remaining.On Notre Dame’s ensuing possession, Pat Connaughton threw a long pass down court to Demetrius Jackson, who saved the ball from going out of bounds but threw it into the hands of Northeastern guard Zach Stahl.AdvertisementThe Huskies did not have a timeout left, and Eatherton said he wished they did, to draw up a play. Walker came around a curl looking for a 3-pointer, but he was defended, and passed it off to Quincy Ford, who had the ball swiped away by Jerian Grant.Advertisement“I’ve watched the N.C.A.A. tournament, and crazy things happen,” Grant said. “So I just wanted to be able to make a play and try to get the ball.”Northeastern then watched as Zach Auguste, who was fouled after grabbing the loose ball, made both free throws with 1.9 seconds left to provide the margin of victory. Notre Dame will play No. 6 Butler on Saturday.In truth, Brey had been wary of Northeastern, making its first N.C.A.A. appearance since 1991, as far back as November, when both teams appeared in the Hall of Fame Tipoff tournament in Uncasville, Conn. Notre Dame did not draw the Huskies then, and Brey told his players he was glad they had not.This time, the Irish did not have a choice. Northeastern stayed close the entire first half, when neither team led by more than 5 points. To beat Notre Dame, Huskies Coach Bill Coen said, his team could not afford to make mistakes. Any.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“You have to play the perfect game,” he said.The Huskies did not play a perfect game — their 16 turnovers offset their 33-17 rebounding advantage, Coen lamented — but still nearly joined the ranks of Iowa State and Old Dominion and Winthrop, teams that in recent years drew the higher-seeded Irish in the round of 64 and vanquished them. Those defeats contributed to Notre Dame’s reputation as a postseason patsy, a reputation that the Irish expected to begin erasing during this tournament.They ousted Duke and North Carolina in the conference tournament, but it was another victory — by 70-63 against Miami in the A.C.C. quarterfinals — that Brey evoked in the locker room after Thursday’s game.“It was really hard,” Brey said. “Let’s see if we can get on a run like we did down there.”If Notre Dame does go on a run, it will need more complete performances from Jackson, who had 8 points and 9 assists, and Auguste, whose pick-and-roll proficiency flummoxed Northeastern. He scored 17 of his game-high 25 points after halftime, none more important than those that came on his two free throws.Those shots, Auguste said, put Notre Dame “in a place where we don’t have to worry too much.” The Irish, at tournament time, are not that familiar with that place. Maybe another victory — or two — will acclimatize them.A version of this article appears in print on March 20, 2015, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Notre Dame Breaks Through, Holding Off Northeastern.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.