AdvertisementSupported byBy Zach SchonbrunIn his first news conference since the N.C.A.A. penalized his program on March 6, Jim Boeheim, the men’s basketball coach at Syracuse, took responsibility for some of the transgressions revealed in a 94-page N.C.A.A. report, but he also lashed out at the penalties, which he called “unduly harsh.”Answering questions in the Carrier Dome for more than an hour Thursday morning, a defiant Mr. Boeheim denied the N.C.A.A.’s assertions that his program had spun out of control and argued that the punishment — including a nine-game suspension for Mr. Boeheim to be served at the start of conference play next season — did not fit the alleged infractions.“This is far from a program where student-athletes freely committed academic fraud,” Mr. Boeheim said.Mr. Boeheim, 70, said he planned to file an appeal Friday against some of the penalties, which also included reducing 12 scholarships over the next four years and vacating 108 wins since 2004.On Wednesday, the university announced that Mr. Boeheim, who had been second in career Division I wins with 966 before the infractions were announced, would coach for three more seasons, and that the athletic director, Daryl Gross, had resigned, although he will remain at the university as a special assistant to the chancellor.Mr. Boeheim offered his apologies for how the investigation had affected his program, which imposed a postseason ban on itself for this year.“Ultimately, as head coach, I must also accept responsibility for the conduct of individuals within the program,” Mr. Boeheim said, “including those found to have committed violations of N.C.A.A. rules.“I do regret that these violations happened,” he added, “and I apologize for any harm it has brought to my players or the university, and any embarrassment it has caused to our alumni, students and fans.”Mr. Boeheim said three years was longer than he had planned to continue coaching, and he indicated that he had considered retiring after Syracuse reached the Final Four in 2013. But he did not want to leave the Orange amid a lengthy investigation, he said, and he did not want to abandon the program now.“I believe three years is right for me to be able to do my job as best as I can,” Mr. Boeheim said. “I believe the program will be in a great position when I retire.”He also acknowledged that his retirement could come sooner than after three years.Mr. Boeheim maintained that he had no personal involvement in the alleged infractions. He lamented that his side of the story had been “disregarded by enforcement staff,” and that he was not asked to interview with the N.C.A.A. a second time.His remarks veered when he spoke about the former player Fab Melo, who was one of the main subjects of the N.C.A.A.’s investigation into academic misconduct. At one point, he implied that the focus on Mr. Melo as an at-risk student from Brazil was biased and that Mr. Melo had been unfairly portrayed as a student who was unable to do the work because he was a foreign student.“I think there’s a little racism involved,” Mr. Boeheim said, “when they start talking about not taking this guy or that guy. He’s from a foreign country. We shouldn’t have foreign students at Syracuse?”According to the N.C.A.A., Mr. Gross convened a meeting with members of the athletic department, as well as the faculty athletic representative and an associate provost, in January 2012 to strategize a way to get Mr. Melo back on the court after he had been declared academically ineligible.The group settled on a plan to get a grade in one of Mr. Melo’s previous courses changed, according to the N.C.A.A. A former director of basketball operations, Stan Kissel, was asked to assist Mr. Melo in making this happen, and he did, providing text, research and citations to the “extra work” that Mr. Melo submitted to a course he had taken the previous year.Mr. Boeheim said those efforts were undertaken without his knowledge or consent. He said, “This was not my way.”Advertisement