
Sports of The Times By                     
 WILLIAM C. RHODEN
 
MARCH 19, 2015
Shortly after Hampton University defeated Manhattan on Tuesday night in the first game of the N.C.A.A. tournament, Hampton’s president, Bill Harvey, was on the phone, more proud than excited.The 74-64 victory had given Hampton the right to be the first tournament opponent for undefeated Kentucky on Thursday.Depending on how you look at it, facing Kentucky is an unenviable task or a great opportunity. Harvey, 74, sees only opportunity. “We dare our kids to be great,” he said. “I just hope that we can play a good game and keep it respectable.”Kentucky beat one of its opponents by 58 points this season, and three others by at least 40. It led the nation in margin of victory at 20.9 points per game. Hampton managed to score fewer points than its 34 opponents over the course of the season.Advertisement“It’s very unlikely that Hampton can beat Kentucky,” Harvey acknowledged. “But our kids can say we went dancing. They probably won’t dance long, but we went.”AdvertisementA similar opportunity awaits other long shots over the next two days: teams like Robert Morris and North Dakota State and Coastal Carolina, programs whose hopes are higher than their odds of winning. In Portland, Ore., on Thursday afternoon, Texas Southern, the 15th seed, will take on second-seeded Arizona. Arizona is hardly as imposing as Kentucky will be for Hampton, but the result is expected to be the same: a rout.For the Texas Southern president, John Rudley, the seeding is less important than the experience.“The most important thing is that these kids get this exposure,” Rudley said by phone from Portland. He was sitting in a hotel lobby amid the happy chaos of cheerleaders, band members and T.S.U. fans who had made the trip.“We are providing an opportunity for our students, athletes and our fans who normally don’t get to see the Halls of Valhalla when it comes to big-time sports,” he said. “This is a lifetime experience for any kid, whether you’re in the big school in Kentucky or whether you’re at Texas Southern. This is an experience you’ll be telling your kids about and you will remember the rest of your life.”At a time when super elite conferences reign supreme in college sports, increasing numbers of athletic programs are being forced to contemplate new directions and revised metrics of success, and sometimes even if they should continue to compete at all. In this changing era, does success mean competing for national championships? Conference championships? Does it mean consistently having winning seasons? Attracting fans?For Harvey, the Hampton president since 1978, success increasingly means doing well outside the confines of its affiliation with the country’s historically black colleges and universities. In recent years, the champions of the H.B.C.U. conferences, the Mid-Eastern Athletic Conference and the Southwestern Athletic Conference, have consistently been seeded 15th or 16th and been promptly trounced by a top seed.To officials like Harvey, that prospect is becoming less and less appealing.This week I asked Harvey if he would consider leaving the Mid-Eastern Athletic Conference for a conference like the Big East or the Atlantic 10.Harvey said he was open to the idea, knowing that such a move would require a significant commitment of resources, not to mention an invitation.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“My facilities are as good as any in the Big East,” he said. “I’ve got the money to compete. Even more than that, I have the will to compete.”AdvertisementWill conferences be open to a program like Hampton’s joining the exclusive club? Or would they fear that an H.B.C.U., once it moved into the neighborhood, might develop a built-in recruiting advantage in the chase for black players?Tennessee State joined the Ohio Valley Conference in 1986 after a 20-year campaign for membership, and the Tigers have enjoyed modest success, even playing in the N.C.A.A. tournament twice in the 1990s. This year, Tennessee State’s women’s basketball team will represent the O.V.C. in the N.C.A.A. tournament.A different question is whether an H.B.C.U. can become part of a mainstream conference and still maintain a connection to the African-American tradition even as it expands its mission. Texas Southern’s Rudley said he was more intrigued by H.B.C.U.s coming up with a new model instead of linking with a mainstream conference. If H.B.C.U.s are to prosper, he argued, they must create a more independent model, either inside the N.C.A.A. framework or outside it.“Whether you’re in the SWAC or the M.E.A.C., we’re playing around the edges,” he said. “We should create the same kind of league, the same kind of excitement. We could break away from the N.C.A.A. and make our own competition.”These are long-term challenges, and full of risk.For now, Hampton and Texas Southern face tremendous short-term tasks: undefeated Kentucky and powerful Arizona.Mission impossible? Perhaps. But the one-and-done nature of the N.C.A.A. tournament — and the essence of college basketball itself — allows for the occasional miracle. Hampton, with its 16-17 record, proved that Tuesday. Rudley learned that as a player at the University of Toledo.“Whether you’re a little team like Harvard or Texas Southern, you get a chance to deal with the big boys, five on five,” he said. “I don’t care if you’re a rich boy whose mom and daddy gave him basketball lessons from Day 1 or a poor kid in the hood who played in the projects until the sun went down, we can lace ’em up together now.”Let’s embrace the weekend. The new frontier can wait.Email: wcr@nytimes.com We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »