By JERÉ LONGMANMARCH 19, 2015
GRAND RAPIDS, Mich. —  The top-ranked, undefeated team from Kentucky arrived at the Final Four, wearing familiar blue and white, but the charter was a bus, not a plane. The trip took nine hours with a stop at Arby’s and a gym for practice. The team hotel is not five-star plush but Holiday Inn utility.“Ashley Judd doesn’t come to this undefeated team’s games,” said Jeff Hans, the women’s basketball coach at Division III Thomas More College (31-0), a Catholic liberal arts school with 950 undergraduates in Crestview Hills, Ky.The men’s team from the University of Kentucky gets the attention and celebrity endorsement, but the women from Thomas More have been equally successful and ambitious this season. And with the Division III Final Four set for Friday and Saturday, Kentucky’s first unconquered champion of 2014-15 could be nicknamed the Saints, not the Wildcats.“I heard there’s another team in Lexington that’s undefeated; I’m not sure who they are,” Terry Connor, the athletic director at Thomas More, said playfully.AdvertisementIf Thomas More is largely unfamiliar to the broader sports audience, the last name of its star — Moss — is not. It is a football name seeking a separate and distinct prominence in women’s basketball as a daughter longs to escape the athletic shadow of her father and step into her own sunlight.Advertisement“I think everybody wants to get out of their parents’ footsteps and try to make a name for themselves,” said Sydney Moss, a 5-foot-10 swing player and the 2014 Division III player of the year, who is the daughter of Randy Moss, the former N.F.L. All-Pro receiver.Sydney said: “Through high school, I was known as ‘Randy Moss’s daughter, Randy Moss’s daughter.’ I feel like if we win a national championship, it would get me farther out of his spotlight and kind of make me into my own person, my own name.”Last season, as a sophomore, Moss set a Division III record by scoring 63 points in a game. She also matched the season scoring record with 891 points before tearing the anterior cruciate ligament in her right knee while driving for a layup during the regional semifinals, known as sectionals, of the 2014 N.C.A.A. tournament.That was the only game, of 63 played, that Thomas More has lost in Moss’s two seasons. A left-hander, she can play all five positions, leading the Saints with 24.4 points per game and ranking second with 3.8 assists per game. In four N.C.A.A. tournament games this season, Moss has delivered 43, 40, 37 and 35 points.“We don’t see that kind of athleticism in D-III,” said Carla Berube, the coach at Tufts, which faces Thomas More on Friday in a national semifinal. “She’s a complete player. Even after the A.C.L., it doesn’t look like she’s missed a beat. She can cross over, hit step-back 3s, slash, hang in the air at the rim.”Moss’s desire to be her own person seems evident in her tattoos, in her Mohawk haircut, in the omission of her father’s name from her official team biography.She describes a complicated relationship with her father. Sydney, 21, was born while Randy was in high school in West Virginia. During his peripatetic football career, she lived primarily with her mother, Libby Offutt, and her maternal grandparents, Frank and Margaret Offutt. At the moment, Sydney said, she and her father are not speaking. He does not attend her games.Advertisement“I feel like we’re the same person, so we don’t really get along,” Sydney Moss said. “I think we’re both” — and for a few seconds she paused before saying, “hardheaded, I guess that’s the right word.”Her career has been almost as complex. Moss first attended Florida and was named to the Southeastern Conference all-freshman team in 2012-13. But she grew homesick and her grandfather died. And she found Division I basketball more of a job than an adventure with its incessant demands and rigid structure.“You didn’t really have a life outside of basketball,” Moss said. “It was, I guess, too much.”Florida did not grant her a release to transfer to Kentucky, an SEC opponent, for reasons that have not been explained. So Moss chose Thomas More. One, it was 15 minutes from Boone County High School, which she attended in Kentucky. She knew most of the Saints players. Two, she would not have to sit out a year after transferring. Three, she was only a few hours from her mother and grandmother in West Virginia.The fact that Moss remained at a Division III college after one season surprised many, including some faculty and staff members at Thomas More. But Moss is on schedule to graduate next spring with a degree in communications and said she enjoyed discovering “what it’s like to be a regular student.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.She has become the rare elite player to find fulfillment at a level of basketball that offers no athletic scholarships, television limelight or express-train connections to professional ball in the W.N.B.A. or overseas.“To me that’s big for all of women’s basketball,” said Hans, the Thomas More coach. “It shows that a young lady can be successful” in Division I “and not have the enjoyment and love for the game and come to a smaller school and love her teammates and love the campus and stay with it.”Thomas More is hardly a one-woman team, largely drawing players from northern Kentucky and Cincinnati. The first reserve, Olivia Huber, is an all-American soccer player who led Division III in scoring last fall. She is a defensive-minded guard in basketball and a rapacious forward in soccer, positions that might seem contradictory but demand acute focus and an insistence to be near the ball.Yet it is Moss who makes Thomas More particularly compelling because of where she is and who she is — the daughter of a famous athlete trying to forge her own identity.“I feel like you have to win a national championship to leave people remembering your name,” she said.A version of this article appears in print on March 20, 2015, on Page B8 of the New York edition with the headline: A Kentucky Team and Its Star Seek Their Own Fame.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.