AdvertisementSupported byKeeping ScoreBy Benjamin HoffmanJacob deGrom will get the ball in the N.L.D.S. Game 5 Thursday night against the Los Angeles Dodgers, with the Mets asking him to win on the road for the second time in a five-game playoff series. It is a tough task, but at least this time the starter whom deGrom is facing has won only one Cy Young Award, not three.In his first playoff start, deGrom outdueled Clayton Kershaw, winner of three of the last four National League Cy Young Awards and perhaps the game’s best active pitcher, by throwing seven shutout innings, striking out 13 batters and allowing just five hits, with an intentional walk.DeGrom will presumably need to be equally sharp to defeat Zack Greinke, the 2009 American League Cy Young Award winner and one of the favorites for the N.L.’s award this season after he recorded a major-league-leading 1.66 E.R.A., in one stretch pitching 452/3 consecutive scoreless innings.An endorsement for deGrom came from a surprising place Tuesday, after Game 4 of this division series.“You know what: It’s probably dead even, to be honest,” Kershaw said when asked to evaluate the matchup between Greinke and deGrom. “As good as Zack is and has been the whole year, deGrom has been the same.”Should deGrom get the win, it will be only the fifth time in the era of the five-game division series that a starting pitcher won Games 1 and 5 on the road. The feat would put him in the company of Cliff Lee (2010, Texas Rangers), Kerry Wood (2003, Chicago Cubs), Russ Ortiz (2002, San Francisco Giants) and Brad Radke (2002, Minnesota Twins).To do so, deGrom will have to overcome some difficult franchise history in winner-take-all games. In eight trips to the postseason, the Mets have faced a single game to decide elimination or advancement five times, winning twice; in only two instances did the Mets’ starting pitcher make it past the fourth inning.In 1973, the Mets went to a decisive Game 5 in the National League Championship Series, against the Cincinnati Reds. After throwing eight brilliant innings, Tom Seaver loaded the bases with one out in the ninth, but Tug McGraw came in to finish the Mets’ victory.The Mets also went the distance in the 1973 World Series, but Mets starter Jon Matlack was no match for the Oakland Athletics’ Ken Holtzman in Game 7. Matlack left after two and two-thirds innings, having given up four runs. He was chased from the game by a long home run by the eventual most valuable player of that Series, Reggie Jackson.In 1986, Ron Darling got the ball for Game 7 of the World Series against the Boston Red Sox. Mets fans remember the team winning the game and the series but may have forgotten that Darling failed to get out of the fourth inning, giving up three runs before Manager Davey Johnson replaced him with Sid Fernandez. The Mets’ bats woke up in the sixth inning, and the team eventually won, 8-5.In 1988, Darling again got the ball in a winner-take-all game, but he had an even poorer outing. It was Game 7 of the National League Championship Series against the Dodgers, and Darling recorded just three outs, giving up six runs (four earned). He pitched to five batters in the second inning, recording zero outs, before being relieved by Dwight Gooden.It hardly mattered, though, because the Dodgers’ ace, Orel Hershiser, was at the top of his game and threw a five-hit shutout to send his team to the World Series.Finally, there was Game 7 of the 2006 N.L.C.S. against the St. Louis Cardinals. Oliver Perez — yes, Oliver Perez — started that game for the Mets and performed well, giving up one run in six innings. But the Mets fell behind, and the game ended with Perez’s teammate Carlos Beltran looking at a third strike with runners on every base.To advance this time around, the Mets not only need deGrom to perform well but also need to score against Greinke, which proved difficult for the entire league this season. In Game 2 of the division series, he beat the Mets by allowing two runs in seven innings, striking out eight, in what for Greinke qualified as a mediocre start.It would help the Mets if David Wright, in particular, could assert himself at the plate. He has one hit in 12 at-bats in this series, although that hit, a two-run, bases-loaded single in the seventh inning of Game 1, was a big one. He has also walked five times, giving him a decent .353 on-base percentage.Still, his batting average of .083 ranks near the bottom among all the players on teams still taking part in the postseason. Wright, the Mets’ captain, waited nine years to get back to the postseason, and it will surely be intensely frustrating for him if he cannot contribute offensively in Game 5 and the Mets fall to the Dodgers.Wright is just one hitter in the lineup, though, and the Mets, more than anything, will be leaning on deGrom. That he is considered a formidable foe for Greinke on Thursday — despite being in just his second season in the major leagues — speaks volumes about his talent and his makeup.DeGrom will have to remember he does not have to be perfect in Game 5; he just has to be better than a pitcher who was awfully close to perfection for much of the season.Advertisement