By ROB HUGHESMARCH 19, 2015
LONDON —  Britain has given the world two great sports, but right now it cannot make or buy a winning team in either of them.Last year, England’s national soccer team was brushed aside in the group stage of the World Cup in Brazil. On Wednesday the last of its clubs, Manchester City, exited from the Champions League.England has similarly been humbled by failing to get past the group phase of the Cricket World Cup in Australia and New Zealand.It is not about ambition, because the British invented these sports and sent out missionaries to teach their games while they set the standard of play.AdvertisementIt isn’t through lack of trying now, because no league on earth expends more money or makes a greater effort to improve than the English Premier League clubs.AdvertisementUntil recently, the English were a dominant force in the Champions League. But after the exit of Manchester City and Arsenal this week, following the elimination of Chelsea and Liverpool in earlier matches, there is no Premier League presence left in the tournament.Friday’s quarterfinal draw involves two French clubs (Paris St.-Germain and Monaco), three Spanish contenders (Barcelona, Atlético Madrid and Real Madrid), one German (Bayern Munich), one Italian (Juventus) and one Portuguese (F.C. Porto).All this is a far cry from 2008, when three English teams reached the Champions League semifinals and other countries feared the Premier League was becoming too omnipotent in Europe.The English clubs, many of them now owned by overseas investors, share an unrivaled television income that tempts foreign players like bees to honey. Yet England’s presence has now been completely erased just when the competition reaches it most meaningful stage.The goal that confirmed Manchester City’s elimination on Wednesday was everything that England wishes it had, and much of what is beyond it.Barcelona midfielder Ivan Rakitic began the move by digging out the ball on the edge of his own penalty box. The left back Jordi Alba then picked up his pass and ran 30 yards before passing the ball to the man who makes all the difference.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Lionel Messi changed both speed and direction to throw off two nearby defenders and spotted a player moving into the opponent’s penalty area. It was neither Neymar nor Luis Suárez, both of whom who lured defenders from the goal and created a chance for the indefatigable Rakitic to knock down with his chest a pass from Messi and lob it over the shoulder of City goalkeeper Joe Hart.It wasn’t Messi, alone. There was a gulf of talent between the sides, and the more that City tried to speed up the tempo and bring to bear what the Premier League is noted for — the intensity of its play — the more Barcelona kept the ball away from it. At times, Barça slowed the game to walking pace.AdvertisementThere have been diverse but salutary lessons for England’s teams this season. Paris St.-Germain conquered Chelsea in the air, where Chelsea reckons itself to be unbeatable, with headed goals from corner kicks. Arsenal lost on its own ground to a Monaco side that could scarcely believe that the London team would gift away goals and be so open to the counterattack. And Liverpool? The Liverpool team that is now climbing rapidly through the ranks of the Premiership was blown away in the autumn, seemingly not ready for the demands of European soccer while it was rebuilding its lineup during the first half of this season.So four English sides failed to progress in a Champions League in which this season’s big beasts are Barcelona, Real Madrid and Bayern Munich. The French renaissance has plenty to do with P.S.G. receiving a huge financial backing from Qatar, though Monaco, owned by a Russian billionaire, advanced because it was able to expose Arsenal’s complacent approach in London.Munich, now under the former Barcelona coach Pep Guardiola, combines the core of Germany’s World Cup champion with the sorcery of a select few imported talents, like Franck Ribéry and Arjen Robben and Robert Lewandowski.The Madrid clubs fought last season’s final in Lisbon and are continuing where they left off, and Portugal’s champion Porto has progressed through organization, technique and the ability to get the maximum out of its players.Which leaves who? The Old Lady of Torino, Juventus.Italy’s clubs once dominated as England’s did, and just as the Spanish teams have done lately. But while Juventus is running away with the Serie A championship for the second straight year, its easy elimination of Borussia Dortmund on Wednesday will have surprised the remaining teams in the Champions League.Juventus started without the playmaker Andrea Pirlo and lost the powerful midfielder Paul Pogba to an injury early in the game at Dortmund. Undaunted, the Italian champion destroyed Dortmund with three breakaway goals.Carlos Tevez was the catalyst. He scored first from 28 yards and set up the second with a selfless pass for Álvaro Morata, then finished off the scoring in Juventus’s 3-0 victory.Tevez seemed inspired in front of 80,000 fans in Germany, who usually empower their team. Like Messi, Tevez is from Argentina but, unlike Messi, he does not stay in one place for long. He once represented Manchester City, but was let go because he challenged authority. Now 31, he seems to have found a team that understands him.A version of this article appears in print on March 20, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.