AdvertisementSupported byBy John BranchSusan Mueller, a flutist and the chairwoman of the Nevada-Las Vegas music department, examined the referee’s whistle in her hand. She closed her office door after warning those outside that she was about to make a loud noise. She put the whistle to her lips and blew. The instrument shrieked. Mueller looked surprised.“You really have to blow,” she said. She did it again, eliciting a shrill blast of about 115 decibels. She examined the whistle again, then blew again. She played a note on a nearby recorder. She hummed a note. “I think it’s a high G,” Mueller said. For sports fans, there may be no noise as familiar yet unconsidered as that of the referee’s whistle. The noise is familiar, in part, because most of the whistles used in major sports organizations, including the N.B.A., the N.F.L. and the N.C.A.A., are the same model: the Fox 40.The same whistle has been heard at the Olympics and the World Cup soccer tournament, but it was designed with basketball in mind. Starting this week, Fox 40 whistles are expected to be blown about 85 times a game during the N.C.A.A. men’s basketball tournament — roughly 6,000 times in all. And for the first time, the whistle — not a scoreboard operator on the sideline — will automatically stop the game clock during the tournament, through a Precision Time System carried by every on-court official. Ron Foxcroft, a former N.C.A.A. referee who lives in Ontario, knows just about everything there is to know about the whistle. He invented it. He knows how it works (three chambers, no pea) and how many are produced (11,000 a day). But he does not know what note it produces. “No one has ever asked me that,” he said. Four conference tournaments took place in Las Vegas last week. One, the Mountain West tournament, was held on U.N.L.V.’s campus. A referee offered a whistle, still in the package, to be tested at the music department. The whistle, after all, is an instrument, at least for the roughly 100 referees working the N.C.A.A. tournament. “It all depends on the listener,” Mueller said. “To some people, this might be their instrument of choice. It wouldn’t be mine. But if you find you can best express yourself using this whistle as your instrument, who’s to say it isn’t?”Basketball referees express themselves mostly with a whistle. It makes the action stop (a foul, a ball out of bounds, a timeout), though it occasionally foretells that action is about to start (the end of a timeout or a ball about to be inbounded). The sound usually comes in one blast, about a second long. As with a car horn, a different message can be sent with multiple toots. A couple of quick ones might signal a substitution; four full-blown ones might be to try to break up a fight. “It’s our most important piece of equipment,” Foxcroft said, referring to officials. Before the Fox 40, games were conducted with a familiar whistle, like Acme’s Thunderer or one of its imitators — a tapered snout protruding from a round end that contained a pea, a small ball of cork, that vibrated inside against an opening to provide sound. “There is not a major league sport that has not been graced by this whistle,” Acme’s website declares.But whistles with a pea can be inconsistent noisemakers. The pea can get stuck when blown too hard, or it can be affected by elements, including saliva. Foxcroft officiated the 1976 Olympic gold medal game between the United States and Yugoslavia, when the American Adrian Dantley took an elbow to the face. Foxcroft blew the whistle, but no noise came out. It finally bleated after a few attempts.Every official knew the feeling. After many more tootless episodes, Foxcroft began a long attempt to reinvent the pealess whistle. Acme, based in England, already had one, from the 1880s — the Metropolitan, made for Scotland Yard and London’s Metropolitan Police, a tube-shaped attention-getter to replace the rattle or clapper. About a year later, in 1884, Acme launched the Thunderer, which it says was the world’s first pea whistle.Foxcroft wanted a combination: a pealess whistle that looked like a sports whistle. The owner of a Canadian trucking company called Fluke (motto: “If it’s on time, it’s a Fluke”), Foxcroft said he had accumulated $150,000 in debt trying to create the whistle over more than three years. Early prototypes were too big or looked like miniature trumpets. “It’s got to look like a whistle, and it has to feel like a whistle,” Foxcroft said.The winning result was the Fox 40. Its three chambers vary by 13-thousandths of an inch to provide three tones — low, medium, high — that combine to create one steady noise that rises to 123 decibels. “And it will not fail,” Foxcroft said. “The harder you blow, the louder it gets.”He took the Fox 40 to the 1987 Pan American Games in Indianapolis. Referees ordered them. Soon, the whistles were all over the N.C.A.A. and the N.B.A. “Many, many, many times before, my partner blew a whistle and I never heard it,” said Bobby Dibler, whose 20-year career as an N.C.A.A. referee bridged the change in whistles. Dibler, the coordinator of officials for the Pac-12, Mountain West and Western Athletic Conferences, added, “We have some of the loudest arenas here in the West, and I’ve never not heard this whistle.”A Fox 40 Classic will be in the mouth of every official at the N.C.A.A. tournament. Most use one or two each season, identified by their teeth prints gnawed onto the tip. Fox 40 now comes in a version with a rubber mouth cushion.Each whistle hangs on a lanyard. And just below the whistle is a clip that holds a black wire with a tiny microphone. The wire is wrapped around the lanyard, tucked inside the collar of the official’s striped shirt, and plugs into a box clipped to the belt. It is the Precision Time System, invented in the 1990s by the former N.B.A. referee Mike Costabile. Each time the referee blows the whistle, the game clock, if it is running, stops. To start the clock, the referee reaches to the box on the belt and pushes a button. It is choreography that few fans notice. But eliminating the reaction time of a clock operator on the sideline — who pushes a button after hearing the whistle — saves at least 30 seconds of action in a 40-minute college game, tests showed. A clock operator is still there to serve as a backup and to handle clock problems that crop up, especially at the end of the game. The N.B.A. and most college conferences have used the system since the late 1990s. This year, the N.C.A.A. is using it throughout the tournament for the first time. When Costabile designed it, he needed a consistent noise from the whistle. (These days, any repeatable noise can be programmed into the system.) “At the beginning, we couldn’t have gotten it to work with an old pea whistle,” Costabile said. In Las Vegas last week, the Mountain West men’s and women’s basketball tournaments took place on the U.N.L.V. campus. Three other conferences held tournaments in town, too. Whistles were blown thousands of times. At the university’s music department, Mueller wanted to double-check her trained musical ear. She found two electronic tuners, set them on her desk and blew the whistle. The whistle’s three tones, distinguishable from close range, burst into a single shrill pitch. She blew again and again. The tuners waffled between G and A. A few more tries, and Mueller made the official call: The Fox 40 is a high A, she said, but not a pretty one. “Like a bad soprano vibrato,” she said.Advertisement