AdvertisementSupported byBy Richard GoldsteinAllen Jerkens, the Hall of Fame thoroughbred trainer who was known as the Giant Killer for springing some of horse racing’s greatest upsets, died on Wednesday in Aventura, Fla. He was 85.His death was announced by his son Jimmy, who is also a trainer. Mr. Jerkens had been hospitalized with an infection for several weeks. Mr. Jerkens, who was based at Belmont Park for most of his 65-year career, never had a winner in the Triple Crown series or the Breeders’ Cup, but he won more than 200 stakes races and gained renown as a master of his craft.“You can never be casual about Allen Jerkens,” Penny Chenery, the owner of Secretariat, told USA Today before the running of the 1999 Belmont Stakes. After winning the Triple Crown in 1973, Secretariat was been beaten twice by colts trained by Mr. Jerkens. At the time, the self-effacing Mr. Jerkens said: “Sometimes, it’s being in the right place at the right time. I’ve been around a long time.”He emerged as an upset architect in 1962 and ’63, when his colt Beau Purple scored three victories over Kelso, a five-time horse of the year. Jerkens’s Handsome Boy bested the outstanding colt Buckpasser in the 1967 Brooklyn Handicap.Mr. Jerkens’s greatest moments came in 1973, when he won an Eclipse Award as racing’s top trainer. That year, his mounts got the best of Secretariat after he won the Kentucky Derby, the Preakness and the Belmont Stakes and gained acclaim as perhaps the fastest horse ever. Mr. Jerkens’s colt Onion beat Secretariat in the Whitney at Saratoga, and his Prove Out defeated Secretariat in the Woodward at Belmont Park.In 1998, Mr. Jerkens’s 34-1 shot Wagon Limit bested Skip Away, who was seeking a third straight victory in the Jockey Gold Cup and trying to surpass Cigar as horse racing’s career earnings winner.Although known to fans as the Giant Killer, Mr. Jerkens, not given to hyperbole, preferred the more simple tag Chief, as he was called by track insiders. His horses won more than 3,800 races and garnered nearly $104 million in purses.Mr. Jerkens trained Sky Beauty, who won the prestigious Triple Tiara series for 3-year-old fillies (which then included the Acorn, the Mother Goose and the Coaching Club American Oaks) at Belmont Park in 1993 and captured an Eclipse Award the next year as the best female handicap horse. He also saddled Devil His Due, the winner of the Gotham and the Wood in 1992, and Kelly Kip, a star sprinter who had won $1.1 million in purses when he was retired in 2000. When Mr. Jerkens was inducted into the National Racing Hall of Fame in Saratoga Springs, N.Y., at age 46 in 1975, he was the youngest trainer ever chosen.Harry Allen Jerkens was born on April 21, 1929, in Islip, on Long Island, the son of a retired Austrian cavalry captain who ran a riding academy. He dropped out of high school, intent on becoming a jockey. But finding he was too big, he turned briefly, at 17, to steeplechase riding. At 21, he received his trainer’s license, and on July 4, 1950, he had his first winner, at Aqueduct.Mr. Jerkens became the head trainer for Hobeau Farm, owned by the investment banker Jack Dreyfus Jr., in 1962, and soon after notched his three upsets over Kelso.Mr. Jerkens never focused on the Triple Crown races, and most of his major victories came in handicaps or stakes races for older horses. He entered only six mounts in the series — three horses in the Kentucky Derby and three in the Belmont Stakes (none in the Preakness) — without finishing in the money.“My good 3-year-olds weren’t that good,” Mr. Jerkens said in an interview with The Record of New Jersey. “They got better and came on at 4.”Mr. Jerkens saddled Best of Luck in the 1999 Belmont Stakes for what became his Triple Crown finale. The colt’s breeder and owner, Allaire duPont, had also bred and owned Kelso. Best of Luck finished fourth in the Belmont.Mr. Jerkens left Belmont Park as his base in late 2013, shifting to Gulfstream Park in South Florida.In addition to his son Jimmy, Mr. Jerkens is survived by his son Steven, also a trainer, and another son, Allen; his daughter, Julie; and several grandchildren, the New York Racing Association said. His wife, Elisabeth, died last year. Mr. Jerkens became known for his attention to detail, even supervising the feeding at his barn each evening, and for his ability to nurture a horse. He was particularly astute in buying and claiming seemingly ordinary horses and turning them into winners who returned a handsome profit. “He was a horseman’s horseman,” Mr. Jerkens’s fellow Hall of Fame trainer D. Wayne Lukas told The Daily Racing Form. “No frills, old school, as they call it nowadays. Very thorough. Always to be considered, whether it was the third race on a Wednesday or a Grade I on a Saturday.” John Veitch, who trained the 1970s star colt Alydar, told The New York Times in 1993 that Mr. Jerkens cared little about horse racing’s social trappings. “At 3 o’clock in the afternoon,” he said, “you might find him standing outside his barn in rubber leggings and shoes, spraying water on a horse’s legs.”Advertisement