AdvertisementSupported bySouth: San Diego State 76, St. John's 64By Viv BernsteinCHARLOTTE, N.C. — D’Angelo Harrison had just exhausted himself on the offensive end, trying to help St. John’s come back from a double-digit second-half deficit. Walking toward the raucous contingent of Red Storm fans, he shook his head back at them. It was an understanding that neither was about to give up on this game even though the No. 9-seeded Red Storm were marginal underdogs to No. 8 San Diego State in this second-round South Region game at Time Warner Cable Arena. St. John’s was also missing the suspended center Chris Obekpa, and the key scorer Rysheed Jordan was stuck on the bench with foul trouble in the first half.Despite the Red Storm’s efforts, it was all too much to overcome. San Diego State, which came in as one of the lowest-scoring teams in Division I, found its touch against the Red Storm and came away with a 76-64 victory. J. J. O’Brien had 18 points as the Aztecs (27-8) advanced to a game against No. 1-seeded Duke on Sunday, and St. John’s failed once again to win in the tournament. The Red Storm (21-12) have not won an N.C.A.A. tournament game since 2000.“Foul trouble early clearly affected our chances to be successful,” St. John’s Coach Steve Lavin said. “Rysheed picking up that second so early in the first half, that’s when San Diego State put some distance.” Lavin added, “Obviously we’re a different team when Rysheed is on the floor.”Sir’Dominic Pointer had 21 points, and Harrison added 18 for St. John’s, with Phil Greene IV adding 9 and Jamal Branch 6 in their final game as seniors. Harrison fouled out with 1 minute 4 seconds to go, ending his St. John’s career.“When I sat down, that’s when it hit me,” Harrison said of his emotions after fouling out. “It’s tough. I don’t know how to put it into words.”The game was a strange one. Before the tipoff, much had been made of San Diego State’s defense, which was ranked second in Division I. But maybe the more telling number was 202: the overall defensive rank St. John’s brought to the game. And playing without Obekpa, a force in the middle who had averaged 3.1 blocks per game and who had been suspended after reportedly failing a drug test, the St. John’s defense made a scoring-challenged team like San Diego State look positively prolific.San Diego State, which lost the Mountain West tournament championship to Wyoming by 45-43 and entered the game ranked 300th in total offense at 61.8 points per game, scored nearly as much in the first half against St. John’s as it had in the entire game against Wyoming. The Aztecs took a 40-33 lead into halftime, led by Dwayne Polee II’s 12 points. Pointer had 13 for St. John’s in the half.St. John’s was never able to cut into that lead against the suddenly hot Aztecs, who opened the second half by hitting eight of their first nine shots.Polee, a former St. John’s player who missed a portion of this season with a heart ailment after collapsing during a game in December, had 15 points, hitting 5 of 7 from 3-point range.Advertisement