By JOE DRAPEOCT. 14, 2015
New Jersey’s effort to offer legalized sports betting was given new life Wednesday when a federal appeals court agreed to reconsider its decision to prohibit gambling on games.The move vacated an Aug. 25 decision by the United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit in Philadelphia that upheld a lower-court ruling that had voided state legislation on sports gambling. The judges held then, in a 2-to-1 decision, that New Jersey’s efforts to allow casinos and racetracks to take bets violated the federal Professional and Amateur Sports Protection Act, or Paspa, which was passed in 1992.“We acknowledge New Jersey’s salutary purpose in attempting to revive its troubled casino and racetrack industries,” the opinion said. “We now turn to the primary question before us: whether the 2014 law violates Paspa. We hold that it does.”But now, in a process known as en banc, at least 12 of the 23 judges in the Third Circuit will rehear oral arguments and review supplemental briefs. Judge Marjorie O. Rendell and Judge Maryanne Trump Barry were in the majority of the August opinion and could not vote on a rehearing. They will participate, however, according to the order issued Wednesday.“This is extraordinarily rare — the judicial equivalent of winning the lottery,” said Daniel Wallach, a sports and gambling lawyer at Becker & Poliakoff in Fort Lauderdale, Fla. “It means that New Jersey’s sports betting hopes are alive and strong, and at least six out of the 10 judges who signed the order thought there were some significant issues to readdress.”AdvertisementIt was the latest development in a more than three-year battle pitting New Jersey against national sports organizations over the state’s efforts to expand gambling to sports events, and it came amid a growing appetite for sports wagering. Lawmakers across the nation have looked to legalized sports betting as an opportunity to shore up sagging state budgets with taxes on a pastime already engaged in illegally by millions of Americans.AdvertisementThe booming industry of daily fantasy sports games had successfully tried to take advantage of that void until a recent scandal involving accusations of “insider trading” and predatory practices by some of its employees caught the attention of Congress and state attorneys.The New York attorney general has opened an inquiry into the prospect that employees of DraftKings and FanDuel, the leading daily fantasy companies, won lucrative payouts based on information not available to the public. In addition, three class-action suits have been filed alleging fraud — the most recent in Louisiana, where the operation of daily fantasy sports is prohibited. Still, the plaintiff, Artem Genchanok, a New Orleans resident, said he had paid entry into DraftKings and FanDuel contests and deposited money on their websites.Spokeswomen for DraftKings and FanDuel did not respond to requests for comment.The New York attorney general’s inquiry is looking at what internal controls, if any, the companies had in place, as well as accusations that employees used proprietary data to win millions of dollars on one another’s sites.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Both companies have denied wrongdoing but acknowledged that they allowed their employees to compete in the games, with many of them winning substantial sums of money. Last week, however, the companies permanently barred their employees from playing daily fantasy sports on any site.Fantasy sports operate under an exemption to the Unlawful Internet Gambling Enforcement Act of 2006, which outlawed online poker and sports betting. About 57 million people in the United States and Canada have participated in fantasy sports this year, according to research conducted for the Fantasy Sports Trade Association. But that figure is dwarfed by the sheer scale of illegal gambling, in which $400 billion is bet globally each year, according to law enforcement and industry estimates.FanDuel and DraftKings have each been valued at more than $1 billion, and they have attracted investment from some of the leagues that have opposed New Jersey’s effort to make sports betting legal. The N.B.A. has a stake in FanDuel, and Major League Baseball and the N.F.L. team owners Robert K. Kraft and Jerry Jones have stakes in DraftKings.Both companies have spent hundreds of millions of dollars on sponsorships with professional teams and on television advertising on most major networks.The efforts have paid off. On Sunday, DraftKings and FanDuel experienced their biggest Sunday of the season, according to SuperLobby, an independent site tracking the industry’s guaranteed prize games. Both operators had a season-best number of entries for N.F.L. guaranteed prize pools, SuperLobby found: DraftKings received 4.14 million entries, and FanDuel received 3.38 million.Advertisement“Fears concerning the potential impact of the mainstream media’s negative D.F.S. coverage last week appear unjustified,” David Copeland, the chief executive of SuperLobby, said, referring to daily fantasy sports.A version of this article appears in print on October 15, 2015, on Page B17 of the New York edition with the headline: Court Will Reconsider Its Ban on Sports Betting in New Jersey.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.