By MARC TRACYMARCH 20, 2015
SEATTLE — In 2001, Gordy Bohannon drove his three older sons from their home in Iowa to the Final Four in Minneapolis. After watching Duke defeat Arizona for the national championship, they drove back, and the sons told themselves that their goal was to one day play in the Final Four.Today, one has achieved that goal, and another is only three games away.The oldest son, Jason, who is now 27, played four years at Wisconsin and was a Big Ten sixth man of the year. But he never got past the round of 16.Zach, 24, was a captain on the Badgers last season when they reached the Final Four, where they lost to Kentucky in the semifinals.And now Matt, 21, is a guard on fifth-seeded Northern Iowa. He had 6 points in 16 minutes during the Panthers’ 71-54 victory against Wyoming on Friday.Advertisement“Now Matt’s three games away from doing it as well,” Zach said in a telephone interview Friday. (A fourth brother, Jordan, 17, has already received several scholarship offers, including one from Northern Iowa, according to Zach.)AdvertisementMatt said he received even more motivation to make it to the Final Four when he attended last year’s event in Arlington, Tex., to watch his brother.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“You see a Final Four and see how its hyped up,” he said before he fist-bumped the Super Bowl-winning quarterback Kurt Warner, a Northern Iowa alumnus. “Until you see it in person, you don’t see the magnitude. Up on the big screen, showing celebrity after celebrity.”He added: “The nice thing is that my brothers are so supportive of me; my whole family is. They just said, ‘Have fun with it; enjoy it.’ ”Yet Matt’s plans may have been altered by a broken left index finger, which he jammed during the game. Matt, who is right-handed, will have surgery on his finger Saturday, Zach said, but he still may be able to play Sunday, when Northern Iowa takes on Louisville.“There’s no doubt in my mind that he’s going to play,” Zach said.A version of this article appears in print on March 21, 2015, on Page D5 of the New York edition with the headline: Northern Iowa Player Aims to Follow Brother’s Path to Final Four.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.