AdvertisementSupported byEast: Oklahoma 69, Albany 60By Patrick MaksCOLUMBUS, Ohio — Midway through the first half of Albany’s game against Oklahoma, Peter Hooley planted his feet, calibrated his hips and launched a 3-point attempt high into the air. The moment evoked images of Hooley’s heroic Hail Mary heave at the buzzer last weekend against Stony Brook that lifted the Great Danes into the N.C.A.A. tournament.And when the ball swished through the net, Hooley, the senior guard and captain, stormed over to halfcourt, pounded his chest and bellowed as if to tell onlookers that 14th-seeded Albany would not lie down for No. 3 Oklahoma, a heavy favorite in this East Region mismatch. The same magic that helped the Great Danes nip Stony Brook last Sunday, however, did not carry over to Nationwide Arena on Friday night, as they lost to Oklahoma, 69-60.“Let’s face it: Oklahoma is the better basketball team,” Albany Coach Will Brown said. “We only needed to be the better basketball team for one night. We weren’t tonight. So the better team won.” Speaking generally, Hall said he was proud of his players but wished that they had “shot the ball probably a little bit better.”“I think the result might have been a little different,” he said. “I thought we got some good looks.” And, he added, “I think they thought I was crazy, because I kept telling them: ‘Let it fly. Let it fly.’ ”That plan buoyed Albany, which made 8 of 25 3-point attempts to keep pace with the bigger and faster Sooners.Buddy Hield, the dominating, do-it-all junior guard who was named the best player in the Big 12 — scored 15 points, grabbed four rebounds and hit three 3-pointers. He made his presence known throughout the night. Oklahoma’s sins — and there were many in a game that became a seemingly endless loop of watching the Sooners pad their lead before letting it slip away — were neutralized by a bruising frontcourt that bludgeoned the smaller Great Danes. That dynamic became apparent early in the contest, and the Sooners entered halftime up by 37-28. Hooley, hanging his head after the game, said, “When you’re playing such a big school, you have to make sure that, as you’re making your little run — when you get within 6 or 7 — just one more shot will help.” He added: “As Coach said, if we got within 3 or 4, maybe the game would have swung different. Maybe they would have got nervous or something. We always just hung around, and we kept preaching to the guys, ‘Hang around and we’ll be O.K.’ ”In the second half, Albany quickly whittled the deficit to 5 points and rallied each time it fell behind by double digits. The Great Danes locked up on defense. Hooley played fearlessly, in his decisions to slash into the lane or to pull up for 3-pointers with the confidence of a player accustomed to making big shots. “We knew they were not just physical,” said the senior forward Sam Rowley, who scored 12 points for Albany. “They were tough, and they were pretty skilled. So we were battling down there for the whole game.” Because of Oklahoma’s mistakes or Albany’s refusal to wilt, this was a close game that probably should not have been, considering the Sooners’ advantage in height and talent on the floor. Brown said: “I felt, coming in, there was a chance we were going to be overmatched physically and athletically, especially in the frontcourt. We hung around.”With about six and a half minutes to play, Hield — who struggled to find his shooting touch in the second half — made a 3-pointer from the left wing, giving the Sooners a 58-47 lead. Oklahoma fended off another rally before Jordan Woodard, a freshman guard who finished with 8 points, knocked down a pair of free throws to push his team’s lead back to 8 points with less than 40 seconds to play. Rowley said: “Every time we seemed to get close, it seemed like they made a shot to hold us back a little bit. I thought we played well today. I thought we gave it our all. But to beat these teams you need to play nearly a perfect game.”The Sooners will play 11th-seeded Dayton, which defeated No. 6 Providence on Friday night. Dayton slipped by Boise State, 56-55, on Wednesday night in a play-in game.Advertisement