By ANDREW KEHMARCH 20, 2015
The juxtaposition of the Nets and the Milwaukee Bucks on Friday provided more evidence of the capriciousness of sports fates, the fallibility of best-laid plans and the peculiarity of the Eastern Conference.On one side were the Bucks, all athleticism and untapped potential, preparing for the future while embracing their growing pains. On the other were the Nets, a once star-laden squad, built a couple of seasons ago to invite championship chatter.Yet as the season enters the final stretch, it has been the Bucks, almost in spite of themselves, who have maintained playoff position, while the Nets, despite their best efforts, have strained to keep their window of opportunity open. The Nets are stuck in 11th place and covet a postseason berth. The Bucks, who entered the night two and a half games ahead of the seventh-place Miami Heat, seem not to care particularly much about theirs.Bucks Coach Jason Kidd, who coached the Nets to the second round of the playoffs last season, repeatedly shifted the focus of the conversations on Friday beyond the current season.Advertisement“Sometimes you use the word playoffs, but I think for us it’s been about getting better each time we take the floor, whether it’s preparing for the playoffs or preparing for next season,” Kidd said Friday morning before the Nets outlasted the Bucks, 129-127, in three overtimes at Barclays Center.AdvertisementThe Bucks have maintained their favorable position in the standings despite a recent dip. They won 10 of 12 games before the league’s Feb. 19 trade deadline. They then made a seemingly counterintuitive trade just before the deadline — shipping away Brandon Knight, their point guard and most consistent offensive player, and acquiring Michael Carter-Williams, a still raw talent — and proceeded to go 4-11.After the trade, the Bucks had the league’s seventh-worst shooting percentage (43.1 percent) and were third worst in points scored per 100 possessions (94.4).Even Kidd’s defense of the trade and his team’s subsequent play was based on an apparent disregard of wins and losses and playoff goals in this current season. He bristled, for instance, when a reporter asked whether the Bucks could recover down the stretch this season after “trending down” of late.“We’re in sixth,” said Kidd, who was encircled by members of the news media. “No one in front of me is saying we would ever be here, so how are we trending down?”The reporter responded that the team had experienced a string of poor results.“That’s the way you look at it,” Kidd said. “We’re getting better every time we play, winning or losing.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Bucks won only 15 games last season. They took Jabari Parker with the No. 2 pick in the 2014 draft, only to lose him for the season after he tore the anterior cruciate ligament of his left knee on Dec. 15. Their relative success has had a lot to do with the continuing maturation of their young talent, but Kidd has earned much praise, too.“His ability to relate to players is his biggest strength,” said Jerryd Bayless, who signed with the team last summer.Even as the Bucks have struggled, Kidd has tried to keep the mood light. Asked what advice he had given his young team about the current stretch before the playoffs, Kidd, who appeared in 158 postseason games in his playing career, said he told them that there was no pressure, that they should feel free to make mistakes and learn from them.AdvertisementAfter the Bucks’ shootaround Friday morning, Kidd and Bayless inched around the 3-point arc, playing a shooting game while exchanging amiable trash talk. Kidd described his project in Milwaukee as a marathon spanning several seasons. He noted that after the season the Bucks would have “draft picks, a lot of money to spend, and every guy pretty much on our roster coming back.”Compare that with the Nets, who are handcuffed by three maximum contracts and do not have control of a first-round draft pick until 2019. The Bucks have been trying to expand their focus beyond this season; the Nets were reluctant to look even to Saturday. Before the game, a reporter began to ask Coach Lionel Hollins about the significance of the team’s coming stretch of games but proceeded to guess Hollins’s response — that he was looking only night to night.“Thank you for answering that for me,” Hollins said with a smile. “Yes, that’s all we can do. All we can worry about is the Bucks tonight.”It was the second three-overtime game between the teams this season — the first time in N.B.A. history two teams had played multiple three-overtime games — and the Nets prevailed with the help of Brook Lopez’s 32 points and 18 rebounds. “They’ve still got a chance to make the playoffs,” Kidd said of the Nets earlier. “They’re in the East.”A version of this article appears in print on March 21, 2015, on Page D7 of the New York edition with the headline: Kidd’s Past Club Beats Present One as He Looks to Future.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.