AdvertisementSupported bySouth: Iowa 83, Davidson 52By Marc TracySEATTLE — Time and again Friday night, one of Davidson’s guards — Jack Gibbs, perhaps, or Brian Sullivan, each 5 feet 11 inches — took the ball down the court and was met by a humid jungle of arms. Iowa’s lengthy, lithe forwards were outstretched, blocking passing lanes, ready to put a hand in the Davidson player’s face.“Hands up! Hands up!” Iowa Coach Fran McCaffery yelled to his players as they got back on defense.It was, for Iowa, a mismatch made in heaven. One of the tallest teams, it was playing an average-size team that got more than 40 percent of its points from 3-pointers, according to the statistics site KenPom.com. With Iowa’s length, it found a natural way to prevent Davidson from doing what Davidson wanted to do.That was a big reason that the game, which ended in an 83-52 Iowa victory, was never particularly close. The other main reason was that Iowa played beautiful offense: It moved the ball, did not waste time, cut expertly and, when all else failed, had players creating scoring chances for themselves. As a team, the Hawkeyes shot 50.7 percent from the field.Aaron White, a senior forward from the appropriately named Strongsville, Ohio, had a career night. He scored 26 points and was 11 of 14 from the field — in one stretch, he made eight shots in a row — with six rebounds. He also made a gorgeous steal on a Davidson perimeter pass and took it all the way back.“We had to impose our physicality, our size,” White said, adding, “We really had to use our length to run them off the line.”Davidson’s 3-point game was clearly disrupted. This season, it tied for second in Division I with 10.9 3-pointers per game on 27 attempts. On Friday, it tried 28 but made just six — 21.4 percent for a team that until that point had scored on 4 in 10 of the 3-pointers it tried.“I thought we did a real good job contesting the 3-point line,” McCaffery said, adding that it was harder than it looked because most of Davidson’s players could also drive to the basket.Iowa forward Jarrod Uthoff grabbed nine rebounds. Center Gabriel Olaseni — part of a minority of Iowa players not from the Hawkeye State — contributed productive minutes off the bench, finishing with 6 points, 6 rebounds and 3 blocks.The Wildcats’ scoring leaders were forward Peyton Aldridge and Gibbs, both with 14 points. Guard Jordan Barham led the team with seven rebounds, and guard Tyler Kalinoski made a couple of spectacular plays, including a driving layup that looped high, kissed the glass and fell in.It was the kind of play that fans were used to seeing from Davidson’s most famous alumnus, Stephen Curry. Now a candidate for the N.B.A.’s Most Valuable Player Award with the Golden State Warriors, Curry led the Wildcats to the round of 8 seven years ago. At 6 feet 3 inches, Curry uses his speed and quick release to help neutralize perimeter defenses in the N.B.A. The Wildcats could have used some of that.Advertisement