AdvertisementSupported byBy Tom SpoustaJACKSONVILLE, Fla. — A celebrity deserves better. Fame, even for 15 minutes, should carry some cachet. Maybe an upgraded suite with plush carpeting, designer seat coverings, a comfy corner to rest weary wheels? How about a place behind a fancy desk, if just for one night? The chair that will be forever linked to Georgia State Coach Ron Hunter and the 14th-seeded Panthers’ stunning upset of third-seeded Baylor on Thursday, the chair that was honored by the Panthers’ band members with the chant, “Chair! Chair! Chair!” as it was wheeled out of Jacksonville Veterans Memorial Arena after the victory — was literally locked away. “It spent the night under the bus,” the Georgia State athletic trainer Dinika Johnson said Friday.Specifically, it was stowed in the luggage compartment of Georgia State’s team bus, where amid the darkness it shared space with equipment bags and whatever else spends nights there. By the time the door was opened Friday morning, the chair had its own Twitter feed. Internet memes included one with Hunter tumbling from the chair in front of the White House, which had players howling with laughter. Another had Hunter and the chair starring in their own Life Alert commercial. “The memes are crazy,” guard Kevin Ware said. “I’ve probably seen 100 of them. They got real creative with it.” For this bracket, the more unusual that your picks are, the more points you’ll receive — so long as those picks are correct.Georgia State (25-9) will presumably lavish the chair with the luxury it deserves before Saturday night’s game against No. 6-seeded Xavier (22-13). The chair — actually a four-wheeled stool — has become a sixth man of sorts, a coaching tool for Hunter after he tore his Achilles’ tendon Sunday while celebrating the Panthers’ N.C.A.A.-tournament-clinching victory in the Sun Belt championship game. Hunter, a superstitious type, made it a point to practice in the chair at the Panthers’ workouts Wednesday and Friday and guaranteed that the chair would be safe and ready to roll. No one else is allowed to sit in it, either. “That chair has more protection than the president of the United States right now,” Hunter said. “I want that chair back. I don’t know where they got it from, but that chair, it will stay with me for the rest of my life. Whenever we leave, I’m taking that chair with me. Win, lose or draw, that chair is going to be in my house with me the rest of my life.” The chair’s odyssey began with Johnson. Oddly enough, it was an afterthought. Johnson was leaving the Georgia State training room to catch the team bus when she realized she had to try something. “I just thought, let me grab this stool, maybe it will be helpful,” said Johnson, who had it loaded into the storage compartment for the 345-mile ride from Atlanta to Jacksonville. Georgia State Athletic Director Charlie Cobb said Hunter did not need official permission from the N.C.A.A. to coach from a stool, but precautions were taken. “The biggest question we had was, was it safe for everybody,” Cobb said. “You hate to have a kid get hurt or have it get in the way of the game.”Hunter, 50, said he was out of sorts early in the game and blamed himself for his team’s slow start as Baylor bolted to a 14-point lead in the first six minutes. “I couldn’t bark out the signals like I wanted,” he said. “They’re used to hearing certain calls and signals that I do, and I couldn’t get comfortable enough or close enough to them. We’re going to change up some things a little bit with our defensive calls on Saturday. What I didn’t want was this to be difficult for the players.” Hunter tried a four-wheel scooter and the chair, and decided the chair was easier to maneuver along the bench. “He felt comfortable with it,” Johnson said. “His posture was good. It helped him sit up higher.” She added with a roll of her eyes, “Then he forgot he had the cast on.” Johnson became part of the video that went viral; she is seen quickly rushing to Hunter’s aid as he tumbles sideways after his son, R. J., drilled the 30-foot shot with 2.6 seconds left to beat Baylor, 57-56. She always sits at the end of the bench, but Johnson had moved closer to Hunter for this game to help make sure the animated coach would not roll backward off the court. “I just thought, Oh my gosh, not again — no more injuries,” she said. Hunter had hip surgery a couple of years ago and still receives treatment. He cracked his cast in the fall, and a doctor was expected to fit him with a new one Friday. Which gives his players, a loose, fast-talking group that is quick with a quip and a full-court press, more fodder to razz their hobbled coach.“Especially if he’s falling out of his chair every time something happens,” R. J. said. “He’s only adding to it. We have way more heat to bring now, trust me.” Hunter will roll with it. Along with the most famous chair in the N.C.A.A. tournament, if not the sports world.“The great part about all this, it takes the pressure off my guys,” Hunter said. “They’re joking at me and laughing at me and wheeling me around. They’re enjoying all of this.”Advertisement