
TV Sports By                     
 RICHARD SANDOMIR
 
MARCH 20, 2015
Casting a three-announcer booth is rarely easy. You need a play-by-play announcer who can get the best out of two analysts, not the usual one. You need two analysts with different perspectives who can provide complementary commentary without each repeating what the other has just said. And you need those analysts to accommodate each other — and not fight for airtime between plays.Fox’s three-man Major League Baseball booth did not work well last season, partly because Tom Verducci and Harold Reynolds lacked enough game experience to be effective or interesting.The newest high-profile, three-man grouping is at CBS and Turner Sports, where Bill Raftery and Grant Hill are calling the N.C.A.A. men’s basketball tournament with Jim Nantz.The two networks needed replacements for Steve Kerr, who left to coach the Golden State Warriors, and Greg Anthony, who was arrested in January on a charge of soliciting a prostitute.AdvertisementMatching Raftery, an old hand, and Hill, who has little television background, carries the risk of imbalance and awkwardness. Raftery is in his 33rd season of college basketball commentary for CBS and coached Seton Hall before that. Hill played in the N.B.A. for 18 seasons and has less than two years of experience as a league analyst for TNT and NBA TV.AdvertisementWhat could he add to the conversation that Raftery does not know? And why was he added as a No. 1 analyst rather than having to work his way up?Throughout their first game of the tournament, Michigan State’s victory over Georgia, on TruTV, Raftery was the same amusing and insightful guy he had been beside Verne Lundquist for 15 years. Hill was underwhelming and not acutely analytical. Early on, he noted that Michigan State Coach Tom Izzo is known for his in-game adjustments, but he never returned to say what Izzo had done.When plays ended, Raftery routinely gave the first analysis, which was usually insightful or a little wacky, given his oddball glossary. While Raftery gave his prescriptions for X’s and O’s, Hill often seemed to sit back, waiting too patiently for the proper moment to speak. He was not seizing his place in the triumvirate, and absent that, Raftery had no choice besides filling the space as if he were the sole analyst. Hill no doubt has opinions born of his experience, and some of them emerged, but he was not seizing the moment to offer them.Sometimes, a comment by Raftery offered an invitation to Hill to join in, but too often he did not. Was he being polite? Did he not want to sound like the new guy trying to challenge the old dude? Nantz and Raftery occasionally nudged Hill into the conversation by asking him questions or giving him verbal cues to speak up. That ploy worked, even if it sounded as though they were treating Hill as a guest.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Hill was at his best after commercial breaks, when he had a few minutes to plan what he would say about a strategy or about whether Michigan State was seeded too low at No. 7 in its region.But in the heat of a game, a highly experienced analyst like Raftery can rattle off a quick comment with the sort of ease that comes only with experience.When the Spartans’ Bryn Forbes sank a 3-pointer on a pass from Travis Trice, Raftery went into a rapid riff: “How about Trice keeping the ball alive? So many guys would make a mistake in the lane, leave their feet, don’t connect. But here, good poise and delivery. Get those puppies organized! This kid’s been stroking it in a major league fashion.”The second game, Virginia’s win over Belmont, was different for Hill. He sounded comfortable, as if his jitters were gone. He more often offered the first post-play analysis. You heard his relief. His sense of humor emerged. When a defense changed, he quickly noted the shift. He offered strategic suggestions with more freedom, as if he was no longer waiting for an opening between Nantz and Raftery.AdvertisementAnd he correctly cited the best defensive matchup for Virginia to choke off the shooting of Belmont’s Craig Bradshaw, whose late 3-pointer off the glass was the epitome of a Rafterian “kiss.”He did ignore a pertinent question. With Virginia leading by 62-60, Nantz asked when the Cavaliers’ nerves would kick in, knowing the game might go to the wire. It was the sort of question Hill, a former Duke star, should have aced. Didn’t his Blue Devils ever feel similar pressure? Instead, he said: “All the pressure is on Virginia. They’re a little uptight. Belmont is free and loose.” Wrong answer.Hill will continue to improve, and at 42 he is more the future of CBS and Turner’s tournament broadcasts than Raftery is at 73. Still, what if CBS and Turner had delayed the pairing of Raftery and Hill and done something different? What if they had given Raftery and Lundquist, the Sunshine Boys, a chance to do the Final Four together just this year, and let the Nantz-Raftery-Hill threesome take over in 2016?In giving Raftery his first chance at calling the Final Four on television, wouldn’t it have been dandy to let him do it beside a partner with whom he has wonderful chemistry?Email: sandor@nytimes.comA version of this article appears in print on March 21, 2015, on Page D3 of the New York edition with the headline: Raftery-Hill Analyst Team Has a Bland Debut but a Better Sequel.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »