AdvertisementSupported byBy Ray GlierLOUISVILLE, Ky. — When he became ill, Mick Cronin, the head coach at Cincinnati, did not hand the reins of the basketball program to just any coach. He handed them to his twin, to his equivalent, to a man who shares Cronin’s doctrine of maniacal basketball. Cut them open, and Cronin and the interim coach Larry Davis are the same man.Davis, like Cronin, begged his way into college coaching more than 30 years ago. Both stand about 5 feet 8 inches and are baldheaded dynamos on the sideline, steering and cajoling the Bearcats in a red-faced frenzy. Cronin said he and Davis believed about 90 percent of the same things in basketball, starting with intensive strategizing and intense defense.When Cronin learned in December that he had vertebral arterial dissection — meaning that the lining of an artery in the back of his head was damaged — doctors told him he could not coach on the bench during games the rest of the season. Davis, the associate head coach, took over, and he will be in the lead chair on the Cincinnati bench when the eighth-seeded Bearcats (23-10) play Kentucky, the undefeated No. 1 seed, here on Saturday in the N.C.A.A. tournament’s round of 32.The handoff of a team because of a health crisis does not always go smoothly. The last time Duke did not appear in the N.C.A.A. tournament (1995), Coach Mike Krzyzewski was sidelined as a result of a combination of exhaustion and off-season back surgery, and his program flopped (13-18).Cincinnati did not flop, Davis said, because on Dec. 20, when Cronin stepped down, he declared to his players that they would still be ambitious hellcats of defense and rebounding.“I’ve helped Mick too hard, and he’s built it for too long,” Davis said he had told his team. “This is not going to crumble and fall apart. We are going to keep doing things the way we do them, and if you don’t like it, there’s the door. “You can’t lose your culture. If you lose your culture once you establish something — and you see it all the time — you see programs all of a sudden that were winning — they fall apart.” Davis, 58, got into coaching in 1978 by barging into the office of Jim Halihan, the coach at East Tennessee State, and asking for a job. For this bracket, the more unusual that your picks are, the more points you’ll receive — so long as those picks are correct.“I don’t have a job for you,” Davis said Halihan told him. Davis went back to Halihan the next day and got the same answer. He went back the day after that and the day after that, and Halihan eventually relented and gave Davis a salary of $1 for the season as a graduate assistant.Cronin got into coaching in 1996 by badgering Bob Huggins, who was then Cincinnati’s coach, until Huggins gave him a job as video coordinator. Cronin, who became Cincinnati’s coach in 2007, has kept a respectful distance the last three months, allowing Davis to build his identity as coach — which, to the players, meant one thing. “He definitely stepped up that yelling habit,” the sophomore guard Kevin Johnson said of Davis.Cronin watched Thursday night’s overtime victory over Purdue from a downtown Louisville hotel. He will not be in the arena Saturday for the Kentucky game, but he promised to be close. “I wanted him to know he’s got to coach the team, and I am going to support him,” Cronin said of Davis. “He and I are going to talk, but when he goes out there, he is going to coach them up. We agree on 90 percent of everything. We know what works. With Larry, I have to get him comfortable; he’s my coach. I tell him just go coach the game. I don’t want him thinking about all the stuff I have said.”The Cincinnati players have embraced Davis, a native of Mount Sterling, Ky., who attended Asbury University in Wilmore, 17 miles south of the University of Kentucky campus in Lexington. They encircled him in the locker room after the win over Purdue and doused him with cups of water in celebration.The players are still bound to Cronin, yet they chide him as a figurehead.“He’s always around,” Johnson said, adding with a smile: “He’s like our Pat Riley of the program. He’s always making sure we’re doing the right thing — that good G.M. that all teams need.” Cronin said he could be cleared by doctors by the end of next week after another battery of tests. He said he expected to be the coach next season.Davis could be his assistant, unless, of course, the Bearcats manage to upend the colossus that is Kentucky.If that happens, Cronin will have to see whether he has another twin out there somewhere, because Davis could have a new job all his own.Advertisement