AdvertisementSupported byBy Billy WitzLAKELAND, Fla. — As Alex Rodriguez rounded first base on Friday, his eyes fixed on right field, he turned back toward the bag, uncertain where to go.Rodriguez was hesitant because he saw the ball bounce back onto the field, not realizing that it had ticked off the top of the wall, hit a light standard and ricocheted back. But it would be easy to guess that Rodriguez was simply stunned by the result — a home run.The hit ended a 1-for-14 skid for Rodriguez, and it came off an upper-90s fastball from Tigers reliever Bruce Rondon, the type of high-velocity pitch that Rodriguez had been struggling to connect with even before his yearlong suspension from baseball.“It’s a real good sign,” Manager Joe Girardi said after the Yankees’ 11-2 exhibition win over Detroit.Rodriguez, his recent slump notwithstanding, has showed indications through the first month of spring training that he could provide a productive bat for the Yankees this year. Playing primarily as a designated hitter, he is batting .269 with two home runs and a double. He was also pleased to have played a day game on the road Friday, which included a 45-minute bus ride, after getting three at-bats the previous night at home. Two games in less than 24 hours was a good challenge, he said, and his body held up fine.As for gaining encouragement from the home run, he said: “I laugh when people say you can’t hit the ball in the mid-90s. I couldn’t hit it in my prime when I was 28, certainly not consistently.”Rodriguez declined to comment on the decision of his cousin, Yuri Sucart, to drop his not-guilty plea in the Biogenesis drug scandal, the case that led to Rodriguez’s banishment from baseball last year.According to court documents, Sucart is now scheduled to plead guilty to drug-distribution charges next week. If the case had gone to trial, Rodriguez would presumably have had to testify. Now he will not.Back on the field, shortstop Brendan Ryan, who injured his back just before spring training, played in his first exhibition game. Adam Warren, a valuable cog in the Yankees’ bullpen, made his case for a spot in the rotation by allowing four hits scattered over five innings. He allowed one run.Advertisement