AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressKevin Durant, the N.B.A.’s reigning most valuable player, is unlikely to return this season for the Oklahoma City Thunder.General Manager Sam Presti said Friday that Durant still had pain in his right foot, well after he was expected to be ready to return. When asked if the best thing would be best to shut down Durant for the season, Presti said, “Essentially, that’s the direction that we’re taking right now, in terms of removing him from all basketball-related activities.”Oklahoma City now faces the prospect of trying to make the playoffs without Durant, a four-time scoring champion. The Thunder led the New Orleans Pelicans by a game for the No. 8 spot in the Western Conference heading into Friday night’s game, which Oklahoma City won, 123-115, against the visiting Atlanta Hawks. Russell Westbrook had yet another triple-double for the Thunder and scored 17 of his 36 points in the fourth quarter. It was Westbrook’s seventh triple-double since the All-Star break, his ninth of the season and the 17th of his career. He had 10 rebounds and 14 assists, and he made all 17 of his free throws.Dion Waiters matched a season high with 26 points for the Thunder. Pero Antic scored a career-high 22 points for the Eastern Conference-leading Hawks, and Dennis Schroder added 21.Durant is averaging 25.4 points, 6.6 rebounds and 4.1 assists a game, but he has played in just 27 of the Thunder’s 68 games this season. He last played Feb. 19 against Memphis and had surgery three days later to replace a screw that was causing discomfort in his right foot, which he had broken during the preseason. At the time, Coach Scott Brooks said that Durant could return to the lineup in one to two weeks.The Thunder had hoped to get a boost from Durant’s return, but Presti said Durant’s long-term health was the primary concern. Presti said that he was unsure of the source of the current pain and that Durant would see specialists in the coming days.“He still has some soreness in his foot, and the protocol that’s in place calls for him to be able to compete on the floor without that at this stage,” Presti said.76ERS 97, KNICKS 81  Nerlens Noel scored a career-high 23 points and grabbed 14 rebounds to lead host Philadelphia over the Knicks in a matchup of the two worst teams in the Eastern Conference.Alexey Shved made seven 3-pointers and had a career-best 25 points for the Knicks. The Knicks dropped to 14-55, the worst record in the N.B.A. and three games behind the 76ers (17-52). MAGIC 111, BLAZERS 104 Elfrid Payton had 22 points, 10 rebounds and 10 assists, and Orlando ended a six-game losing streak with a victory over visiting Portland.The triple-double was the second straight for Payton. He became the first Magic player to post consecutive triple-doubles and the first N.B.A. rookie to do it since Antoine Walker, with the Boston Celtics in 1997.LaMarcus Aldridge led Portland with 31 points and 10 rebounds.CAVALIERS 95, PACERS 92 LeBron James scored 29 points — 13 in the fourth quarter — and Cleveland edged Indiana for the Cavaliers’ 15th straight win at home. James was at his best down the stretch. He scored 11 straight points in the fourth to give Cleveland a 93-92 lead. HEAT 108, NUGGETS 91  Dwyane Wade scored 22 points, Goran Dragic added 18, and host Miami clamped down in the fourth quarter to beat Denver.Kenneth Faried scored 20 for the Nuggets.Advertisement