AdvertisementSupported byBy Karen CrouseORLANDO, Fla. — Morgan Hoffmann, pro golfer and amateur pilot, was performing touch-and-go maneuvers on a Stuart, Fla., runway when a vulture flew into his line of sight. Worried that the bird was on a collision course with the propeller, Hoffmann swiftly pulled up his aircraft, a six-seat Piper Lance turboprop.That gave Hoffmann, a self-described adrenaline junkie, heart palpitations. But he was not the least discomfited to see two major winners rise like vultures to challenge his equanimity at the Arnold Palmer Invitational.Hoffmann, winless in 67 PGA Tour starts, followed his opening six-under-par 66 at Bay Hill with a 65 on Friday to take a three-stroke lead over the defending champion, Matt Every, who posted a 66. Henrik Stenson and Harris English, who also carded 66s, are tied with Every. Lurking five strokes behind Hoffmann, tied for sixth at eight under, is the world No. 1, Rory McIlroy, whose 66 was his first sub-70 score in eight rounds on the PGA Tour this year. Louis Oosthuizen, the 2010 British Open champion, sits at seven under after a 68. “It’s a course I’m comfortable on, which really helps,” said Hoffmann, who played Bay Hill regularly during his junior golf days. “And playing well on top of that is really great.”It has been the best of weeks and the worst of weeks for Hoffmann, who found out shortly before teeing off in the first round that his 97-year-old grandmother, Dorothy Lionetti, died Thursday morning in her sleep. He will skip an informal memorial for her Saturday in Fort Lauderdale, Fla., but will fly to New Jersey, where he grew up, for a formal service next weekend.His grandmother’s death gave Hoffmann, 25, a renewed appreciation for how quickly time flies. It seemed like only yesterday, he said, that she was making homemade pasta and he was dreaming of a professional golf career.Hoffmann, who is in his third year on the tour, thought by now that he would have joined peers like Brooks Koepka and Rickie Fowler, a teammate of Hoffmann’s at Oklahoma State, as winners. “I’m behind my schedule,” he said. “I would have liked to have won a few times by now.”He added, “I’m so lucky to be out here and grateful, but I’ve seen myself a little higher up than what I’ve performed.”It would be fitting if Hoffmann’s long-awaited breakthrough victory came at Palmer’s tournament. In 2009, Hoffmann said, he played in the Palmer Cup, an amateur event, and he had a conversation with the tournament’s eponym.“We talked for about an hour about flying,” Hoffmann said, “and he’s inspired me to get my pilot’s license and fly myself to tournaments. It’s pretty cool, and he’s been a big inspiration in my life. The biggest thing he said is, ‘Respect everybody no matter how hold or young,’ and he said, ‘Make sure your signature is legible.’ ”Hoffmann was easy to pick out of a crowd Friday, and not just because his autograph is readable — he was wearing lemon yellow pants. In a coincidence, so was Danny Lee, one of his competitors.Lee’s goal was to match Hoffmann’s score, not just his slacks. He exceeded it with a 64, the low round of the week, to move to eight under. “Must be the yellow pants,” Lee joked.He added, “Today I had the mind-set of almost playing match play with Morgan, which helped me a lot.”Lee got off to a fast start, with birdies on the first two holes. Then Hoffmann heated up. Starting at the third hole, he birdied six of seven. Through 36, he has 13 birdies, two bogeys and an eagle, which raises a question: How did he pull his game out of a stall?Hoffmann broke into the top 30 in the FedEx Cup standings last season, but his best finish this season is a tie for 17th at the World Golf Championship event outside Miami. He missed the cut last week at the Valspar Championship and spent the weekend hitting balls from dawn to dusk.“When I was 10 years old, I used to hit balls all day, and that’s probably what helped me get here,” Hoffmann said. “I’m going to start going back to that, I think, a little bit.”Hoffmann’s renewed commitment to golf prompted him to reluctantly pass up an opportunity to skate with the Hall of Famer Wayne Gretzky at a charity tournament last weekend in Las Vegas. “I decided to not get hurt and be smart,” said Hoffmann, who played hockey and golf until his father encouraged him in high school to concentrate on one.Hoffmann, who was a defenseman, said he picked the more cerebral sport because it posed the greater challenge. “Golf, it’s hard to be calm out there, but it really helps me focus, and it’s a challenge for me,” he said.Hoffmann could have fooled Lee, who said of being paired with him, “It’s almost like you’re playing with a monk.”Advertisement