By PETER KERASOTISMARCH 20, 2015
PORT ST. LUCIE, Fla. —  Although their baseball odometer shows a lot of mileage, Bartolo Colon, Michael Cuddyer and Curtis Granderson showed for at least one day that there was still a lot of life left in their game.Colon, who had struggled in previous outings this spring, had his best March showing. Colon, at 41 the oldest player on the Mets’ roster, was solid over four and two-thirds innings Friday against the St. Louis Cardinals in a 5-4 Mets victory at Tradition Field. The Cardinals had six hits against the right-handed Colon, but only one was damaging: Scott Moore’s two-run homer. Along the way, Colon struck out five and walked one.Offensively, the Mets were buoyed by Cuddyer and Granderson. After Colon surrendered Moore’s homer in the third, Cuddyer, who turns 36 next week, evened the score with a two-run homer in the top of the fourth. It was his fourth home run of the spring.“I feel good at the plate,” he said. “Obviously, it’s spring training, but anytime you step out on the field you want to do well, you want to compete.”AdvertisementManager Terry Collins said that when the Mets pursued Cuddyer — a free agent in the off-season — they did so because of his “power potential.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“He brings a huge presence in our lineup,” Collins said. “He can hit.”As for Granderson, 34, he continued his sizzling spring, going 3 for 3, with two doubles and a single, raising his batting average to .458. More impressive, Granderson continued to hit to the opposite field, which will make him harder to defend if he maintains that ability.Advertisement“I’m just trying to be in a position to drive the baseball,” he said. “That’s been the main focus this spring. Hit the ball where it’s pitched.”Meanwhile, the Mets sent down one of their promising pitching prospects, Noah Syndegaard. With Steve Matz pitching Saturday against the Detroit Tigers in Lakeland, it might signal that Matz has moved a rung ahead of Syndegaard on the organizational ladder. The Mets also optioned pitcher Cory Mazzoni. Catcher Kevin Plawecki and the right-handed pitcher Jon Velasquez were reassigned.General Manager Sandy Alderson also said that a magnetic resonance imaging test done on second baseman Daniel Murphy revealed a pulled hamstring and that he would be out at least a week.A version of this article appears in print on March 21, 2015, on Page D6 of the New York edition with the headline: Three Veterans Pace Mets.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.