AdvertisementSupported byEast: Louisville 57, U.C. Irvine 55By Marc TracySEATTLE — Through almost all of Louisville’s 57-55 win Friday, U.C. Irvine had the tallest player on the floor. In the first half, the Anteaters put in either the 7-foot-6 center Mamadou Ndiaye, a sophomore from Senegal, or the 7-2 center Ioannis Dimakopoulos, a sophomore from Greece.In the second half, U.C. Irvine kept Ndiaye in most of the time; his 30 minutes easily exceeded his season average of 19.1 over 14 games (he missed 19 games with a foot injury).Ndiaye weighs 300 pounds. His wingspan was measured in 2012 as 8-1. He finished with 12 points and 5 rebounds. He also had four personal fouls, and although he was officially credited with only one turnover, he caused several more changes of possession. But the Anteaters clearly planned to live or die by the play of their big men.The objective of nearly every offensive possession for U.C. Irvine was to get the ball inside to the center in the low post and see what he could do with it. Each time was its own roll of the dice. Would Ndiaye or Dimakopoulos be out of position, leading to an overthrown pass or an easy Louisville steal? Would he catch the ball, only to have it stripped? Would Louisville go for the strip, only to commit a foul? Or would the center — Ndiaye in particular — shake in the right direction and open the basket up to an easy dunk? (When Ndiaye dunks, he does not jump so much as stand on his tiptoes.)The game was close the whole way, the lead never larger than 5 points. Louisville had the edge by a basket through most of the second half before U.C. Irvine took the lead with less than a minute left. Louisville was then able to score, force the Anteaters to take a long 3-point attempt and draw a foul on the rebound, and the freshman guard Quentin Snider hit both free throws to provide the final margin of victory.Louisville runs a guard-centric offense, but it lost its best guard last month when the team dismissed the senior Chris Jones after he was charged with rape. (Jones has pleaded not guilty.) Snider and the sophomore Terry Rozier have stepped into the role, and they performed well on Friday. Sometimes that meant driving and kicking for corner 3s. Often, it meant exploiting the soft spot in the lane above where Ndiaye or Dimakopoulos, anchored near the rim, could stop them, trying runners — of the sort for which the San Antonio Spurs’ Tony Parker is famous — for 2 points at a time.Rozier finished with 12 points and 5 assists; Snider had 16 points; and the senior forward Wayne Blackshear led the Cardinals with 19 points.“Chris is our best shooter, our best defensive player, our toughest guy in the backcourt,” Louisville Coach Rick Pitino said he had told his team after Jones was dismissed.“Quentin Snider’s done an outstanding job,” he said, adding: “We’re not quite as good defensively at that position, but we do a lot of things very well. I think that everybody said, Yeah, you’re right, we all have to pick it up now and play — I used the statistic of everybody’s got to be 20 percent better than they have been. I think they have.” Behind by 2 points with less than six seconds left, the Anteaters had one last chance, but guard Alex Young turned the ball over. The crowd felt there had been a foul and booed the noncall. By that point, Ndiaye was off the floor.Advertisement