By PAT BORZIMARCH 20, 2015
OMAHA —  It took several anxious moments in the second half, and one jarred tooth, but basketball fans in Kansas will get exactly what they wanted: a cross-state matchup of Kansas and Wichita State in the N.C.A.A. tournament’s round of 32 on Sunday.The Shockers withstood a barrage of 3-pointers from Indiana, the top 3-point-shooting team in the Big Ten, to nudge ahead in the second half and hold on, 81-76. That earned Wichita State, the No. 7 seed in the Midwest Region, a long-awaited date with second-seeded Kansas. The teams last played in 1993. The Jayhawks ousted New Mexico State, 75-56, in Friday’s first-round game at CenturyLink Center.“Kentucky last year, Indiana this year, Kansas next,” Wichita State Coach Gregg Marshall said, listing the Shockers’ recent N.C.A.A. tournament opponents. “Those are blue-blood programs, programs with some of the winningest college basketball in the country.“We’re not the blue blood, so to speak, that those teams are, but we generally play well against them. And if we play really well, we’ll have a chance to win.”AdvertisementFred VanVleet’s 27 points, mostly on penetration and foul shots, helped the Shockers (29-4) counteract 11-for-22 3-point shooting by Indiana. Wichita State made only 2 of 13 3-point attempts, but Tekele Cotton hit a crucial one with 5 minutes 32 seconds to play to give Wichita State a 6-point lead.AdvertisementVanVleet’s aggressiveness was a key to Wichita State’s 44-24 advantage on points in the lane. The Shockers also sank 29 of 34 from the foul line after spending most of the second half in the bonus, with VanVleet and Ron Baker each going 9 for 10. Forward Darius Carter added 7 of his 9 points after taking an elbow in the mouth early in the second half and nearly losing a front tooth.“It got pushed back pretty far, and the guys that were out there couldn’t see it while I was in pain,” Carter said. “I’m thankful I got my tooth. That would be a bad look to not have a tooth.”Indiana, unable to stop VanVleet from driving the lane, trailed by 72-65 with 4:20 to play. Three-pointers by Collin Hartman and Yogi Ferrell cut the lead to 1 point, but Baker hit seven of eight foul shots in the final 1:58 to hold off the Hoosiers.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Our offense was hitting a couple of shots, but at the end of the day, we should have been playing better defense,” said Ferrell, who had 24 points. “They scored so many points inside. If we could have got more stops in a row, which is what we wanted to do, and knocked down a couple of shots, we could have been right there.”Troy Williams added 11 points and 12 rebounds for Indiana (20-14). Baker shot only 3 for 13 from the field and missed all five of his 3-point attempts, scoring 9 of his 15 points from the foul line.“Darius was a different player after his tooth deal, and Ron closed it out for us,” VanVleet said.After a rugged, up-and-down first half, Indiana held a 39-36 lead on the strength of six 3-pointers in 13 attempts. Indiana stayed in front until Wichita State ran off 8 consecutive points early in the second half to slip ahead by 50-47.Now, Kansas. Ever since Selection Sunday, Cotton said, a possible matchup with the Jayhawks had been on the Shockers’ minds.Wichita State’s run to the Final Four two years ago, and its memorable last-minute loss to Kentucky in last year’s tournament, effectively scared off nonconference opponents with any pedigree.Advertisement“Obviously when people saw the bracket, they were already talking about this day,” said Baker, one of two Kansas natives on the Shockers’ roster. “It’s a big thing for the state of Kansas. A lot of excitement. A lot of houses are going to be divided.”A version of this article appears in print on March 21, 2015, on Page D2 of the New York edition with the headline: Wichita St. Withstands 3-Point Fest by Indiana.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.