By VIV BERNSTEINMARCH 20, 2015
CHARLOTTE, N.C. —  Craig Bradshaw lofted a 3-point shot that banked off the glass and into the net with 4 minutes 37 seconds left as No. 15-seeded Belmont closed the Bruins to 2 points behind No. 2 Virginia in their first-round East Region game. Belmont was on a run, and Virginia was in trouble.Suddenly, improbably, the biggest upset of the N.C.A.A. tournament looked as if it might just happen at Time Warner Cable Arena on Friday afternoon.“I was thinking we were going to win,” the Belmont sophomore Taylor Barnette said.But Virginia (30-3) kept its poise and kept the lead, edging away in the final minutes for a 79-67 victory and a game in the round of 32 on Sunday against Michigan State.“They made some tough shots,” Virginia Coach Tony Bennett said. “I don’t know if nervous is the right word. I knew we were going to have to make some plays, some stops and free throws.”AdvertisementAlthough Bradshaw finished with a game-best 25 points and went 5 of 9 from 3-point range, he might not have made the most significant 3-point shot of the game.AdvertisementThat one went to Justin Anderson, who hit a 3-pointer from the baseline 6:32 into the first half for Virginia on the way to 15 points in the game, third on the Cavaliers behind Malcolm Brogdon’s 22 and Anthony Gill’s 16.Why was that 3 so important? Anderson’s shot could mean everything for Virginia in its hopes to make a mark in this year’s tournament.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Anderson had missed eight games after sustaining a broken finger against Louisville on Feb. 7, followed by an appendectomy. He was averaging 13.4 points per game and shooting 48.4 percent from 3-point range as a starter before the injury.Anderson came back during the Atlantic Coast Conference tournament, but he was scoreless in two games off the bench. The shot that he had worked so hard to improve in the off-season was gone, perhaps affected by a brace and tape on his left hand.The 3-pointer he hit against Belmont (22-11) was his first since early February, before the injury.“It felt good,” Anderson said. “It just felt good to be out there and get a win in this tournament. Being able to be a contributor defensively and offensively, it felt good to get back in that rhythm.“I honestly never felt rusty.”That will be crucial for Virginia when it plays No. 7-seeded Michigan State. The Spartans eliminated Virginia in the round of 16 last year. With Anderson back, the Cavaliers are as healthy as they have been for some time.“It’s going to be a tough fight,” Anderson said. “We remember the bitter taste that we had last year, but at the same time, they know that we realized that and they’re going to try to come out and come at us again. It’s going to be a tough, physical game.”A version of this article appears in print on March 21, 2015, on Page D3 of the New York edition.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.