AdvertisementSupported byOn BaseballBy Tyler KepnerPORT ST. LUCIE, Fla. — When Zack Wheeler learned on Monday that his job had changed from pitcher to patient, he hung up the phone and returned to the Mets’ clubhouse in a daze.“Everybody was sort of just staring at me when I’m rounding this corner,” Wheeler said Friday, by his locker. “I was like, ‘Torn U.C.L.’ And then they all just came up to me, and I cried a little bit. They’re all really supportive and better than I thought they were going to be. Bunch of good guys in here.”This was the start of Wheeler’s lonely journey, in training rooms and doctors’ offices and rehab centers, a 14-month slog back to health. Wheeler, a dynamic Mets right-hander, confirmed that he needs Tommy John surgery on his elbow. He will have the operation Tuesday or Wednesday in New York, and said it was realistic to target June 2016 for his return.Wheeler, 24, said his elbow pain last season came from a torn tendon and a resulting calcium deposit, an injury doctors told him had occurred long before. He went through platelet-rich plasma therapy to fix that problem, and came here determined to pitch the same way, without changing his mechanics.But sometime this spring, Wheeler said, his ulnar collateral ligament tore. He could not pinpoint when, but he knew something was wrong when his routine elbow pain did not subside with rest. The time bomb exploded, and now Dr. David Altchek will put Wheeler’s pitching arm back together.“They’re going to fix the ligament, fix the tendon, clean up that calcium deposit, all the scarring and dead stuff inside,” Wheeler said. “I’ll basically have a new elbow once I come out.”Wheeler now follows the Mets’ well-worn recovery plan for Tommy John patients, a list that includes Matt Harvey, Jacob deGrom, Jenrry Mejia, Steven Matz, Bobby Parnell and others. And while Wheeler could surely have helped the Mets’ effort to end a six-year string of losing seasons, it was no guarantee that he would.Wheeler made 32 starts last season, and in the last 16 he was 8-3 with a 2.71 E.R.A. He may have been primed for a big year, but his peripheral statistics were ordinary. Pick an advanced metric — wins above replacement or E.R.A.+ — and Wheeler’s overall 2014 performance, in this pitching-dominated era, was essentially league average.The Mets could fill his spot with the steady, if unspectacular, Dillon Gee. They could explore the potential of Rafael Montero, Steven Matz or, in time, Noah Syndergaard. The Mets lose some depth without Wheeler, but they can absorb this.“Where we’re strong, where we’re weak, where we have depth, where we don’t, if we’re going to have an injury and you sort of depersonalize who it is, yes, this is an area where we have broader, deeper resources,” General Manager Sandy Alderson said. “It doesn’t minimize at all the loss of Zack, both in terms of his performance as well as his relationship to the rest of the team. But strictly from an asset point of view, that’s probably true.”The Mets did not fortify their rotation assets this off-season, but they did not deplete them, either. Losing an everyday player would have hurt much more, because the Mets have few good ones to spare.Their major move was to sign outfielder Michael Cuddyer — who homered on Friday for the second day in a row — for two years and $21 million. The Mets did little else besides hiring Kevin Long as hitting coach and moving in the fences again, but the state of their offense depends on one’s perspective.The Mets hit .239, and their .673 on-base plus slugging percentage ranked 26th in the majors. Yet they outscored the St. Louis Cardinals, who reached the National League Championship Series, and ranked eighth of 15 N.L. teams in runs.Spring training is the time to highlight the most optimistic possible outcomes.The Mets believe Curtis Granderson, 34, can get in better position to drive balls to the opposite field.They think Cuddyer, who turns 36 next week, can thrive after injuries held him to 49 games last season for Colorado.“We don’t play in parks he’s been playing in, but he still has real good power and brings a huge presence in our lineup because he can hit,” Manager Terry Collins said. “That, first and foremost, was what we were looking for: a guy who can get in there and drive in some runs.”Collins said the Mets had enough hitters with extra-base pop to handle Citi Field, which may still play big despite the new dimensions. With the right coaching and approach, Alderson said, the Mets’ hitters would maximize their potential, whatever that becomes.Other N.L. teams have similar hopes for an offensive revival. Just as the Mets expect more with a healthy David Wright, the Cincinnati Reds expect more with a healthy Joey Votto. The San Diego Padres and the Chicago Cubs have made improvements.The Mets’ offense could be competent, but preventing runs is still their ticket to relevance. The bullpen and the defense complicate that effort.The left-hander Josh Edgin has been lost to Tommy John surgery, and Vic Black is down with shoulder problems. Mejia, the closer, had the highest WHIP among the 15 N.L. closers with at least 20 saves last season.Defensive metrics are also unkind to most Mets, other than center fielder Juan Lagares. Alderson stressed that there were no perfect players.“You accept weaknesses in order to acquire strengths,” Alderson said. “So you make compromises. We’ll see how that works out. I don’t subscribe to the notion that we’re going to have a lousy defense. I don’t believe that’s the case. But at the same time, I don’t assume, nor do I think, all of our success is predicated on being outstanding defensively.”Their success depends on many factors, and they are lucky that their biggest hit came in their sturdiest area. The loss of Wheeler should not be fatal. The soft spots on the rest of the roster might be.Advertisement