By PATRICK MAKSMARCH 20, 2015
COLUMBUS, Ohio —  The windows of opportunity were left wide open, as if to beg 12th-seeded Buffalo to jump through them and escape its first N.C.A.A. tournament game with something to show for it.Instead, a disorderly start and a frantic finish doomed the Bulls in a 68-62 loss to fifth-seeded West Virginia on Friday afternoon at Nationwide Arena. It was an erratic and brutal contest, littered with fouls (49), turnovers (29) and body slams.“My body is tired,” the Buffalo senior forward Xavier Ford said after the game. “And I know a few of their bodies are tired as well.”This was a flawed but gritty duel that devolved into a skirmish of pivotal moments in the game’s waning minutes before Tarik Phillip, a West Virginia sophomore guard, pulled up in front of his team’s bench and buried a 3-pointer in the closing seconds to lift the Mountaineers into the round of 32. West Virginia will play No. 4 Maryland on Sunday.Advertisement“The only one who wanted Tarik to shoot it was Tarik; he had to,” West Virginia Coach Bob Huggins said of Phillip, a player whose season of highs and lows seems to have reflected his team’s campaign.AdvertisementWhile Phillip’s shot made him something of a star, West Virginia was buoyed by Devin Williams, a sophomore forward who scored 17 points and collected nine rebounds.The rangy Mountaineers also used a smothering defense that picked and poked at the smaller Bulls, swarmed around ballhandlers up and down the court, and swatted at balls under the basket. They were egged on by fans who yelled: “Press! Press! Press!” as the team scattered across the court.“We don’t face teams like this, usually, that are physical in trapping and that are relentless the way they play their defense,” Buffalo Coach Bobby Hurley said.He added: “It’s hard to simulate that. It’s just hard to figure that out as a player. Just not something we face very often.”For about 15 minutes, it was enough to overwhelm Buffalo, which trailed by as many as 13 points in its first appearance on college basketball’s biggest stage. The Bulls were wobbly and overwhelmed early. They made just one of their first 11 shots and turned over the ball 12 times in the first half.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“There’s no true preparation other than experience and being in these kinds of games,” said Hurley, who guided his team to the Mid-American Conference championship last weekend. “And then, as fast and as hard as West Virginia plays contributes to us not playing at our best early.”The Bulls found life with Ford, who scored 16 points and feathered in a 3-pointer to tie the score at 62-62 late in the game. Shannon Evans, a sophomore guard who scored 15 points, also helped the team curb its first-half struggles.“We jumped right back in the game,” Hurley said.Still, Buffalo’s blunders — turnovers, poor free-throw shooting and a late, spirit-sapping foul on Justin Moss, a sophomore forward regarded as the team’s best player — made any path toward a stirring comeback a taxing endeavor.AdvertisementBuffalo had entered as something of a bracket darling, picked by the likes of President Obama and the ESPN basketball analyst Jay Bilas to deliver an upset in the Midwest Region.“If you had told us three weeks ago or even at the beginning of the season that the president would pick us to win in the first round of the N.C.A.A. tournament, a lot of people would have laughed in your face,” Ford said.The Bulls also spoke of a fearless brand of basketball — a notion they said had been conceived in losses to the top seeds Kentucky and Wisconsin earlier in the season — and a hunger to make a name for themselves in the postseason fray.“We were finished with moral victories when we were at Kentucky and Wisconsin,” Hurley said. “We felt we had a team that could win games in the tournament.”But he added, “It didn’t play out that way.”A version of this article appears in print on March 21, 2015, on Page D3 of the New York edition.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.