AdvertisementSupported byBy Allan KredaGREENBURGH, N.Y. — Henrik Lundqvist, who was cleared to return to practice with the Rangers this week, was not at the team’s workout Friday because his wife, Therese, was close to giving birth to their second child.For his teammates, however, the comforting fact that Lundqvist, their franchise goaltender, would soon be back was something worth waiting for.“For sure it will be great to have our leader back,” left wing Rick Nash said. “He’s so competitive; that’s why he’s one of the best goalies in the world. Family comes first; that’s for sure. But now we know he will be back.”Lundqvist has not played since Feb. 2, two days after he sustained a blood-vessel injury in his neck when he was hit in the throat by a puck. He wrote in a post on Twitter late Friday that his wife had given birth. “My little girl is here!!” he wrote. “Everyone is doing great. She did not get the memo of me returning to practice today so we’ll try that again. ...” Lundqvist, 33, said before Wednesday’s 1-0 loss to Chicago that he expected to practice with the team for a week before determining a timetable for his first game back. Because he missed practice, it remained unclear how that schedule might change; the next full practice would be next Wednesday.Coach Alain Vigneault said Lundqvist would join the Rangers for their morning skate before Tuesday’s game against the Los Angeles Kings at Madison Square Garden.Rangers defenseman Marc Staal, who has missed time in his career with concussions and a serious eye injury, said he understood the situation Lundqvist faced when he realized that he would be away from the team for significant time while he recuperated from his injury.“You have to accept what has happened and do your best to focus on coming back,” Staal said. “But it’s hard to watch games when you aren’t playing because you want to be out there competing. Win or lose, you want to be with the guys.”Defenseman Ryan McDonagh, whose stick inadvertently lifted Lundqvist’s mask in the game against Carolina, leading to the goaltender’s injury, said he expected Lundqvist to find his winning form quickly.“He’s such an intense competitor, and I’m sure he will do everything necessary to be ready,” said McDonagh, the Rangers’ captain. “But any time you have an injury — and until you know what it is and know your timeline — it’s mentally hard to keep yourself in game mode.”Lundqvist is 25-11-3 with a 2.25 goals-against average and five shutouts this season. He has never endured a layoff this long in 10 seasons with the Rangers.Vigneault has said he expects Lundqvist to play several games before the regular season ends April 11. The backup Cam Talbot is 13-3-3 in place of Lundqvist, and the rookie Mackenzie Skapski also has two wins.Vigneault said Talbot would start against the Hurricanes on Saturday. The Rangers (44-18-7) return home to face the Anaheim Ducks on Sunday before the Kings visit Tuesday.Staal said that having Lundqvist returning to practice — when hoots and hollers accompany goals as well as stellar saves — would provide an energy boost for the Rangers, who lead the second-place Islanders in the Metropolitan Division by 5 points with three games in hand.“Being alone at the practice rink is hard,” Staal said of recovering from an injury away from the team. “I’m sure once Hank gets back on the ice with us and we start pouring in some goals, he’ll be fine.” SLAP SHOTSRangers defenseman Kevin Klein, who broke his left arm when he was struck by an Alex Ovechkin shot in a win at Washington on March 11, said he hoped to resume skating within the next week.Advertisement