AdvertisementSupported byMichigan State 70, Georgia 63By Viv BernsteinCHARLOTTE, N.C. — Reaching the N.C.A.A. tournament is enough of a rarity at Georgia that the Bulldogs celebrate each appearance on a banner that hangs in Stegeman Coliseum and lists every year they have made the field. The annual expectations at Michigan State, where the banners honor national championships and Final Four appearances, are just a tad higher.So if Friday’s East Region game at Time Warner Cable Arena was a destination for No. 10 seed Georgia, it was merely a starting point for the No. 7 Spartans. And after a sluggish beginning, Michigan State made sure it was nothing more than that, holding off a last-minute rally for a 70-63 victory.Denzel Valentine had 16 points, and Travis Trice added 15 points and 6 assists, igniting a Michigan State fast break that accounted for 19 points. Georgia never figured out a way to slow him down. Bryn Forbes scored 14 points off the bench for the Spartans, whose double-digit lead was cut to 3 points in the final minute before they sealed the victory at the free-throw line.Charles Mann led Georgia with 19 points.“I just thought our fast break was the difference in the game the first half, and then in the second half the same thing,” Michigan State Coach Tom Izzo said. “Once they cut the lead, we got a couple quick buckets off the break, and that was the difference.”Georgia (21-12) took an early lead, going ahead by 9-3 as Michigan State went 1 of 7 from the field. But the advantage did not last long. Georgia was ahead, 14-10, when the Spartans went on a 10-0 run to take a 20-14 lead late in the first half.For this bracket, the more unusual that your picks are, the more points you’ll receive — so long as those picks are correct.Michigan State (24-11) pulled away from there. The Spartans built a 13-point halftime lead, 35-22, behind Trice, a guard, who had 11 points and 4 assists in the half.Georgia made a run in the second half, closing to 39-37 with 5 minutes 53 seconds remaining. But the Bulldogs were never able to tie, and Michigan State slowly rebuilt its lead.Still, the Bulldogs closed to 66-63 with 21 seconds left, forcing Michigan State to win the game with foul shots. Valentine was 6 of 6 from the free-throw line in the closing seconds.“Michigan State, they played like a team that’s been here before,” Georgia forward Marcus Thornton said. “So when you’re playing against a team like that, there’s only a very limited margin for error. So it kind of caught up to us in the end.”Michigan State, playing in its 18th consecutive N.C.A.A. tournament, will face No. 2 seed Virginia, which defeated No. 15 Belmont, 79-67.As for Georgia, which has not won an N.C.A.A. tournament game since 2002 and was in the field for only the third time in 13 years, Friday’s appearance added another year to its banner. More important, when is kickoff?Advertisement