By PAT BORZIMARCH 20, 2015
OMAHA —  New Mexico State’s tall front line and extended zone defense were supposed to pose matchup problems for Kansas, the No. 2 seed in the Midwest Region of the N.C.A.A. men’s basketball tournament. Instead, the Jayhawks found open shots everywhere, especially behind the arc, and repeatedly beat the slow-to-react Aggies down the floor to win easily, 75-56.The day after Big 12 teams dropped all three of their first-round games in the tournament, the Jayhawks restored some respect to the conference, which sent seven teams to the tournament (tying the Big Ten for the most) and topped Division I in Rating Percentage Index, a metric used to rank college basketball teams.Kansas, which struggled from beyond the arc in recent weeks, broke out by hitting nine 3-pointers in 13 attempts while shooting 54 percent from the field. The Jayhawks led by 13 points at halftime and never let the No. 15-seeded Aggies, who came in with a 13-game winning streak, closer than 11 the rest of the way.Guard Frank Mason III led Kansas with 17 points, shot 6 of 7 and grabbed 9 rebounds, one more than Tshilidzi Nephawe, New Mexico State’s 6-foot-10 center. Even with New Mexico State starting three players 6 feet 8 inches or taller and bringing the 7-foot-3, 335-pounder Tanveer Bhullar off the bench, Kansas held a 36-29 edge on the boards.Advertisement“I thought we defended and rebounded pretty well in the first half,” Kansas Coach Bill Self said. “I think that’s what got us the lead.”AdvertisementA ragged start saw Perry Ellis of Kansas and Nephawe each miss dunks in the first two minutes before Kansas surged ahead, 11-4. The Aggies were scoreless for more than six minutes while Kansas scored 10 consecutive points to go up by 34-16.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Kansas shot 54 percent in the first half with five 3-pointers, its largest total in a half in more than a month.“We’re used to starting a little slow,” New Mexico State forward Remi Barry said. “We just couldn’t catch up. That’s what it is. They were making some tough shots.”Ellis, moving carefully with a brace on his troublesome right knee, had 9 points and 2 rebounds.Kansas (27-8) faces seventh-seeded Wichita State on Sunday. New Mexico State, with nine international players on its 13-man roster, finished 23-11.“I told our guys as soon as the game was over that we were O.K. today, we were pretty good today, but we have got to be better on Sunday, whoever we play, and I think they all agree,” Self said.A version of this article appears in print on March 21, 2015, on Page D3 of the New York edition.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.