AdvertisementSupported byMidwest: Notre Dame 67, butler 64, OvertimeBy Ben ShpigelPITTSBURGH — The best team in Indiana is Notre Dame. The third-seeded Fighting Irish proved as much Saturday night, escaping a tussle with sixth-seeded Butler to prevail, 67-64, in overtime, at Consol Energy Center to advance to the Midwest Regional semifinals in the N.C.A.A. tournament. The Irish will play Kansas or Wichita State on Thursday night in Cleveland.Butler and Notre Dame, whose campuses are separated by 130 miles, had not played since 2006, and regulation could not decide their captivating game, which featured six ties and nine lead changes. Steve Vasturia, who made a critical 3-pointer in overtime, led the Irish with 20 points.After the game, Notre Dame Coach Mike Brey revealed that his mother, Betty, a former Olympic swimmer, died of a heart attack Saturday morning. She was 84.“I'd talk to her during the season, and very rarely did I get hey, Mike, how you doing?” Brey said. “It's like: ‘Have you got them ready? Are they ready? I think we can beat Duke, Mike.’ It’s unbelievable. She was intense.”For this bracket, the more unusual that your picks are, the more points you’ll receive — so long as those picks are correct.The Irish (31-5) did beat Duke, in the A.C.C. semifinals last week, amid this run of seven consecutive victories. Butler (23-11), which overcame a 10-point deficit in the first half to lead by as many as 6 points after halftime, came closest to toppling them. After both teams went scoreless over the final 2 minutes 58 seconds of the second half — after a double-dribble call on Zach Auguste gave Butler possession with two seconds left in regulation and after Pat Connaughton blocked a potential winning shot right out of the hands of the Bulldogs’ Kellen Dunham — Notre Dame seized control with 1:22 left in overtime. Vasturia, a sophomore whom Brey calls the Irish’s baby-faced assassin, made a shot-clock-beating 3-pointer from the corner to put Notre Dame ahead by 65-61. After Butler’s Kelan Martin made one of two free throws, Jerian Grant answered with a driving layup, sending Notre Dame into the round of 16 for the first time since 2003.“I heard the bench telling me to drive,” Grant said. “I was going to pull up. I wanted to shoot a jump shot in my step back. But I saw the lane open, and my teammates and the coaches on the bench kept yelling drive. I felt like I had a lane.”Brey spoke throughout the day with his brother and sister, which, he said with a slight laugh, helped him not to think about the game.“She tried to make swimmers out of all of us, and I snuck out of practice when I was 9, and she let me go to basketball camp,” Brey said. “So that worked out real well.”Advertisement