By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSMARCH 22, 2015
Brook Lopez had 26 points and 4 blocks to lead the Nets to a 123-111 victory at Indiana on Saturday night, their fourth win in five games. The Pacers have lost five straight.The Nets, who have won four of five, are trying to take full advantage of their opportunities to get into the postseason — even if that means having to play on the road the night after pushing through for a 129-127 triple-overtime win Friday against Milwaukee.“I think we came out the way we knew we needed to,” Lopez said. “We all came out and tried to be aggressive. When the other team made a run, we responded.”Bojan Bogdanovic had 21 points and 5 rebounds off the bench, and Deron Williams scored 17 points for the Nets.AdvertisementGeorge Hill had 18 points and 9 assists, and Luis Scola and Solomon Hill each finished with 17 points for the Pacers.AdvertisementLopez scored the go-ahead basket with 1.5 seconds remaining in the third quarter, giving the Nets an 88-87 lead.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Nets pulled away as Joe Johnson converted a 3-point play and Bogdanovic made a 3-pointer to put the Nets ahead by 109-100 with four minutes remaining.“You don’t want to be fighting uphill when you’re playing these high-powered offensive teams,” Solomon Hill said. “It’s tough when you see guys making shots like they were making them.”The Nets, who used an 11-0 run in the second half to take the lead, had lost to Indiana, 110-85 in Brooklyn on Dec. 27. But this time, the stakes were higher. A win for the Pacers would have put them in sole possession of eighth place in the Eastern Conference.Instead, the Nets closed the gap in a crowded race for the final playoff spot.“We controlled the game from the first minute to the last minute,” Bogdanovic said. “We’re going to have to continue to do stuff if we’re going to make the playoffs.”A version of this brief appears in print on March 22, 2015, on Page SP10 of the New York edition with the headline: Nets Top Slumping Pacers.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.