AdvertisementSupported byBy Allan KredaNEWARK — Struggling to score goals and fighting a four-game losing streak, the Islanders made their way to New Jersey hoping to rediscover their offense.They were coming off a listless 4-1 loss in Chicago last Tuesday after three home defeats. But on Saturday, having had three days off to regroup and bolstered by the return of defenseman Nick Leddy, who was out during the four losses with an upper-body injury, the Islanders recovered for a 3-0 victory against their division rival Devils.The return of the offense was particularly welcome after it scored only four goals in those four losses, but it was goaltender Jaroslav Halak who made the real difference.Halak made 26 saves for his fifth shutout and fourth victory against the Devils this season. He made a stellar glove stop on defenseman Eric Gelinas midway through the second period and also stymied Steve Bernier and Scott Gomez on successive shots eight minutes into the third to preserve the win, his 35th of the season.“It’s tough to play against teams desperate for points fighting for a playoff spot,” Halak said of the Devils, who had won three straight. “We needed these points, since the standings are getting tighter and tighter. It’s good to have these type of games before the playoffs start.”The Islanders perhaps also drew extra strength with a strong contingent of boisterous fans among the sellout crowd of 16,592. They were eager to exercise their vocal cords for a road game, and they had their first chance when Ryan Strome whipped a shot from the left circle past goaltender Cory Schneider for his 15th goal at 7 minutes 37 seconds of the opening period.Pockets of blue and orange erupted with “Yes! Yes! Yes!” — a standard chant at Nassau Coliseum this season.They repeated the process at 12:19 of the third when Travis Hamonic blasted a slap shot past Schneider to make it 2-0. It was Hamonic’s fifth goal this season. Strome and Brock Nelson assisted.“We can score with the best teams in the league,” Hamonic said. “We also try to play defense as stingy as possible. Jaro was great tonight.”Kyle Okposo added an empty-net goal — his 15th — for the Islanders at 19:22 to complete the scoring. It was Okposo’s first point since he returned after missing almost two months after surgery for a detached retina.Islanders fans have had much to celebrate in this final season on Long Island before the team leaves the Coliseum — where they have played since 1972 — and moves to Brooklyn’s Barclays Center next season.The visiting fans continued chanting and singing as they left the arena to await a four-game homestand next week, starting with Tuesday night’s game against Minnesota.The Islanders (44-25-4) have accrued the most wins since they won 50 games in 1983-84, and they are playoff-bound for the second time in three seasons.Leddy, who leads the Islanders’ defensemen with 10 goals, was paired as usual with Johnny Boychuk. They were acquired in separate trades last Oct. 4 that have proved crucial to the team’s success.The moves solidified the defense while adding offensive punch from the blue line. Both players were deemed so vital to the franchise’s future they were each signed to long-term contracts in recent weeks.Halak, who already has established an Islanders record for wins in a regular season, improved to 35-15-1 in this first season with the team.For the Devils (31-30-11), Schneider made 27 saves.“We didn’t take advantage of what they gave us, and they took advantage of what we gave them,” said Lou Lamoriello, the Devils’ president and general manager, who has been behind the bench since Pete DeBoer was fired in late December. “I can’t fault our effort. That was a playoff atmosphere.”Clearly, the Islanders benefit when Leddy, Boychuk and Hamonic are in the lineup. They are 36-15-4 when all three defensemen are playing and 8-10-0 when one or two are missing.The Islanders are now 20-5-1 this season against the Metropolitan Division opponents, including a 9-2-1 mark on the road.“It’s a good win; it’s good to get rewarded,” Islanders Coach Jack Capuano said. “We executed our game plan as we needed to do.”The Islanders are 21-13-4 on the road and have earned at least a point in eight of their last nine games away from home.And three goals appear to be a magic total for the Islanders, as they are 37-7-2 when they score at least three times — including shootout winning goals — but only 7-17-2 when they do not.SLAP SHOTSForward Patrik Elias returned for the Devils after missing three games with back spasms. ... The Islanders scratched defensemen Lubomir Visnovsky and Calvin de Haan and forwards Michael Grabner and Colin McDonald. ... The Devils scratched forwards Michael Ryder and Mike Cammalleri.Advertisement