By KATIE ROGERSOCT. 14, 2015
Dennis Hof, the owner of the Nevada brothel where Odom was found unconscious, said he believed the former N.B.A. star had taken an herbal sexual stimulant while at the brothel.Lamar Odom, the former N.B.A. forward who became a reality TV star after marrying a Kardashian, was hospitalized after he was found unconscious in a Nevada brothel on Tuesday evening.Odom, 35, had been staying at the Love Ranch in Crystal, Nev., since Saturday. He was found lying facedown by two women who went to check on him Tuesday afternoon, Dennis Hof, the brothel’s owner, told The Associated Press.“He just wanted to get away, have a good time and relax,” Hof said, adding that Odom was “throwing up all kinds of stuff” when the brothel’s staff members tried to turn him on his side. Hof said that Odom had been taking an herbal sexual stimulant, but that he did not know if Odom had been taking anything else.Officials were able to stabilize Odom at a nearby hospital, but they were unable to fit his 6-foot-10 frame into a helicopter for further treatment. Instead, he was driven by ambulance to Sunrise Hospital and Medical Center in Las Vegas, according to a statement from the Nye County Sheriff’s Office.AdvertisementThe website TMZ, which was among the first outlets to share news of Odom’s hospitalization, reported that his former wife, Khloe Kardashian, was at the hospital with him.AdvertisementThe couple married in 2009. They separated in 2013, and their divorce was finalized in July. But since Odom has been associated with the Kardashian name, his every move has been well documented, both in Kardashian-related projects and under the paparazzi’s glare. The couple chose to put their relationship in front of the cameras on “Keeping Up With the Kardashians” and, eventually, with a spinoff show, “Khloe and Lamar.” Other licensing deals, like a fragrance, followed.In an interview with Complex magazine this summer, Kardashian said that the two remained on good terms.The Rev. Jesse L. Jackson, outside the hospital where Lamar Odom, the former N.B.A. forward, is being treated, said Mr. Odom is improving but is still in critical condition.“When you genuinely feel like that was the right relationship,” she said, “you’re supposed to give it all you can.”Odom, who won two N.B.A. championships during a succesful seven-year stretch with the Los Angeles Lakers, has struggled with drug addiction since the couple’s separation. In 2013, he was pulled over for drunken driving in Los Angeles, and he later checked into a treatment center for drug and alcohol addiction.Odom, a New York City native, played high school basketball for Christ the King in Middle Village, Queens, and then for a prep school in Florida, where he was considered one of the best players in the country.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.He had initially planned to attend the University of Nevada, Las Vegas. But after questions arose about his test scores, the school dropped him. Later that year, he was arrested in a prostitution police sting operation in Las Vegas. He wound up playing one year at the University of Rhode Island.Soon after he was chosen as the fourth overall pick in the 1999 draft by the Los Angeles Clippers, his publicized battle with drugs began: In 2001, he was suspended from playing after he was found to have violated the N.B.A.’s drug policies.“It’s something that can’t happen again,” Odom said at the time. “Hopefully, now I can put it behind me and start to better myself.”His performance fell sharply in his final two seasons, one with the Mavericks and another with the Clippers. After a brief stint with a team in Spain and with the Knicks, his career was over in 2014 at age 34.AdvertisementExcel Sports Management, the company representing Odom, released a statement on Wednesday, saying, “We are staying close to the situation but have no additional information or comment at this time.”An earlier version of this article misstated the day Excel Sports Management released a statement regarding Lamar Odom. It was Wednesday, not Tuesday.Victor Mather contributed reporting.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.