AdvertisementSupported byWest: Xavier 75, Georgia State 67By Tom SpoustaJACKSONVILLE, Fla. — The Xavier Musketeers were once N.C.A.A. tournament darlings, a plucky program and bottom-bracket seed looking to make a name. They understood the ride 14th-seeded Georgia State wanted to continue Saturday night and knew an upset lurked here at Jacksonville Veterans Memorial Arena.Xavier responded with experience and clutch shooting, breaking through Georgia State’s full-court press often enough to secure a 75-67 victory and a spot in next week’s West Regional semifinals in Los Angeles. The Musketeers advanced to the round of 16 for the sixth time since 2008. Jalen Reynolds and Myles Davis combined for 38 points. Reynolds scored most of his career-high 21 points inside, and Davis notched all of his outside, hitting 5 of 8 shots from 3-point range. Dee Davis added 15 points. The Musketeers shot 81 percent in the second half, and their 67.6 percent shooting for the game was a season high. Xavier missed only three field-goal attempts in the second half (13 of 16). After committing nine turnovers in the first half, the Musketeers had only five the rest of the way. “I think it took our guys a half to realize how much of a gambling attitude and style of play that Georgia State employs,” Xavier Coach Chris Mack said. “In the second half, we continued to shoot a really high percentage. All these guys had terrific nights.” Myles Davis made a 3-pointer for a 67-57 lead with 92 seconds to play, and Xavier kept the Panthers at bay with free throws the rest of the way. For this bracket, the more unusual that your picks are, the more points you’ll receive — so long as those picks are correct.Georgia State continually turned to R. J. Hunter, its leader and Coach Ron Hunter’s son, down the stretch. He finished with 20 points on 6 of 15 shooting but was kept in check by Xavier when it appeared the Panthers were ready to mount a rally. “If they had made a couple of mistakes here and there, but they just didn’t,” Ron Hunter said. “We just kept talking about if we could just get them to crack. They wouldn’t crack. They beat us; we didn’t beat ourselves. We can walk away a little bit more proud because they beat us.” The Panthers were erratic on both ends of the floor early but found a rhythm and their 3-point stroke late in the first half. Twice they trailed by 11 points. But then Hunter made two 3-pointers and Ryan Harrow hit another to pull them to 30-28 behind. Reynolds ended the first half with a dunk for Xavier, an emphatic punctuation mark after the Musketeers broke through full-court pressure. Indeed, Georgia State thrives on forcing turnovers off its tenacious press, and its band members have a clever way of making opponents aware of their mistakes against it. They point accusatory fingers and scold players in the unnerving tone of a disappointed schoolteacher. “You let the whole team down! You let the whole team down!” goes the chant.Xavier was in a giving mood, too. Georgia State converted the nine first-half turnovers into 10 points. That helped offset Xavier’s dominance on the boards, a 17-5 edge (23-12 for the game) in rebounds, led by six from Matt Stainbrook, a 6-foot-10, 270-pound center whose bulk in tandem with the 6-10 Reynolds was clearly something to be considered by any Panther driving through the lane. Coach Ron Hunter, his left leg in a cast because of a torn Achilles’ tendon, had pushed onto the court aboard a scooter, switching to his now-famous four-wheel chair along the bench. It was the same stool he fell off when R. J. Hunter hit the 3-pointer that beat Baylor here Thursday. But this time, the metal frame of Hunter’s chair was wrapped in padding, giving it athletic-looking stability for an even longer trip into the West Region bracket. “If we win Saturday, we’re going to bus to L.A. We’re just going to take off, and this is going to be like the Brady Bunch, Partridge Family. This is fun for us,” Hunter had said.After the horn sounded, the Panthers exited the stage to a standing ovation, led by their coach on his scooter, wiping tears from his eyes and thanking fans as he led his team off the court.Advertisement