By BEN ROTHENBERGMARCH 21, 2015
INDIAN WELLS, Calif. —  One dominating with returns, the other with serves, Novak Djokovic and Roger Federer marched on toward another meeting in the desert.The top-seeded Djokovic was the first to book a spot in the BNP Paribas Open final, beating No. 4 Andy Murray, 6-2, 6-3, on Saturday. Djokovic won a full 50 percent of his points on Murray’s first serves, an incredible feat in conditions where the thin air and the high-bouncing court have often given servers an advantage. Djokovic, one of the best returners in the history of the sport, pounced on Murray early in rallies and opened each set with a 3-0 lead.Djokovic acknowledged that Murray’s substandard serving gave him opportunities to take control.“That allowed me to, obviously, step in and be aggressive,” he said. “I thought I played solid, with the right intensity from the beginning.”The second-seeded Federer advanced next, beating the sixth-seeded Milos Raonic, 7-5, 6-4. While they played five more games than Djokovic and Murray had, quick holds by both Federer and Raonic allowed Federer to prevail in two minutes less than Djokovic had needed.AdvertisementDjokovic and Federer met in last year’s final at Indian Wells, with Djokovic winning in a third-set tiebreaker even as Federer showed signs of a resurgence. Federer won three of the next four meetings between the two last year, but lost in five sets in the Wimbledon final.“He’s tough, as we know,” Federer said of Djokovic. “He barely misses. He moves great. He makes you go for the extra shot. This is one of the great hardcourt players we have seen, you know, in tennis. After losing so close last year, I was quite disappointed, even though I was happy how I was playing.”Federer continued: “Can’t wait until we get a chance again to play him here, because you have to wait one entire year — got to win another five matches — and finally you’re in the finals again. So I think it’s very exciting for both of us, and also for fans, to see a rematch of the great final from last year.”Federer has played Djokovic more than any other opponent; the final on Sunday will be their 38th meeting, a number second in ATP history only to the 42 meetings between Djokovic and Rafael Nadal. Federer has a 20-17 record against Djokovic, including a straight-sets victory in the final at Dubai in February, their lone meeting this year.“He’s playing great, there’s no question about it,” Djokovic said of Federer. “We all know that Roger, with all his records — we know the experience that he has.”AdvertisementDjokovic said Federer would be expected “to play nothing less than his best in these stages of the tournament.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Djokovic added: “He’s been proving that. He won so many titles. He loves the big occasions, and I’m sure he’s going to come out wanting to win, being aggressive.”Though he suffered a disappointing third-round loss at the Australian Open, Federer has won 30 of his last 31 matches outside Grand Slam events, the only loss coming to Raonic at the Paris Masters event in October. Raonic had derailed an eagerly awaited semifinal reunion of the so-called Big Four — Djokovic, Murray, Federer and Nadal — by saving three match points in a win over Nadal in the quarterfinals. It would have been the first time the Big Four had convened in the semifinals of a tournament since the 2012 Australian Open.Federer was most likely not dismayed to have avoided Nadal, against whom he has a 10-23 record. Because his meetings against Djokovic have been largely in semifinals, while his matches against Nadal were in finals, Federer said his memories of playing against Djokovic were not always as sharply focused.“What remains is that you know it’s always been tough against him,” Federer said. “I have seen the rise of him as he’s gotten fitter and more match tough, mentally tougher — became one of the best movers we have in the game. It’s been nice seeing him do that, improving as you move along.“Sometimes I wonder if everybody’s willing to improve as much as Novak did. It’s been interesting to see him figure his game out, and I’m happy I can still hang with him. I must be quite honest, because he’s in his absolute prime right now, and I enjoy the challenge of him. I hope he enjoys my challenge.”What might have been a blockbuster match on the women’s side of the tournament did not materialize, as a knee injury prompted top-ranked Serena Williams to withdraw from her semifinal against No. 3 Simona Halep shortly before it was set to begin Friday evening. Williams addressed the crowd alongside the tournament announcer Andrew Krasny, who kept the tone positive, and the reaction was much more generous than it was in 2001 for a similar withdrawal by Venus Williams, in a match she was supposed to play against Serena.Federer, similarly, injured his back and pulled out of a match against Djokovic in November at the World Tour Finals, but he addressed the crowd alone.“I think it’s the hardest thing to do for an athlete, but it’s most respected by the fans,” he said of making the announcement himself. “Clearly, you go nervously into that kind of a speech. It’s good when you have a good guy on the mike. Makes it easy for you, to be quite honest. I had more of a speech than anything else. I was happy once I got it out of the way and the message was out, but it was one of the more difficult moments in my career, no doubt about that.”A version of this article appears in print on March 22, 2015, on Page SP2 of the New York edition with the headline: Rematch in the Desert for Federer and Djokovic.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.