AdvertisementSupported bySports of The TimesBy Juliet MacurLOUISVILLE, Ky. — At one point during U.C.L.A.’s victory on Saturday, the blonde behind the Bruins’ bench stood just feet behind Coach Steve Alford, and was almost his mirror image.As he called to his team, “Box out!” she yelled, “Box out!” Then, at once, the two of them raised their elbows to their sides and made fists, to show the players how boxing out might be done.He clapped, then she clapped. He dropped his head, she dropped hers.Coincidence? Maybe. But it makes more sense if you know that the blonde in the yellow U.C.L.A. shirt with fingernails painted U.C.L.A. blue is the coach’s wife, Tanya, whose two sons — Bryce and Kory — play on the team.Having not one, not two, but three family members in this N.C.A.A. tournament might cause other mothers to melt under pressure. But by now, after 27 years of marriage to Steve, an Indiana basketball legend, Tanya has learned to enjoy this stress.It’s usually just the same old drill. This time, though, she said it is sweeter.“Dealing with the ups and downs of this game is what we’re used to because basketball is part of our family’s DNA,” she said Saturday after U.C.L.A.’s 92-75 victory over the University of Alabama-Birmingham, which advanced the Bruins to the round of 16. “But in all of our years, there’s been nothing like this. I just wish I could freeze time right now. I don’t want this to end.”Last year, in his first season at U.C.L.A., Steve Alford led his team to the round of 16 before losing to Florida. But Tanya Alford called this year’s run “unforgettable magic” because Bryce, a sophomore point guard, has been so important to U.C.L.A.’s success, and Kory, a junior walk-on, has been there to support him.On Saturday, Bryce scored 22 points. In the previous round, against Southern Methodist on Thursday, he sank eight 3-pointers, and his final attempt at a 3 was called good because of goaltending. It won that game for U.C.L.A., by a point. Not bad for a kid who critics once said shouldn’t have come with Alford from New Mexico and was given playing time at U.C.L.A. only because he was the coach’s son.Kory ran onto the court after the buzzer and tackled his brother. Both parents looked on, teary-eyed.Steve Alford later said he told Bryce that the most 3s he had ever made in one game was eight, and that he and Bryce — sorry, kid — were still tied in that category, 8-8.“The dad in me says, ‘You made eight, son, because the ninth one never did go in the basket,’ ” Steve Alford said.He was probably not joking.Steve Alford, a coach’s kid himself, has long been known for his competitiveness. He would sweep snow from his driveway and knock icicles off the net with a broomstick so he could practice shooting. He would make 100 free throws a day, dropping for 10 push-ups each time he missed. When he became a father, he would often challenge his boys to shooting games, but he would never let them win.For this bracket, the more unusual that your picks are, the more points you’ll receive — so long as those picks are correct.“We were O.K. with that because it made us better,” said Kory, who wants to be a coach, just like his father and grandfather. “I really do think it’s not mean to challenge your kids at any age. So, yeah, I wouldn’t even feel bad about beating them in Candy Land.”Tanya Alford said the key to keeping her sons interested in basketball — and, frankly, not letting their father’s intensity push them away from it — was keeping it fun. She was an expert at reminding them what many sports-focused families often forget: Sometimes, even if just a little, you have to lighten up.Her sons live on campus at U.C.L.A., but often come home on Sundays for church and a meal. If they or her husband are down because of a loss, she will suggest watching a scary movie, or playing some golf or the card game euchre.“I’m a master at changing the subject,” she said. “But you can’t get us away from competition because we like it so much. It’s what we do.”Tanya, who is 50, as is Steve, grew up in New Castle, Ind., about 50 miles east of Indianapolis, where the high school gym seats more than 9,000. She met Steve when he moved there in fifth grade, then started dating him during their junior year of high school. She missed her senior prom to watch Steve play in a tournament in Pittsburgh. It was the start of her role as a lifelong cheerleader, together they would reach the highest levels of the sport: Steve went on to win an N.C.A.A. title with Indiana and an Olympic gold medal.While her daughter, Kayla, was never interested in playing sports, she said, Bryce and Kory always showed a love for basketball. They couldn’t escape it, even if they had wanted to.At their father’s first college coaching job in the early ’90s, at Manchester in Indiana, Bryce and Kory were the unofficial team mascots because the Alfords eschewed babysitters. On long road trips to games, they would ride on the team bus, staying busy by watching “The Lion King.” Soon, they were ball boys.Just as his father did for him, Steve would set up a small plastic hoop in his office for his kids to practice their shooting. And just as his father did for him, at home, Steve encouraged his boys to fine-tune their shots by having them toss Ping-Pong balls into Pringles cans. To foster rivalries, the boys and their father would write the names of N.B.A. teams on the balls and create their own brackets for that championship.“Bryce and Kory now have a scoreboard in their house to keep tabs of who wins more FIFA video games,” Bruins center Tony Parker said. “At the Alfords, everything is a contest. Everything.”Tanya Alford said she and Steve didn’t push their children to be that way, it just came naturally. She offered the example of Bryce once coming home from middle school, complaining that a girl had a crush on him.“Mom, she wants me to sit with her at lunch,” Tanya recalled him saying. “So I’m not going to like her because I want to shoot basketballs at lunch. You got to find a girl who understands that basketball is important to you.”Steve Alford certainly found that in Tanya. Lucky guy. Lucky family. But don’t let her fool you: She wants to win, too. She is, after all, an Alford.“All of this is like a dream come true,” she said of the Bruins’ tournament victories here. “It’s wonderful, magical, all that. But I’m going to put this in my scrapbook and move on. We cannot rest on this. There’s more games to play.”Email: juliet@nytimes.com Advertisement