AdvertisementSupported byBy Karen CrouseORLANDO, Fla. — After a 300-yard drive on Bay Hill’s par-5 sixth hole on Saturday, Daniel Berger had a downhill lie and a difficult decision. The 540-yard hole wraps around a lake like a backward “C,” and if Berger wanted to try for the green, his second shot would be flirting with the water.Berger, who lost in a playoff to Padraig Harrington at the Honda Classic three weeks ago, has never lacked self-belief. But after he nearly won that tournament, his 11th start as a rookie, Berger’s confidence now knows no ceiling. Using his 4-iron, he produced the perfect shot during the third round of the Arnold Palmer Invitational. Berger’s ball barely cleared the water, bounced on the green and rolled into the cup for a double-eagle 2.“When I got up there, it was pretty cool to pick the ball up out of the hole,” said Berger, who tossed it to a child in his gallery. By the time he signed for his round of four-under-par 68, Berger had added an eagle, a birdie and a par on the other par 5s to complete Bay Hill’s version of a royal flush. “The whole course is not playing that easy,” said Berger, who was at seven under, “but anytime you play the par 5s that many under par, you’re going for a pretty good day.”Henrik Stenson shot a 3 on the course’s last par 5, the 16th, on his way to a second consecutive 66 and sole possession of the lead, at 16-under 200. Stenson, who has not finished worse than fourth in his last two starts, is two strokes ahead of the 36-hole leader, Morgan Hoffmann, who shot a 71.“It was a weird day,” Hoffmann said. “I got some squirrelly lies in the fairway, I got some mud balls and got some lips in the bunkers.” Jason Kokrak equaled the low round of the day, a bogey-free 65, to share third, at 13 under, with Matt Jones (67), Ben Martin (68) and Matt Every (69).The par 5s, which should belong to the long-hitting, straight-driving Rory McIlroy, got away from him on Saturday. McIlroy, the world’s top-ranked player, played them in one under, including a bogey, his third in a row, at No. 16. He finished with a 71 that left him tied for 12th at nine under.“There were parts of the round that were good,” McIlroy said. “I have to concentrate on that and focus on the positives and try and take those into tomorrow. Try to get off to a fast start.”Making an impressive climb up the leaderboard on moving day was Kiradech Aphibarnrat of Thailand, who had survived the cut by one stroke, then carded a 65 to move into a tie for eighth with Brendan Steele (68), Kevin Na (69) and Harris English (72).Aphibarnrat said the chance to test his game against the best players in the world was worth the 26-hour journey to get here.“One day I try to come over and play here all the time but it’s not easy,” he said. “A lot of players, No. 1 tour in the world. Everyone try to go here.”Aphibarnrat and Berger each teed off before 11 a.m. Playing in warm, windless conditions, with greens softened by rain on Friday night, the first 36 players to tackle the course were a combined 58 under, with all but nine posting scores of par or better. The last 34 players to tee off had to negotiate greens baked by heat and made bumpy by morning traffic, and their scores reflected the greater difficulty. They were a cumulative 48 under, with 12 players failing to break par.Stenson, playing in the penultimate twosome, had few bumps down the stretch. His eagle at No. 16, a dogleg right that measures 511 yards and has water in front of the green, was the third of five consecutive 3s on his scorecard. He was four under in that stretch. Describing the 16th, Stenson said, “It’s a hole where you can make up a lot and still there will be bogeys on that hole, and possibly even double bogeys.”He added: “I like it. It sets up for a bit of drama.”The climactic shot on 16 was struck early in Saturday’s action, while the 36-hole leaders were finishing their preround lunch. Berger was answering reporters’ questions in the scoring area when Shawn Stefani, who played in the twosome after him, strode into view. He caught Berger’s eye and said, “Nice 2 there, buddy.”Berger grinned. “Thanks, bro,” he said.Advertisement