AdvertisementSupported byN.H.L. RoundupBy The Associated PressJesper Fast and J. T. Miller scored, and Mats Zuccarello had the lone goal in a shootout as the visiting Rangers edged the Carolina Hurricanes, 3-2, on Saturday night.Cam Talbot shook off a 1-0 home loss to Chicago and made 28 saves to lift the Rangers to their N.H.L.-best 23rd road victory this season. Talbot made two saves in the shootout, and Carolina’s other attempt went high.Fast’s goal at 12 minutes 59 seconds of the second gave the Rangers a 2-1 lead after Miller had tied it 3:39 into the period.Carolina struck first as Elias Lindholm scored 2:01 in when he slammed a low drive under Talbot’s pads. Ryan Murphy tied it with 5:33 left, but the Rangers swept the five-game season series.WILD 6, BLUES 3 Justin Fontaine had a goal and two assists, Thomas Vanek also scored and host Minnesota breezed by St. Louis Blues.Chris Stewart, Zach Parise, Jonas Brodin and Mikko Koivu contributed goals, too, and Charlie Coyle and Ryan Suter each had two assists for the Wild, who improved to an N.H.L.-best 22-6-2 since trading for goalie Devan Dubnyk on Jan. 14.The Blues stayed 3 points behind Anaheim for first place in the Western Conference.CANUCKS 4, KINGS 1  Radim Vrbata set up the tying goal by Nick Bonino in the second period and scored the go-ahead goal during a 5-on-3 power play in the third to lead visiting Vancouver.Eddie Lack made 25 saves for Vancouver.BLUE JACKETS 3, FLAMES 2, Rene Bourque scored his second of the game at 4:01 of overtime to give Columbus a victory in Calgary. With prolonged pressure in the Flames end, Kevin Connauton’s shot was stopped, but Bourque slipped the rebound past Karri Ramo’s outstretched pad.JETS 3, CAPITALS 0  Ondrej Pavelec made 27 saves as host Winnipeg won its fourth straight game. Mark Stuart, Mark Scheifele and Adam Lowry scored for Winnipeg, which extended its lead to 4 points over Los Angeles in the chase for the final Western Conference wild card.The Capitals lost for the first time in four games, but they have a firm grip on the Eastern Conference’s first wild card.PANTHERS 2, BRUINS 1  Brandon Pirri scored a winning shootout goal to lead Florida over visiting Boston. Roberto Luongo turned aside all three of the Bruins’ shooters.Boston is 2 points ahead of Ottawa in the race for the eighth playoff spot in the Eastern Conference.CANADIENS 2, SHARKS 0  Tomas Plekanec scored in the first period and Carey Price made 29 saves for his second shutout in a row and ninth of the season for host Montreal. Price earned his N.H.L.-leading 40th victory.Antti Niemi made 27 saves for the Sharks (35-29-8), whose chase for a Western Conference playoff spot took a hit.PREDATORS 3, SABRES 0  Pekka Rinne made 22 saves to lead Nashville at home. Rinne earned his third shutout of the season and 36th of his N.H.L. career.SENATORS 5, MAPLE LEAFS 3  Kyle Turris scored the winning goal, and host Ottawa extended its winning streak to six games.Turris added an empty-net goal with 46.6 seconds remaining.STARS 4, BLACKHAWKS 0  Kari Lehtonen stopped 33 shots, including a penalty shot, for his fifth shutout this season for host Dallas. Advertisement