By THE ASSOCIATED PRESS and BILLY WITZMARCH 21, 2015
Chicago Cubs starter Jon Lester missed his start Saturday against the Seattle Mariners because of a tired arm, but Manager Joe Maddon expects Lester to make his next start in the rotation.Lester, a left-hander who signed a six-year, $155 million deal in the off-season, said it was just preparation for the season.“It’s part of throwing, getting used doing this every five days,” Lester said. “It’s nothing to be alarmed about.”Lester, 31, was tagged for six runs and seven hits in three and a third innings in his start against the San Diego Padres on Monday. If all goes as expected, Lester will take his regular turn in the rotation on Thursday.Advertisement“We wanted to be very cautious with it right now,” Maddon said. “And at this point, it doesn’t impact opening day.”AdvertisementWAINWRIGHT’S DEBUT Adam Wainwright pitched four innings of four-hit ball, walking one and striking out three in a spring training debut that had been delayed because he had sustained a mild abdominal strain early in camp.Wainwright had to move quickly off the mound a couple of times on defense and said he had no problems. He said he would be ready to start April 5, opening night against the Cubs at Wrigley Field.WHITE SOX ACE RECOVERING The Chicago White Sox ace, Chris Sale, threw a bullpen session and said he was making progress while recovering from a broken foot. He said he hoped to return by perhaps the second week of the regular season.Sale started throwing against a wall from one knee just four days after the broken foot was diagnosed on Feb. 27, but said he needed to work on other aspects of the game before he could return. He added that he has been restless while waiting.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I watched every episode of ‘Breaking Bad’ in 18 days,” he said.STRASBURG TO MISS START The Washington Nationals right-hander Stephen Strasburg will miss Sunday’s scheduled spring training start after injuring his left ankle during conditioning work Friday. “He’s a little sore,” Manager Matt Williams said, “so we don’t want to have any issues with him not feeling 100 percent.”It is the second time Strasburg has missed a Grapefruit League start. He was scratched from a scheduled start March 12 against the Mets with an ingrown toenail.GARDNER’S GLOVE ADVENTURE When Yankees center fielder Chris Young leapt at the wall to try to catch a home run hit by the Astros’ Chris Carter in Tampa, Fla., the ball was not the only thing that disappeared over the fence. So did Young’s glove.As Young and left fielder Brett Gardner discussed what to do, the Yankees sent out a new glove to Young. But before it got there, Gardner scaled the 8-foot fence to retrieve the glove — and the ball.Advertisement“I told him this isn’t Little League,” said Manager Joe Girardi, whose team was plagued by injuries last season and which lost reliever David Robertson several years ago to a sprained foot sustained while he unloaded boxes at his house.Gardner seemed to enjoy his adventure. “It wasn’t like I was jumping over the Green Monster,” Gardner said, referring to the left-field wall at Fenway Park.His one concern, he said, was that he was not sure if he was going to be able to get back over the fence. “I would have probably walked around to the players’ lot and got in my truck and left,” Gardner added. “If I stayed there long enough, they would have sent somebody else out there to play left field.” BILLY WITZA version of this article appears in print on March 22, 2015, on Page SP3 of the New York edition with the headline: Lester Skips His Start to Let Arm Rest Awhile.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.