AdvertisementSupported byBy Patrick MaksCOLUMBUS, Ohio — The Oklahoma star guard Buddy Hield sat in his team’s locker room on Saturday afternoon picking at a bag of Cheetos. His snack was interrupted by a gaggle of reporters who entered the team’s lair with questions about an upcoming game against Dayton, which will play in what is essentially its third home game in five days in the N.C.A.A. tournament.Hield, the Sooners’ best player and the Big 12 player of the year, shrugged off the notion of potential inequity Sunday night at Nationwide Arena, which is about an hour east of the Dayton campus. “We don’t worry about that,” he said.“If we were playing close to home, they’d be saying it was unfair, too.” He added: “It’s whatever. It’s basketball.”Hield pointed to road games against the likes of Oklahoma’s conference foes Kansas, Iowa State and Kansas State, which are known for their feisty and ferocious fans. “We’re used to playing against teams that have 18,000 or like 16,000” fans at their games. “It’s fun, you know?”For this bracket, the more unusual that your picks are, the more points you’ll receive — so long as those picks are correct.TaShawn Thomas, a senior forward who scored 18 points to help his team beat Albany on Friday evening, had a similar thought. “I think the fact that we had to play in a lot of tough road games in the Big 12 is going to help us out a lot,” he said. “It’s not going to be nothing new to us.”Yet in such arenas, the Sooners have struggled. They are 5-6 away from their home court. Hield, speaking of road games, said: “We haven’t won those games yet. It’s sad to say, but we’re up for the challenge.”Dayton, which captured imaginations in a surprising run to the N.C.A.A. tournament’s round of 8 last year, should be a worthy adversary. The 11th-seeded Flyers upset Providence on Friday and nipped Boise State in a play-in game earlier in the week.“I see how they fight and they scrap and how they play together,” Hield said. “Even though they’re small in size, they find a way to win. That’s just something about this team. They made a run last year. We’ve got to find a way to stop their run.”Eventually, Hield was left to return to his snack. In the locker room, he shouted, “Y’all want some Cheetos?” He smiled. “You know why I’m here!” he said, as if to channel Marshawn Lynch, the tight-lipped Seattle Seahawks running back.Advertisement