AdvertisementSupported byBy Marc TracySEATTLE — During Gonzaga’s 86-76 victory against North Dakota State on Friday night, forward Domantas Sabonis was fouled hard under the basket. He lay on his stomach for a moment until guard Byron Wesley ran over and stuck his hands beneath him as if lifting a piece of furniture.Sabonis, a 6-foot-10 freshman and son of the former N.B.A. player Arvydas Sabonis of Lithuania, spent his formative years at Unicaja Malaga’s academy in Spain. Wesley, a 6-4 senior, grew up east of Los Angeles and played at Southern California. Their diverse pedigrees, like those of other players, have come together at Gonzaga.The Bulldogs, who are 33-2, won the West Coast Conference and secured a No. 2 seed in the N.C.A.A. tournament, have eight players who either played in another country before college or began their college careers with a different team.“It’s been a good experience for all of us,” said junior forward Kyle Wiltjer, who transferred from Kentucky after the 2012-13 season. “We all came from our unique stories. We just blend together. We’ve learned a lot, and hopefully that can translate.”Struggling to compete with programs like Kentucky, Duke and U.C.L.A. for the top prospects, Gonzaga has developed something like a Moneyball approach to recruiting, offering itself as a home to tall, talented Europeans as well as Americans who were not ideal fits at their old programs.“To differentiate yourself, sometimes you have to find a niche in recruiting, and Gonzaga has done that,” said Evan Daniels of Scout.com. “They may be in a midmajor conference, but they are a high-major program because they’ve been able to get high-major recruits.”The Bulldogs, who play Iowa on Sunday in the round of 32, hope their formula will reverse a trend of recent struggles. Though the Bulldogs have reached the tournament in 17 straight seasons, they have not played in its second weekend since 2009 or reached the final eight since 1999. For this bracket, the more unusual that your picks are, the more points you’ll receive — so long as those picks are correct.Coach Mark Few said that the diverse roster was key to Gonzaga’s success this season and that despite their different backgrounds, the players sacrificed individual accomplishment for team success.“It’s been cool to sit back and watch,” Few said.The most important transfer this season is Wiltjer, the team’s star. Even Kentucky Coach John Calipari understood Wiltjer’s desire to be the big fish in a smaller pond, though he might regret it should his undefeated Wildcats have to face Wiltjer, a mobile 6-10 forward with 3-point accuracy, in the title game.But Wiltjer is not the only notable transfer. In Wesley and Eric McClellan, Gonzaga got the leading scorers for U.S.C. and Vanderbilt, and Angel Nunez, who played for Louisville, was on the roster of the 2013 title team. Kevin Pangos, the starting point guard, is from Canada. His roommate, the 7-1 center Przemek Karnowski, was a member of Poland’s under-17 team.Recruiting foreign players, particularly big men, has become something of a specialty for Gonzaga. The effort is spearheaded by Tommy Lloyd, who has been an assistant coach under Few since 2001. “We have a good network over there of recruits we’ve gotten over the years,” Lloyd said. “It’s where we’ve been able to have success.” Lloyd cited Ronny Turiaf, who came to Gonzaga from France in the early 2000s and was drafted in the second round by the Lakers, as the team’s first major foreign star. “Guys are able to see an established track record now,” Lloyd said. “It’s easy for them to see themselves being successful.”Karnowski said Lloyd made several visits to see him play, including traveling to his native Poland. “That’s quite a trip,” he said. In the case of its transfers, Gonzaga has given players second chances. Wiltjer grew up in Portland, Ore., and was heavily recruited by Gonzaga before committing to Kentucky. Nunez missed an entire season at Louisville after sustaining a concussion. Wesley got his degree and took advantage of a recent N.C.A.A. rule allowing graduates to transfer without having to redshirt a year. McClellan was kicked off Vanderbilt’s team after an academic violation and a misdemeanor theft charge.“They worked hard for my future,” McClellan said of Gonzaga. “There’s a lot of things they did behind the scenes that people don’t see.”Few, who is in his 16th season as Gonzaga’s head coach, said he tried to do right by transfers.“Much like our connection with foreign kids, any time you establish a precedent or a history of, Boy, they really served that guy well and I can relate to that guy, then that’s going to help you,” he said.Nunez said Gonzaga “does a good job embracing everyone.”“If you come in, you’re handed a role, and that’s your role, and everyone just embraces it,” he said.Kelly Olynyk, a Canadian who played for Gonzaga and is now on the Boston Celtics, encouraged his countryman Pangos to give the Bulldogs a look.“He just said he loved it,” Pangos said, “and he told me what he liked about it — what it’s all about, the family environment.”Then, too, there is Gonzaga’s Flex offense, which emphasizes ball movement.Wesley said he was struck immediately — in a pickup game, in fact — by “just how unselfish everyone is.” He added, “At Gonzaga, I realized right away, you always pass the ball to the open man, you always make the right play. That’s the basketball I was taught to play.”This resonance is no accident, according to Lloyd.“The way these guys play fits our style,” he said. “It’s a skilled style. You have to be able to think and make decisions. And the European kids are brought up that way.”Finally, players say, integrating outsiders is easier at Gonzaga, which has the family atmosphere one would expect of a smaller school in sleepy Spokane, Wash. “I’m from Austin, Tex.,” said McClellan. “The population is a lot more than Spokane. But being in a location that is real chill and remote is good for me.”Sabonis found he could import a crucial aspect of the lifestyle he learned in Spain.“I still have my naps,” he said of the midafternoon siesta. “I try to manage it whenever I can.”Advertisement