AdvertisementSupported byBy Billy WitzTAMPA, Fla. — C. C. Sabathia chuckled at the almost apologetic question: Would it mean anything to him to be starting Sunday against the Mets and their ace Matt Harvey when the Yankees travel across the state to play their crosstown rivals?“No,” Sabathia said, smiling. “Sorry.”The Mets and the Yankees play meaningful games every year now — and sometimes, as when they met in the 2000 World Series, the games are more meaningful than others. But their meetings in spring training have been sporadic, given that their two camps — one in Tampa and the other in Port St. Lucie — are on opposite coasts of Florida, about 160 miles apart.This is their first meeting during the exhibition season since 2012, and before that it had been 16 years since the teams had played in Florida.If the atmosphere in Port St. Lucie figures to be vibrant on Sunday, with enthusiasm for the Mets — particularly when Harvey pitches — running higher than in recent years, it was considerably less enthusiastic in the Yankees’ clubhouse Saturday.Hourslong bus trips are the bane of a veteran’s existence — Mariano Rivera rarely, if ever, played in a road spring training game during the last decade of his career. And the Yankees’ buses will leave for Port St. Lucie at 7:30 a.m. Sunday. Sabathia said he planned to drive there with his family on Saturday night.There was a time when games between the Mets and the Yankees that did not count did matter. One way to spark the wrath of George M. Steinbrenner, the team’s longtime principal owner, was for the Yankees to lose to the Mets.“The crosstown, back pages of the papers, all that stuff,” said Stump Merrill, the former Yankees manager who is a special assistant to General Manager Brian Cashman. “Of course those games mattered. But that’s how he was. Even way back in the ’70s, he’d come in if you lost two in a row and say, ‘O.K., this is a must win.’ ”Steinbrenner sent scouts to the Mets’ camp in advance of games, an almost unheard-of tactic. He seethed when he had to endure chants of “Let’s go Mets” after one Yankees loss. He engaged in a shouting match with Manager Billy Martin after another defeat, an episode that led to Gabe Paul, the team president, getting drenched with ice water.And after a young pitcher, Mike Griffin, was battered in a 9-6 loss to the Mets in 1981, he was sent to the minors.“We had to find out about our young pitchers,” Steinbrenner said then. “Well, we found out about Mike Griffin today. You say you can’t tell from one outing? The hell you can’t. This spells it for Mike Griffin. He’s got to go down to the minors and prove himself to me.”The series began in 1962 when the Mets, who went on to lose a major-league-record 120 games, defeated a Yankees team that was in the midst of playing in five consecutive World Series.When the Yankees moved their spring training headquarters from Fort Lauderdale to Tampa in the mid-1990s, there was little reason to continue the series, given the distance between the teams’ camps. But in recent years, as teams like the Dodgers (Vero Beach) and Orioles (Fort Lauderdale) have left Florida’s east coast, the Mets have needed to go farther afield to play games.The Mets will travel to Tampa on Wednesday.If the games are perfunctory for veterans like Sabathia, for others the atmosphere and the opportunity to face Harvey is something more. Aaron Judge, the Yankees’ top outfield prospect, lit up when he was told that Harvey was scheduled to start.“To hit against Harvey would be a challenge, but that’s what you want — a chance to compete,” he said.It’s a sentiment Steinbrenner would appreciate — and so will many of the fans who are there Sunday. Perhaps these games will be a sort of spring training for them, a chance to exhort and criticize and ready themselves for when the games between the teams will count for something more than bragging rights.The Mets and the Yankees play earlier this season than ever, in late April at Yankee Stadium. And then once more, later than ever in the regular season, in September at Citi Field. If the teams and their fans are fortunate, with each team trying to end uncomfortable absences from the playoffs, those games will matter the most.Advertisement