By NELLIE BOWLESNOV. 9, 2017
SAN FRANCISCO — On Tuesday afternoon, Twitter added a small blue check mark to the account of Jason Kessler, a move known as verification that indicates a prominent person’s real account.The action was quickly met with outrage. That’s because Mr. Kessler is a well-known white supremacist who has used Twitter to spread his message and organize rallies like Unite the Right’s march in Charlottesville, Va., where torch-wielding protesters marched through the streets chanting racist rallying cries.Across the Twitterverse, people including the comedian Michael Ian Black came down on the company.
            Hey @jack: very active user, 2.1M followers here: this is disgusting. Verifying white supremacists reinforces the increasing belief that your site is a platform for hate speech. I don't want to give up Twitter, but I may have to. Who do you value more, users like me or him? https://t.co/5ymcNfFvH0 
            Hi @Twitter,Hope you realize there's no such thing as being neutral when it comes to Nazis. Verifying Jason Kessler is a political act -- and one that puts you on the wrong side of history. https://t.co/VlvDaMwQO3 By Thursday morning, Twitter announced it would be halting its entire general verification program. It was yet another situation that the company has had to make amends on, just a week after the accidental deletion of President Trump’s Twitter account and testimony in Washington on how Russian agents used its service last year to sow discord.“The system is broken and needs to be reconsidered,” Twitter’s chief executive, Jack Dorsey, tweeted on Thursday. “And we failed by not doing anything about it. Working now to fix faster.”
            We should’ve communicated faster on this (yesterday): our agents have been following our verification policy correctly, but we realized some time ago the system is broken and needs to be reconsidered. And we failed by not doing anything about it. Working now to fix faster. https://t.co/wVbfYJntHj When Twitter puts a verified check mark next to a white nationalist’s name, is the company endorsing that person? That was what Twitter was trying to figure out on Thursday.The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Advertisement“Verification was meant to authenticate identity and voice but it is interpreted as an endorsement or importance,” the company said on Twitter. “We have created this confusion.”AdvertisementTwitter originally began verifying accounts to give high-profile individuals — celebrities, politicians, journalists and others — a way to distinguish themselves from impersonators. The blue check mark has since become something of a badge of honor, signaling that someone had reached a certain level of importance.“It’s recognition. It’s a simple as that,” Richard Spencer, a white supremacist who was verified by Twitter in 2016, said in an interview. “The blue check mark is useful.”The white nationalist movement has flourished on Twitter, but Mr. Spencer said the platform had been behaving erratically toward his community lately.“It seems to be non-algorithmic now,” he said. “It seems like there’s one person who doesn’t like this tweet or that account one day, and it seems like a judgment. It’s incoherent.”Mr. Kessler’s account — with the handle @TheMadDimension — remains verified. Late Wednesday, he responded to the uproar with a tweet wondering if it was still O.K. to be white, and included a poll for people to answer. As of Thursday afternoon, he had gotten nearly 50,000 responses.
            Is it okay to be white?        Follow Nellie Bowles on Twitter: @NellieBowlesA version of this article appears in print on November 10, 2017, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: After Outcry, Twitter Pauses Check Mark Verification.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.