
Bits By                     
 QUENTIN HARDY
 
MARCH 25, 2016
Some say that on the Internet, content is king, because that is what draws audiences. Maybe — but if so, its crown is not very golden.Take the value of recorded music, as reported in this story from Ben Sisario and Karl Russell. From 2006 to 2010, revenue from music sales fell from just under $12 billion to about $7 billion. The good news is, it hasn’t fallen further: In 2015, industry figures show, music sales were $7.02 billion.The somewhat niche market for vinyl albums grew to a point where vinyl brought in more revenue than music royalties on YouTube. But wait — there’s more bad news for the industry. Sales of CDs are still falling, while subscriptions to streaming services, which pay the record companies much less, are rising.For the recording companies and the musicians they pay, this is not a positive trend, in terms of making a living. But it is nice for consumers, because they now have access to immense catalogs of music for almost nothing.AdvertisementSo what happens next? For one thing, probably more touring to try to make up for those losses. For those at the top of the heap, much more money can be made. On Wednesday, Billboard reported that Madonna now has a lifetime gross of $1.3 billion from touring. Billboard has been keeping track of this since 1990. The Rolling Stones are top earners, with a lifetime $1.84 billion, while U2 comes second at $1.67 billion. The Material Girl is third.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.This is in line with a trend The Times noted a couple of years ago: As fast-moving digital things become commonplace, some perishable human experiences — like big event concerts — become more valuable.A century ago, a record by Enrico Caruso cost $30, in today’s dollars. His voice is now free on YouTube. Seeing Caruso also cost $30 then. On her last tour, the average price to see Madonna in North America was $450.AdvertisementO.K., so Madonna is probably happy about current events in the music industry. The people who make her records and all the lesser acts that don’t have her fan base to buy concert tickets? Probably less so.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »