
App Smart By                     
 KIT EATON
 
DEC. 28, 2016
WHETHER it’s by iMessage, WhatsApp, Snapchat, or Facebook’s Messenger or Instagram, we collectively send billions of text messages daily. This fast-paced method of communication has become so ingrained that other apps have borrowed the chat format for different purposes.Take a look at Hooked. The app takes the idea of epistolary storytelling into the 21st century by delivering a story to readers in tiny chunks that emulate a text-message-based conversation. All someone has to do is click “next,” and speech bubbles purportedly from each of the characters in the story appear on screen and scroll upward as in a real chat.This app feels unsettling to use at first. But after a while, Hooked becomes fun, and the stories are compelling, particularly the horror-based ones. There’s something satisfyingly voyeuristic about reading someone else’s texts, even though they are fictional.Hooked has a home page that tempts you to read different stories based on title and a thumbnail image. You can also search by category, like “top picks” or “sci-fi,” or type in a keyword. If you set up a free profile inside the app and feel creative, you can compose and share stories of your own.AdvertisementThe interface is fairly easy to use, though sometimes it can be confusing. While you can download the app and read stories free on iOS and Android, there are time limits, so you can read only parts of a chat story — then you must wait awhile to read more. It costs $3 a month and as much as $40 annually to get access to all the features to read when you like and to submit your own pieces.AdvertisementAmazon has an app similar to Hooked called Rapids. The difference is that while Hooked has content of all types, Rapids is a chat-based story app aimed squarely at a younger audience.With children ages 7 to 12 years old in mind, the story lines cover simple themes and are edited to be amusing. A glossary allows children to look up the definitions of unfamiliar words. The interface is easy to use, the graphics are cartoonlike and each character has a cheerful cartoon avatar to help identify which person is relating which parts of the story. You can opt to have the story read aloud, which is great for bedtimes.Yet the idea of telling stories to youngsters in this ultrashort style seemed a bit much to me, particularly if you feel that children are already too distracted by the attractions of the internet. And while Rapids is free to download on iOS and Android and there is a short free trial, it costs $3 a month to get all the content.In many ways, episodic messaging in story apps is not new. The format was a big feature of a news app called Circa, which was briefly popular a few years ago.Whereas other news apps published straightforward stories, much like those you would read on other websites, Circa revealed the news in short chunks. This supposedly made it easier to keep up with what was happening in the world in real time because you could quickly scan the headlines and a few introductory paragraphs of each story. If you were particularly interested in a story, you could follow it to read more as the events unfolded and the story was updated. But Circa ultimately failed to raise enough money to keep going and the app was shut down.More recently, the Quartz news app has taken the core idea of Circa and raised it to a whole new level of emulating text messaging. Getting the news from Quartz’s app feels much like having it revealed to you as a series of instant messages. You can answer questions posed by the app by choosing responses that are much like instant messages; these tell it which news stories you would like to read. It also delivers chat-like notifications on a phone or Apple Watch to keep you updated on events. The app is a free iOS or Android download.Lastly, there is an interesting game that uses instant messaging as its main interface: Frequency.In Frequency, which is part story, part adventure game, a mysterious character messages you from the future, with the messages popping up almost as if they were real texts. At a decision point, you have a choice from among a few text replies. It’s simple and fun, and the way it plays out over time makes interacting with the story gratifying. Frequency is a free iOS download.Fam is a new and popular addition to Apple’s iMessage chat interface that adds a neat feature: group video chatting. Designed so that you can easily pop in and out of a chat, Fam lets up to eight people chat via video at the same time. Fam is free.A version of this article appears in print on December 29, 2016, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Text Format Takes Apps Into Chattier Realm.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »