
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
AUG. 2, 2017
Q. With all the concern about Microsoft Paint going away in the next Windows 10 update, I almost missed that there’s yet another update to Windows 10 coming out this year. When is this one supposed to arrive, and what will it do?A. Microsoft Paint, the free graphics software that has been included with the Windows operating system for 32 years, is not going away entirely, but Microsoft did announce that it was ceasing any future development of the program. In a company blog post, Microsoft said that the old version of Paint would be available in the Windows Store as an optional download, even if it would no longer be included in future versions of Windows.While the company has retirement plans for the old Paint, its newer Paint 3D app (released earlier this year with the Windows 10 Creators Update) includes many of the same drawing, painting and visual tools — and as the name suggests, refreshes the app with 3-D drawing and modeling features. The Windows blog has tips and video tutorials for those who want to explore Paint 3D.As for the next version of Windows 10, Microsoft is calling it the Windows 10 Fall Creators Update and plans to release it next month, but has yet to reveal an exact arrival date. New additions include Timeline (a visual record of your sessions on the computer that makes it easy to jump back into a project) and Story Remix (a moviemaking app that automatically creates videos from your clips). Many other features are expected in the Windows 10 Fall Creators Update, including a redesign of the Action Center for system settings and notifications, enhancements to the Cortana virtual assistant and built-in protection from ransomware attacks.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »