
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
AUG. 2, 2017
Q.  I have a desktop computer, but I would like a low-cost tablet around $100 or so just to tweak my beats when I’m at work or on the go, and to use it for ideas that I come up with from random thoughts. Which low-cost tablet would you recommend?A. The Wirecutter, a product recommendation site owned by The New York Times, has tested a variety of Android tablets and found the Amazon Fire HD 8 to be the best model for the budget-minded, priced at $80 for a tablet with 16 gigabytes of memory. The device runs the Fire OS, which is a variant of Google’s Android system, and can run software and media bought from Amazon’s online store, like the DJ Mix Pads or edjing Mix apps. (If you do not find programs to fit your needs in Amazon’s app store, it may be possible to get them from the Google Play store through some technical tinkering, but do so at your own risk.)Android tablets around the $100 mark often have slower processors, lower-resolution screens and smaller storage capacities than pricier hardware. If you are just looking for a portable device to mix your own music, there are several models to consider, and most mobile operating systems include a basic note-taking app if you do not want to download fancier software. The ASUS ZenPad 7.0 and the Lenovo Yoga Tab 3 8 are other Android-based tablets with price tags between $100 and $200. The Google Play store has plenty of apps for making music as well, including FL Studio Mobile 3, Stagelight and Ninja Jamm.Cheap devices that run Windows 10 are also available, like the eight-inch NuVision tablet, and music apps can be downloaded from in the Windows Store. Apple’s least expensive model in its iPad line is the $329 Wi-Fi iPad with 32 gigabytes of memory; the company’s own GarageBand music-creation program is free, and the App Store has other possibilities. Buying a refurbished tablet is another way to keep costs down.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »