
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
NOV. 6, 2017
Q. Why does the iPhone battery drain so much? I have an iPhone 6 and consider myself a “normal” user of the iPhone. I have gone to Apple’s website and done everything suggested to slow the drain, but sometimes by 6 p.m. I’m down below 50 percent. What else can I do?A. Battery drain can be caused by a number of factors, including the age of the battery itself. The iPhone 6 was released in 2014, and if you purchased the device around that time and have been using it regularly for three years, the battery may be losing its ability to hold a charge. Having an authorized service provider replace the battery or investing in an external battery are two options for a failing power cell.Advice and tips on the technology changing how you live.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.If you purchased the iPhone 6 more recently — and have been regularly upgrading its operating system as Apple produces fresh versions each year — your phone’s hardware may not be able to use the latest iOS releases as effectively as the faster processors in newer iPhones. Complaints about lousy battery life often dog new iOS versions, which in turn lead to incremental updates from Apple that are intended to provide “bug fixes and improvements.”Apple released a significant update to the operating system on Oct. 31, so if you have not installed it yet, upgrading to iOS 11.1 might ease some of the power-sapping issues. This iOS 11.1 update also adds dozens of new emoji characters and corrects a few performance issues. Keeping your apps updated may improve things, too.You can see which apps and services are using the most power by opening the Settings app and selecting Battery; the information is listed under Battery Usage. Turning on Low Power Mode — and turning off power-hungry features like Background App Refresh, Hey Siri and Location Services (when not needed) can also help.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.A version of this article appears in print on November 9, 2017, on Page B8 of the New York edition with the headline: Slowing iPhone Battery Drain.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »