AdvertisementSupported byTech TipBy J. D. BiersdorferQ. Why does Windows always want to restart after it downloads updates? Do I have to restart? Why do some software updates not require the whole computer to be restarted?A. Big system-software updates for Windows and Mac (as well as for Android, iOS and other devices) typically involve multiple steps. The first is downloading the update from the company’s servers, which can take several hours if the software is several gigabytes in size and you have a slow internet connection. Once the update has downloaded, another program takes over to install the new software.When the computer is up and running, its operating system files are in use. If the software update includes security patches and improvements to other parts of the operating system code, Windows needs to shut down everything first by restarting the computer. This action frees up the files it needs to add, remove or replace as part of the update process.In the quest for up-to-date security and system software, Windows 10 has been aggressive about automatically downloading updates and installing them — even if doing so disrupts work and forces the computer to restart in the middle of a project. But to fully install the system updates, the computer must restart at some point. (Setting up your Active Hours preferences in the Settings app can give you a say on when the mandatory restarts should occur.) Temporarily switching to a metered connection in the Network settings can stop the automatic downloads for the time being, but puts the computer more at risk if security updates are pending.Not every software update requires the computer to restart. App updates and other code fixes that do not require access to any active system files install themselves without disruption.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.Advertisement