By MIKE ISAACJUNE 8, 2016
For much of his life, Dan McComas has worked to foster community.He grew up in the San Francisco Bay Area’s punk music scene, where he built a community for youths with 924 Gilman Street, an all-ages punk club and co-op. He was early in supporting the local, neighborhood-driven newspaper, The Bay Citizen (now defunct). He ran a marketplace start-up, called Redditgifts, which let online friends buy and sell gifts for one another; it was later acquired by Reddit, the online message board.But Mr. McComas, who was let go by Reddit last July and moved to Salt Lake City, has not found his ideal online community, one where abuse does not run rampant and where people can coexist and remain shielded from online misconduct.“I loved some of the community aspects of Reddit, but what I didn’t love was all of the strife that went on inside, and outside, of the company,” said Mr. McComas, 41. “We had serious problems with harassment.”So Mr. McComas decided to try building a different kind of online community with Imzy, a community site he founded last September, where people can form groups around shared interests and host discussions about anything from feminism to “Game of Thrones.” From the start, the goal was to get right the areas he believes Reddit got wrong — specifically, by ending the consistent abuse and trolling across Reddit’s many subcultures.AdvertisementImzy is one attempt to tackle the problems created by anonymity and community on the internet, a powerful set of dynamics that many entrepreneurs have tried to take on before — often unsuccessfully. While anonymity and pseudonymity can spur swift growth at fledgling sites, they also create breeding grounds for vitriol-spewing trolls that have made many online environments toxic.The toll has been heavy. Start-ups like Secret, YikYak and Ask.fm, which offered users anonymity while messaging and communicating, grew quickly. But they found it difficult to curb harassment and nurture long-term communities. Secret was shuttered last year; YikYak has struggled with how to deal with abuse on the platform.“I asked myself why this was happening,” Mr. McComas said, noting the threats of physical violence and verbal abuse that he and his wife, both former Reddit employees, encountered on the site. “Is this just the internet? Are people just bad like this?”The idea behind Imzy owes much to what Reddit did well, which was to build communities that grow up organically around certain topics. More than 230 million people visit Reddit regularly each month, and an average visit lasts more than 13 minutes. Reddit has had an open approach to free speech — nearly anything goes — and people participate in long, threaded message board discussions, many of which are entirely text-based and consist of thousands of individual comments.What Mr. McComas and others found was that certain subjects on Reddit, such as politics, feminism or discussions of race, would almost always attract trolling commenters. That made it difficult for people to feel that Reddit was a positive place for hashing out ideas and having conversations.AdvertisementImzy tries to combat some of those issues through the site’s architecture. When someone signs up, they are directed to pick a few specific communities they want to join. That’s different from Reddit’s “front page,” which displays a smattering of different popular subforums to new users.The idea, Mr. McComas said, is that the core, devoted members of a group are often not the ones who make a community toxic, but rather the passers-by who may stumble upon a new community and leave disparaging remarks.Imzy users are also allowed to select only one username in each community they join, to keep trolls from creating multiple identities with which they can harass others. Individual moderators self-govern their communities, based on rules of their own making, giving each community the flexibility to set its own terms about what is and is not permissible. Other conventions, like chatting in threads and posting images, are much the same as predecessor sites.“We’re building this way because we want people to find and join communities that they have a real connection to, and these are really our first measures to address the problems in the way of getting there,” Mr. McComas said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.He is also expanding Imzy slowly — people need an invitation to participate, and users can invite only a handful of others once they have joined. Imzy has partnered with other culture groups and celebrities, including the “Girls” creator Lena Dunham, to bring their own internet fan bases to the platform.“Everyone becomes their Mr. Hyde selves on the internet,” said Shawn Kittelsen, creative director of Feral Audio, a podcast network that is working closely with Imzy to start an online community for its listeners. “The bottom line is, do you have a system to help manage the bad eggs so that they don’t ruin the experience for everyone else?”Imzy has a hard road ahead before reaching the mainstream. The site hosts 15,000 users, and 20,000 more are on the waiting list, a paltry number compared with the hundreds of millions of users who visit Reddit and other competing sites.For revenue, Imzy does not rely on advertising. The start-up will function partly on “tips” from users, who can also donate money to support their individual communities. The start-up will eventually open up its developer platform — which programmers can use to build new features into their community — and that could become its future business model. Imzy, based in Salt Lake City, has raised $3 million from investors including Charles River Ventures and O’Reilly AlphaTech Ventures.Gina Bianchini, chief executive of the online community platform Mightybell and co-founder of Ning, another community site, is skeptical about whether Imzy will take off.Advertisement“This is a classic situation where someone thinks that the thing that worked in 2006 will work in 2016 if they clean up the design and make it ‘nicer,’” she said. “Over a decade later and there is no Reddit-killer. There’s a reason for that.”Imzy is not the only one trying to root out hostility and trolling in its online community. Jack Dorsey, chief executive of Twitter, has vowed to make curbing harassment on the network a top priority. And since Mr. McComas left Reddit in July (because of differences about how the site should be run), the company has begun introducing tools that let users block abusive members and enacted a new set of rules that prohibits posting items that “violate a common sense of decency.”Reddit declined to comment on the terms of Mr. McComas’s departure.“The value of Reddit is an experience that shows the real discussions that people are having on almost every imaginable topic,” Alexis Ohanian, co-founder of Reddit, said in a statement. “As with any large, dynamic, community platform of engaged users expressing themselves, we are bound to see the spectrum of public opinion, from extreme views to everyday acts of kindness and humanity.”Imzy’s supporters know Mr. McComas’s ambitions are high. But they see the company’s business model, which is not reliant on advertising, as a potential strength.“We see an opportunity for a new media platform to be created that enables moderators to make a living on the platform,” said Saar Gur, a partner at Charles River Ventures and an Imzy investor. “We haven’t seen anyone yet build a community platform that truly is a platform with a developer community.”If Imzy does indeed become large enough to be the next Reddit, Mr. McComas said it would have a greater chance at success because he is tackling cultural problems head on, rather than further down the line.“That’s where things went wrong for Reddit,” he said. “It didn’t get its start by really thinking about the community. You have to focus on all of this from the beginning.”A version of this article appears in print on June 9, 2016, on Page F2 of the New York edition with the headline: Reimagining Reddit, While Warding Off Trolls.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »