AdvertisementSupported byBy Mike IsaacSAN FRANCISCO — For more than a year, investors have braced for Facebook to reach the limit of its moneymaking capacity. The growth of its advertising business, the company has warned, would eventually start to slow down.It turns out that Facebook has barely broken stride.On Wednesday, the social-networking giant reported yet another blockbuster quarter, surpassing Wall Street estimates despite a modest slowdown in revenue growth.“We just continue to see businesses coming to both Facebook and Instagram to find people on mobile,” David Wehner, the company’s chief financial officer, said in an interview. “Mobile continues to be the driver of growth.”Facebook reported $9.3 billion in revenue for the second quarter, up 45 percent from the same period last year. Profit rose to $3.9 billion, up 71 percent from last year, or $1.32 a share, exceeding Wall Street’s expectations of $1.12 a share on $9.2 billion in sales.Facebook also said it continued to attract new users and businesses, even though it already served a large portion of the world’s population. More than 2 billion people visit Facebook on a monthly basis, 17 percent more than a year earlier. About two-thirds of those visitors use the site every day.Mr. Wehner said that despite the company’s growth soaring over all, Facebook expected growth in advertising revenue to continue slowing the rest of this year as it reaches the limit of the number of advertisements, or “ad load,” it can place in its news feed without disturbing users.“This ad load ultimatum has led to a more improved news feed experience for all users, but obviously takes additional time and resources for marketers to deliver compelling ads,” said Andrew Foxwell, a founder of Foxwell Digital, a social media advisory firm.Facebook also warned that it would be spending a great deal of money for the foreseeable future. The company now has more than 20,000 employee, 43 percent more than a year ago. And it had more than $1.4 billion in capital expenditures in the second quarter — a category of spending the company does not see slowing any time soon.Such warnings do not appear to have spooked investors. After a brief dip in after-hours trading, Facebook’s share price rose to more than $172, a record high.The continued financial success comes amid a tumultuous year for the social network. Facebook continues to grapple with claims that it is instrumental in the spread of fake news, and it is also dealing with the many controversial ways people have used Facebook Live, its latest streaming video product.Still, company executives see a number of opportunities in the near future that may excite investors. Instagram, the photo-sharing service owned by Facebook, is selling ads in more places within its app, including its “Stories” product, which takes many cues from the messaging app Snapchat.Facebook Messenger and WhatsApp, two of the company’s messaging properties, are just now starting to dabble in generating revenue. Expanding those efforts could accelerate in the coming months.“I want to see us move a little faster here, but I’m confident we’re going to get this right,” Mark Zuckerberg, Facebook’s executive, said on a conference call with investors on Wednesday.Facebook also continues to spend money building out its video platform, courting top performers from YouTube and improving Facebook Live to entice more people to use it.Follow Mike Isaac on Twitter @MikeIsaac.Advertisement