
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
OCT. 31, 2017
Q. How do I make the Cortana software on my Windows 10 PC ignore everybody else in the house and respond only to my voice?A. For Microsoft’s Cortana virtual assistant to obey only one voice, the software has to get to know that voice. So you need to do a few training exercises so the program recognizes you and doesn’t respond to other voices.Advice and tips on the technology changing how you live.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.To start training, open the Cortana settings; in the new Windows 10 Fall Creators Update, open the Settings app from the gear-shaped icon on the Start menu. In the Settings area, select Cortana.Next, in the Cortana settings box, click Talk to Cortana on the left side of the box. In the “Hey Cortana” area, make sure the “Let Cortana respond to ‘Hey Cortana’” setting is turned on and then click the “Learn how I say ‘Hey Cortana’” link.This opens the Cortana panel, where you will be asked to repeat six phrases displayed on the screen. Click the Start button in the Cortana window and follow along as the software guides you through the voice training. (Some users have reported buggy and nonresponsive behavior when trying to use Cortana’s voice-learning feature, but Microsoft’s online support forums have troubleshooting suggestions.)Once you complete the required phrases, return to the main Settings app and go back to the Cortana area. Now that the software has had a full introduction to your voice, click the button next to “Try to respond to only me.”Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.A version of this article appears in print on November 2, 2017, on Page B7 of the New York edition with the headline: Fine-Tuning Cartana’s Voice Recognition.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »