
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
FEB. 2, 2017
Q. I recently switched to a Mac laptop, and the Safari browser confuses me. Sometimes it has scroll bars on the side of the page, and sometimes it doesn’t. Why is this?A. In an attempt to streamline the user interface, Apple’s Safari browser for the Mac has scroll bars that can disappear from view if you are not actively scrolling through a web page. The company has been tinkering with desktop scrolling behavior for several years, and Safari’s behavior on the Mac is similar to the way it behaves in Apple’s iOS mobile operating system.Scroll bars that disappear until they are needed make more sense on a mobile device with limited screen space than they do on a bigger screen navigated by mouse or track pad. Fortunately, you can change the scroll bar behavior for your programs in the Mac’s system preferences.Click the System Preferences icon in the Mac’s desktop dock, or go to the Apple Menu and choose System Preferences. When the System Preferences box opens, click the General icon in the top row.In the General box, go to the “Show scroll bars” section and click the button next to Always. Additionally, you can change what happens when you click in a scroll bar too, either jumping to the next page or to the area of the page where you clicked. (Before you close the preferences box, you can make other interface adjustments like changing the highlight color and increasing the sidebar icon size, among other things.)If you do not like Safari, you can download another Mac-friendly browser like Google Chrome, Mozilla Firefox, Opera or Vivaldi. In most newer browsers, you can even use a keyboard shortcut to roll through a page — tap the space bar to scroll down, or hold down the Shift key and tap the space bar to reverse direction.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »