AdvertisementSupported byTech TipBy J. D. BiersdorferQ. I can’t get Google Now on Tap to work on my iPhone running the Google app. Is there a switch I need to flip?A. The stand-alone Google app for iOS includes a version of the Google Now assistant for keeping track of your appointments and news stories you may care about, but the iOS version does not have the On Tap feature. The full Google Now on Tap experience works on devices running at least Android 6.0 and brings up links to additional information about the topic open on the screen when you hold down the home button on the phone or tablet.However, you can still use the basic Google Now service on the iPhone, as long as it has been enabled. To do that, open the Google app and tap the gear-shaped Settings icon (or your account profile picture) in the top left corner of the screen. On the Settings screen, tap Google Now to get to the service’s own Preferences page.Here, you can turn on the Google Now feature and select the information cards you would like to see from it: Google Now can show you updates on traffic, weather, stocks, sports teams, television shows and other items of interest, while also reminding you of your friends’ birthdays and events on your daily schedule. You can also search the web by voice through the Google app. Holding down the iPhone’s home button summons Apple’s Siri assistant or the iPhone’s older Voice Control feature instead of On Tap results.For Android users, Google recently updated Now on Tap to narrow the focus of the information cards that pop up when you hold down the home button. Instead of scanning the whole page for possible topics, Google Now on Tap can reel in information about specific words you have highlighted onscreen. You can also hold down the home button to get more information about an image you have open in the Photos app or on a webpage.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.Advertisement