
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
JUNE 6, 2016
Q. Can I change the size of the tiles in the Windows 10 Start menu? I want to make the apps I use the most bigger so I can find them faster.A. Windows 10 gives you four Start menu tile sizes to choose from: Small, Medium, Wide and Large. The Small size shows just the app’s icon, while the Large size often shows a chunk of information from that app, like news headlines, the day’s calendar appointments or the week’s weather forecast. The Medium and Wide sizes vary the information they show based on the app.When you want to change an app tile’s size, right-click the tile (or press and hold your finger on the glass of a touch-screen device), choose Resize from the contextual menu and select the new size you want to use. You can also use the Unpin From Start option on the same menu to remove tiles you never open.You can also resize the amount of space the Start Menu itself takes up. To make a minor adjustment, select the side or top of the Start Menu’s outer edge and drag it out as far as you can. To see even more app tiles across your display, you can expand the Start Menu’s real estate to fill the entire screen. Just click or tap the Start button, go to the Settings app on the Start Menu, select Personalization and then Start. Turn on the option next to “Use Start full screen.”If you do not want to use the entire screen but would still like to add more tiles to the standard Start Menu, stay in the Start settings box, but turn on the “Show More Tiles” option instead. Now, instead of three medium-sized tiles in a row across the menu, you can have four of them in a horizontal line.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.A version of this article appears in print on June 9, 2016, on Page B7 of the New York edition with the headline: Resizing Tiles in Windows 10.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »