
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
JUNE 2, 2016
Q. Can a parent with an iPhone keep tabs on the location of a child with an Android device with the “find my phone” tracking feature?A. As long as the child has not disabled the location services function on the Android device and you have the name and password for the Google account associated with the gadget, you should be able to log into the Android Device Manager page at www.android.com/devicemanager from the iPhone’s web browser to see the Android hardware’s current location on a map. (If you are concerned that the child will turn off location services, you can install a parental control app on the device, or set up a restricted profile that blocks access to the Settings app.)If you want to keep up to date on the whereabouts of multiple family members more easily, inexpensive apps and services are available for most phones. The major national wireless carriers, AT&T, Sprint, T-Mobile and Verizon Wireless, all offer family locator apps. These services cost an extra $6 to $15 a month, but offer additional features like automatic location checks and integrated text messaging.Glympse and Life360 Family Locator are similar third-party options with a basic free service that can be upgraded to a premium level with more features. Some locator apps require each user to check in voluntarily or share location information, so make sure the service you are considering meets your needs.For families sharing the same mobile platform, apps like Apple’s free Find My Friends for iOS are another possibility. The company also has a general Find My iPhone app you can use with an iOS device to locate another gadget through the iCloud-based tracking service.Android families can find Life360’s Find My Friends app in the Google Play store among the other locator apps for sale and download. A free Android Device Manager app is also available.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »