
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
DEC. 19, 2016
Q. I have heard that the Classic Shell program makes a Windows 10 computer look more like a Windows 7 system. I don’t see it in the Windows Store, though. Is it safe to download the software from the web?A. Classic Shell is a utility program that has been around for several years now. It allows you to customize the look of your Windows system — especially if you want to make the Start menu in Windows 10 look like one from an older, more familiar version of Windows. The software is free, but donations to support the project are accepted.The Windows Store does not currently offer Classic Shell, but the program can indeed be found on shareware sites around the web. Some sites, however, may bundle in adware and other things you do not want with your download. As an alternative, you can get Classic Shell from the download link on the project’s own website at www.classicshell.net.Downloading just about anything from the web these days can carry a security risk, though, and the Classic Shell home page even states that its download service was briefly hacked last summer. The site says its currently available file is safe, but before you install any software you have downloaded, make sure your computer’s security software is on and up-to-date.Once installed and configured, Classic Shell lets you use Windows 10 with a retro Windows 7 look for the Start menu, File Explorer and other system interface elements. The Classic Shell frequently asked questions page is worth a read before you install the program, so you know what to expect.Similar programs like Start10 and Start Menu 8 can also provide a retro look to your system.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.A version of this article appears in print on December 22, 2016, on Page B7 of the New York edition with the headline: Give Windows 10 a Classic Look.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »