
Bits By                     
 PUI-WING TAM
 
DEC. 15, 2016
After plenty of buildup, President-elect Donald J. Trump met with executives from some of the biggest tech companies on Wednesday. It was billed as a potential slugfest between the president-elect and the tech industry because there had been little love lost between both sides during the presidential campaign.But as David Streitfeld reports, the meeting instead turned out to be a charm offensive.Mr. Trump called the group, which included Timothy D. Cook of Apple, Larry Page of Alphabet, Satya Nadella of Microsoft, Sheryl Sandberg of Facebook and Jeff Bezos of Amazon, “truly amazing” and told the attendees that they were doing a good job. In turn, many of the executives listened politely, brought up topics like immigration and education, and chatted.It all ended up as a somewhat tame affair. Afterward, Mr. Trump’s oldest son, Donald Jr., who was at the meeting, said on Twitter that he was “honored” to be there. Mr. Bezos released a statement saying it had been “very productive.”Given the lack of fireworks, the attention soon turned to some of the details of the event. Why exactly did three of Mr. Trump’s children attend, some wondered, adding that the younger Trumps’ presence once again raised the specter of conflicts of interest for the president-elect. Others dug deep into the meaning of the meeting’s seating chart.Still others analyzed the photos from the meeting and concluded that not many of the tech leaders looked like they had had a good time. BuzzFeed published several pictures of the executives with grim-looking expressions in “13 Faces Every Tech C.E.O. Who Goes To A Meeting With Donald Trump Will Immediately Recognize.” And Business Insider published a picture of Mr. Bezos, Mr. Page and Ms. Sandberg at the meeting looking somewhat glum, captioning it “this picture perfectly captures the first meeting between Trump and all the tech C.E.O.s who opposed him.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »