
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
OCT. 25, 2017
Q. I am trying to conserve space on my Mac, and I read about the storage-optimization tools on the Storage tab in the About This Mac box. However, when I open the box and click the Storage tab, I don’t have a Manage button to click and start the cleanup process. Why?A. Apple added the Optimized Storage feature to its macOS Sierra (10.12) update. If your operating system is older than last year’s release, you will not see the Manage button on the Storage tab that leads you to the new space-saving utilities.You can see what version of the system you are using by going to the Apple menu, selecting About This Mac and clicking the Overview tab. If your Mac is running OS X El Capitan (version 10.11) or earlier, you need to update your operating system to use the storage-optimization feature.Advice and tips on the technology changing how you live.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.If you cannot (or do not want to) update your Mac’s operating system, you can manually free up space by deleting unneeded files, old mail attachments and other clutter. You can also find programs to automatically sweep your computer and collect unnecessary files. Clean My Mac 3 ($40, with a free trial period available), Cocktail (on sale for $19, also with a free trial period) and the free AVG Cleaner for Mac are three possibilities.For those who upgrade (or who have already), Apple’s support site has a guide to using the storage-optimizing tools in macOS Sierra and the new macOS High Sierra. Among other things, you can use the feature to seek out and delete files you no longer need, store documents and photos in iCloud and automatically empty the Mac’s trash can.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »