
Bits By                     
 FARHAD MANJOO and
 

 MIKE ISAAC
 
AUG. 6, 2016
Each Saturday, Farhad Manjoo and Mike Isaac, technology reporters at The New York Times, review the week’s news, offering analysis and maybe a joke or two about the most important developments in the tech industry.Farhad: Howdy, Mike. Some people think August is the worst month, but I actually think it’s the best month. I was born in August. So was Barack Obama. So was Bill Clinton (in fact, we have the same birthday). In short: Welcome to my birth month, friend.Mike: I just envisioned a future under President Manjoo and felt a chill run down my spine. And that’s no easy feat, considering I’m visiting New York right now and every time I step outside I’m like the Wicked Witch of the West at a pool party.Farhad: One of the great things about August is that almost nothing happens in it (other than the birth of yours truly, which of course is big enough). So this was a relatively light week in tech news.AdvertisementThere was one huge story: Uber sold its Chinese operations to Didi Chuxing, its primary Chinese rival. That was big because it represented a reversal in Uber’s usually hyperaggressive stance — the ride-hailing company seemed willing to spend unlimited resources to conquer China, and it has never really had a reputation for retreating — and it also highlighted the difficulty that American tech companies have in getting into China.AdvertisementSo, you cover Uber. I’ve heard some observers say that getting out of China will improve Uber’s bottom line, and thus speed up its path to an initial public stock offering. Do you think we’ll see an Uber I.P.O. in 2017?Mike: Travis Kalanick (Uber’s chief executive) really, really doesn’t want to go public. But he’s probably feeling a lot of pressure to take Uber public now that its balance sheet will be cleaned up in a big way. Uber China was a huge cash drain on the overall business, which executives have said is doing rather well in some of Uber’s major cities — namely New York, San Francisco and some in Europe.When you eliminate something they’ve poured hundreds of millions of dollars into, it makes it far easier to gain public market confidence when you make your shares available for sale.Also, um, early Uber investors and employees want a return on the billions of dollars of stock they’re sitting on but can do little with until the company goes public. Travis will have to stop ignoring that at some point.So in short, yes — 2017 I.P.O. is my guess.Farhad: Let’s talk about gambling. This year, DraftKing and FanDuel, two “fantasy sports” sites, were forced to shut down in New York after the state’s attorney general accused them of essentially acting as sports bookies. Now all has been forgiven. This week Andrew Cuomo, New York’s governor, signed into law a measure that legalizes daily fantasy sports sites. Sure, it’s still gambling, but now the state gets to take a cut of the action in taxes, so all’s good, I guess.The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mike: It’s like weed in Washington and Colorado, but for apps.Farhad: Finally, Facebook did a couple of things this week. Its picture-based subsidiary Instagram rolled out a new feature that is an exact replica of one of the most popular features in Snapchat, the social network that’s hugely popular with young people.The new Instagram feature is called Stories; it’s a copy of a Snapchat feature also called Stories. In each one, you snap a photo or video to add to a diarylike video of things that happened in your day. Each montage lasts only 24 hours before it disappears, which adds a kind of tossed-off, casual sensibility to your social profile.AdvertisementMike: I’m using it a lot. That surprised me. It also has the unintended side effect of reducing my time spent in Snapchat, which is bad for Snapchat.Farhad: I don’t use either Snapchat or Instagram very much, but yeah, I find Instagram’s new feature pretty well done. Also, I don’t have any strong feelings about companies copying other companies’ best features. If something’s great, copying lets more customers use it.Mike: Speaking of which, I don’t have any strong feelings about companies copying other companies’ best features. If something’s great, copying lets more customers use it.Farhad: That’s so Farhad of you. But what I really wanted to talk about was headlines. Facebook made a change to its news feed algorithm this week that penalizes what it calls clickbait— that is, stories whose headlines “withhold or distort information.” Some of the examples the company cited were:“When She Looked Under Her Couch Cushions and Saw THIS.… I Was SHOCKED!”or“He Put Garlic in His Shoes Before Going to Bed and What Happens Next Is Hard to Believe.”I have to say, I really want to know what happened with the garlic shoes thing. Anyway, there are lots of news sites online that thrive on this kind of deceptive headline, so I’m glad that Facebook is pushing against these. In fact, I don’t think it’s going far enough, as I’ll explain below — but first, do you have any thoughts on this?Mike: It seems like an automated rehash of what Facebook did two years ago or so, when they said they were cracking down on clickbait before. Back then, it was basically killing Upworthy, a site whose bread and butter was based on that headline structure.I think Facebook is up against a different problem now. This system apparently doesn’t work for videos that are uploaded directly to Facebook, which is pretty much how every new media organization is posting videos these days. BuzzFeed is basically a video site, as are Mashable and a few others. I figure enterprising publications will find a way to game the system that way, eventually, though I’m not sure how.This probably also won’t assuage fears that Facebook is essentially an editorial organization, making editorial decisions about what should and should not be seen by the masses. They don’t really deny this positioning per se — they published a list of values a few months ago on the matter — but they also probably don’t want to be seen as competing with some of their biggest partners. Also, Facebook most likely doesn’t see itself through this lens, but it usually never sees itself the way the outside world perceives it.AdvertisementFarhad: Yeah, as I’ve argued before, I think it’s wise to be wary of Facebook’s power to shape the news. But I also think we should be happy when it’s using its power for good, which it clearly is here.Lots of studies have shown that people don’t finish reading many articles online — instead, we all mostly skim, catching bits of information from headlines and images that float by in our streams.Mike: I know. I’ve been inserting the sentence “Mike Isaac rules” into random paragraphs of my stories for years and no one has said a word.Farhad: Uh, O.K. That’s why headlines that withhold information are so destructive: Collectively, they make the public less informed, precisely the opposite of what news should do.But I don’t think addressing clickbait headlines is enough. In general, headlines, which are really an artifact of the print newspaper, have not evolved enough for online news. In print newspapers, headlines generally appeared on the same page as the story, and there were lots of other clues — photos, captions, pull-quotes, subheads — that informed the rushed reader.Online, headlines are usually first encountered on social streams like Facebook’s news feed, and the rest of the article is available only after you click. This means they function more as marketing tools than as information. News companies want you to click on them and read the whole story, so the headlines try to be pithy and clever and not give everything away.As a one-off, that’s not so bad. But if your daily stream presents you with hundreds of headlines that don’t tell you much, and if you’re only clicking on a handful (because you’re busy), you’re not really getting the day’s news.That’s why I think headlines for online news should become longer and more informative — they should be more like ministories than like a tagline for a movie. For a good example of this, look at the news module on the right side of The New York Times’s home page, which gives you a little summary of a story rather than a snappy headline.AdvertisementSure, this might make news more boring. But it would have the collective effect of making it much more informative, which is a good thing.Mike: This is something done by Techmeme, the news aggregator site that essentially acts as a daily bible of what’s happening in Silicon Valley. It’s smart, but don’t tell the founder I said that or he’ll get a big head.Anyway, I theoretically agree with you, but I also have to get old on you for a second. Part of the beauty of headlines is in the art of a perfectly crafted one: pithy, clever, striking. Perfect for the tone of the article with just enough sass or information to entice you further. It’s a practice Times copy editors have mastered in many ways.Does artfulness work in an age of search engine optimization and clickbait-killing algorithms? Probably not. But if we do usher in a wave of so-called more informative headlines as you propose, I’ll be sad to see the old ones go.Or in Timesian convention: “In Era of New Headlines, a Times Writer Feels Bummed.”Farhad: Speaking of boring our readers, we should probably end here. See you next week!We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »