
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
DEC. 13, 2016
Q. Do apps like TweetDeck let you edit Twitter posts?A. TweetDeck, a dashboard program for Twitter power users, can do a lot of things, but it cannot edit tweets that have been published online already. Twitter’s own guide for new users states that you cannot edit a message after you have posted it, so you should delete it from your timeline and post a new version with corrected information. (Twitter itself has not ruled out the possibility of the feature being added in the future, despite technical hurdles to overcome.)The TweetDeck app does let you schedule your tweets for later posting, as do similar social media management programs like Hootsuite. If you have composed your posts ahead of time, you can go back and edit them before they are scheduled to publish.With an app like TweetDeck, you can manage multiple accounts at once, set up alerts and searches, display several timelines across the screen at the same time and more. TweetDeck is free to use and available on the internet at http://tweetdeck.twitter.com, or as a Mac desktop app or Chrome browser extension. A Windows version of TweetDeck was discontinued earlier this year, but the work-in-progress Tweeten app has a Windows edition available in the Windows Store, and a version for Microsoft Edge under construction.Iconfactory’s Twitterific 5 for iOS is one app that tries to make fixing an errant post a little easier (a $5 Mac desktop version of the app is also available but development stopped in 2013 with version 4.5.1). The iOS app has a “Delete and Edit Tweet” command that deletes your original post and copies the text into a new, pending one that you can quickly edit. Once you have finished editing, you can post the new version, but it will carry a new time stamp; favorites and retweets from the original message will be lost.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »