AdvertisementSupported byBitsBy Jim KerstetterIf the ransomware attack that has spread throughout the world has taught us one thing, it is the benefits of legally obtained software.A new strain of ransomware spread rapidly around the world on Friday.Computer users around the world — particularly in Russia and China — struggled into a fourth day with a cyberattack that locked them out of their computers. Now the question is: Who is responsible for this?The obvious answer, of course, is the hackers who set the malware loose. But plenty of others can take some of the blame for enabling their global assault:■ The National Security Agency. The agency discovered the Windows vulnerability that allowed the ransomware attack to occur and seems to have kept it among a growing collection of software vulnerabilities that it doesn’t tell anyone about. What’s more, the agency lost control of this secret information, and it was posted on internet forums for any savvy — or not so savvy — hacker to deploy.■ Microsoft. Microsoft is, of course, responsible for making sure the security of its software is up to snuff. And when the software is not, the implications can very quickly become global. In fairness, the company issued a patch for the vulnerability several months ago. It also issued a special patch for Windows XP, which hasn’t been fully supported for several years. Should the company continue to support its software regardless of how old it is? It’s a fair question. But that leads us to the next responsible party.■ Bad technology managers. Microsoft can put out all the right patches, but it’s up to tech managers to install those fixes. Clearly, that was not done in many locations. In fact, some government agencies appear to have been using Windows XP, which first hit the market in 2001. Microsoft stopped fully supporting it three years ago. Let’s think about that another way: Imagine in 2001 that we were still using software written in 1986 — one year after the first version of Windows was released. It would seem ridiculous.■ Software pirates. It is no coincidence that two of the countries hardest hit by the ransomware attack were China and Russia. For years, Microsoft and other Western software companies have bitterly complained that software piracy was rampant in those countries. And when you use stolen software, you tend not to get security updates from the company.Advertisement