By MARK SCOTT and NICOLE PERLROTHMAY 17, 2017
Robert Gren was working from home on Friday when, all of a sudden, his laptop stopped working.What he initially thought was just a kink in his computer’s software was in fact part of a global ransomware attack that has affected more than 200,000 computers and caused untold havoc from China to Britain.Now, Mr. Gren and the thousands of other victims worldwide face an agonizing choice: either hand over the ransom — a figure that has climbed to $600 for each affected machine — by a deadline this Friday, or potentially lose their digital information, including personal photos, hospital patient records and other priceless data, forever.“I’m pretty devastated,” said Mr. Gren, 32, a manager of an online entertainment business in Krakow, Poland, who has spent almost all of his waking hours since Friday looking for ways to reclaim his digital data. “I’ve lost private files that I have no other way of recovering. For me, the damage has been huge.”That decision has become even more difficult as cybersecurity experts and law enforcement officials have repeatedly warned people against paying the ransom ahead of this week’s deadline.AdvertisementAside from dissuading victims from handing over money that may help fund further such attacks, they caution that it is not guaranteed the attackers will return control of people’s computers even if they pay the assailants in bitcoin, a digital currency favored in such ransomware attacks that can be difficult to trace.AdvertisementOfficials also note that the attackers, who have yet to been named, have provided only three bitcoin addresses — similar to a traditional bank routing number — for all global victims to deposit the ransom, so it may prove difficult to know who has paid the digital fees.This haphazard planning has led many victims to hold off paying, at least until they can guarantee they will get their data back.So far, roughly $80,000 has been deposited into the bitcoin addresses linked to the attack, according to Elliptic, a company that tracks online financial transactions involving virtual currencies.F-Secure, a Finnish cybersecurity firm, has confirmed that some of the 200 individuals that it had identified, who had paid the ransom, had successfully had their files decrypted. Yet that represented a small fraction of those affected, and the company said it still remained unlikely that people would regain control of their computers if they paid the online fee.The tally of ransom payments may rise ahead of Friday’s deadline, but cybersecurity experts say the current numbers — both total ransom money paid and machines decrypted — are far short of early estimates forecasting that the digital attack may eventually cost victims hundreds of millions of dollars in combined ransom fees.“I predict this may be an epic failure,” said Kim Peretti, a former senior litigator in the Department of Justice’s computer crime and intellectual property division who now is co-chairwoman of the cybersecurity preparedness and response team at Alston & Bird, an international law firm. “Because of the publicity of this attack and the public’s awareness of people potentially not getting their files back, the figures aren’t as high as people had first thought.”For victims of such attacks, the potential loss of personal or business files can be traumatic. In typical ransomware cases, including the most recent hack, assailants send an encrypted email to potential targets. The message includes a malware attachment that takes over their machines if opened. The attackers then demand payment before returning control of the computers, often through money paid into bitcoin or other largely untraceable online currencies.The latest ransomware strike, experts said, was particularly virulent because it was based on malicious software stolen from the National Security Agency. Law enforcement agencies from the United States, Britain and elsewhere have been tracking the potential culprits, with suspicions now focusing on hackers in North Korea.AdvertisementFor Randy Meyers, a technology consultant for a rural hospital in western Texas, the recent ransomware attack has brought back bitter memories.Last month, Mr. Meyers discovered that a similar virus had taken over critical computers at a 25-bed medical facility in Fisher County, roughly a three-hour drive from Fort Worth. The virus locked physicians and other medical staff out of patient records, and his repeated pleas by email to the attackers to unlock the vital machines went unanswered.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Eventually, Mr. Meyers brought in cybersecurity experts to crack the malicious software, ensuring that the struggling hospital would not have to pay the roughly $18,000 in bitcoin ransom to retrieve patients’ files. Still, he said, the attack had crippled the hospital for four days, with doctors and nurses resorting to pen and paper.“It’s like going home and finding out you’ve been broken into,” said Mr. Meyers, who said he had never before experienced such an attack in more than 20 years as a technology consultant. “You never want to have to pay the ransom. It gives them a reason to do it again and again.”For some organizations, particularly government agencies, paying to decrypt locked-out computers is not even an option. In many countries, including across Europe and Asia, the payment of any form of ransom is forbidden by laws often written to counter terrorist attacks in the offline world. That means organizations like Britain’s National Health Service, among the worst affected in the recent ransomware attacks, are left with few options to retrieve data that can have life-or-death implications.In the United States, there is no nationwide policy outlawing such ransomware payments. But experts still warn against handing over money because it may lead to far more significant costs down the road.Exclusion and cooperation clauses in many cyberinsurance policies expressly prohibit businesses from paying such digital ransoms without pre-approval. If a victim hands over the money anyway, insurers may cancel a business’s coverage and leave clients paying out of pocket — including covering the cost of disruptions to their businesses, remediation expenses and customer notifications.“In general, the advice is not to pay,” said Kevin Kalinich, a global cyber-risk expert at Aon, the insurance broker. “The perpetrators may not release your data, or you’ll be considered a target for future attacks.”AdvertisementJorge Reza, a sales manager for a construction business in Laredo, Tex., was forced to take that gamble when the company he works for was hit with a ransomware attack last year.Hours after one of his colleagues was locked out of the business’s main computer, which held company invoices, payroll data and other sensitive information, Mr. Reza, 34, found himself online, researching how to open a bitcoin account and other tips for paying the digital ransom.Despite fears the assailants would not unlock the computer, Mr. Reza uploaded money through Western Union, found someone who would sell him $1,200 worth of bitcoin and waited for notification that the machine had been returned to his control. The process, Mr. Reza said, was both stressful and uncertain, as he could not be sure the attackers would follow through on their promises. Luckily, less than 12 hours after the initial attack, he was able to decrypt his files.“They were digital terrorists, but at least they were honest,” Mr. Reza said. “They were holding our data hostage. What other choice did I have?”An earlier version of this article misstated the number of people that F-Secure identified as having their files successfully decrypted. F-Secure said that only some of the 200 people it identified as having paid the ransom had their files decrypted, not more than 200 people.Follow Mark Scott @markscott82 and Nicole Perlroth @nicoleperlroth on Twitter. Mark Scott reported from Rome, and Nicole Perlroth reported from San Francisco.A version of this article appears in print on May 18, 2017, on Page A8 of the New York edition with the headline: As Deadline Nears, Ransomware Victims Face an Agonizing Choice.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.