By FARHAD MANJOO and MIKE ISAACAUG. 5, 2017
Each Saturday, Farhad Manjoo and Mike Isaac, technology reporters at The New York Times, review the week’s news, offering analysis and maybe a joke or two about the most important developments in the tech industry.Mike: Good morning, Farhad! I hear you’re going on your second vacation inside of a month next week. And good thing, too; two weeks of work in a row is a lot for you.Farhad: Working with you takes a toll, Mike.Mike: I completely understand. I’ll take a week off when Uber stops cranking out drama every other day. So, perhaps 2020?Anyway, let’s talk tech. Reddit raised a fresh round of funding this week, adding $200 million to its coffers and valuing the company at a whopping $1.8 billion. Which just goes to show you, even the worst corners of the internet can turn a buck somehow.AdvertisementTo be fair, Reddit is also highly entertaining, despite — and occasionally because of — its murkier parts.AdvertisementFarhad: Reddit has always been a strange business. It’s the internet’s most productive viral machine; every other meme or GIF you encounter online probably came from Reddit first. But if it creates lots of stuff for the rest of the internet to gawk at, it hasn’t been very good at becoming a mainstream site by itself. For the uninitiated, it’s tricky to navigate Reddit and find yourself a comfortable corner there.And it sounds like the company understands that. The new money will go to redesigning the site and creating a better mobile version, in the mold of more modern services — it will look like Facebook or Twitter, per Recode, the technology site. This sounds smart, but entrenched communities tend to hate change, so we’ll see what Reddit’s hordes have to say about this.Mike: Right, well, you get one downvote for that comment. And I certainly can’t imagine the hordes of Redditors being superenthusiastic about a Facebook-esque version of the site.Moving on, Facebook bought a small team of artificial intelligence experts who were working on Ozlo, a smart virtual assistant that seemed to do rather well with natural language processing. That is, you could text with Ozlo and he (she? it?) would respond with suggestions and serve up answers to your questions.I can’t imagine what I’d do with a virtual assistant, though perhaps it would help me remember to pay rent on time, which I am constitutionally incapable of doing. In any case, I’m curious to see how Facebook decides to use the tech. Perhaps they’ll incorporate it into Messenger, the chat app that was playing around with its own virtual assistant ideas.Farhad: I’m glad to see Facebook is still plugging away at the message bot idea. Sure, it’s so 2015, but hey, as you say, people like you need all the help they can get.Mike: Uh huh. Well, if none of this works out, you can always have your old job back as my assistant. At a lower pay grade, of course.AdvertisementAlso in Facebook news, the company is apparently working on a video chat hardware device, something along the lines of what Cisco or Polycom offer, I believe, but also possibly similar to Amazon’s most recent video tablet offering.I thought it was crazy and something I’d never use, but a lot of folks on Twitter told me it’s absolutely perfect for older people like their grandparents, who love to use video chat to keep in touch with family. Maybe I’m wrong? Maybe I’m just too young and cool to understand? Help me, Farhad.The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Farhad: I’m with your Twitter pals. If Facebook is making something like Amazon’s Echo Show — a hands-free computer with a screen, which I love — it’s on the right track. Facebook made billions by giving us an easy way to see which crazy conspiracy theories our grandparents believe. Soon grandpa will be able to call you about his flat-earth obsession. Ah, family!Mike: Meanwhile, in content land, HBO suffered a fairly significant hack this week, in which the company lost thousands of internal documents, television episode scripts and videos, and delved into the personal information of a studio executive.That’s not good! But I can stomach it as long as they don’t start leaking “Game of Thrones” spoilers all over the place.Farhad: This week’s episode has already leaked! I just watched it, and let me say, Hot Pie’s sudden return to defeat Cersei and take over the Seven Kingdoms sure was surprising.Mike: No spoilers! Unless, that is, you hear anything about the return of Gendry.Oh, a quick reminder: If you have any Bitcoin, the digital currency just underwent a “hard fork” and now something called Bitcoin Cash exists, too. I’m honestly too dumb to understand the larger implications of this, which is why I continue to insist The New York Times pay me in gold coins that I hoard in a pile under my bed.Do you have any Bitcoin, Farhad? Or perhaps now some Bitcoin Cash?Farhad: Alas, I was once a Bitcoin thousandaire, but I’ve since sold all my holdings. Now I collect the only commodity that matters: Twitter followers.AdvertisementMike: O.K. then.Finally, I wanted to scratch at something in potential acquisition land. According to a report from Business Insider, Google was apparently sniffing around a potential acquisition of Snap, the self-styled “camera company” and maker of Snapchat, for a whopping $30 billion.The caveats: This all happened last year, and Snap said the rumors were false (though there may have been “informal” talks, according to B.I.). It may not have been a real serious possibility, and often when rumors like these get floated, it stems from folks who have quite a vested interest in making an acquisition actually happen.Farhad:  It’s kind of like that rumor about how you’re being sent to The New York Times’s Siberia bureau. I’m not sure who keeps starting that rumor.Mike:  That said, I see the logic in this deal. Snap is in trouble. Their stock is getting hammered, Facebook is copying nearly all of its features wholesale across practically all of the Facebook-related apps, and Instagram is overtaking every popular Snapchat behavior and making it better inside of its own app.Advertisers are noticing. I keep hearing chatter about ad budgets being moved from Snapchat over to Instagram, which offers a nearly identical product but with better advertising technology and a much larger base of users. If you’re an ad exec looking to spend dollars on digital ads aimed at youngsters, it seems like kind of an easy choice.So perhaps a bailout acquisition by Google would actually make a modicum of sense. Think back to when Facebook bought Instagram. Mark Zuckerberg basically said, “keep doing what you’re doing” to Instagram, and acted to help supplement Instagram’s growth only by providing some of Facebook’s strongest assets. Facebook is sitting on a mountain of sophisticated ad technology, not to mention hundreds of thousands of eager advertisers looking for more space to buy ads.I could see Google and Snap in a similar situation, especially since Snap is actively in the market to improve its advertising technology through a potential acquisition or two, as we’ve heard rumors of over the past few months. Selling out seems like a no-brainer to me, even if it’s a tacit admission that the company couldn’t make it alone on the public markets.Farhad: On paper it would seem to make sense. But in reality I’m not sure it would work out, which is perhaps why it didn’t gel last year. For one thing, it doesn’t seem as if Snapchat wants to sell — part of the reason it has been so innovative is that it has set itself apart from the Silicon Valley tech giants, and I suspect it feels it would lose some part of what makes it special under Google.Also, it’s expensive. Even for Google, tens of billions of dollars on a second-place social networking company might be too much to swallow. Also, aren’t we holding out for Google to buy Twitter? How many social networks can we expect Google to save?AdvertisementAnyway, I’m going to Disneyland, Mike! See you in a couple of weeks.Mike: Happy trails!Follow Farhad Manjoo on Twitter @fmanjoo and Mike Isaac @MikeIsaac.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.