AdvertisementSupported byBy Katie Benner and Matt ApuzzoSAN FRANCISCO — In the months leading up to Apple’s standoff with the United States government over the unlocking of an iPhone, the technology industry braced itself for a big demand — a back door into all of Apple’s products, or a way to destroy the company’s strong encryption.Instead, the F.B.I. took the industry by surprise and cleverly stopped short of expectations. The bureau asked Apple for something very specific: that it create an alternative operating system for just one phone that would help the government break into the device. The limited nature of the request has helped the government portray this case as a one-time demand, without ramifications beyond the case at hand.In public statements posted on Sunday, the F.B.I. director, James B. Comey Jr. wrote: “We don’t want to break anyone’s encryption or set a master key loose on the land.”While the F.B.I. is pursuing a narrow focus, Apple is arguing its side as broadly as possible.The company has repeatedly said this case is about much more than the iPhone of one of the attackers from a mass shooting in San Bernardino, Calif., which killed 14. The company has framed the government’s request as a larger discussion of privacy and civil liberties, and a slippery slope that could open the way to similar demands in the future.In an internal email sent to Apple employees on Monday, Timothy D. Cook, the company’s chief executive, wrote: “This case is about much more than a single phone or a single investigation, so when we received the government’s order, we knew we had to speak out. At stake is the data security of hundreds of millions of law-abiding people, and setting a dangerous precedent that threatens everyone’s civil liberties.”The differing approaches are set to be the core of each side’s arguments as Apple and the United States government dig in for an extended period of legal wrangling. Both are betting that their narrow-versus-broad lines of reasoning will help them win both in court and in the court of public opinion.For now, while civil liberties groups and many tech companies say they side with Apple, the government may have carved out an advantage by proffering its narrow argument.“By making its request so targeted, Apple has fewer grounds to argue their side than had the government asked it to permanently change its code,” said Jason Healey, a former White House security policy director and a research scholar at the School of International and Public Affairs at Columbia University.The government’s edge was reflected in a report from the Pew Research Center on Monday. In its report, Pew said 51 percent of Americans say Apple should unlock the iPhone to assist the F.B.I.’s investigation of the San Bernardino attack, while 38 percent said Apple should not help, and 11 percent did not offer an opinion.Apple has until Friday to file a formal brief opposing the federal court order requiring it to cooperate with the F.B.I.’s investigation of the San Bernardino incident. The order was issued last Tuesday by Magistrate Judge Sheri Pym of the Federal District Court for the District of Central California.An Apple spokeswoman declined to comment beyond the remarks that Mr. Cook had made.The greatest fear among many privacy and computer security advocates was that the government would try to force Apple to give up the security keys it uses to digitally sign its code, keys that would let government programmers disable Apple’s security.Instead, the F.B.I. understood that Apple can cleanly install new software on broken phones, without replacing them, and asked the company to make a similar tool that would let investigators break into a work phone issued to Syed Farook, one of the San Bernardino attackers.The bureau has taken pains to note that it did not ask Apple to break the password, and that this solution would not work on newer phones.On Sunday, Mr. Comey’s statement to defend why the agency needed to break into the iPhone said that the court order “isn’t about trying to set a precedent or send any kind of message. It is about the victims and justice.”F.B.I. technical specialists have been working with companies to figure out how to extract data from phones for years.A government official said on Monday that investigators quickly realized that in the San Bernardino case, a technical solution was available. “This was just the logical extension to what we were already doing,” one senior government official said.“I think Apple was hoping that the request that came was more outrageous,” said Dan Guido, the founder of the security firm Trail of Bits. “The F.B.I. was very adroit. They waited for the perfect situation where they had all these factors aligned so the request looks pretty straightforward.”After the judge ordered Apple last week to create the new tool, Mr. Cook posted a personally signed letter to customers that “the government suggests this tool could only be used once, on one phone. But that’s simply not true. Once created, the technique could be used over and over again, on any number of devices.”In a note posted to its website on Monday, Apple reiterated that the government’s request seems narrow but really isn’t. “Law enforcement agents around the country have already said they have hundreds of iPhones they want Apple to unlock if the F.B.I. wins this case,” the company said.To that point, the New York City police commissioner, William J. Bratton, and the Manhattan district attorney, Cyrus R. Vance Jr., criticized Apple after it refused to comply with the court order and said that they currently possessed 175 iPhones that they could not unlock.Charlie Rose recently interviewed Mr. Vance and asked if he would want access to all phones that were part of a criminal proceeding should the government prevail in the San Bernardino case.Mr. Vance responded: “Absolutely right.”Even people who oppose the Justice Department’s request concede the government made a smart first move, one that could establish precedent to justify more invasive tactics.“They’ll come up with a reason why for every single phone,” said Chris Finan, a former White House security adviser who, while in government, said he opposed this tactic. But as a strategic matter, he said, “It’s tactically brilliant.”Some citizens and politicians have attacked Apple’s decision, like the families of the San Bernardino victims, Tom Ridge, the former secretary of the Department of Homeland Security and Senators Richard Burr, Dianne Feinstein and Susan Collins.To gird for the fight, Apple has hired Theodore J. Boutrous Jr. and Theodore B. Olson, partners at Gibson Dunn, as outside counsel. Both men have a long history of pushing the courts and the public to see the bigger picture on heated issues including gay marriage.Technology peers like Facebook, Alphabet, Microsoft and Yahoo have shown support, albeit muted, for Apple’s stance on the issue. Sundar Pichai, Google’s chief executive, cautiously weighed in on the matter last week, while others followed suit in the days after.But privately, there is talk among these companies that Apple may have overplayed its hand by taking the issue public in an all-out defiant assault against the F.B.I., according to two people briefed on the discussions, who spoke on condition of anonymity. These people fear the public may eventually sympathize with the F.B.I.’s argument, especially considering the heinous nature of the crimes.Perhaps sensing that hard battle lines are being drawn, with most technologists and security professionals on one side and a country rattled by the threat of terror attacks on the other side, Apple said on Monday it wanted to shift its battle with the government from a courtroom — where it is currently being fought — to a hearing room on Capitol Hill.The statement came after the House Energy and Commerce Committee invited Mr. Cook and Mr. Comey to testify at a hearing on privacy and national security “to explain to Congress and the American people the issues at play and how they plan to move forward.”Apple proposed in its statement that federal prosecutors de-escalate the situation by withdrawing their demands, and “as some in Congress have proposed, form a commission or other panel of experts on intelligence, technology and civil liberties to discuss the implications for law enforcement, national security, privacy and personal freedoms.”Katie Benner reported from San Francisco and Matt Apuzzo from Washington. Mike Isaac contributed reporting from New York.Advertisement