
Bits By                     
 FARHAD MANJOO and
 

 MIKE ISAAC
 
MAY 20, 2017
Each Saturday, Farhad Manjoo and Mike Isaac, technology reporters at The New York Times, review the week’s news, offering analysis and maybe a joke or two about the most important developments in the tech industry.Mike: Bonjour, Farhad! I am particularly happy this morning because this weekend I am seeing “Alien: Covenant.” It’s a film that combines nearly all of my passions: The vast expanse of space, the terror of murderous xenomorphs and the boyish good looks of Michael Fassbender.Farhad: Fun fact about me: Never seen an “Alien” movie.Mike: Wow, crazy. Well, they do say in Silicon Valley, no one can hear you scream.O.K., let’s talk tech news. Earlier this week in transportation drama, I wrote a piece on how Waymo and Lyft — two of Uber’s largest competitors — are collaborating in some sort of future self-driving car initiative. It will no doubt stoke all sorts of speculation that Waymo, the self-driving car arm spun out of Google, may one day decide to buy Lyft. Who knows if they actually produce anything from the partnership — which is still light on detail — but at the very least it’s a big ding to Uber at a time the company is vulnerable to attack.AdvertisementFarhad: I know it’s hard to love Uber, and also it’s quite possible that Uber stole Google’s self-driving tech (we’ll find out as the big lawsuit proceeds). But to me, Google’s actions here also deserve scrutiny.AdvertisementLook at all the sides Google and its parent company, Alphabet, are playing in self-driving. Through Waymo, Alphabet is building its own self-driving tech. But through its venture capital firm, Alphabet is also a huge investor in Uber. And it is also suing Uber. Also, through Waze, its mapping app, Google is running a car-pooling service that could compete with Uber. And now Waymo is partnering with Uber’s biggest competitor.Isn’t this exactly the sort of thing people complain about when they say Google is getting too big and powerful? In every way imaginable, Google is trying to use its huge power to completely dominate the future of driving tech.Mike: It reminds me of how you act around the office.Anyway, in non-Uber news, Wired dropped a huge story on Apple’s new campus, Apple Park, which basically looks like something out of a Kubrick film. My favorite follow-up story, however, came from The Outline, which had a source send them a pizza box from the company. Apple patented a circular pizza box that keeps pizza crispy and well-ventilated as employees walk from Apple’s cafeterias back to their desks.This is exactly why Apple is the most valuable public company in the world.Farhad: I don’t care how much rounded glass Apple’s HQ has, it won’t beat working from home.Mike: Moving on, Instagram added face filters to its app, continuing its streak of innovatively finding new ways to rip off Snapchat for its product road map. Bravo.Facebook had a series of embarrassing errors this week. After admitting it made its 10th mistake in advertising measurement, they had to pay back a bunch of the marketers who advertise through the platform. Nothing worse for a business than paying the people back who, um, are the ones paying you.Shortly after that, Facebook also was ordered to pay a $122 million fine to the European Union for making misleading statements regarding user privacy back when the company bought WhatsApp, the messaging app, for an obscene amount of money. Ouch.The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Since our Federal Trade Commission seems relatively toothless in big tech acquisitions, methinks Facebook is going to face a lot of pain in the E.U. over the next few years. Keep an eye on that.AdvertisementFarhad: Not just Facebook, I imagine. As the world gets more and more worried about the size and power of Apple, Google, Facebook, Amazon and Microsoft, foreign regulators might become the most powerful checks on the tech giants. It will be an interesting fight to watch.Mike: I should note Google’s slew of announcements at I/O, the company’s annual conference for software developers. They basically do a gigantic news dump where they announce the latest in software updates, the status of Android, and the evolution of some of their latest initiatives like Google Home and Google Assistant.But to be honest with you, the Google stuff reminds me of what I really wanted to talk about this week: I genuinely do not care about any of it.Nothing against Google, mind you. It’s just difficult for me to concentrate on the slow dribble of tech news when the United States seems to be going through what amounts to the final season of “Lost” in front of our very eyes. I’m hoping that — spoiler alert! — we wake up at the end and realize it was all a hallucination directly preceding our untimely deaths. Or maybe something less grim.Farhad: Oh, yes. I went to Google’s opening keynote and I thought there was actually a bunch of cool stuff there. But half the time I was glued to my phone for news of an impending constitutional crisis. It’s hard to muster much interest in easier photo sharing when your entire photo deck is full of screenshots of crazy headlines.Mike: Just look at our front page on any given day. Or, heck, turn on literally any form of electronic communication around 6 p.m. each day and watch a shotgun blast of political news dumps drop.This week was the continuing saga with former F.B.I. director James Comey, the investigation into Russia’s possible collusion with Donald J. Trump in the 2016 election, and the latest on Michael Flynn, the disgraced National Security Advisor. And that was just Monday!AdvertisementHow do you stay passionate about tech news throughout this stuff? I find it difficult to do more than warm up microwave burritos every night for dinner and watch CNN for hours.Farhad: It’s an interesting question — and as someone who’s usually hooked to both politics news and tech news, I’ve been feeling this tug. On the one hand really nothing in tech seems like it’s that interesting at the moment. It’s not just that national headlines are eating up all my brainspace; it’s also that so much of what’s interesting in tech, these days, is pretty speculative.Self-driving cars are a good example. Everyone in tech seems pretty sure that self-driving cars will change society in big ways, when they come. But when will that happen? Uber, Waymo, Tesla and others are locked in this existential battle for the future of transportation, but the battle is sure to be long, slow and unpredictable.We might have a sense of where self-driving tech is going next year, and a better sense the year after that, and an even better sense in five or 10 years. But at any given moment, a particular development in the industry is going to seem like pretty small ball, especially compared to the car crash of politics news.One thing I’ve found is that chatting with folks in tech can be pretty therapeutic. A lof techies are relentlessly optimistic. Even when the world is falling apart, they can see some better version of the future, and they’re working to build it. We journalists can get pretty cynical about the world, but being around techies does give me some sense, sometimes, that things could get better. Maybe.Mike: Maybe, but we still have to talk to each other every week.Farhad: Oh man, you’re right. Maybe it doesn’t get better after all.Follow Farhad Manjoo on Twitter @fmanjoo and Mike Isaac @MikeIsaac.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »