By FARHAD MANJOO and MIKE ISAACOCT. 27, 2017
Each Friday, Farhad Manjoo and Mike Isaac, technology reporters at The New York Times, review the week’s news, offering analysis and maybe a joke or two about the most important developments in the tech industry. Want this newsletter in your inbox? Sign up here.Farhad: Hello, Michael! How has your week been? I am very excited that summer has decided to never go away. Also, that I have air conditioning.Mike: Wait, you have air conditioning? No self-respecting San Franciscan buys A/C!I live on the top floor of my apartment building with no A/C, which means every day above 80 is a special kind of hell for me. Maybe this is the universe’s way of telling me I should stop working from home. Anyway, I’ll be in Washington and New York over the next few weeks, so maybe I’ll get lucky and it’ll be snowing.Twitter Bans Russia TodayFarhad: O.K., that sounds rough. Speaking of rough, let’s get to tech news. Next week, Twitter, Facebook and Google are sending representatives to Washington to answer questions about how their platforms were used by Russian operatives to interfere with last year’s presidential election.AdvertisementMike: I’ll be there for it! Uh, do you think I should wear a suit? Oh and uh, unrelated: Where does one buy a suit? Asking for... a friend.AdvertisementFarhad: I’m not going to dignify that with an answer. Anyway, in the run-up to that testimony, Twitter — which has been criticized by lawmakers for its response so far — announced that it would ban two Russian news organizations from buying Twitter ads. The two news sites are Russia Today and Sputnik, both of which are backed by the Kremlin and are accused of furthering Russian propaganda worldwide.The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mike: I was a bit stumped by this. You could praise Twitter for taking some action against groups that have clearly acted against the interests of the American people.That said, I find it difficult for a tech company to position itself as a stateless platform while also largely adhering to Western value structures. Does Twitter block CNN from Russia if Russia lodges a similar election interference complaint?Farhad: I’m not sure how effective this change will be in limiting Russian propaganda, since these outlets will still be allowed to have a presence on Twitter — they just can’t buy ads. This also puts Twitter in a spot I thought it didn’t want to be in; it’s unclear what policies and guidelines it will use to determine whether a news service is actually a propaganda outfit. Is it government funding? Well, then what about the BBC? Is it aggressively pushing a nationalistic point of view? What about Fox News? This is opening a can of worms.Mike: Yep, fully agree. Twitter is trying to push back a bit on that through the lens of “transparency.” That is, the company promised to give details to individual users on where the ads are coming from and who’s spending money to target them specifically. The company hasn’t really dug into the details on that yet, but we’ll see if it actually makes a difference.Reddit Bans Nazis, and Honolulu Bans Distracted WalkingFarhad: Russia Today wasn’t the only thing that was banned this week. It was a big week in bans! Reddit shut several sections of its site that catered to Nazis and white supremacists. This comes after a policy change that now prohibits content that calls for violence. It’s a big change for Reddit, which has long had an anything-goes policy.Mike: We can’t really emphasize enough how big of a shift this is for Reddit. As you’ve said, the site has essentially taken a stance similar to Twitter since its inception: Free speech, no matter how odious you may find it, above all else. That has led Reddit down some dark paths, like refusing to ban outright racist groups and topic pages, not to mention dealing with an entire community devoted to “creepshots” of underage women.AdvertisementI don’t know what changed in their thinking. Perhaps Reddit, which has raised significant venture financing over the past two years, is trying to present a more polished view of itself in hopes of one day being acquired or going public.Farhad: Meanwhile the city of Honolulu banned looking at your phone while walking. If you look at your phone while crossing the street, police officers can fine you $35 for the infraction. Mike, if they had this ban in San Francisco or New York, I’d be very very poor.Mike: I do this thing where if a stranger is looking down at their phone and coming at me on the sidewalk, I refuse to move out of the way. Either they look up at the last minute and apologize, or they run right into me. I don’t take a stand on many things, but this is one of them.Anyway, go Honolulu!Snap’s Spectacles FloppedFarhad: Finally, there was news about Snap. Remember them? They make a popular messaging app that teenagers love. But apparently they don’t love it enough to make them O.K. with goofy glasses.According to The Information, Snap badly overestimated demand for Spectacles, the camera-enabled glasses it released last year. I loved these glasses! I thought they were one of the most innovative gadgets I’ve used in a while.Apparently kids don’t think like dads. Snap sold only 150,000 pairs of specs, and the company has hundreds of thousands of unsold units in its warehouse. And even those it did sell weren’t used very much; according to Business Insider, most of the people who bought Specs stopped using them after a few weeks.Mike, are you still wearing your specs?Mike: Sadly, no. But not really for any philosophical or fashion reasons. Basically, it’s because they’re not prescription and I don’t want to start running into walls without my regular glasses on.Does the company insurance plan cover Snap prescriptions?Farhad: Um, somehow I doubt that. O.K., see you next week!A version of this newsletter appears in print on October 30, 2017, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: Farhad and Mike’s Week In Tech: Taking a Stand.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.