
Bits By                     
 QUENTIN HARDY
 
JAN. 27, 2017
It’s O.K. to feel a little confused about the direction the new administration in Washington is taking. And that is before you consider the case of Elon Musk and Tesla.As James Stewart writes, Mr. Musk, a brainy South African immigrant who has criticized Donald Trump and built Tesla Motors and SolarCity — which benefit from government subsidies — might seem the wrong fit in Washington these days.And yet shares of the carmaker Tesla, which has absorbed solar power company SolarCity, are going up. Analysts are even raising their estimates of how high they could go.Moreover, Mr. Musk has been a guest at two meetings of business leaders with Mr. Trump. What gives?Maybe these strange bedfellows aren’t so strange.AdvertisementPrimarily, Tesla is both futuristic in its technology and traditional as an operation. Unlike big software outfits, it employs a lot of people with a relatively normal range of skills inside its factories. Tesla has 25,000 workers, our article notes, and could double that if it increases production in its battery factory. The factory is in Nevada, one of Mr. Trump’s battleground states in the last election.Mr. Musk, who likes big and bold visions, has discussed ways to rebuild the United States energy grid, too. That would be another huge project requiring traditional workers.AdvertisementAnd while Mr. Musk has taken $2 billion in subsidies, he needs them less now. Tesla will soon make 200,000 vehicles, which will trigger an end to his federal subsidies.And the subsidies paid out to the alternative energy industry appear to have enabled enough research and market power to make its offerings increasingly price competitive with fossil fuels.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.That means Mr. Trump could take credit for ending subsidies out of favor with his constituents, and Mr. Musk could prosper.Then, too, Mr. Musk is himself a brash and successful billionaire, something attractive to the president. At a recent business meeting, he pressed Mr. Trump for a tax on carbon fuels, something the president did not dismiss out of hand.That is almost a mark of a big business coming into its own: when you stop asking the government for handouts, and instead press it to hurt your competitor.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »