
Bits By                     
 QUENTIN HARDY
 
JAN. 24, 2017
Samsung has a main culprit in its combustible battery fiasco, and the problem is among the hardest to fix. It is Samsung itself.As Choe Sang-Hun and Paul Mozur write, the South Korean technology giant, the world’s largest maker of smartphones (among other things), has delivered a report on how the battery in its Galaxy Note 7 smartphone failed so spectacularly.As originally issued, the Galaxy Note 7 had a propensity to catch fire. While not a widespread defect, it happened enough that United State airlines banned the phone’s operation, and eventually the phone itself, from flights. Having your brand announced as a lethal hazard on a commercial flight pretty much defines bad public relations.In an hourlong presentation, Samsung laid the blame on manufacturing flaws, along with aggressive efforts to make the phone’s design as sleek as possible. In this case, that appears to have created a chronic safety problem.But as Sang-Hun and Paul write, the real difficulty appears to be the hard-charging nature of Samsung itself, and a culture of continuous short-term achievement that leads to stress, corner-cutting and expediency over quality. That is a recipe for wrecking a brand.AdvertisementThere have been similar problems in tech before. Eleven years ago, the batteries in Dell laptops caught fire, possibly in bigger numbers than affected the Note 7. Japan has been dogged for more than five years by the meltdown of reactors at Fukushima. The meltdown was caused by an earthquake and tsunami, but three executives at the once-infallible Tokyo Electric Power Company, or Tepco, were indicted on charges of criminal negligence.AdvertisementDell’s culture was considered stingy to the point of error at times, and Tepco was seen as arrogant. Further back, the involvement of organized crime in the destruction and rebuilding of Kobe, Japan, after a 1995 earthquake exemplified a kind of larger corruption in Japanese society. The 1979 explosions of Ford Pintos felt like a symbol of an American auto industry in decline.While Samsung’s phones resulted in less damage than any of those things, it is likely to cause trauma in South Korea. That is because for years, big companies, in particular Samsung, have been closely identified with the national character and the government’s industrial policy as well as how individuals might succeed within the culture. Nobody felt that way about Dell.If that goes deep, South Korea may be in for a period of troubling introspection. Hopefully as a prelude to re-energizing and renewal.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »