By KATIE BENNER and EMILY STEELAPRIL 19, 2016
Media and entertainment companies want to help shape the next entertainment platform: virtual reality.Over the last several months, companies including Condé Nast and Vice Media have delved into the technology as a new frontier for storytelling and a potential outlet for selling ads. They have forged partnerships with companies that make virtual reality headsets and software makers that broadcast events in virtual reality, and are trying to figure out how best to create virtual reality content.Some media and entertainment companies are also starting to invest in virtual reality companies themselves.HBO was recently the lead investor in an addition to a funding round for Otoy, a Los Angeles-based special effects start-up. Otoy, whose LightStage facial rendering technology, used in films like “The Curious Case of Benjamin Button,” has won an Academy Award, has also gotten into virtual reality. Discovery Communications and Liberty Media participated in the funding, which raised as much as $37 million and was an extension of financing that took place in 2014, according to VC Experts, a venture capital research firm.Advertisement“Not a single media company isn’t thinking about what happens when the rectangle goes away,” said Jules Urbach, 41, the founder of Otoy, referring to a future when videos are experienced in virtual reality rather than watched on screens. “Everyone needs a strategy.”AdvertisementOtoy, whose name is short for “online toy,” lets people capture virtual reality video, process it and then distribute it to viewers with its technology. Otoy also makes a virtual reality player that is free to download; the company wants to become the open standard for virtual reality distribution.“Think of them as the cloud system similar to what Pixar would use to create incredible graphics,” said Matt Miesnieks, whose firm Super Ventures invests in virtual and augmented reality start-ups. Otoy could eventually become a platform, like an Amazon Web Services for graphics, he said.Michael Lombardo, HBO’s president for programming, said most video created for virtual reality currently “leans toward marketing stunts or promotional opportunities,” but that could change when companies like Otoy become more integrated into the process of creating programming.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.With the additional funding, Otoy’s valuation of more than $300 million did not change from 2014, according to VC Experts, which added that the start-up had raised a total of $101 million.Otoy, founded in 2009 as a company whose software is used to make 3-D graphics, declined to comment on financial details. Its previous investors include Ari Emanuel, co-chief executive of William Morris Endeavor, and the enterprise software company Autodesk.The investment in Otoy is just one of several financing deals that media companies have participated in with virtual reality companies. In September, Disney led a $65 million investment in Jaunt, a virtual reality camera maker that also has software for editing and distributing the video. Comcast and Time Warner participated in a $30.5 million funding round in November for NextVR, which uses virtual reality to broadcast live events. In January, Legendary Entertainment invested an undisclosed amount in 3BlackDot, a social media platform for virtual reality.Of the 133 virtual and augmented reality investments made in 2015, media companies participated in six, according to the venture capital research firm CB Insights.Other media companies are diving into virtual reality in other ways. Vice worked with the director Chris Milk to create a virtual reality journalism project about protests in New York and a refugee camp in Jordan. Condé Nast is developing a virtual reality series about a dynastic family with a special gene that gives them the power to become invisible. The New York Times Company has created short documentary content in virtual reality and worked with Google to distribute its VR device, Google Cardboard, to subscribers.Discovery Communications introduced a service last August called Discovery VR, which is available via Apple and Android apps, as well as through other outlets. Discovery VR has more than 75 virtual reality experiences about such topics as sharks, gold mining and surfing. The app has been downloaded nearly 600,000 times and has been viewed more than 23 million times, according to the company.AdvertisementSuzanne Kolb, executive vice president of Discovery Digital Networks, said the deal with Otoy should give Discovery a front-row seat to new technological developments and ways to tell stories. “It is an evolving space,” she said.A version of this article appears in print on April 20, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Virtual Reality Lures Media and Entertainment Companies to New Frontier.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.