AdvertisementSupported byBitsBy Farhad Manjoo and Michael J. de la MercedEach Saturday, Farhad Manjoo and Mike Isaac, technology reporters at The New York Times, review the week’s news, offering analysis and maybe a joke or two about the most important developments in the tech industry. Mike was away this week, so another Mike, the DealBook reporter Michael J. de la Merced, filled in.Farhad: Hello, Michael! Thanks so much for filling in for Mike. I got a panicked email from him this morning saying he suddenly didn’t have time to chat about tech news. When I asked him why, he offered this cryptic explanation: “I loved my previous life. I had so many things going. This is more work than in my previous life. I thought it would be easier.”Michael: Happy to be here! At the least, it’s much better than having spent thousands of dollars on a luxury concert festival in the Bahamas — only for there to be no musical acts, tents, food or luxury of any kind.Farhad: O.K., well, it’s that time of the year again: earnings season. Several tech giants reported their quarterly numbers this week. It wasn’t very exciting.Amazon, Microsoft and Google are all making bundles off their cloud businesses. Twitter’s ad revenue is falling but, in a surprise, it added nine million more monthly active users — it now has 328 million.That’s less than half the number at Instagram, which didn’t report earnings (it’s owned by Facebook, which reports next week) but did say it had crossed the 700 million-user mark. That resonated with me, as I’ve been spending a lot more time on Instagram lately — at the expense of Twitter.Michael: It still strikes me as remarkable, and a little sad, that Twitter can be at the center of political discourse these days and still can’t somehow figure out a way to increase its business. Maybe it’s still too early for any Trump-related activity to filter into those financial results, but that glimmer of hope investors see feels fairly dim. I’m curious to see whether Snapchat can continue to figure out how to stave off Facebook in ways that seem to have eluded Twitter.Farhad: Also, as expected, Ajit Pai, the new chairman of the Federal Communications Commission, outlined a plan to loosen the network neutrality rules adopted by the agency two years ago. Now advocates of net neutrality say that the “open internet” is under threat — that is, internet providers will be free to block or prioritize certain content over others. It’s pretty alarming, but I suspect it will go through without much of a hitch, as it’s a fairly complicated issue that is unlikely to arouse much mobilized opposition.Michael: This is a shameful thing to admit, but every time I see “net neutrality” in a news story, I have to force myself to continue reading the article. There are very real potential implications to the F.C.C.’s actions, but you’re right that it’ll take time to see whether they pan out. (That said, most of what I use the internet for these days is watching “The Great British Baking Show: Masterclass” on Netflix, and if my ability to watch Paul and Mary bake a perfect Victorian tennis cake is threatened, I will be very cross.)Farhad: Let’s dive back into the mess that is Uber.So, you may know that Waymo, Google’s self-driving car sister company, is suing Uber for theft of its technology. There was a development related to that legal case this week. Anthony Levandowski, the former Google employee and current Uber employee who is at the center of the case, stepped aside from his job of leading some of the company’s self-driving car technology. This follows a split between Levandowski’s lawyers and Uber’s lawyers: Levandowski, seeking to protect himself, had invoked his Fifth Amendment rights in the case, which potentially imperiled Uber’s case. His stepping aside from the self-driving job will give some legal cover to Uber, it seems.Michael: Levandowski’s legal issues continue to be one of the biggest millstones hanging around Uber’s neck, especially if the company believes that self-driving cars are critical to its future. Another one is the man who’s leading Uber, Travis Kalanick, as Lesser Mike deftly chronicled in his profile of the C.E.O. earlier this week.For a company that once looked unassailable, Uber is under fire from all sides, and definitely doesn’t look as if it can go public anytime soon. But why haven’t other competitors — Lyft first and foremost, but also smaller ones like Gett — been able to seize upon those issues and provide more heat?Farhad: Yeah, I dunno. Meantime, two more self-driving car items: Bloomberg published a photo of a retrofitted Lexus that Apple is using to test its self-driving tech. And Waymo announced a program to let people in Phoenix test its fleet of self-driving minivans.Also: A start-up funded by tech titans — including Alphabet’s chief, Larry Page — announced a flying vehicle that was described as a “flying car,” but actually was more like a boat that can hover. It doesn’t drive on roads, which seems to be a requirement to be a flying car.Anyway, the boat car did remind me of The Simpsons’ Knightboat:So, do you want a flying car?Michael: Well, I really always wanted a “Back to the Future” DeLorean. But sure, a flying car wouldn’t be so bad, if it meant dodging all the traffic on the 101 and 280 highways.Farhad: Meh. I prefer Elon Musk’s idea — tunnels!Anyway, thank you for being here, Better Mike. See ya!Advertisement