
Bits By                     
 QUENTIN HARDY
 
JAN. 6, 2017
They say talk is cheap. In tech right now, it is also very valuable.As Neal Boudette and Nick Wingfield report, Ford Motor Company is working with Amazon to allow Alexa, Amazon’s voice-activated virtual assistant, to work inside Ford’s vehicles.That would require downloading an app and carrying a smartphone in the car. It would enable drivers to do things like get weather reports, stream music, juggle their calendars or remotely lock and unlock their cars. And, of course, shop on Amazon while driving.Other tech companies are also getting into using “conversational computing,” or voice commands, in cars. Apple has CarPlay software for dictating messages or getting map directions while behind the wheel. Google has Android Auto for something similar.Amazon really seems to be pulling out the stops to connect people to cloud-based services, though. The Ford announcement was made at International CES, where Alexa appeared in a number of other devices. Lenovo announced an interactive speaker, similar to Amazon’s Echo, which also uses Alexa technology. Whirlpool’s appliances are to be integrated with Alexa, so you can just tell your dishwasher to get going.AdvertisementIn all, there seemed to be more than a dozen companies with Alexa capabilities at CES. Notably, Huawei, a Chinese electronics company, said its flagship Mate 9 phone would have Alexa preinstalled. That’s particularly impressive, because the Mate 9 uses Google’s Android operating system and thus has access to Google Voice, a voice assistant.That’s not all. At last month’s Amazon Web Services cloud computing conference for software developers, there were several sessions on how companies could put Alexa in even more places.AdvertisementThere appears to be a race to dominate conversational computing, and Amazon is eager to be ahead. That means you’re likely to hear the conventional Alexa voice — educated, female and professionally friendly — in even more places.Why the big push now?“If you own the voice-user interface, you own lots of data, and you know what people are talking about. That gives you a much better chance of selling them something,” said Patrick Moorhead, the president of Moor Insights & Strategy, a tech analyst. “It’s also a Trojan horse for getting people to use A.W.S.” (Amazon Web Services is by far the most profitable part of Amazon.)Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.User data, direct digital knowledge of what people are doing with your products and in the world, is perhaps the most valuable currency in a world dominated by online life. It is the best way to know how your products are going over, and what to build next.Amazon collects lots of shopping data from its retail website, and now has the most information on how people use cloud computing systems like A.W.S., but it has an uneven record in many other areas. Its phone was a dud, and it has a relatively modest business in tablets mostly used for reading. It has no operating system of its own to speak of, and that is often how companies like Apple and Google obtain some of their best data.If the company can capture voice computing, it can gain lots of insights without having to build lots of low-margin hardware. Easy to see why the push is on.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »