The reshaping of Twitter’s top ranks under Jack Dorsey continues. On Tuesday morning, Mr. Dorsey announced the appointment of Leslie Berland as Twitter’s chief marketing officer, overseeing a department that has been in flux, with various leaders over the last five years. “Welcoming @leslieberland to Twitter!” Mr. Dorsey, Twitter’s chief executive, said in a tweet. “She will join as our CMO to help tell the stories of our iconic product!”
PhotoLeslie Berland previously was an executive at American Express, where she worked on partnerships with retailers and technology companies.Credit American ExpressMs. Berland’s appointment comes amid a slew of high-profile departures from Twitter, including those of Kevin Weil and Alex Roetter, two of the company’s most senior executives, who oversaw product development and engineering throughout the organization. Katie Jacobs Stanton, the company’s vice president for media, also announced her departure, as did Jason Toff, a general manager at Vine, the Twitter-owned social video product. Ms. Berland was an executive at American Express, where for the last decade she worked on advertising, marketing and digital partnerships with retailers and technology companies, including Facebook, Foursquare and Twitter itself. Before that, Ms. Berland worked as a vice president at GCI Group and as an account executive at Ketchum. Shortly after Mr. Dorsey’s announcement on Tuesday, Ms. Berland posted on Twitter: “Thanks @Jack! Excited to join you and the amazing teams to bring to life the power, uniqueness and magic of Twitter!”Ms. Berland takes over a position that has changed hands multiple times in short order. Anthony Noto, Twitter’s chief financial officer, briefly oversaw the company’s marketing activities. Before that, Gabriel Stricker, Twitter’s former vice president for communications, also oversaw the marketing department.Twitter is also expected to announce the appointment of two new board members, one of them a prominent media personality, in the coming weeks, according to two people familiar with the company’s plans.A version of this article appears in print on 01/27/2016, on page B2 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Business Briefing; Twitter Taps Amex Executive to Lead Marketing Division.