By KATIE BENNERFEB. 3, 2017
Josh Miller, who was a member of the White House Office of Digital Strategy under President Barack Obama, has joined Thrive Capital, a venture capital firm run by the investor Joshua Kushner.At the firm, Mr. Miller, who begins work there on Monday, will focus on technology that serves the needs of underprivileged Americans. Mr. Miller said he hoped that tech investors and founders would help people who did not have internet access or the digital literacy to navigate job websites and who had to use predatory payday lenders.With the appointment of Mr. Miller, who joined Mr. Obama’s administration in 2015, Mr. Kushner continues to surround himself with Democrats. Many of the founders of his portfolio companies supported Hillary Clinton, as did his girlfriend, the model Karlie Kloss, according to social media.But Mr. Kushner’s older brother, Jared Kushner, is the son-in-law of and adviser to President Trump. As a result, Joshua Kushner has also been thrust into the spotlight, including whether he agrees with his brother on various matters. The technology and start-up industries have been opposed to Mr. Trump’s policies, particularly his stand on immigration.A spokesman for Mr. Kushner declined to comment. Mr. Miller, who joins Thrive as entrepreneur in residence, said that Mr. Kushner’s ties to the new Republican administration did not deter him from taking a role at Thrive.AdvertisementMr. Kushner and Mr. Miller have known each other for several years. Mr. Kushner and Thrive encouraged Mr. Miller to take time off from college to build the media start-up Branch, which was sold to Facebook in 2014. Mr. Miller later joined Mr. Obama’s administration to oversee and create digital products, like its websites.AdvertisementMr. Miller has previously invested in start-ups that aim to serve the underprivileged, including in Josephine, a community meal marketplace that largely serves women, minorities and immigrants.He also had been on the board of Coalition for Queens, a New York philanthropy that serves minority residents and teaches them to code.“Starting with the needs of Americans who are underserved feels like a more productive place than starting with a novel technology, such as augmented reality,” Mr. Miller said in an interview this week.An earlier version of a capsule summary with this article misstated the relationship between Jared Kushner and his brother Joshua. Joshua is his younger brother, not his older brother.A version of this article appears in print on February 4, 2017, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Tech Aide to Obama Joins Firm Run by a Kushner.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.