AdvertisementSupported byTech TipBy J. D. BiersdorferQ. I had my iPhone and iPad set up to send all my photos to my Dropbox account, so I could access them on my PC. Suddenly, about six weeks ago, they no longer do this and I can’t figure out how to reset it so they will. It is possible that I told my iPhone to send my photos to the iCloud library on that day, but I don’t remember for sure. Please help!A. If you think you may have inadvertently diverted your automatic photo uploads to Apple’s iCloud Photo Library service from Dropbox, you can reverse the process. To do so on an iPhone running iOS 10.3 and later, go to the home screen and tap Settings. On the Settings screen, tap your Apple ID account name at the top. On the next screen, tap iCloud. On the iCloud screen, tap Photos and turn off the iCloud Photo Library service.Once you have turned off the iCloud photo backup, make sure Dropbox is still set to upload from the camera. Return to the home screen and open the Dropbox app. Tap the Account icon in the bottom-right corner and then select the gear-shaped Settings icon at the top of the screen. Select Camera Uploads and tap the button back to the On position if it was off.If iCloud was not turned on and Dropbox was still set to handle your camera uploads, other issues may be interfering. Dropbox has a page of troubleshooting tips for Camera Uploads in the support area of its site. The Camera Uploads feature is available to users who have free Dropbox Basic accounts that are linked to a computer running the Dropbox app, or who have paid Dropbox Plus and Dropbox Professional accounts.As part of its iOS 11 software update, Apple added support for the High Efficiency Image File Format. Make sure you have a recent version of the Dropbox app for iOS that supports the new format. Not long after the iOS 11 software was released in September, many users reported problems with camera uploads after upgrading because of the file incompatibility.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.Advertisement