
Bits By                     
 MIKE ISAAC and
 

 MICHAEL J. de la MERCED
 
APRIL 9, 2016
Each Saturday, Farhad Manjoo and Mike Isaac, technology reporters at The New York Times, review the week’s news, offering analysis and maybe a joke or two about the most important developments in the tech industry. Mr. Manjoo is off this week (again), so Michael de la Merced, a DealBook reporter, is filling in.Mike: Hello! It’s Michael de la Merced, my trusty colleague from our DealBook section, filling in for Farhad this week.Michael: Thanks for inviting me, Mike! I always welcome the chance to question your knowledge and qualifications as an expert on the technology industry.Mike: Excellent. Keep me honest in Farhad’s absence. Unless I’m somehow wrong, in which case just nod your head and go with it.AdvertisementSo, this week was rather eventful. Facebook is pushing out more features for live video, including the revolutionary ability to “doodle” and post stickers to streaming video. Our technological forefathers would be proud, I’m sure.AdvertisementMeanwhile, Reddit is trying to clean up its act by giving users the ability to block other people on the site, a first in the company’s 10-plus years of existence. I guess that means now I’ll have to go to YouTube for the latest racist and sexist anonymous commentary.Michael: Our founding fathers would be disappointed, if they could ever conceive of “the Internet” or “computers” or “illegible screeds with vile language, strange capitalization and overuse of exclamation marks.”Mike: Right. Also, Yahoo is still trying to sell itself, I think. I’m not quite sure, except to say that this whole process is playing out in excruciating detail in public, and it looks ugly.You’re following this closely. Tell me what to think.Michael: We’ve been to this rodeo before. But this time is different, or so Yahoo C.E.O. Marissa Mayer and her team want people to think, especially with investors clamoring for a deal. First-round bids are due soon, though some of those tossing their hats in the ring may just be playing along and learning more about how much the embattled company is, well, embattled.Verizon — which owns AOL, another Web 1.0 pioneer — is considered an early front-runner. So maybe you can expect to have a bunch of purple-themed icons preloaded on your next smartphone.Mike: That sounds like an awful expectation of what a giant company thinks customers want, and is completely ungrounded in reality. In other words, it sounds like a telco!The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But I want to get to a bigger thing I’m preoccupied with. And that thing is Twitter, of course, the medium of choice for self-centered journalists like myself.AdvertisementTwitter made a huge deal this week about a new deal with the N.F.L., in which Twitter will broadcast 10 Thursday night football games on Twitter itself. We still don’t know exactly what it will look like, except that it will be live video of football.This is a big deal, particularly for a few reasons: Facebook was trying to make this deal and did not. Amazon and Verizon were, too, but Twitter ended up winning the bid. Right now, many of the major tech companies want to be known for their ability to present live content — see Facebook Live’s press onslaught as of late — so that’s automatically a nice win for Twitter, branding-wise.Michael: It seems like everyone is pursuing live video, right? You had mentioned Facebook before. And of course Snapchat has been pushing its own version of live, in the form of Snapchat stories. There’s a real belief that mobile is the new television experience, and right now there are few bigger gets for any company than the N.F.L., which for many is basically the modern-day equivalent of going to church.Mike: Right, exactly. The other thing that the big TV people are worried about is the wacky cord-cutter types — millennials, natch — and the web mediums they’re taking to instead of, say, signing up for a traditional cable bundle like their parents before them. That’s at least part of why the N.F.L. and other media types are willing to cut broadcast deals like these.The bigger win here, I think, is Twitter’s chance to convince people to come watch TV on Twitter and stick around long after. With these games, Twitter has 10 chances to show old and new users that it’s a worthwhile service to come back to again and again. That’s something they’ve missed the opportunity to do in the past. And that means Twitter needs to nail the experience of watching the games on the service this time around.Michael: That’s a big, open question. Yahoo — back to them again! — infamously paid about $20 million to stream a Thursday-night game between the Jacksonville Jaguars and the Buffalo Bills this past season and drew just over 15 million viewers. Yahoo claims that it was happy with the results, while other commentators were decidedly less impressed.Maybe Twitter will have more success this time around. It has some advantages, including the ability of viewers to comment on the games alongside their feed, mimicking the community feeling and fun of watching the N.F.L. with friends or at a bar. (Which will be handy when I need to bemoan the state of my New York Giants.)Yahoo did manage to improve on audiences for previous streamed N.F.L. games. But Twitter will need to do significantly better — and in the process find the perfect way to energize its stagnant audience growth — if it hopes to reap a good return on this investment.AdvertisementMike: Honestly, I hope Twitter makes the watching experience cool for normal people. That is, the folks who aren’t like you and I, people who aren’t glued to their phones making snarky tweets whenever something on TV — or really, anywhere in the world — happens. It’s like a little running commentary that anyone can have access to, they just have to be good at discovering it. And for total newcomers, it’s that sense of discovery that can make Twitter completely impenetrable.Anyway, thanks for dropping by, Michael! I’ll have to have you back another week, perhaps to complain to you when my phone is filled with little purple icons. Ciao!Michael: Thanks for letting me hang out so I could burn you in a more public forum than our Slack chat room!We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »