When you hear “hackathon” you envision a scene from “The Social Network”: bleary-eyed developers working into the early morning, slamming energy drinks, furiously typing away on keyboards; the end goal being to best your competition, and be showered in glory from your peers. When I joined The New York Times two years ago, I assumed my first 100% Day would be similar; nothing could be further from the truth. The Times periodically hosts an internal 100% Day. A typical 100% Day, or “Maker Day” at The Times fosters a spirit of collaboration and personal development. We use this time to better ourselves, to learn something new, or build something that we may be interested in. It’s a time where we can dig in, hang out with other members of the organization, and just learn. At the end of the day, we share whatever knowledge we’ve gained, or things we’ve built, with the rest of the company.The March version of 100% Day was no different. Inspired by the work of Lara Hogan, I spent most of my day investigating ways to boost the speed of our current site. I dug into a tool called vmprobe and found ways to optimize our autoscaling efforts on the Real Estate section. There were dozens of talks, ranging from researching findings to full blown demos. Here are some that I personally found interesting:NYT Reactions: Jared McDonald, Jeff Sisson and Angel Santiago, from Technology, built a system to allow emoji reactions to articles. The goal was to create a mechanism for user feedback that’s more at ease in a mobile setting, and which could attract a reader that would not otherwise be comfortable composing a fully fledged comment. The system was designed to be flexible enough to accept a range of emotional reactions; so anything from “Recommend” to “” is possible.Lunchbot: Chris Ladd, from Digital Design, built a Slack bot to respond to the question: “What’s on the menu in the cafe on the 14th floor?” Chris demonstrated his code live on stage, and integrated the bot into several NYT Slack channels. He has also graciously open sourced his code. If you’re so inclined, you can check out the code on GitHub.
Good Morning Times: Ethan G, from Technology, explored what was possible with the Alexa Skills Kit (ASK) for the Amazon Echo. Ethan provided a lighthearted demo showcasing the Echo, with Alexa providing the color commentary using the headlines from The Times’s morning briefing as content.Ethan explained his motivation for the project: “Sci-fi movies make it look all magical and cool to see humans interact in natural language with machines, but from my experience it quickly gets old and I just want Alexa to get stuff done while using my voice as little as possible.”This led him to spend most of his time designing and implementing a reduced instruction set for the parsing schema, allowing him to speak less and still get the same response from Alexa. The end result was a very compelling demo.Cory Borg (@coryborg) is a development manager on the NYT Beta team at The New York Times. His focus is on helping the readers of Real Estate section. A self-described coffee snob, Cory can be found frequenting the many third wave coffee shops scattered throughout NYC.