By MIKE ISAACAPRIL 7, 2016
SAN FRANCISCO — Uber will pay as much as $25 million to settle a civil lawsuit with the district attorneys in Los Angeles and San Francisco over claims that the ride-hailing company misled people on its safety practices and the methods it used to screen drivers.The settlement, filed on Thursday in the United States District Court in the Northern District of California, requires Uber to pay $10 million to be split equally between the district attorneys of Los Angeles and San Francisco. The company also must reword the safety-related language around the fee that the company charges for each ride.Uber has to pay an additional $15 million if it does not comply with all the terms of the settlement within two years. They include continuing to work with California’s Division of Measurement Standards to measure customer fares using GPS technology.The settlement ends a long-running headache for Uber over whether it does enough to scrutinize the drivers on its service. The civil suit suggested that Uber overstated the safety measures it uses to screen drivers, since Uber drivers need only pass a background check carried out by a third-party service.AdvertisementEarlier in 2014, a New York Times article found that Uber and Lyft lobbied against fingerprint-based background checks in courthouses across the country. At the time, lawmakers said that in a rush to add drivers to their services, Uber and Lyft chose speed over quality in background checks. Uber had previously described its screening methods as “industry-leading” and “the gold standard” of safety measures.Advertisement“The result we achieved today goes well beyond its impact on Uber,” George Gascón, the district attorney of San Francisco, said in a statement. “It sends a clear message to all businesses, and to start-ups in particular, that in the quest to quickly obtain market share, laws designed to protect consumers cannot be ignored.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Last year, the district attorneys said in an amended complaint that background checks used by Uber failed to uncover the criminal records of 25 of its drivers in San Francisco and Los Angeles.Uber, which admits no wrongdoing in the settlement, similarly settled a class-action lawsuit in February over safety background checks. The San Francisco-based company agreed to pay roughly 25 million riders approximately $28.5 million in that settlement.Uber has said it will spend more time researching advanced safety technologies for its drivers such as biometric identification and voice verification.“We’re glad to put this case behind us and excited to redouble our efforts serving riders and drivers across the state of California,” Uber said in a statement.A version of this article appears in print on April 8, 2016, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: Uber Settles Lawsuit in California Over Driver Background Checks.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.