AdvertisementSupported byTech TipBy J. D. BiersdorferQ. How do you upgrade from Windows 10 Home to Windows 10 Professional? Can you do it without having to reinstall everything on the computer?A. Performing a “clean install” — where you copy all your data from the computer before reformatting the drive, installing a factory-fresh version of an operating system and copying your data back — can prevent many upgrade glitches. However, Microsoft allows you to upgrade your copy of Windows 10 Home to Windows 10 Professional directly by downloading the software from its online store. Before you upgrade, make sure your system is up-to-date and fully back up your computer.Depending on where you got the version of Windows 10 currently running on your PC, you may have to pay an upgrade fee of $99. You will need to activate the new version with either a digital license or a digital entitlement (which is already installed on the PC from your original purchase) or by entering another 25-character Microsoft product key from the seller.If you do not have a license or product key from your original system purchase, go to the Start menu and select the Settings icon. Choose Update & Security and on the next screen, select Activation. Tap or click the “Go to Store” link in the box to visit the Microsoft Store to buy and download Windows 10 Professional on your PC.Unless you have a digital license stored on your computer, you need to pay for the upgrade. (If you do have a product key for the Pro version, select the Change Product Key option in the Activation box and type in the new code.)Windows 10 Professional includes all the features of the Windows 10 Home, but adds bonus features like automatic cloud storage for your Microsoft Office files and the ability to log into your computer remotely. For extra security, the professional edition also includes BitLocker, Microsoft’s tool for encrypting your computer’s hard drive.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.Advertisement