By KATIE BENNERMAY 16, 2016
SAN FRANCISCO — Xfund, a beleaguered venture capital firm that has put money into start-ups like the genetics company 23andMe and the real estate outfit Zumper, is breaking new and belligerent ground in the normally discreet world of technology investors.A complaint filed on Friday in Santa Clara County Superior Court in California by Hugo Van Vuuren, one Xfund founder, against Patrick S. Chung, the other founder, and the fund itself, includes accusations of secret contract amendments, bullying and schoolyard name-calling.Mr. Chung called Mr. Van Vuuren a “spiteful moron” and “a trivial person pursuing trivial things” in emails, according to court documents. Mr. Chung also wrote that working with Mr. Van Vuuren was “like working with a retarded person” and that Mr. Van Vuuren would be worth more “dead than alive once we have key-man insurance.”The dispute between the two founders of the $100 million fund is a rare moment of public bickering among venture capitalists.AdvertisementMr. Van Vuuren claims in his suit that Mr. Chung committed fraud by secretly amending their partnership agreement to take full control of Xfund’s investments, operations and governance.Mr. Van Vuuren also claims that Mr. Chung had a fiduciary duty to tell him about any changes to their agreement, but that when he was asked to sign the amended documents at the end of 2014, Mr. Chung mentioned only the fact that they had been altered to include a way to share proceeds from successful investments with new employees.AdvertisementIn May 2015, a lawyer for Xfund at Ropes & Gray emailed Mr. Van Vuuren to say that the agreements were drafted so that Xfund remained a “marriage of two equals,” but later that law firm told Mr. Van Vuuren to have an independent lawyer review the amendments that he had signed, according to the complaint.Xfund investors have tried to salvage the fund by approving a plan to support a scaled-back version that would be run solely by Mr. Chung, possibly with a third party monitoring his work, said an investor in the fund, speaking on the condition of anonymity.But the intervention has not stopped the fight from heading to the courtroom. Mr. Van Vuuren has indicated that he has no plans to step aside, and he is pushing for a court trial, which could further embarrass Xfund and its investors — about 20 family investment offices, venture firms and corporations including the investor Jim Breyer, the venture capital giant New Enterprise Associates and companies like the oil company Saudi Aramco.A representative for Mr. Van Vuuren declined to comment beyond the lawsuit. An Xfund representative called the allegations bewildering and noted that Mr. Van Vuuren was a signed counterparty to all the fund formation documents.Xfund began in 2011 as a small seed fund created to invest in start-ups out of Harvard University and the Boston area before it blossomed into an operation with an office and investments in Silicon Valley.The co-founders have been fighting for nearly two years. As their relationship fell apart, Mr. Van Vuuren claims, Mr. Chung blocked his investment ideas and looked for ways to lessen his influence. He says Mr. Chung offered David J. Malan, a professor at Harvard, a share of Xfund’s profits for help with Xfund matters, in an attempt to “obtain an East Coast-based resource to replace Van Vuuren,” according to the court documents.AdvertisementThe complaint accuses Mr. Chung of defamation for filing a restraining order in March, saying that the move was an attempt to keep Mr. Van Vuuren away from an Xfund-sponsored event in California, and from the committee that was deciding how best to advise investors on how to act given that the fund’s partners could no longer work together.In his restraining-order application, Mr. Chung said that his partner had physically and verbally threatened him and his family. The application was later withdrawn.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.This month, Xfund’s investors approved a proposal that the agreements governing the fund be completely redrawn to move Xfund’s existing investments solely under Mr. Chung’s purview.Two investors in the fund who agreed to speak on the condition of anonymity because of the private nature of the firm’s partnership contracts said that this waspartly because Mr. Chung had made most of Xfund’s investments.In his lawsuit, Mr. Van Vuuren does not mention how many investments Mr. Chung made, but he does claim that a single company accounts for more than 85 percent of Xfund’s appreciation. That investment, Kensho, is one that Mr. Van Vuuren says that he made, according to the documents.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.