AdvertisementSupported byApp SmartBy Kit EatonIN a volatile economy, many Americans are on the job hunt. But with the days of scanning the classifieds in a newspaper long behind us, one of the best ways to find a new gig is with the help of an app.The Indeed app is an excellent resource if you are looking for a job. It gathers opportunities from a wide range of online portals and lets you search them with just a few clicks.Indeed is designed to be simple. To use the app, you tell it the type of job you are looking for and the desired location. Then you click “Find jobs,” and the app generates a scrollable list of all the listings that match your search criteria.Each job is displayed in a large window in mostly plain text. Usually the window will tell you everything you need to know about the position being advertised, including the company’s requirements for expertise and education. Typically the text also details the job requirements and responsibilities.To see more information, you can tap on the “View job” button, and the app will take you to the original source of the listing. If the source site supports it, you can apply for the job directly from this web page.Indeed also lets you bookmark job postings as favorites, and you can even post a résumé to the site in a special format so potential employers can easily gain access to your information. Indeed is quite hands-on, and you will find yourself doing lots of tapping and swiping as you use it, but it is easy to use and is brimming with useful job information. Indeed is free for iOS and Android.If you are looking for work in the technology industry, the Switch job search app is an excellent option. The app is designed to work a lot like the dating phenomenon Tinder: Job listings matching your interests are presented as one-page summaries, and you swipe left if they are not for you, and right if you like them.A company manager can swipe left or right on your profile as well, and if the two of you are a match, you can then chat and exchange more detailed information. Switch works anonymously at first, with potential managers seeing only your profile and not your name. The company that makes it also promises that there are no headhunters or recruiters on the system; only staff members with the company posting the job can correspond with you. Switch is easy to use, and it’s free on iOS and Android.Monster is a big name in online job hunting, and the company has an app to complement its more traditional web-based service. Monster’s app works similarly to Indeed — you search for job offers by keyword, and then you can see information on available positions in the app and apply for some of them immediately.The Monster app also has a system for uploading your résumé and standard cover letters, so you can forward them to an employer if you are interested in a position — this could definitely speed up the application process, which may be important for jobs that are snapped up quickly. The app is simple to use and cleanly designed, and it’s free on iOS and Android.Monster also owns the Jobr app, which is a fast-paced, swipe-if-you’re-interested system similar to Switch. Because of the way it works, Jobr may be a speedier way to browse Monster’s list of millions of available jobs. The app also includes a “concierge” service, which guides you through the search process depending on whether you are looking for a new job with a higher salary or more challenging work that matches your skill set and so on. It’s free on iOS and Android.There is still a place for the traditional résumé when it comes to applying for new jobs, and the Resume Free CV Builder app is a good option. This iOS app includes résumé templates that you can populate with your information. Once you have perfected a résumé, you can email it to yourself as a PDF, ready to forward to a potential employer. The app is free, but to gain access to some of the more interesting design templates, you have to pay a few dollars. Android users should check out My Resume Builder, which has similar features and is also free.Discovering music in a social way is the goal of Lisn. The new app lets you share songs with friends and listen to the music together while chatting about it in real time. The idea is that the best recommendations for new music may come from people who already know your tastes. Lisn is free and ad-free for iOS users only.Advertisement