
Bits By                     
 QUENTIN HARDY
 
NOV. 10, 2016
Silicon Valley loves disruption — just not, it turns out, disruptions of a certain kind.As Farhad Manjoo writes, the world capital of technology was in shock after Tuesday’s election of Donald J. Trump as president of the United States. Mr. Trump had few visible fans in the Valley, other than billionaire Peter Thiel, and many vocal critics.The tech elite had criticized him for his statements about immigration and globalization, along with much in his personal behavior. Mr. Trump in turn took the Valley companies to task for building their iconic products in China, and implicitly condemned the local culture of global elites, driving their subsidized Teslas past much of working-class America.With a relationship like that, there are expectations that much of the tech business as usual is over. At first pass, even before Mr. Trump’s policies and programs are known, the tech world seems to feel as if it won’t be at the center of attention, the way it seemed to be in the now-passing Obama years.President Obama, a self-proclaimed geek, liked publicizing his school science fairs at the White House and embraced the idea that the sweeping changes to the economy and society wrought by modern technology were ultimately beneficial.Mr. Trump, with his slogan of restoring America, seems more wary of big changes — particularly those that alienate his base of traditional Americans in the country’s rural zones. Not to mention that he has a well-known penchant for holding a grudge, and is likely to remember Silicon Valley’s disdain for his campaign.AdvertisementNot being cool with the powers that be would indeed be disruptive, and could very likely affect local profits. But there are a few things the Valley should bear in mind before falling into utter despair.AdvertisementFor starters, no matter who is in charge, the future is still coming at us, one day at a time, and they have a big role in that. The next administration won’t recall all iPhones or forbid the production of apps.And while Mr. Trump may profess anger at the digital industry, he is clearly fond of Twitter, and ran a lightweight, fast-moving and iterative campaign that owed much to his fans using new media like YouTube.Besides, Mr. Trump famously likes to do deals; with all the billions lying around the Valley, the two sides might eventually find a way to do business together.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »