
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
DEC. 12, 2017
Q. I was installing a browser extension the other day, and the software said it needed to “read and change all the data on the websites you visit.” Why is this, and should I be worried?A. Browser extensions meant to perform tasks — like finding coupon deals or stopping videos from automatically playing — are programs all on their own. Web browsers that use a permissions system to explain what data the extension needs to function should alert you to what the program wants to do and, as with app permissions on mobile devices, give you a chance to stop installing the software if its reach seems too invasive.Advice and tips on the technology changing how you live.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In theory, an extension that has license to “read and change all the data on the websites you visit” can see the sites you browse, make changes to those pages and report back to its creator with the information. Some extensions legitimately require access to this data to perform their function. For example, video-blocking software must read a website’s code to see that a clip is set to play automatically — so it knows how to stop the playback.Many extensions benignly use this information, but there is always the danger that the all-access pass will be abused or that rogue software will grab keystrokes, login information, account numbers and other private data. Malware makers have hijacked or even bought legitimate extensions from their original developers and used the access to pump invasive advertisements into web pages; Google previously banned these offenders from its Chrome extension store.The creators of Honey, a popular shopping extension that requires permission to “read and change” the data on the websites you visit, have said that they have been approached by malware and data collection companies about selling their trusted software — but that they have not done so. Many add-on programs quietly do their jobs without grabbing your data, but if online privacy and security concern you at all, consider skipping the convenience of the browser extension, or thoroughly read its creator’s privacy policy so you know what you are agreeing to share when you install the software.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.A version of this article appears in print on December 14, 2017, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Danger From Using Browser Extensions.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »