
Bits By                     
 PUI-WING TAM
 
MARCH 16, 2017
Tensions between the United States and Russia have festered for months over the issue of cybersecurity. Russian hackers were identified by American intelligence officials as having tried to aid Donald J. Trump during the presidential election last year, at the expense of Hillary Clinton.On Wednesday, the Justice Department said Russians were also behind another prominent hacking: a giant breach at the internet company Yahoo in 2014, when 500 million user accounts were compromised.Federal officials said two Russian intelligence officers were responsible for the breach, along with a Russian hacker and a Kazakh national living in Canada, write Vindu Goel and Eric Lichtblau, reporters for The New York Times. The Russian government then used the information obtained through the Yahoo breach to target American executives and other officials, according to the indictment from the Justice Department.The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The development is likely to deepen questions over how much the United States and Russia can trust and work with each other. The relationship is also in the spotlight because of comments President Trump has made about his Russian counterpart, Vladimir Putin, which have raised some eyebrows.AdvertisementAt least one person was thankful that the Justice Department had brought its indictment out over the Yahoo breach. Marissa Mayer, Yahoo’s chief executive, who is also grappling with another hacking of some 1 billion user accounts at the company, wrote in a message on Twitter that she was “very grateful” to the American authorities for getting to the bottom of things.
            Very grateful to the FBI & DOJ for bringing to justice the Russian officials & hackers who led the attack on Yahoo.https://t.co/AQ4qHpPv6C More tech news:A video gamer’s death during a 24-hour live stream raises questions about a lifestyle. After Brian C. Vigneault died, many gamers acknowledged the health risks of a culture that rewards those who stay online for hours.McDonald’s says it’s Twitter account was compromised after an anti-Trump post. After the fast-food chain’s corporate account sent out a message insulting President Trump, the company deleted the post and said it was investigating.AdvertisementShopping for a new TV? Here’s how to cut through the jargon. Now is a good time to buy, experts say, because improvements make for superior picture quality.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »