
Bits By                     
 PUI-WING TAM
 
MARCH 15, 2017
The internet has been a great destroyer of cultural businesses. Its toll includes getting people accustomed to listening to music and consuming news without paying, and it has freed people to cut the cable cord.But some of that arc may be changing — and all at once, Farhad Manjoo writes in The New York Times.In his State of the Art column, he writes that consumers are, with accelerating momentum, more willing to pay for content online. Sure, people have been subscribing to Netflix for some time, which has enabled that streaming service to order up strong original programming. But now people are more game to pay for all sorts of content — podcasts, videos by YouTube stars and even art through sites like Patreon, which lets consumers finance artists over time.The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The trend is evident in the news business, including at The Times and The Washington Post, where subscriptions have jumped in the last few months. Subscriptions have soared elsewhere, too, including for Apple Music and Spotify.Advertisement“I do think something has changed culturally,” Jack Conte, the founder of Patreon, told The Times. “This new generation is more concerned with social impact. There’s a desire to vote with your dollars and your time and attention.”AdvertisementMore tech news:U.S. charges 4 people, including 2 Russian spies, in Yahoo hacking. Federal prosecutors announced criminal charges against the four men for their roles in the 2014 theft of 500 million Yahoo accounts, one of the largest known data breaches.How the internet is saving culture, not killing it. There has been huge growth in digital subscription services, and they are revolutionizing every cultural industry.Hackers post pro-Erdogan messages in attack on Twitter accounts. The breach came amid a bitter standoff between Turkey and European Union countries, and as Dutch voters cast ballots in a general election.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »