
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
MARCH 13, 2017
Q. Why does the screen border on my Android tablet sometimes turn orange?A. In Android 5.0 (Lollipop) and later, the top and bottom edges of the screen turn a bright orange when the device’s power ebbs low enough to kick in the Battery Saver mode. Plugging the tablet into its charger returns the screen to its normal color scheme.When Battery Saver is on, certain functions of your tablet are disabled to conserve energy. Mail, messages and other apps may not sync in the background, Google Maps navigation is turned off and vibrating alerts, location services and some other functions are limited.In Android 7.0, you can enable (or disable) the Battery Saver function by opening the Settings app, selecting Battery and then Battery Saver. In Android 6.0 and Android 5.0, open the Settings app, choose Battery, tap the More menu in the upper-right corner and select Battery Saver. When you choose to turn the feature on, you can have the Battery Saver kick in automatically when the device’s battery edges down to 5 or 15 percent of the current battery charge.Microsoft’s Windows 10 Mobile software has a Battery Saver option of its own in the settings. The company’s support site has power-saving tips for earlier versions of the Windows Phone software, too.Apple has included a similar Low Power Mode setting in iOS 9 and later; you can switch it on or off by opening the Settings app on the home screen and tapping Battery to get to the Low Power Mode control. When the Low Power Mode is activated, the iOS battery icon at the top of the screen turns yellow and certain functions like the “Hey, Siri” feature and automatic downloads are temporarily shut down. The low-battery setting turns itself off when the device regains at least an 80 percent battery charge.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.A version of this article appears in print on March 16, 2017, on Page B8 of the New York edition with the headline: Seeing Orange? Time to Recharge.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »