
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
JAN. 14, 2016
Q. Is there a way to watch Amazon’s Instant Video on my television instead of my tablet? If I’m subscribed to Amazon Prime in the United States, can I watch the Prime Instant Video outside the country, like when I’m traveling overseas for work?A. If you want to move the picture to a bigger screen, Amazon has a version of its video app available on several devices that connect to your television set in one way or another; you may already have the hardware on hand. A few inexpensive set-top boxes designed to stream video to the TV can tap into Amazon’s video library, including the company’s own Fire TV and Fire TV Stick devices. Hardware from Roku, TiVo and Panasonic can also stream Amazon Instant Video to the television screen.Game consoles like Microsoft’s Xbox One and Xbox 360, Sony’s PlayStation 4 and PlayStation 3 models, and the Nintendo Wii U and Wii can stream Amazon’s video content to the connected TV screen. Smart TVs and Blu-ray disc players from several major manufacturers also have Amazon’s app for videos built in.Although an official Amazon Video app has yet to arrive for the Apple TV, the company does make an iOS app for its streaming video service, and content from an iPhone, iPod Touch or iPad can be beamed to the television by way of Apple’s AirPlay technology; some recent Mac laptops can stream content from the browser to the TV screen with AirPlay as well. Although Amazon Video does not officially support Google Chromecast, you might be able to stream video from Amazon’s website on the Chrome browser to the TV-connected Chromecast device.As for watching Amazon Prime Instant Video when traveling beyond the United States, Amazon’s Terms of Service states that you cannot use its video service outside the country because of restrictions from its content providers. But while legally streaming Amazon Video may be forbidden overseas, videos you fully download to your tablet from the site before you go can be viewed wherever you happen to be.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »