By QUENTIN HARDYJAN. 14, 2016
SAN FRANCISCO — Not that long ago, Wall Street believed that as Intel goes, so goes much of the rest of the technology industry.If Intel did well in its quarterly earnings report and planned to spend aggressively in the coming months, it meant personal computer makers were likely to do the same because the company was the main supplier to all of them.A lot has changed in recent years. The PC market has been in a long, slow decline, and Intel does not have the same clout with companies that build smartphones, which are today’s hottest gadgets.But even if some of its financial clout has waned, Intel’s spending continues to be a key indicator of the health of the tech world. Intel is still — by a good stretch — the world’s biggest semiconductor maker and perhaps the only company of its kind with the resources to keep improving chip technology.AdvertisementIf computer chips do not continue to improve, the entire tech industry stalls. Semiconductors have leapt from computers and mobile phones to all sorts of devices, including cars, appliances and toys. They are increasingly connected to the fast-growing computer “clouds” of companies like Amazon and Google, which are powered by vast data centers of computer servers that mostly use Intel chips.AdvertisementIntel’s financial results are a sort of proxy for growth in cloud-based services, said Thomas Kurian, the president of product development at Oracle, one of the world’s largest software companies. “If they ship a lot, it means a huge growth in new cloud projects,” he said.In quarterly earnings reported by Intel on Thursday, the company’s revenue was up slightly from the same period last year, but money from data center chips was up markedly.Intel reported that its net income in the fourth quarter of 2015 fell 1 percent to $3.6 billion, or 74 cents a share, from the year-earlier quarter. The company said revenue climbed 1 percent, to $14.9 billion.The net income was above the expectations of Wall Street analysts. They had anticipated 63 cents a share on revenue of $14.8 billion, according to a survey of analysts by Thomson Reuters.For all of 2015, Intel revenue was $55.4 billion, down 1 percent from 2014. Net income was $11.4 billion, down 2 percent.Intel’s share price was down about 4 percent in after-hours trading Thursday evening.No doubt, Intel’s influence has changed in recent years.Intel still gets 59 percent of its revenue from chip sales to PC makers like HP Inc. and Dell, just as Microsoft and other makers of PC software count on the demand for new PCs to sell their products. Now PCs are a tough business: On Tuesday, the market research firm IDC said 276 million PCs were shipped worldwide in 2015, a drop of 10.4 percent from 2014.Advertisement“PCs don’t matter as much as they used to,” said Jay Chou, an analyst with IDC. “They’re only part of the story that includes mobile devices and cloud computing.”On Thursday, Intel said data center chip sales, not just to clouds but to older kinds of computing, rose 4 percent in the fourth quarter of 2015. Along with Intel’s much smaller businesses in memory and sensor chips for devices, data center chips accounted for than 60 percent of the company’s operating profit margin.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Since the PC industry is sliding, using Intel as an indicator of the health of the rest of tech is not as easy as it used to be. Analysts say the number to watch now is Intel’s investment in Moore’s Law. Named for an Intel co-founder, Gordon Moore, that is the observation that computing power, figured in the density of transistors on a chip, tends to double every 18 to 24 months. That effectively means that $2 of computing power today will cost $1 in 2018.Keeping up with Moore’s Law is increasingly expensive. In 2001 research and development, along with marketing and sales, cost Intel about $8 billion. In 2015, Intel said Thursday, it cost $20.1 billion.As a percentage of revenue, the number has crept up too, and on both counts it is at a cost few companies could manage. Besides Intel, which develops new chips ahead of everyone, the last big semiconductor makers are GlobalFoundries, Samsung and Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Company. Each has to invest billions to stay in the game.“Intel can decide if Moore’s Law is 18 or 24 or 36 months long,” said Amit Daryanani, an analyst with RBC Capital Markets.Last year, Intel scared many technologists when it announced that a critical next step in delivering on Moore’s Law would happen about a year later than expected. The company has since released numerous charts showing this was a temporary blip.If it was more than a blip, developers of those self-driving cars, connected drones and other new devices will also struggle to make improvements.Relax, said Stacy Smith, the chief financial officer of Intel.“Moore’s Law is the heartbeat of our company,” he said. “It is the core of our competitive advantage.”Indeed, Intel’s corporate identity is wrapped up in this concept of ever-improving chips.“They can’t risk not being seen as the leading engineering company,” Mr. Daryanani said. “The beauty of this thing is that this way, they are in control of their own destiny, and not a lot of tech companies can say that.”AdvertisementAnd if that costs billions, so be it.A version of this article appears in print on January 15, 2016, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Intel Faces Uphill Battle to Live by Moore’s Law.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.