
Bits By                     
 JIM KERSTETTER
 
JUNE 29, 2016
Sometimes local politicians can be an awfully unpredictable bunch.This month, Airbnb appeared to be surprised when the once friendly San Francisco Board of Supervisors turned hostile, unanimously voting to fine Airbnb $1,000 a day for every unregistered host who uses the service, in a new law that is expected to go into effect in July.Airbnb is suing to stop it, arguing that the supervisors are violating a federal law that protects websites from being responsible for what people post on them.What’s more, the supervisors’ vote was a rare setback for Airbnb, which often cited San Francisco as a city that understood how to support innovation. Innovation, of course, being a code word for agreeing to do what the tech industry wants.Has San Francisco lost its zeal for the tech industry? Unlikely. Uber appears to be getting along just fine with local officials. Tech buses are still using municipal bus stops with the city’s blessing (and a very small fee). And tech luminaries like the angel investor Ron Conway continue to have an outsize influence in local politics.AdvertisementThat could change. Housing activists say they will continue to press their case that Airbnb is limiting affordable housing, and they have indicated they’ll take a second swing at a ballot measure to place tight restrictions on the service. Their first attempt failed last year.Now there are indications that voters may be asked to change the rules of engagement for tax breaks that lured companies like Twitter to the city’s Mid-Market neighborhood. According to The San Francisco Examiner, the city’s voters may be asked to approve a 1.5 percent surtax on tech company payrolls. Advocates say it could raise $120 million a year.AdvertisementIn a city struggling with soaring housing prices blamed on an influx of moneyed tech workers, it should surprise no one that local officials are starting to look at those companies as a source of tax revenue that has yet to live up to its potential.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »