AdvertisementSupported byTech TipBy J. D. BiersdorferQ. I get several phone calls each day on my cellphone from different phone numbers that I do not recognize. If I don’t answer, no message is left. If I answer, there is no response, just a hang-up. If I call the number back, there may be a voice message that “this number does not accept incoming calls” or that “all lines are busy,” or no response at all. What are these calls, and how should I respond? I have decided not to answer calls from unrecognized numbers, thinking that if it is important, the caller will leave a message. Problem with that is, I may miss an important call from someone not in my contacts list.A. If you are getting multiple calls each day and the caller is not leaving a message (or hanging up after a couple of seconds), your number is most likely being dialed by scammers trying to confirm that a human exists on the other end of the line. Once your number has been verified, it can be added to a database and passed along to the highest bidder.With your number in a database, telemarketers or robocalling software will keep calling, trying to get you on the line. A recent tactic used by phone spammers is to call you from numbers (spoofed or otherwise) that resemble your area code and telephone exchange, with the hope that you might mistake the number displayed on your screen as being from a neighbor or member of your family — and answer.People calling you with important reasons will almost always leave some sort of a message. Even if you let the call ring through to voice mail and the caller does leave an urgent message to call back, you can do so immediately without the risk of answering and getting stuck on the line with someone who is ultimately a waste of your cellular talk time.You can block persistent callers individually or with an app if the calls get to be too much. If you find spammers have besieged your phone, a recent Smarter Living guide from The New York Times has tips for fighting back.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.Advertisement