AdvertisementSupported byBy Patrick LaForgeThe world may have plenty of social media platforms already, but a new one called Peach captured the fancy of early adopters and technology bloggers over the weekend.Peach is the work of Dom Hofmann, a co-founder of Vine, the popular video platform now owned by Twitter. It quickly won some favorable press, dominated many Twitter conversations and began to climb the download charts in the iPhone app store (there is no Android version).By Monday, predictably, some were ready to declare it dead or at least doomed, like so many wannabe Twitters and Facebooks before it. But many were still giving Peach the benefit of the doubt or at least trying to figure out how it compared with established platforms.The service experienced some growing pains as people rushed to try it.We're fixing a few issues that have sprung up for people with large friend lists. Should be better soon! Hope you're having a nice weekend 💕Comparisons to Instagram, Snapchat, Tumblr and other services were plentiful, and while many described it as a messaging app, that description seemed imprecise.The sharing function is limited to the iPhone’s normal text messaging. You can’t email, tweet or share your Peach content directly on Facebook or other platforms. Likewise, linking out of the app, though possible, seems to require cutting and pasting from a browser. There is nothing comparable to retweeting or resharing within the app. There are no hashtags.As with Facebook, users have “friends” and must be friends to click “like” or comment on each other’s posts. This is not a place for unreciprocated following, although any post is potentially visible if the user’s name is known. The newest posts appear at the bottom of a user’s stream, and users must scroll up to see older content.The app encourages users to be creative within their streams. They can draw a picture with a finger.They can “shout” a message in big letters, use “here” for a place check-in, share the weather, reveal the charge remaining in their iPhone’s battery, tag the name of a favorite TV show or a book, and more. The app has several Slack-like shortcuts called “magic words” for these actions.The overall effect might remind some of the “ambient intimacy” of earlier times in the history of social media.Peach encourages the easy taking and sharing of photographs and video, including selfies, and sharing animated GIFs is a popular activity, made easy with a search engine that offers up a big selection of memes.Users may identify a song by holding their phones up, Shazam-style, then share a link that opens either Spotify or Apple Music streaming services. That’s if the song can be identified or found on the streaming service, which is not always the case.In a multifaceted revival of the Facebook poke, friends can wave, boop, blow a kiss, hiss or give a piece of cake.Unlike Twitter, text posts appear to have no character limit. Nor can they be edited, a feature also missing on Twitter. Even so, nobody seemed to be writing any Medium-length essays.The main difference from the popular social networks is the lack of a continuous social feed. The app shows when friends have posted something, more or less chronologically, but users must click into the friend’s stream to view it. As some users noted, this can be time consuming and is likely to discourage having too many friends. There is reportedly a cap on the number of friends.Finding friends on the app can be a bit of a challenge if you don’t have them in your contacts. You can’t use your friend and follower lists from Facebook and Twitter. And, with no method for identity verification, anonymous and fake accounts were already proliferating.Few brands have found their way onto Peach yet, although the Merriam-Webster dictionary was one exception over the weekend.Whether Peach will grow and endure remains to be seen. Plenty of social apps have been rapidly adopted, played with and abandoned, and their names are barely remembered: App.net, Ello and Path were among those that had their moments of celebrity. Even Mr. Hofmann, who declined an interview request, had an earlier post-Vine app called Byte that has languished.Even so, in the competitive world of social media identity, users have to hedge their bets.Advertisement