AdvertisementSupported byBy Mike IsaacThe founders of Lyft, the ride-hailing service, have long imagined that the future of transportation would involve fewer cars on the road. Now General Motors is helping the start-up reach that goal.Lyft announced on Monday that G.M. had invested $500 million in the company, or half of its latest $1 billion venture financing round. The funding, which recently closed, values Lyft at $4.5 billion, not including the new capital.G.M.’s support includes more than financial backing. As part of the investment, G.M. and Lyft will work on developing an on-demand network of self-driving cars, an area of research that companies like Google, Tesla and Uber have all devoted enormous resources to in recent years.G.M. will also work with Lyft to set up a series of short-term car rental hubs across the United States, places where people who do not own cars can pick up a vehicle and drive for Lyft to earn money. Daniel Ammann, president of G.M., will join the board of Lyft, which is based in San Francisco.“We strongly believe that autonomous vehicle go-to-market strategy is through a network, not through individual car ownership,” John Zimmer, president of Lyft, said in an interview.G.M.’s $500 million interest in Lyft is the single largest direct investment by an auto manufacturer into a ride-hailing company in the United States, according to data from PitchBook, an alliance that pairs an auto stalwart with the kind of start-up trying to disrupt it. The investment reflects how much consumer automotive habits have been changed by technology over the last decade. With the rise of ride-sharing companies, car manufacturers have raced to adapt to how people can now use each other’s vehicles for rides, which could potentially lead to a decline in car ownership.The shifts have started a spate of partnerships between carmakers and auto-related start-ups. In 2011, G.M. teamed up with RelayRides, a car-sharing marketplace, to let G.M. auto owners rent out their idle vehicles. Ford struck a similar deal last year with Getaround, another car-sharing marketplace start-up. And Daimler has been experimenting with Car2Go, a Zipcar-like service that offers SmartCar rentals in urban areas like Brooklyn, Berlin and Toronto.In an interview, Mr. Ammann said G.M. wanted to be part of the changing business models in transportation. “We think there’s going to be more change in the world of mobility in the next five years than there has been in the last 50,” he said.Mr. Ammann added that the core profit from G.M.’s business comes from cars sold outside the urban environments where Lyft primarily operates, especially sales of sport utility vehicles in suburban areas.“From a G.M. perspective, we view this as much more of an opportunity than a threat,” he said.G.M.’s investment is also a vote of confidence in Lyft, which faces a competitive ride-hailing field. Founded in 2012, Lyft helped promote the ride-sharing craze in the United States, positioning itself as a superior alternative to owning a car or using public transportation. Lyft users can summon a private or shared car with a few taps of an app.Lyft and G.M. did not give a specific timeline for when they expected their autonomous vehicle network to become publicly available, nor did the companies offer details on how the network is expected to function.It will most likely be some time before a fully autonomous network of cars becomes a reality. Early rules for self-driving vehicles may hinder the speed of progress. California recently passed legislation requiring a driver to be behind the wheel of a self-driving car at all times.A mix of Lyft’s existing investors, including the Asian e-commerce giants Rakuten and Alibaba, also contributed to the most recent financing round, as did the Chinese ride-hailing start-up Didi Kuaidi.Uber, Lyft’s largest and most formidable rival, has raised more than $10 billion to date, and is valued at $62.5 billion, about 14 times Lyft’s new valuation. Uber operates in hundreds of cities in 67 countries. The company also operates its own research center for self-driving cars in Pittsburgh and is steadily recruiting engineering talent from Carnegie Mellon University as well as from competitors like Google, whose efforts on autonomous vehicle research have been well publicized.Lyft has been working to catch up to Uber. The company recently teamed up with ride-hailing competitors in Asia like Didi Kuaidi, Ola and GrabTaxi to expand. It has also struck deals with major brands like Starbucks and pop stars like Justin Bieber to broaden its reach. Lyft also teamed with Hertz to offer rental cars to drivers who do not own vehicles, and struck a deal with Shell that gives gasoline discounts to Lyft drivers in a handful of cities.videoAdvertisement