
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
JUNE 20, 2016
Q. Is it true that Google keeps the recordings of your voice searches on the site? A. If you have ever conducted a voice-based search or asked a question by saying “O.K., Google” into the company’s app, a recording of your voice making that request is likely stored on your Google Account history page. To find and hear these recordings, log in to your history page on the company’s site at https://history.google.com/history/audio and click the Play button next to the clip that you want to hear.By default, Google keeps a detailed history of your interaction with its search engine and other services when you are logged in to your Google Account. For example, if Google has access to your device’s location settings for mapping and search suggestions, it stores your location history, which is displayed on a map you can see when you are logged into your account.Part of this data-hoarding is to make Google’s predictive services more accurate by tailoring suggestions (and advertisements) to your known interests and location. Some people like having more relevant material (including ads) served up to them, but if the collection creeps you out, you can change your Google Activity controls to clear out the stored information from your account. (The company says it may still keep the data for its purposes, but makes it anonymous.)To change your Google Activity settings, go to https://www.google.com/settings/accounthistory when you are logged in to your Google Account and make adjustments as you see fit. You can delete your search and browsing history from the site, information from your mobile devices (like contacts and calendar events that use Google apps), your voice-search recordings, your location history, and your searches and viewing activity on YouTube.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.A version of this article appears in print on June 23, 2016, on Page B8 of the New York edition with the headline: Data Hoarding on Google.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »