
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
NOV. 16, 2017
Q. How do you add emoji to your Twitter name?A. You can add emoji to the name displayed on your Twitter account by editing your profile and selecting the characters you wish to use. Start by opening the Twitter app on your Android or iOS device, or by logging into your account on the web at twitter.com.In the mobile app, tap your round account icon in the corner to get to the profile page and then tap the Edit Profile button. In a desktop web browser, click your personal icon on the left and then click Edit Profile on the next page. Once you select the Edit Profile button, you can change the customized text and images associated with your account.Advice and tips on the technology changing how you live.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Click the name displayed on your Twitter account and then insert your preferred emoji characters. On a mobile device, switch to the emoji keyboard included with Android or iOS. If you do not have a ready set of emoji built in into your desktop operating system, look for an online emoji repository like Emojipedia.org, where you can copy and paste characters into your profile or other documents.In addition to changing your displayed Twitter name — which has a maximum of 20 characters — you can update your account’s personal and header images, add or edit the short bit of biographical text shown next to your name, and adjust several other items on your profile. Tap or click the Save Changes button when you are finished.You can also change your unique user name (the @yournamehere part of your account) in your Twitter settings without losing your existing followers. To do that, select your profile icon in the app or browser and choose “Settings and privacy” from the menu. Next, tap or click Account and then Username, where you can make your change — as long as the new user name is fewer than 15 characters and is not in use already by someone else.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »