The shift from reading news in print to reading news online has dramatically increased the data available about our products. With print, user engagement is opaque — if you recycle your Sunday paper without reading it, we’ll never know. With digital products, it’s increasingly easy to collect data on how users interact with online articles, smartphone apps, or email newsletters.However, a mere increase in statistics collection is no guarantee of accurate interpretation or insight. The challenge now lies in effective analysis and distribution of data in a noisy environment. Big data may be a hot, new buzz phrase of the digital future, but the critical question is unchanged: How do we understand our metrics and use them to better our products?As a software intern at The Times this summer, I’ve been lucky to work on a project that both enables data insights and serves as a nice example of how product and technology teams can support our mission in the newsroom. Working on the NYT Email team, the team responsible for the internal email platform that supports our popular, free email newsletters, I built a software package to process some of the statistics we already track.My package, endearingly dubbed Stats Digest, detects changes in basic email engagement metrics — like open and click rates for each instance of a newsletter product — as well as large changes in subscriber counts. When a change is deemed significant, an email alert notifies a relevant person, likely a newsletter producer, of the change. The sensitivity in detecting changes is customizable and dynamic, though the math is not complicated. Essentially, I’m looking at averages and day-to-day deviations to determine what constitutes a significant change. It’s conceptually simple, but the potential impact on the usability of these metrics is huge.
An example of an email alert sent when the engagement or subscriber statistics for a product deviate from the expected average beyond a particular threshold.Internal reporting tools like Stats Digest enable those in business and editorial roles to actually leverage their data. At The New York Times, this point is essential. If you’re working to produce high quality news content on a tight schedule, it’s unrealistic that you’ll spend much time digging through tables of numbers to find the important ones. It’s not that the statistics aren’t important. If a newsletter receives an unusually high number of opens or precedes a massive exodus of email subscribers, you probably want to think hard about the cause. But how would you learn of such a change? There needs to be less overhead for those hoping to use data insights without spending all their time analyzing raw numbers.My summer project leaves ample room for improvement, for both Stats Digest itself and for the general space of internal monitoring tools. A challenge inherent to the structure of any large company is that critical information must be analyzed and distributed in the right places, at the key moments, by those with the relevant expertise. Simple reporting tools are then a worthwhile investment, saving time and easing communication across the company.Back in February, I’d craned my neck at a campus career fair, amazed to recognize a familiar newspaper logo among aisles crowded with technology companies. I was instantly curious about the experience of writing software at a company whose central goals are seemingly tangential to tech. I was also skeptical. Many of the developer positions available at non-tech companies strike me as distinctly separate, relegated to back rooms where the main work of the company is only peripherally discussed. I disliked the idea that I could have an employer whose mission and creed might not influence my daily work.Not so at The Times. I learned it’s perfectly normal for software developers to remain in communication with not only product and project managers but with newsroom editors and producers as well. Technology interns participate in most of the same orientation as other business and newsroom interns, and we collaborate with marketing interns on a separate intern-only project on Fridays. We in technical roles are supposed to reach out to those of completely different backgrounds to bring new perspectives to the products we build. Something I’ve come to expect of potential employers, something I’ll certainly remember in the future, is this deliberate, encouraged openness in communication and collaboration across roles.And what’s the magical constant I’ve witnessed that continually motivates us to do so? The Times’ mission to enhance society by providing high-quality news and information keeps us on the same page as we each work to make our own small, hopefully impactful contributions.I’ll begin mine by digesting some statistics.Ayesha Bajwa, a rising junior in Electrical Engineering and Computer Science at MIT, is a summer software intern on the Email team.