By CECILIA KANGJUNE 13, 2017
WASHINGTON — A federal court on Tuesday struck down regulations that cap the soaring cost of phone calls made by prison inmates, in another rollback of Obama-era telecommunications rules.In a 2-1 decision, the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit said that while the rates charged for in-state prison phone calls could be extraordinarily high, the Federal Communications Commission exceeded its legal authority in 2015 when it created rate caps for such calls.The decision was a blow to a 15-year effort by advocates for prisoners and their families to bring down the cost of calls from prisons, which can reach as high as $10 a minute. The calls are typically placed through private telecommunications firms.The F.C.C. rules were challenged by telecom firms that argued against the F.C.C.’s economic calculations for price caps and told the court that the agency did not have the authority to regulate the in-state prison phone rates.AdvertisementThe agency had been preparing a legal defense of its rules but that effort abruptly stopped when Ajit Pai was appointed by President Trump to chair the F.C.C. In February, Mr. Pai said agency lawyers would not argue to defend its rules in the court.Advertisement“Following the presidential inauguration in January 2017, counsel for the F.C.C. advised the court that, due to a change in the composition of the commission, ‘a majority of the current commission does not believe that the agency has the authority to cap intrastate rates,’” the court’s opinion noted.Since his appointment, Mr. Pai has led a charge to overturn Obama administration regulations at the F.C.C. He has scrapped several media ownership rules and is in the process of overturning net neutrality regulations that require internet service providers to allow equal access to all internet content.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.A free-market-oriented regulator, Mr. Pai consistently cites the need to roll back heavy-handed rules created by his predecessor that he argues go beyond the agency’s mandate.As a commissioner, Mr. Pai was against the 2015 prison phone rate rules. He said in a statement Tuesday that he would work with Congress and other member in the F.C.C. to address the high cost of prison phone calls “in a lawful manner.”Mignon Clyburn, the sole Democratic commissioner, has been the leading champion of prison phone rate restrictions.She has called the soaring cost of prison phone rates a civil rights issue, preventing inmates from being able to call the 2.7 million children in America with at least one incarcerated parent.This is “the greatest form of regulatory injustice I have seen in my 18 years as a regulator in the communications space,” Ms. Clyburn said in a statement.A version of this article appears in print on June 14, 2017, on Page B7 of the New York edition with the headline: Court Nullifies Caps on Cost of Inmates’ Phone Calls.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »