
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
FEB. 16, 2017
Q. Is there a way to get the whole list of friends’ birthdays from Facebook on my Mac’s calendar program and have it stay up-to-date?A. Facebook’s birthday list can sync up with the Mac’s built-in Calendar app, as well as with other popular programs like Microsoft Outlook and Google Calendar. In most programs, you can add the birthday calendar by “subscribing” to it, much like you can do with other internet-based calendars that track holidays, astronomy events, sports schedules and other dates you want to observe. (If adding specialized calendars to your Mac appeals to you, visit iCalShare or a similar calendar-sharing site.)To add your Facebook birthday calendar to the Mac’s Calendar app, log into your Facebook page on the web and click Home at the top. On the left side of the page, click Events. On the right side of the Events page, scroll down until you see a box explaining that you can “add your events to Microsoft Outlook, Google Calendar or Apple Calendar.” Click the Learn More link to read Facebook’s instructions, or just click the “Birthdays” link at the bottom of the box.Once you click “Birthdays,” you should see an alert box asking if you want to allow the page to open the Calendar program. Click the Allow button. When the Calendar app opens, you should see the web address for your Facebook birthdays calendar listed, along with a Subscribe button.Click the Subscribe button to add the Facebook list as a new web-based one. You can delete the birthdays calendar from the app later if you decide you do not want to see it anymore. The Internet Accounts settings in the System Preferences also provide controls for how Facebook interacts with the Mac operating system.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »