
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
FEB. 13, 2017
Q. I needed to take a mental break from Twitter last month, so I deactivated my account. Then I changed my mind and went to reactivate the account by logging back into the Android app on my phone, it didn’t work. Is my account gone for good now?A. Twitter allows you to reactivate your account within 30 days of quitting and still retain your timeline, along with your list of followers and people you follow. However, to reactivate your account, Twitter’s help guide says you need to log into twitter.com from a computer because it does not support restarting accounts on mobile devices.If you try to reactivate from the computer’s web browser and get a message that “account reactivation” is disabled, wait a bit and try again; Twitter may have the feature turned off temporarily during site housekeeping or maintenance. Ask Twitter support for reactivation help if you are uncomfortably close to the 30-day deadline for reviving your account.Once you reactivate your account, it may take up to 24 hours for your follow lists and other data to be fully restored to the state it was in before you quit. If more than 48 hours have passed and your account is still not what it once was, contact Twitter’s support team for further assistance in the restoration.If more than 30 days have gone by since you deactivated your account, the company says you cannot reactivate because the account has been permanently deleted. If that is the case, sign up for a new account and get started rebuilding your list of followers and those you follow.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.A version of this article appears in print on February 16, 2017, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: Rejoining Twitter After a Break.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »