
Bits By                     
 FARHAD MANJOO and
 

 MIKE ISAAC
 
AUG. 13, 2016
Each Saturday, Farhad Manjoo and Mike Isaac, technology reporters at The New York Times, review the week’s news, offering analysis and maybe a joke or two about the most important developments in the tech industry.Farhad: Hey, Mike! I’m really getting into experimenting with Instagram Stories, the daily video clipbook thing that Instagram recently copied from Snapchat. It’s given me a totally new place online to act like a complete goofball (after Twitter and the New York Times tech section). How was your week?Mike: The most effort I exerted this week was going to the San Francisco Ferry Building to buy organic mochi from a woman whose email list I am on. The 15-year-old me would be devastated at the man I have become.Oh, and someone claiming to be Martin Shkreli sent a spam email to me and 449 other members of the media without using bcc, so I’m still getting those “reply all” messages. I, too, replied to all, and Gawker made fun of me for it. I deserve it.AdvertisementFarhad: So let’s get to tech news. The big story was Walmart’s $3.3 billion purchase of Jet.com, a young start-up that had raised hundreds of millions of dollars to become a force in e-commerce. Jet was bleeding money, and some in the tech industry were predicting imminent doom — an unsurprising fate for a company entering a market that has been so thoroughly dominated by Amazon. So the Walmart acquisition was a surprise — at least it was to me — and it surely works out well for the investors who poured so much into the company.AdvertisementMike: You and I went back and forth on this one, mainly because I think it was a win and a loss, in that Jet won’t be what it wanted to be: a stand-alone company that could kill Amazon. But $3.3 billion also isn’t bad for two years of work.Farhad: Beyond the payoff for investors, I’m pretty skeptical of this deal. I don’t see how it solves some of Walmart’s fundamental problems — getting people to start thinking of the company as a primary online shopping destination. Earlier this year, I argued that Amazon had become unstoppable in e-commerce, and its recent earnings reports seem to bear this out. Walmart has been trying for years to revitalize its digital operations; the Jet purchase is another reset. But isn’t it too late?Mike: I don’t think it’s too late to sell stuff online at good prices. Walmart’s digital arm does generate revenue — though that is trending downhill in its growth trajectory, which is part of why it bought Jet — so it’s not like no one shops at Walmart online.That said, I think Amazon is so far ahead of everyone else that it is truly difficult for me to see a future where Amazon isn’t dominant in e-commerce in the United States. However! China is a whole other story. Alibaba reigns supreme there, so it’s not like they’ve conquered the world.Farhad: So they’ve conquered the non-China world — that’s pretty big!There were a few other stories worth mentioning this week. Exec shuffling: Google’s venture capital arm — I’m sorry, I mean Alphabet’s venture capital arm — is getting a new boss. David Krane (whom I knew as one of Google’s first public relations people; I’m that old) is going to replace Bill Maris, who was the founding partner of Google Ventures (now called GV, because Google apparently loves changing names of stuff).Mike: GV is like the Madonna of venture firms. Make your name funky to stand out among the rest. It kind of works!Farhad: Meanwhile, Arianna Huffington, co-founder of the eponymous Huffington Post, announced she’d be stepping down as editor of the site to work at her wellness start-up. As I said on Twitter, other than Mark Zuckerberg, it’s hard to think of anyone in the last decade who has been as influential (for better or worse) as Arianna in changing how American media works.AdvertisementMike: Everyone forgets that before legacy media was upset with BuzzFeed’s model, HuffPo angered everyone with its aggregation pioneering approach.One of my favorite moments on video from our beloved, late colleague, David Carr, was when he held up a picture of what aggregation machine sites would look like were it not for the original journalism that outlets like The Times produces. It was the sickest journalism burn ever.The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Farhad: Speaking of media, Facebook made a move to block ad-blocking this week — but it was quickly countered by the ad blockers. This seems like one of those wars that’s going to go on for a while.Mike: Yeah, I’m pretty sure Facebook took two minutes to find a fix to that.Farhad: Finally, Snapchat put out a racist picture filter — again. This week the photo-messaging app unveiled a feature that lets you turn your face into that of an anime character. At least, that was what it said it intended. What it ended up with was “yellowface” — a filter that turns your face into a crude racial caricature of Asian people. This is bad enough on its own, but it’s made worse by the fact that it isn’t the first time this happened. Snapchat released a blackface filter in April.The company has taken the filter down, but what’s the deal? Should we read something more into the fact that the company has recently put out two obviously overtly racist products?Mike: So it’s pretty mind-boggling that both of these things got through the organization and into the app. It brings up a few questions.What do the ranks of the organization look like in order to make something like this O.K. in the eyes of at least a number of people in the company? Questions of diversity obviously spring to mind — which Snapchat has never really addressed or divulged numbers on publicly — and I imagine a more diverse staff might have at least caused some people to question their choices in putting these filters out.If there were indeed people inside of Snapchat that found these filters objectionable — and I certainly hope there were — what does the organization structure look like and how does it function in a way that allows these decisions to go unchecked and ultimately carried out? Are those people who would object able to make their voices heard internally? And if not, why not?AdvertisementI doubt we’ll get a ton of transparency from Snapchat on the issue, since they’re quite a secretive company anyway.Farhad: katie zhu, a Chinese-American engineer and product manager who works at Medium (and who prefers that her name be rendered in lowercase), published a really insightful post on this incident. She urged people to delete Snapchat.“They’ve repeatedly demonstrated their blasé attitude towards issues of diversity, inclusion and representation,” she wrote.She pointed out that Evan Spiegel, Snapchat’s chief executive, was unwilling to disclose how diverse his company is during an interview at the Code Conference last year. Spiegel also seemed uncomfortable with the notion that the tech industry has had a particular problem hiring a diverse work force (which seems obvious according to the numbers).“I think I’m saying that diversity is a challenge everywhere, including tech — and that’s kind of that,” Spiegel told the interviewer, Walt Mossberg. When Mossberg pressed him, Spiegel still seemed hesitant. “There are so many things that feed into diversity and inequality that unpacking them on the stage is probably not the best use of time,” he said.Mike:  I was at that conference. It was super awkward.Farhad: Snapchat says it recently hired a recruiter to focus on hiring underrepresented minorities, so perhaps Spiegel’s view has changed.To me, these two incidents do underscore the importance of a diverse work force: Tech companies are usually small groups of homogeneous people who are trying to make products that satisfy the entire planet. At the very least, a diverse work force can help guard against them making choices that offend large swaths of their potential userbase. Even more than that, a diverse work force can help them come up with new ideas that may not have occurred to 20-something Stanford bros.Mike: That’s why I applaud companies that make it a goal of theirs to strive for diversity at the outset, something that, unless you’ve really made it a point to think about these issues, an entrepreneur may not have even thought of. Perhaps it is also on the venture capitalists and mentors to remind young entrepreneurs that aiming for diversity is, in fact, a strength, and something to be considered when growing the company.One would hope this doesn’t happen again, but this is tech: anything goes, however terrible.On that note, have a good weekend, friend!We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »