AdvertisementSupported byTech TipBy J. D. BiersdorferQ. I tried to log in to my iCloud account from an Android device and got a message that “my browser is not supported.” I’m using Google’s Chrome browser. Is it not possible to track an iPhone from an Android tablet?A. It is possible to use Apple’s iPhone-tracking service from an Android gadget running Chrome, but you need to take an extra step. The mobile edition of Apple’s iCloud site is not friendly to non-iOS mobile browsers, but when you have Chrome open on the Android tablet, tap the More menu, which appears as three dots in the upper-right corner, and select “Request Desktop Site.”Chrome then switches to the desktop version of iCloud.com, which should open on the Android tablet. Once the iCloud home page appears, log in with the Apple ID username and password connected to the iPhone you want to track. On the main iCloud dashboard page, select the “Find My iPhone” icon to see the device’s last known location displayed on a map.For those who do not use Google Chrome, other Android browsers like Mozilla Firefox usually have the option to switch from the streamlined mobile version of a website to the desktop version. Although using the desktop version can get you into some sites, you may find them harder to navigate on a mobile gadget because the design and functionality of the sites have not been optimized for smaller, touch-screen devices.Google itself recently added a “Find your phone” tool to its My Accounts hub, which is the page of settings and security tools used to manage Gmail accounts as well as other Google services. While you can use the tool directly to find an Android gadget there (instead of using the Android Device Manager), the “Find your phone” service points back to iCloud for those wanting to track and locate lost iOS devices running Google apps.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.Advertisement