
Bits By                     
 JIM KERSTETTER
 
JUNE 2, 2017
Détente between President Trump and Silicon Valley is proving hard to maintain. Here’s a brief history.■ During the presidential election last year, the tech industry made it clear that it would prefer just about anyone other than Mr. Trump to become the next president of the United States. Sure, there were outliers, most notably the venture capitalist Peter Thiel.■ Mr. Trump won the election. Not long after, a collection of the tech industry’s most powerful executives — along with Mr. Thiel and Alex Karp, the chief executive of Palantir, a company that Mr. Thiel helped found — made the pilgrimage to Trump Tower to meet with the president-elect. Internet memes mocked the gloomy looks on the faces of many of the executives, but the meeting nonetheless hinted that they were willing to hear Mr. Trump out on his agenda.■ After taking office in January, Mr. Trump attempted to bar for 90 days people from seven predominantly Muslim countries from entering the United States. The ban, blocked in federal court, would have barred all refugees for 120 days, and Syrian refugees indefinitely. Tech companies, heavily populated by and in some cases run by first-generation immigrants, were among the fiercest corporate critics of the proposed ban.Advertisement■ Still, a number of tech executives had agreed to serve on White House advisory councils. Most notable among them was Elon Musk, the chief executive of the electric-car marker Tesla and a strong advocate for alternative energy sources.Advertisement■ On Thursday afternoon, Mr. Trump made good on his campaign promise to pull out of the Paris climate accord, despite lobbying from Silicon Valley figures like Mr. Musk and Apple’s chief executive, Timothy D. Cook. Last month, 25 companies, including Apple, Facebook, Google and Microsoft, bought full-page ads in The New York Times, The Wall Street Journal and The New York Post that argued for staying in the accord.Executives from a number of companies, including Microsoft, Salesforce, Facebook, Twitter, Uber, Google, IBM and Apple, publicly expressed their dismay at the president’s decision. And Mr. Musk said he was quitting two presidential advisory councils.“Am departing presidential councils. Climate change is real. Leaving Paris is not good for America or the world,” Mr. Musk wrote in a Twitter post.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »