
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
MARCH 16, 2016
Q. I want to use the online dictation command in Google Docs, but my laptop’s built-in microphone doesn’t work very well and I’m getting a message about the program not being able to hear me. My computer also seems to be lacking a microphone port on the side for an external mike. What do I do?A. Most programs that take dictation usually work best when you speak into a headset or external desktop microphone, as background noise can interfere with the correct transcription of your spoken words. If you cannot find a quieter place to talk to Google Docs (and adjusting the input volume level on the microphone’s system settings does not improve things), you can get an external microphone that does not need a dedicated microphone port.Most modern streamlined laptops have a single 3.5-millimeter audio jack that handles headphones and microphones; the pictograph on the side or back of the laptop may even show icons for both types of devices next to the jack. If this is the case, try plugging in a headset microphone — like the combination earbuds-and-microphone included with many smartphones — and testing the voice-typing again. Gaming headsets with microphones, USB-based external microphones and wireless Bluetooth headset microphones are other options that may let Google Docs hear you better.For those who have not tried it, Google’s voice-typing feature works with Google Docs in the Chrome browser. To use it, make sure your microphone is enabled, open a Google Doc, go to the Tools menu and choose Voice Typing. Click the screen’s microphone icon, and as you speak your words are converted to typed text in the document.Last month, Google added spoken-word commands you can use for editing and formatting your dictated words. You can learn the commands by reading up on the Google Docs support site or, when you are using the voice-typing function in a document, saying aloud “Voice commands help.”Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »