
Autonomous cars have arrived. Major automakers have been investing billions in development, while tech players like Uber and Google’s parent company have been testing their versions in American cities.
Related Article
UPDATED June 6, 2017
LIDAR UNITCAMERASConstantly spinning, it uses laser beams to generate a 360-degree image of the car’s surroundings.Uses parallax from multiple images to find the distance to various objects. Cameras also detect traffic lights and signs, and help recognize moving objects like pedestrians and bicyclists. RADAR SENSORSMeasure the distance from the car to obstacles. ADDITIONALLIDAR UNITSMAIN COMPUTER (LOCATED IN TRUNK)Analyzes data from the sensors, and compares its stored maps to assess current conditions.LIDAR UNITCAMERASConstantly spinning, it uses laser beams to generate a 360-degree image of the car’s surroundings.Uses parallax from multiple images to find the distance to various objects. Cameras also detect traffic lights and signs, and help recognize moving objects like pedestrians and bicyclists. RADAR SENSORSMeasure the distance from the car to obstacles. MAIN COMPUTER(LOCATED IN TRUNK)ADDITIONALLIDAR UNITSAnalyzes data from the sensors, and compares its stored maps to assess current conditions.LIDAR UNITCAMERASConstantly spinning, it uses laser beams to generate a 360-degree image of the car’s surroundings.Uses parallax from multiple images to find the distance to various objects. Cameras also detect traffic lights and signs, and help recognize moving objects like pedestrians and bicyclists. RADAR SENSORSMeasure the distance from the car to obstacles. MAIN COMPUTER(LOCATED IN TRUNK)Analyzes data from the sensors, and compares its stored maps to assess current conditions.ADDITIONALLIDAR UNITS12345LIDAR UNIT1Constantly spinning, it uses laser beams to generate a 360-degree image of the car’s surroundings.CAMERAS2Uses parallax from multiple images to find the distance to various objects. Cameras also detect traffic lights and signs, and help recognize moving objects like pedestrians and bicyclists. MAIN COMPUTER (LOCATED IN TRUNK)3Analyzes data from the sensors, and compares its stored maps to assess current conditions.RADAR SENSORS4Measure the distance from the car to various obstacles. ADDITIONAL LIDAR UNITS55
The car’s sensors gather data on nearby objects, like their size and rate of speed. It categorizes the objects — as cyclists, pedestrians or other cars and objects — based on how they are likely to behave.
      
      
    
red boxes: cyclistsyellow boxes: pedestrianspink boxes:vehiclesgreen “fences”:locations wherethe car may needto slow downred “fences”:locations where the carwill need to stopred boxes: cyclistsyellow boxes: pedestrianspink boxes:vehiclesgreen “fences”:locations wherethe car may needto slow downred “fences”:locations where the carwill need to stopred boxes: cyclistsyellow boxes:pedestrianspink boxes:vehiclesgreen “fences”:locations wherethe car may needto slow downred “fences”:locations where the carwill need to stoppink boxes:vehiclesred boxes:cyclistsyellow boxes:pedestriansred “fences”:locations where the carwill need to stopgreen “fences”:locations where the carmay need to slow downCollision avoidanceRadar-, laser-, or camera-based systems warn of an impending collision, and can automatically apply the brakes in some cases.Drifting warningIf a car begins to deviate from its lane, some systems alert the driver and apply a small counter-steering force.Blind-spot detectorsCameras or radar can detect vehicles in the driver’s blind spot and then alert the driver with sounds or warning lights.Enhanced cruise controlA predefined distance can be maintained to the vehicle ahead. If it slows, your car also slows.Self parkingThe car maneuvers itself into a parking spot using cameras or sonar. But the driver usually has to brake and follow commands.
Most of the big names — from Mercedes-Benz to Audi, BMW and Hyundai — have begun developing or forming partnerships around self-driving technology. A handful have invested sizable resources as they try to become leaders in autonomous driving.
      
      
    
General MotorsThe company invested $500 million in Lyft and has announced that it would test self-driving electric taxis on public roads within a year. It bought Cruise Automation for about $1 billion, and is planning to build a development center in San Francisco.FordThe company announced a $1 billion investment in Argo AI, an artificial intelligence founded by former Google and Uber employees. Ford plans to have a fully autonomous vehicle in commercial operation for a ride-hailing service by 2021.TeslaThe Silicon Valley company said its cars would eventually come equipped to be fully autonomous, and has continued to update a controversial Autopilot software option (that was involved in the first fatal autonomous driving accident).Fiat ChryslerThe company reached a deal with Alphabet, after having first approached Apple, to add its autonomous technology to Chrysler minivans. Alphabet now has an office in Michigan to work with Fiat Chrysler.HondaAs it develops vehicle prototypes, the Japanese company is designing what it calls an “emotion engine,” which will learn from the driver’s judgments behind the wheel to make future choices and recommendations.VolvoThe company started a pilot project to put autonomous SUVs in the hands of residents in Gothenburg, Sweden — a trial that could later expand to London and China. It is also working with Uber on a trial in Pittsburgh.
While Google has managed to draw headlines, several technology companies have been looking to enter the car business, including some notable ones from China. 

Google (Alphabet)One of the early attention-getters, Alphabet, Google’s parent company, spun off its autonomous car project into its own company called Waymo, signaling that it’s close to being commercialized.AppleThe company’s ultimate ambitions remain unclear. While its once-secret effort, code-named Titan, appeared to be shrinking in 2016, it recently received a permit to test vehicles in California.UberThe company partnered with automakers to roll out prototypes in Pittsburgh and Tempe, Ariz. It has recently been wrapped up in a legal battle with Waymo, which claimed it was using stolen intellectual property.BaiduThe Chinese internet company began testing autonomous technology last year, using vehicles from three domestic automakers, with the hope of deploying cars commercially next year.IntelThe company acquired Mobileye, an Israeli company that makes cameras and sensors, with the hope of becoming the go-to source for computing systems.AutolivThe world’s largest airbag supplier is in a joint venture with Volvo to develop self-driving cars.Harman International IndustriesHarman, which was acquired recently by Samsung, traditionally made audio systems. It has also become a supplier of components such as advanced mapping technology.nuTonomyThe company, spun out from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, has a commercial vehicle trial in Singapore and has tested self-driving cars in the Boston area. It is also partnering with Lyft.DelphiThe former G.M. parts division is developing self-driving and semi-automated technology that it hopes to sell to automakers. It has been testing autonomous cars in Singapore and is also collaborating with Mobileye and Intel.QualcommThe company has been working on systems that allow cars to automatically communicate location information. It is acquiring NXP Semiconductors, a maker of automotive microelectronic equipment, for a deal valued at $47 billion.
Pittsburgh became the first city in which a passenger can hail an autonomous vehicle, when Uber introduced 100 cars that can drive themselves. (Less than a year later, Pittsburgh residents and officials have said that Uber has not lived up to its end of the bargain.)
      
      
    

Tesla uses a computer vision-based vehicle detection system, not lidar technology, which has become popular among other companies developing autonomous functionality.  Tesla says its system is not intended to be used hands-free and parts of the system are unfinished.
      
      
    
Forward-facing cameraImage-processing software can detect lane stripes, signs, stop lights, road signs and other objects.Forward radarReflected microwaves are used to identify the location and speed, but not always the type, of nearby vehicles.Ultrasonic sensorsReflected sound waves are used to detect distance to nearby objects.GPSCombined with high-precision mapping, GPS determines a car’s position on the road.
After Joshua Brown, 40, was killed in May while at the wheel of a Tesla Model S, questions arose about the safety of the car’s crash-avoidance Autopilot system. The company has since released a new version. The accident may have happened in part because the crash-avoidance system was designed to engage only when radar and computer vision systems agreed that there was an obstacle, according to an industry executive with direct knowledge of the system. Some experts speculated that a lidar-driven car might have avoided the crash. But the company’s founder and chief executive, Elon Musk, has said the upgrade could have prevented the crash.Federal auto-safety regulators later said that they found no defects in Tesla’s Autopilot system that was used during the crash.
      
      
    
The Tesla Model S crashed in northern Florida into a truck that was turning left in front of it. The Tesla then ran off the road, hitting a fence and a power pole before coming to a stop.US 27Trailer turns left in front of the Tesla1Tesla doesn’t stop,hitting the trailer andtraveling under it23FENCETesla veers off roadand strikes two fences and a power pole POWER POLEThe Tesla Model S crashed in northern Florida into a truck that was turning left in front of it. The Tesla then ran off the road, hitting a fence and a power pole before coming to a stop.1Trailer turns left in front of the TeslaUS 272Tesla doesn’t stop, hitting the trailer and traveling under it3FENCETesla veers off road and strikes two fences and a power pole POWER POLE

      By GUILBERT GATES, 
    
KEVIN GRANVILLE, 
    
JOHN MARKOFF, 
    
KARL RUSSELL and 
    
ANJALI SINGHVI

By Guilbert Gates, Kevin Granville, John Markoff, Karl Russell and Anjali Singhvi. Neal Boudette contributed reporting.Advertisement