AdvertisementSupported byTech TipBy J. D. BiersdorferQ. Is it possible to move or play my iTunes songs on an Android phone? I thought iTunes locked you into an Apple device, but maybe there are ways to do it?A. When Apple’s iTunes Music Store arrived in 2003, it sold songs and albums as digital files in the Advanced Audio Coding format (instead of the then-common MP3 format) with digital rights management, or D.R.M., restrictions built in to prevent the files from playing on unauthorized hardware. In early 2009, however, Apple announced that it was removing the D.R.M. software from the music it sold in the iTunes Store, which freed up the music files to be played on a wider range of devices.Songs you converted yourself from compact discs were not affected by iTunes Store restrictions. Several music apps and services for Android support most of the audio file types used by the iTunes software, including D.R.M.-free AAC, MP3 and WMA (Windows Media Audio).Using the Google Play Music Manager to upload your iTunes library to Google’s servers so you can stream the songs on an Android device is a common approach, although the files will  be converted to the MP3 format as part of the process. Google notes, however, that some D.R.M.-protected AAC files cannot be uploaded because of the built-in copy restrictions, so iTunes Store songs purchased before 2009 may not work.You can also move your iTunes music library to your Android device for syncing or streaming with third-party apps or over a USB connection. The Google Play store has several apps to do this; doubleTwist is one company making such software for syncing iTunes songs to Android devices.Although you eventually have to pay a subscription fee after a three-month free trial period, Apple does make a version of its Apple Music app for Android. Apple Music subscribers can play their iTunes purchases and other music with the app, which also includes curated streaming radio stations and video features.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.Advertisement