
Bits By                     
 FARHAD MANJOO and
 

 MIKE ISAAC
 
SEPT. 29, 2017
Each Friday, Farhad Manjoo and Mike Isaac, technology reporters at The New York Times, review the week’s news, offering analysis and maybe a joke or two about the most important developments in the tech industry.Farhad: Mike! How are you doing? I’m writing from Seattle, where I visited this week for an Amazon press event about Echo and Alexa. Here’s the news: Amazon is making a lot of Echo devices. There are at least a half dozen different talking speakers now, including one that doubles as an alarm clock.Soon I’ll be talking to Alexa more than I talk to you! I can’t wait.Mike: Yeah, yeah. Alexa sounds nice, but did you visit the Seattle-area Starbucks stores? They’re basically fancier than my actual house.Farhad: I’m sure your house isn’t that nice anyway. O.K., on to other tech news.Farhad: Let’s start with Equifax, the credit ratings agency that got epically hacked last month. After a bungling response to a breach that exposed the private information of up to 143 million Americans, the company’s C.E.O. retired this week.AdvertisementBut as our colleague Ron Lieber has been pointing out, it’s still unclear if the company has gotten any better at doing the basic task of responding to consumers about the hack, or putting in place protections for their data. I continue to be amazed at how poorly they’re handling this — and, more than that, how this doesn’t scream out for a movement calling for data-protection regulations.AdvertisementMike: This is really important, by the way. It’s not like our Twitter accounts getting hacked and someone tweeting a bunch of crazy stuff. It’s social security numbers, credit reports, addresses, phone numbers — deep access to our lives, there for the taking.Here’s the funniest part to me: As a kind of mea culpa, Equifax offered a free credit lock to customers for life. This is the company that couldn’t get a functioning site together to give consumers information on what happened with the hack and whether their information was stolen. Now we’re supposed to try and use their tools and services again?Anyway, this one is not going to end anytime soon. My guess is that Congress is going to step in and amp up the pressure relatively soon.Farhad: O.K., let’s turn to social networks. Six years ago, when I worked at Slate, I did one of those contrarian pieces the magazine is famous for — I called on Twitter to drop its fetishized 140-character limit. I argued that Twitter would have better conversations and fewer ugly abbreviations if it doubled the limit to 280 characters. And you know what happened? Everyone said I was stupid.Mike: I bet this is an elaborate setup for you to say how right you were all along.Farhad: Correct! So imagine my surprise when Twitter announced this week that it is testing out just such a plan! A select few will be getting the ability to tweet up to 280 characters; if the test proves successful (according to Twitter’s own bar for success), the company could decide to roll it out for everyone. (Also, there is a hack to get 280-character tweets already. I tried it out, of course!)Mike: Ugh, Farhad. Congrats on being right for the first time in your life.Farhad: Of course people on Twitter are up in arms about this. Twitter users whine over the tiniest changes, so something big like this set off hours of ridiculousness.But honestly I can’t see a single good argument for not at least testing longer tweets. The original 140-character limit was a totally arbitrary number designed to satisfy a technical constraint around text messages. The constraint no longer applies, so why not test another number — maybe a different arbitrary number will work better!The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mike: Twitter has long treated any major product changes as taboo, and according to folks I spoke to, the 140-character limit was “sacrosanct” to many people internally. Twitter needs to be willing to take risks on how they might change the product, and I’m glad they’re trying this.AdvertisementAll that said, I hope they’re not wedded to any major changes. My advice is to try all sorts of tweaks and changes, see what works, what doesn’t, and keep the best of it all. Maybe 280 is too few characters! Maybe 140 is too many! Basically, my approach would be “no more sacred cows.”My last suggestion: Stop being so scared of what your power users say. Twitter employees spend their days seeing what people who are already addicted to Twitter want out of Twitter. Perhaps a better way to go about it would be to ignore the vocal minority and figure out what prevents normal, non-techie people from coming back to Twitter regularly?Farhad: Good idea. But there was more serious stuff with Twitter, too. For the last few weeks Facebook has been dealing with fallout over its role in amplifying Russian propaganda during the presidential election. Now it’s Twitter’s turn.According to a research report, Twitter has been as instrumental to propagandists, particularly through the use of fake accounts — that is, accounts run by bots pretending to be actual users. (Oh by the way, this was another thing that I predicted! Yeah, I’m going to be that guy.)Mike: You will always be that guy.Twitter is in some hot water, and they finally came clean Thursday — to a small extent, at least — about the company’s part in the 2016 election. My guess: Other tech companies are watching this and waiting for their turn in the spotlight. And it’s going to be painful.Farhad: Finally, let’s talk Uber. The car-sharing company had some scuffles with lawmakers in London and Canada this week. I thought the way they handled each was interesting, because it shed light on how the new C.E.O., Dara Khosrowshahi, is different from his predecessor. But how about you explain the details and school me?Mike: In a nutshell: Transportation interests and the mayor of London said that Uber doesn’t play by the rules and shouldn’t be in London, and revoked Uber’s license to operate there. There is an appeal period, and Uber is galvanizing support from those who want the ride-hailing service. But it was a big blow to Uber, by most measures.AdvertisementMoreover, Uber decided to pull out of Quebec instead of face new, more restrictive legislation passed in the area, a fascinating move for a company usually willing to buck against any boundaries lawmakers deem fit to place upon it.The largest difference here is how Dara handled the situation. He was widely praised for what many saw was humility and an admission that Uber’s past and reputation had caught up with it, and that the company would be forced to pay the price of such a past for some time.That is markedly different tone than, say, when Travis Kalanick, the former chief executive, was running the company. He was more of a wartime chief — something many argue was necessary for the first years of Uber’s life.To Travis’s credit, he has said he’s made mistakes in the past and is trying to turn over a new leaf. But Dara’s response is clearly positioning Uber as a changed company.Anyway, I’m leaving now, before you link to another old article of yours and explain why you were right about something else. See ya!Farhad: Bye!Follow Farhad Manjoo on Twitter @fmanjoo and Mike Isaac @MikeIsaacWe’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »