AdvertisementSupported byBy Paul MozurHONG KONG — In 2014, Baidu announced a hiring coup in the world of artificial intelligence: It had brought in the Stanford and Google alumnus Andrew Ng to lead a new research lab in Silicon Valley.Just under three years later, Mr. Ng said in a blog post on Tuesday that he was leaving the Chinese search engine company.His departure is a blow to Baidu, which has been betting big on artificial intelligence, a technology that is expected to undergird a range of others, like voice recognition and driverless cars.In a post on Facebook and Twitter, Baidu said: “Andrew Ng joined Baidu with a shared goal, to improve life through artificial intelligence. Today, that goal remains strong. Thank you, and all the best on your new chapter!”The company now has more than 1,300 employees dedicated to A.I. In a signal of just how critical the efforts are to the company, it said in January that it had hired Qi Lu, a former executive at Microsoft and an A.I. specialist, to become the chief operating officer.Mr. Ng’s announcement comes after the technology executive Hugo Barra left Xiaomi, a Chinese phone maker and e-commerce company, for Facebook. Mr. Ng and Mr. Barra were viewed as part of a nascent trend of Silicon Valley executives jumping to well-funded Chinese internet companies. They seemed to represent a new era of closer ties, and competition, between America’s tech giants and China’s.The resignations underline how that trend never materialized. Few American tech executives followed them, and China’s internet behemoths remain mostly focused on their home markets.Even so, analysts say, the Chinese companies have grown ever more innovative, particularly in A.I. For instance, last year when Microsoft researchers declared they had created software capable of matching human skills in understanding speech, Mr. Ng chided Microsoft, pointing out that Baidu had achieved a similar feat in 2015.In his post on Tuesday, Mr. Ng struck a positive note: “Baidu’s A.I. is incredibly strong, and the team is stacked up and down with talent; I am confident A.I. at Baidu will continue to flourish.”Mr. Ng wrote that he would continue working to ensure A.I. made “life better for everyone.” He wrote that he saw the technology’s impact going far beyond large tech companies like Google and Baidu.“In addition to transforming large companies to use A.I., there are also rich opportunities for entrepreneurship as well as further A.I. research.”Mr. Ng is part of a still-small coterie of researchers who are experts in deep learning, a branch of artificial intelligence that seeks to use computers to emulate the functions of the human brain. During his time at Baidu, Mr. Ng said the lab at Silicon Valley had helped create two different business units, one that works on speech recognition and another focused on driverless cars.As China’s most dominant search engine, Baidu has long had a lock on a profitable section of online advertising. Yet as more Chinese consumers picked up smartphones, the company has struggled to keep its hold on ad spending. In a bid to surpass its rivals, the company has poured money into A.I. technology that executives say will support next-generation products.Mr. Ng wrote that the lab he helped start and is now leaving is working on many of those technologies, “such as face-recognition (used in turnstiles that open automatically when an authorized person approaches), Melody (an A.I.-powered conversational bot for health care) and several more.”“As the principal architect of Baidu’s A.I. strategy, I am proud to have led the incredible rise of A.I. within the company,” he wrote.Advertisement