By FARHAD MANJOOMARCH 3, 2016
SAN FRANCISCO — Amazon’s Alexa is gaining new powers, and a couple of new looks, too.Amazon, the Internet retailer, on Thursday announced two new siblings for the Echo, the voice-controlled household assistant that people address as “Alexa” and that became a surprise hit for the company last year.One new product, Amazon Tap, is a slimmer, shorter, portable version of the Echo. Rather than requiring an electrical wall connection, the Tap runs off a rechargeable battery. It connects with phones and the Internet through Bluetooth and Wi-Fi.The Tap acts as an ordinary wireless speaker for a phone, but it also provides Alexa on the go. People can ask about weather and traffic, ask for the news, tell it to play a song from a streaming service, or do any one of dozens of other tasks. The device, which will begin shipping at the end of the month, will sell for about $130.Amazon also announced the Echo Dot, essentially an Echo without that device’s powerful speaker. The Dot, which will sell for about $90, looks like a hockey puck, and is meant to provide Alexa’s voice functions for existing speaker systems. The Dot connects to those speakers either through a wire or over Bluetooth; after that, it functions as another Echo.AdvertisementDot shipments also will begin at the end of March. Sales will initially be limited to people who already own an Echo or one of Amazon’s Fire TV devices — a Dot buyer will have to ask Alexa to order one.AdvertisementThe new devices suggest that Amazon has an expansive vision for the Echo, which looked like an experiment for the company when it was introduced in late 2014. The company has not provided sales data for the device, but it has said that sales exceeded its expectations and that customer reviews are rhapsodic.Amazon appears to have increased investment in the device — it keeps adding new features and capabilities to Alexa, and this year it ran Super Bowl ads about the gadget.“The response has been nothing short of incredible,” said David Limp, Amazon’s senior vice president for devices, at an event on Wednesday about the new hardware. “This is almost unprecedented in the history of Amazon, to see this much demand and love for a product.”A version of this article appears in print on March 4, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Amazon Introduces Two Alexa Voice-Controlled Devices.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.