By MIKE ISAACJULY 24, 2016
Foursquare, the discovery and check-in mobile app, was the talk of the town in tech circles half a dozen years ago when it led the way in the use of location-based services and the GPS technology that was built into the iPhone.But over the years, Foursquare’s marquee feature — the check-in — was adopted by apps like Instagram, Facebook and Twitter. Soon, the check-in became more of a feature than a stand-alone product. Foursquare has since switched tactics several times, including moving toward a kind of real-world local search engine.Now location-based services and technology have become the rage again. Pokémon Go, the augmented reality mobile game that has swept several countries, also uses location technology and fuses the real world with the digital one in a way akin to what Foursquare’s check-ins did. The game, based on finding and capturing virtual animals based on maps and landmark data taken from the real world, has caused people to begin exploring the physical world.That may have re-energized interest in Foursquare: The company is seeing eight million check-ins per day in its app, a new high, representatives said. Dennis Crowley, co-founder and chairman of Foursquare, recently discussed the Pokémon Go phenomenon and how Foursquare was early to location-based services. The interview has been edited and condensed:Pokémon Go seemed to take everyone by surprise. Did the fast uptake surprise you?I thought it was interesting that it’s a location-based game. It’s really the first time since the original Foursquare came out in 2009 that a location-based game has really captured pop culture’s attention.AdvertisementI’ve been working in this space for a while. To see a lot of those ideas make it into something like Pokémon, I just sit back and think that it’s awesome.AdvertisementDid Pokémon Go’s fast rise frustrate you at all? Another company nailed something quickly that you guys have been trying to do for years.It’s the opposite of frustration. We started working on this stuff in graduate school, and now it’s exciting to see others pay attention to it. To see this succeed at this level, I think it’s validating for everyone playing in the location-based gaming space for years. It’s a piece of software that changes people’s behavior in the real world.Have you seen any halo effects on Foursquare’s business?I think we’ve been beating this drum for a while. Location services are going to power everything in the future. They’re going to be involved in everything we touch.One of the most interesting things is that it raises people’s awareness that the game board overlaps with the real world.Developers are saying, “How do we build the next Pokémon?” The wealth of data we’ve captured over the past six years, we can help be a part of that. McDonald’s did a deal with Pokémon to make its restaurants available as special game locations. What does this mean for Foursquare’s business?Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.I think what happens with Pokémon is that people start realizing that they can use it to advertise their business, a light bulb will really go off and you’ll see far more of it.It’s not just an ad, it’s a much more creative ad. This is what ad agencies do — they dream up crazy ideas. Now we’re starting to have these conversations with them, saying: “We’ve built this thing. We can make something magical happen when you and your phone walk into a Starbucks, or a baseball stadium. If that’s something you want to build, that’s something Foursquare can power.”AdvertisementHow many stand-alone start-ups can really do this stuff? I think it’s like a “count on one hand” type of thing. Google, Apple, Ingress data owned by Niantic. Our data set is 85 million places. We know latitude and longitude, but we also understand your relationship to where you’re positioned when you move in, out and around those places.If Foursquare is in a strategically advantageous place after the explosion of Pokémon, does it make sense to be a stand-alone company? Would you field acquisition offers?We always have those types of conversations as they come up, and frankly a few more have occurred in the days since Pokémon Go came out.That said, Foursquare is a real business now. We’re in a good spot where we can continue to exist and do what we’re doing for the long haul.A version of this article appears in print on July 25, 2016, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Foursquare Gets Boost From Pokémon.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.