AdvertisementSupported byTech TipBy J. D. BiersdorferQ. Is there any way to report problems or get technical support for a mobile app?A. Apps are software, so if you need help or want to report an issue with the program’s developer, there are a couple of places to look for the contact information. Open the problematic app on your device and check its menus for a link to “Support” or a “Contact Us” page. If the app in question offers such an option, you may find yourself in the program’s online support guide and Frequently Asked Questions area, or get an email address to use for filing your complaint.If the app in question does not include links to technical support documentation, go to the online store where you downloaded it and search for that app’s page. Once you locate the page, look for links to the app developer’s support site and contact information so you can find the answers you need or report specific problems to the app’s creators.Google’s site has support pages for its own apps. Android users can quickly see a collection of just the apps they have installed by opening the Google Play app, tapping the menu icon in the upper-left corner of the screen and choosing “My apps and games.” Tap an app icon to go to its page.Those with iOS devices can see their personal software libraries by opening the App Store icon on the home screen and tapping the Purchased button. Select an app to get a pop-up window showing its information page and links to the developer. Apple’s site has support help for the company’s own apps.Microsoft’s mobile app store site for devices that run Windows 10 Mobile and Windows Phone software usually lists contact information for the software publisher and support links on each app’s page. The company also hosts support pages for its own apps, like its Microsoft Office Mobile software.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.Advertisement