AdvertisementSupported byTech TipBy J. D. BiersdorferQ.  Is it possible to check voice mail on a smartphone when traveling on vacation in Europe?A. You should be able to listen to your voice mail messages overseas from your smartphone or another phone. In most cases, however, you need to know one important piece of information — your voice mail passcode. You may have set up one when you first got your phone and forgotten about it. If you do not remember the password required to check messages manually, contact your wireless carrier to get the information or have the passcode reset.If you are planning to use your phone on your trip, first check your carrier’s website for travel tips and information about the company’s international voice and data plans in various countries. While these plans may charge an additional fee to your monthly bill, they are often less expensive than roaming onto the networks of foreign carriers. If you spring for an international cellular data plan, you may also be able to use your phone’s visual voice mail.In addition to selling their own international calling and data plans, the major American wireless carriers — AT&T, Sprint, T-Mobile and Verizon Wireless — also have instructions for dialing into voice mail while traveling abroad. Many AT&T phones connect you to your voice mailbox anywhere when you press and hold the 1 key on the keypad.If that does not work, you can dial 1 before your own phone number, press the asterisk (*) key during your voice mail greeting and enter your voice mail passcode to hear your messages. Sprint’s phones work in a similar fashion, and T-Mobile and Verizon Wireless have a phone number to dial to get access to messages. You can also dial into your carrier’s voice mail system from another phone — as long as you remember your voice mail passcode and message-retrieval instructions.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.Advertisement