
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
OCT. 13, 2017
Q. How do I make the Windows Cortana program on my PC collect news and scores for specific sports teams?A. You can set Cortana, Microsoft’s virtual assistant for Windows 10 desktop and mobile systems, to keep track of your favorite teams — but you first need to tell the program which teams to follow. You can provide this information in the Cortana's Notebook. In addition to your favorite teams, you can have Cortana gather updates on the movies and television shows you watch, get news stories on the topics you follow, monitor your travel arrangements and round up your weather and stock-market updates.Advice and tips on the technology changing how you live.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.To share your interests, tap or click the Cortana search icon in the Windows 10 task bar and, when the Cortana box pops up, select the Notebook; it is the third icon in the vertical row on the left side. If you have set up the assistant to take voice commands, you can just say, “Hey, Cortana, open the Notebook.” (If you have privacy concerns about sharing too much of your life’s data with Microsoft, Cortana may not be for you.)In the Notebook menu, scroll down and select Sports. In the “Teams you’re tracking” area, select “Add a team.” Enter the name of your team in the search box. Choose your team’s name in the search results. On the next screen, turn on the buttons to get scores and notifications, then click the Add button. When you are returned to the main Sports window, click the Save button or repeat the steps to add more teams.While you are in the Notebook, you can select other categories like Movies & TV and add the films and shows you would like to follow, just as you did with athletic teams. Several categories are available for Cortana to monitor for you. Scholars can even set up the Academic preferences to track news and conference updates, as well as new papers released in a specified field of study.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »