AdvertisementSupported byBy Conor DoughertyMOUNTAIN VIEW, Calif. — Project Foghorn is one of those straight-from-science-fiction concepts we’ve come to expect from Alphabet, the sprawling conglomerate formerly known as Google. The idea, hatched by the company’s X research lab, was to use seawater and chemistry to create fuel that could be refined into gasoline. This gas would be just like the gas we fill our cars with today — except that unlike today’s gas, it would not add to global warming because it would recycle carbon dioxide already in the atmosphere.If the project had been successful — and this was always a big if — it would have changed the definition of green energy and potentially undercut some of the most important industries in the world, not least the oil business. But after two years of trying, and an undisclosed research budget, Foghorn died during a January staff meeting.The result: Everyone on the team received a bonus (they won’t say how much).X, formerly called Google X, cheekily refers to itself as “the moonshot factory.” They are the people behind Google’s self-driving car, along with various out-there projects like Loon, an attempt to beam internet access from stratospheric balloons, and Wing, a drone delivery service. Those efforts sit atop dozens of aborted projects — some just ideas, others that consumed years — like a never built jet pack and giant blimps that would haul cargo with the same efficiency as an ocean liner.What all these efforts have in common, besides imaginative power, is that they do not make any money. X’s budget and head count are a secret, but shareholders’ perceptions about the division were aptly summed up by a poster board in its Mountain View, Calif., offices. It had a picture of a burning $100 bill followed by, “Investors think we do this.”That poster points to a central question for both X and Alphabet: What exactly is X’s business? And how does a public company invest in such speculative ideas, most of which will never work, without irritating investors or wasting a ton of money?Building a research division is an old and often unsuccessful concept. For decades, corporate giants like AT&T, IBM, Microsoft and Xerox have tried, in varying ways, to organize research-oriented groups in hopes of finding ways to cash in on emerging technologies before their competitors.Those efforts played a role in creating some of the 20th century’s most significant innovations. For instance, Bell Labs, then a division of AT&T, invented the transistor, the foundation of modern electronics. But in many cases these research arms did little for the companies that financed them.Xerox pioneered the graphical interface for computers — the idea that people could navigate with a mouse rather than typing obscure commands on a screen. But it was a young company named Apple that turned that idea into a giant business.“In general, the model of having a central research lab that the corporation funds for research into new technologies has not produced much for these companies,” said G. Pascal Zachary, a professor at the Arizona State University School for the Future of Innovation in Society. “That’s why you don’t see many of the successful young companies today thinking about building them.”X is trying to make corporate research systematic by borrowing working ideas from the past, while adding a few wrinkles — like giving people a financial incentive to admit when something is not working out — in hopes of not making the same mistakes.This effort comes at a time when Alphabet is trying to enforce financial discipline over a broad empire that was famous for not worrying about nickels and dimes.Next month will be the first anniversary of Google’s surprise announcement that it would remake itself as a holding company. All the ad-driven and highly profitable businesses like search would still be called Google. The assumption was that the other divisions would have to prove they could stand on their own financially — at least over time.The reimagining of Google is still very much a work in progress, and there have been setbacks. Nest, the Alphabet company that makes high-tech versions of devices like thermostats and smoke detectors, was thought to be a model for how other Alphabet companies would work, since many of its operations were already run independently. But it is in the middle of a management shake-up after a series of product delays, employee morale concerns and what some consider disappointing revenue growth.While investors still do not know X’s budget, they at least have a sense of the limits. In the first quarter, Alphabet lost about $800 million on what it called “other bets” — everything outside Google’s core search and advertising businesses — and it will update the figure when it reports its second-quarter earnings on Thursday.At the same time, now that X is spinning off new companies that will either stand on their own or die, investors are getting something of a yardstick to judge the division’s progress. If one of those new companies starts to rival search advertising as a revenue stream, X will be considered a success. If that never happens, it will be a failure (and not the good kind).For instance, X’s self-driving car project, known internally as Chauffeur, recently hired a chief executive and is poised to become a stand-alone company. Another, called Verily, is a life sciences company that has developed, among other things, a glucose-sensing contact lens for people with diabetes, and has licensed that technology to Novartis. Verily became its own company shortly after Google announced the Alphabet reorganization.“The thing we created — our product — was Verily, and at the highest level we are being paid as an organization to do that somewhat regularly,” said Astro Teller, X’s chief executive, though his actual title is “captain of moonshots.” “I would not want to promise anyone internally or externally that we’re going to do it once a year.”There are two main differences between X and the corporate research arms of the past. While operations like Bell Labs and Xerox PARC worked on problems that were at least nominally related to their parent companies’ core businesses, X employees can work on anything they like. In fact, they are discouraged from straying into Google’s main business because Google has its own research group that focuses on machine learning and other computer science topics.And while Bell Labs and others made huge contributions to basic, university-style research, X projects are conceived as moneymaking enterprises, or things that at least seem as if they could make money sometime in the next few years. With Foghorn, the goal was to turn seawater into gasoline for no more than $5 a gallon — enough that it could conceivably find a market in some European nations where high taxes make gasoline more costly.Kathy Cooper, an engineer who led the project, said of the goal, “I think we could meet it, but it would be more like 15 to 20 years.” That was too far away, which was why she recommended killing it.X employees avoid talking about money, but it is not a subject they can ignore. They face financial barriers that can shut down a project if it does not pan out as quickly as planned. And they have to meet various milestones before they can hire more people for their teams.The point, several executives said, is to encourage employees to think big while staying away from creating technology for technology’s sake.“If you actually want to make the world better, focus on what would actually make the world better, and the technology will take care of itself,” Mr. Teller said. In other words, great ideas that solve real problems will bring in real money.One of the more public examples was a recent overhaul of a Google robotics effort whose best-known project is a robotic cheetah. The division was recently dismantled, and its disparate technologies are being re-evaluated so they can either be sold off or streamlined for a specific moonshot idea, like “build a car that can drive itself.”Over the last year, X has hardened project milestones and created an intermediate step, called Foundry. The group’s leader, Obi Felten, said her job was to hone new technologies into a concrete product and to work with engineers like Ms. Cooper to help them write business plans.The idea is to create a conveyor-belt-like process that encourages employees to quickly jettison projects that seem unlikely to work and to avoid technologies that are neat ideas but would never make money.One of the best ways to save money, Mr. Teller said, is to encourage employees to kill projects before they become expensive — hence the bonus for the Foghorn team. X staff meetings begin with a “premortem” process in which people predict how various technologies might fall short. Employees’ laptops are decorated with stickers of crumpled-up paper that represent the end of past efforts.When Mr. Teller speaks at events like South by Southwest and TED, he ruminates so deeply on the word “fail” that successes are sometimes framed as “failing to fail.”The idea of celebrating failure is a Silicon Valley cliché, but Mr. Teller talks about it in the practical terms of a management consultant. Say you have a team of 20 people working on a project that is not going anywhere, he said in a recent interview. In a year those 20 people will be 30 people. The company has to pay their salaries and health insurance, and the team will inevitably hire a few consultants. Worse, they will have wasted a year.How much money could the company save if you could get them to cut bait a year earlier?“That’s the magic,” Mr. Teller said. “But they won’t do it. They will not raise their hands and say, ‘This project is just not what we should be working on,’ unless you start bonusing them, unless they can get a promotion for ending their project.”Failure bonuses are also an example of how X, which was set up independent of Google from the outset, is a leading indicator of sorts for how the autonomous Alphabet could work. In Alphabet, employees who do not work for Mother Google are supposed to have their financial futures tied to their own company instead of Google’s search ads. At X, that means killing things before they become too expensive.Mr. Teller’s decision to start paying bonuses to employees who kill their own projects happened long before the Alphabet transition, and it was met with skepticism from Google’s chief culture officer. Mr. Teller got what he wanted anyway.“They were just offended by the idea,” he said. “And now we don’t even talk about it anymore.”X was founded in 2010, and it was originally in a brick building on the edge of Google’s main campus. At the beginning, it felt like an extended 20 percent project — the extra projects Google employees are encouraged to work on outside of their main job — with little in the way of process.Former Google employees said this led to a temptation to overhype projects long before they were ready. The most notorious example of this was Google Glass, the much maligned computer glasses.The glasses were supposed to have a marketing scheme to match, and X employees hatched an idea for floating showrooms. Later, when mysterious barges showed up in Portland, Me., and San Francisco Bay, they kicked off months of speculation and conspiracy theories until finally they were towed away without a word from Google.Mr. Teller said he shut down the barges idea the first day it was his decision to make. “There wasn’t a lot of agonizing about that,” he said.Today, the company’s offices are a few miles from Google’s main campus. They are full of electric vehicles and people riding skateboardlike contraptions. Mr. Teller appears to be always on Rollerblades.Beyond the main lobby and offices, behind key-card-protected doors, sit various labs, as well as an open warehouse floor that houses a division called the Design Kitchen, which appears to be a cross between a machine shop and a cool dad’s garage. Some items spotted on a recent tour included climbing rope; lots of tools; oversize plugs; a set of skateboard wheels attached to a block, wires and a 9-volt battery; a plastic ear; and beer.Unlike Google, where software engineers are kings, X is run by an eclectic batch of scientists and tinkerers whose backgrounds range from math, physics and chemistry to design, fashion and public art. The line “I’m not an engineer” seems to be a point of pride. Rich DeVaul, who heads a “rapid evaluation” team whose job is to hatch and kill ideas in short order, guessed that fewer than half the employees have engineering degrees (he doesn’t).“I would argue that the great strength of X, in fact, is that basically we aren’t just a bunch of techies,” he said.The combination of big ideas, lofty rhetoric and a strict code of secrecy has made X a source of endless speculation and conspiracy theories. The one you hear most frequently, usually from competitors and venture capitalists, is that X is a giant public relations plan to distract regulators from Google’s search business, which is under scrutiny around the world.Cynical though that sounds, it points to something that seems fundamentally true: Many of history’s great corporate research efforts, like Bell Labs and Xerox PARC, have come from companies that were monopolies or close to it.Failure bonuses notwithstanding, no normal person would walk away from X thinking it looked frugal. There is a free cafeteria whose recent menu included sushi and pork tri-tip. The bathrooms have Japanese toilet seats with buttons for warmth and spritz. Listening to X executives talk about saving money is a bit like having billionaires tell you they built a $30 million house for $30 million and not a penny more.But X’s success will be less about money saved than the creation of a new Google-size business whose profits wash away all the losses. And while the division has already had some successes, it has yet to produce the “moonshot” Mr. Teller is hoping for.Arguably the biggest success, Google Brain, is the one people know the least about. It was an artificial intelligence effort that was spun back into core Google in 2012 and is now embedded in products like voice search and the Google Photos app, in which users can search their albums for images like “dogs” or “mountains.”Investors would prefer a shiny new business that does not rely on advertising. Mr. DeVaul hopes that if X can deliver a big hit, it will encourage other companies to copy the entire concept. Management science is a lot less interesting than moonshots, but until X hits the moon, that is what it is selling.“We could have five or 10 other world-class organizations doing this, and we would not be able to scratch the surface of the crazy big hard challenges out there,” he said. “I’m an optimist: I believe that there is an endless supply of huge problems affecting humanity.”Advertisement