By KATIE BENNERMAY 11, 2017
SAN FRANCISCO — A day after Snap posted a $2.2 billion loss and decelerating user growth in its first earnings report as a public company, the repercussions started spreading through the technology start-up ecosystem.In venture capital offices and at some start-ups across Silicon Valley, investors and entrepreneurs made Snap’s performance a subject of much talk — and their conclusions were not particularly positive. At Canvas Ventures, a venture capital firm in Portola Valley, Calif., one investor, Rebecca Lynn, said that Snap’s disappointing report was a powerful lesson to other start-ups.“Companies who are thinking about going public will see what happened and make sure that their i’s are dotted and their t’s crossed,” Ms. Lynn said. “We tell our companies all the time that they need to be prepared to meet expectations.”This year was supposed to be one in which technology start-ups would easily go public. Silicon Valley had boomed in recent years with a collection of rapidly growing companies that were highly valued by private investors, and many of those companies appeared ready to graduate onto public stock exchanges. Snap, the parent company of the messaging app Snapchat, was exhibit A in that trend — a hip social media service that went public in March in the biggest tech offering in several years.AdvertisementBut on Wednesday, Snap issued its disappointing earnings, sending the company’s stock down more than 21 percent on Thursday. The virulent market reaction turned Snap into a cautionary tale for venture capitalists and start-up entrepreneurs, some of whom are now reassessing the prospects for their companies’ going public and how prepared those companies really are to deal with the aftermath — especially if the start-ups, like Snap, are deeply unprofitable.Advertisement“There are a lot of very highly valued, money-losing unicorns, like Uber, Pinterest and Spotify,” said Kathleen Smith, a principal at Renaissance Capital, which manages exchange-traded funds that invest in newly listed companies. “This will put a damper on enthusiasm for their valuations.”Scott Raney, a venture capitalist at Redpoint Ventures, said Snap’s performance was being closely watched because of the attention the company’s I.P.O. had received earlier in the year. “Start-up founders do pay attention to something like earnings, particularly with a company as high profile as Snap,” he said. “It was surprising that this happened so soon after going public.”From the start, there was a disconnect between what Snap said it would deliver and what Wall Street wanted.Snap’s public offering filings and pre-I.P.O. messaging included warnings that the business had lost hundreds of millions of dollars, that it might never stop losing money and that earnings would be unpredictable. Evan Spiegel, the company’s chief executive, told investors that what made the company special was not user growth, but how much time people spent using the app. In another warning sign, Mr. Spiegel, his co-founder Bobby Murphy and Snap’s largest venture investor, Benchmark, sold significant amounts of their stock when the company went public, which Ms. Smith said was unusual.But investors clamored for a piece of Snap anyway, hoping it would be a tech growth story like Apple, Facebook or Netflix, and bid up its shares by 44 percent on the first day of trading.A discrepancy between a tech company’s messaging and Wall Street expectations is a time-honored occurrence, one that has also bedeviled many of Snap’s predecessors. Most famously, Facebook’s stock tanked after its first earnings report as a public company in 2012, when the social network failed to live up to Wall Street’s high expectations for mobile ad revenue. Such constant investor scrutiny is often cited by tech entrepreneurs as a deterrent to going public.For Snap, that disconnect was compounded on Wednesday in a conference call with Wall Street analysts. During the event, many analysts’ questions about the company were dismissed by Mr. Spiegel. None of the executives made a particularly impassioned case for why the business would be a success over the long term.AdvertisementOn Thursday, Jim Cramer, the investor and CNBC host, said Mr. Spiegel needed to be “hazed” and put through a “gauntlet” by investors because “he is so arrogant.”The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Snap’s earnings showed that “your house has to be in order before you go public,” Ms. Lynn said. “Your job is to predict what you’ll hit and then do it.”Snap declined to comment.While Snap may make people rethink what it means to be prepared for a public offering and how high investors might value a buzzy company, it will most likely not discourage companies from going public altogether. Generally speaking, newly public companies have done well for investors over the past couple of years, so there is an appetite to buy into more of these start-ups.“There’s a buildup of potential I.P.O.s,” said Scott Sandell, a venture capitalist at New Enterprise Associates.Many start-ups also do not face the tough situation Snap is in now, in which it is being compared to a Goliath like Facebook, which is aggressively copying some of Snapchat’s features.For many of the tech start-ups that are evaluating going public, Snap’s trajectory offers valuable lessons, said Elad Gil, the founder of the genetic testing start-up Color Genomics. The kind of public market beating that Snap just went through can ultimately help a company become more focused and disciplined, he said.Just look at what happened with Facebook, Mr. Gil added. The social network’s stock, which was priced at $38 for its I.P.O., at one point went as low as $18 a share in its first year as a public company.The investor skepticism helped Facebook concentrate on spreading into new areas, such as mobile advertising, where it has since become a juggernaut. On Thursday, Facebook’s stock closed at $150.04.Follow Katie Benner on Twitter @ktbenner.A version of this article appears in print on May 12, 2017, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: In Snap’s Tumble, Start-Ups See the Hazards of Public Offerings .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.