
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
DEC. 7, 2016
Q. Is there a way to email a YouTube clip with a bookmark that makes it start at a certain time point in the video so my recipient doesn’t have to watch all the boring stuff at the beginning?A. The desktop version of YouTube offers several ways to create links to specific parts of videos. You can also manually create links that start the clip in a chosen spot or have a website create the links for you.If you are watching the clip in your computer’s browser and get to the part that you actually want your recipient to see, click the Pause button in the video player window. Right-click (or hold down the Control key while clicking) on the video window and choose “Copy video URL at current time.” You can then paste this link into an email message.As another way to create a URL that begins the clip at a certain point on the timeline, play the clip and click the Pause button when you get to the part you want to use as a starting point. Click the Share button below the video. Underneath the web address box that appears, turn on the checkbox next to “Start at:” and the current time code. Once you click the “Start at:” box, the video’s web address is appended with that start-time code, and that is the link you can share. (You can often use this approach on an Android or iOS device by using YouTube in the web browser instead of the YouTube app, and requesting the desktop version of the site instead of the simpler mobile edition.)Another way to link to a specific time in the video is to modify the clip’s URL with additional information and then share the new version as a link. For example, if you want the video to start playing at two minutes and 10 seconds into the overall recording, go to the end of the video’s web address at the top of the browser window and type in #t=2m10s. The “#t=” part signifies a time jump and the “2m10s” shows where to land — two minutes and 10 seconds from the beginning.If you do not want to fiddle with the URL yourself, make note of the time you want the clip to start playing in the time counter at the bottom of the video window. Next, go to a site like YouTube Time. Paste in the video’s mail URL and type in the start time you want to use. Click the Get Link button to get a new URL you can copy and share.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »