
Bits By                     
 QUENTIN HARDY
 
DEC. 6, 2016
The next cat video you play on YouTube may help the green energy industry.I have a story about Google’s plan to draw 100 percent of its power from renewable sources, like wind and solar. The company has been working with energy producers for most of a decade on sourcing more renewable power, and plans to meet its goal next year.To be clear, Google, which owns YouTube, will not be only consuming renewables: Its massive data centers are on big electric grids, which take power from a number of sources, including coal. Google arranges to have renewable sources on those grids, so that its net consumption isn’t drawing down additional carbon-based power.In fact, in many cases it is buying more wind and solar power than it uses, because Google is still having a hard time developing those sources in Asia. As a result, it overprovisions in places like North America and Europe, where there are more wind turbines.This is a big deal for a couple of reasons. For one, most of the growth in industrial power consumption is from data centers, and Google, along with companies like Microsoft and Amazon, is building global cloud computing centers at an unprecedented clip.Some of the companies have been hit by environmentalists for not being green, and now all three companies are trying to be better corporate citizens, in terms of their consumption.AdvertisementGoogle also makes much of its efficient power usage inside its data centers. For this story, I went to Oklahoma, where a 50,000-acre wind farm generates power for the same grid where Google operates its second-largest computer complex in North America, a plot of eight large buildings not far from the Arkansas border.AdvertisementInside the facility, Google has a lot of clever ways to reuse water, and bring outside air to cool its computer servers. In terms of power usage effectiveness, Google’s computing plant uses almost all the power it takes in to run its machines — not long ago, computer centers used just half the power they brought in.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Individual machines typically waste 30 percent of the power they take; Google’s computers waste 10 percent to 15 percent.Google may be trying to give the planet one big green hug here, but that doesn’t mean the company isn’t also looking out for the main chance. The green announcement is good public relations, and may spur other big companies to use more wind and solar. The industry is young enough that it’s still finding economies of scale, so more consumers could lower Google’s future acquisition costs.In addition, Google announced last July that it had used its artificial intelligence to cut power usage in one data center by 15 percent (the A.I. focused on costs of cooling machines). Google is talking with other companies in traditional industries about how they could use this capability in their own systems.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »