
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
OCT. 9, 2017
Q. I’m deleting Yahoo and my Flickr account. In regards to Flickr, I still have most of the original images on my computer, but need to retrieve a handful of photos I can’t find on my hard drive. Can I download the Flickr copies in the original resolution, or will they be in a lower image quality?A. You can download a copy of each photo at the original resolution in which it was uploaded. Log into your Flickr account and click on a photo in your collection to view it. In the lower-right corner of the viewer window, click the Download arrow icon. In the window that pops up, choose Original to grab the image in its highest resolution.Advice and tips on the technology changing how you live.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Flickr creates several resolutions of uploaded images for sharing purposes. These include small squares and thumbnail previews, as well as medium and large sizes for friends and family who might want to download copies of the pictures — but do not need the bigger original-resolution files. You can see the range of sizes available for a picture when you click the Download arrow and choose View All Sizes from the menu.If you have more than just a few pictures to retrieve from Flickr, you can also download photos by the album, or in batches from your Camera Roll page. To download a set of full-resolution photos from the Albums page, move the mouse over an album’s thumbnail image and click the Download arrow. If you already have the album open, you can just click the Download icon under the album’s title.To download images grouped together on your Camera Roll page, click the Select All button next to a series of pictures. When you have made your selections, click the Download button on the tool bar that appears at the bottom of the screen.Third-party tools are available as well. Flickr Downloadr and Bulkr are two such programs found around the web.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.A version of this article appears in print on October 12, 2017, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: How to Retrieve Photos From Flickr.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »