
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
OCT. 4, 2017
Q. I thought my saved list of web articles was supposed to stay in sync between my new Windows 10 PC and my Surface tablet, but it’s not. What am I doing wrong?A. The Reading List feature in the Microsoft Edge browser can store all the pages you have marked for later perusal, but you need to be signed into your Microsoft account on all your devices in order for the list to stay updated. The synchronization happens online, so if you are not signed into your account — or you do not have an internet connection at the time — the Reading List does not update on any Windows 10 tablets, phones or other computers you use.Advice and tips on the technology changing how you live.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.You should also make sure the Edge browser is set to sync your saved articles. To do so, tap the three-dot menu icon in the top-right corner of the browser window and select Settings. In the Settings menu, scroll down to Account and confirm that the “Sync your favorites and reading list” button is set to On.In addition to sharing saved web pages, the Edge browser allows you to read and sync e-books from the Microsoft Store (or books in the epub format) across your devices. The e-book compatibility was added to Edge in the Windows 10 Creators Update, released in the spring.Apple and Google include similar synchronization features. Through Apple’s iCloud service, you can sync browser bookmarks, your reading list and more across Macs, PCs and iOS devices all using the same Apple ID. Those using Google Accounts on Android gadgets can sync apps and other data, and the Chrome browser can sync bookmarks and other information on different devices using the same account. The separate Google Sync service is also designed to keep Chrome bookmarks, Gmail, contacts and calendars all up to date on various devices.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »