AdvertisementSupported byTech TipBy J. D. BiersdorferQ. What is “purgeable” storage? I couldn’t understand the explanation in the Community Discussion at Apple Support on this.A. In a nutshell, “purgeable” storage is hard-drive space the Mac can make available in an emergency — by automatically deleting files that you can always download again. For example, if you have the purge setting turned on and fill up your internal drive, leaving the system no space to work, the Mac will dump purchased iTunes videos. This is because you can freely download the material again later after you have deleted other files from the computer.The file-purge option is part of the macOS Sierra system, and it can be helpful for Mac models with smaller-capacity internal flash drives. However, you need to turn on the Optimize Mac Storage setting to see the amount of space you regain from files the Mac considers worthy of purging in a pinch.To turn on the setting, go to the Apple menu in the top-left corner of the screen and choose About This Mac. In the box of system information that opens, click the Storage tab. The Storage screen displays a colored bar that illustrates the amount of hard-drive space taken up by various types of files on the computer, like Apps and Mail.Click the Manage button on the right side of the box. The next screen offers several recommendations for saving drive space, including storing some files online in your iCloud account, automatically emptying the Mac’s trash or taking a trip through your documents to toss out clutter you no longer need. The Optimize Storage option is also on the list.When you click the Optimize button in the box, files like old email attachments and iTunes video files you have already watched will be automatically removed from the drive if the Mac suddenly needs more storage space. (Remember, these files also live happily on Apple’s servers if you need to download them again.)If you decide to optimize your Mac’s storage, the Storage tab in the About This Mac box will indicate how much space will be reclaimed if the need to purge arises. If you change your mind about purging certain types of files, you can make adjustments in the iTunes and Mail settings.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.Advertisement