
Tech Fix By                     
 BRIAN X. CHEN
 
MAY 18, 2016
MOUNTAIN VIEW, Calif. — Google on Wednesday introduced Google Home, a voice-controlled, Internet-connected speaker that competes directly with Amazon’s smart speaker, Echo, which costs $180. The company also introduced Allo, a messaging app, and a rebranding of its virtual assistant.Here’s a quick explanation of what these major announcements, made at the Google I/O developer conference, mean for consumers.What do Home and Echo have in common?Home and Echo are both speakers that require a wired power connection. They stream music and perform tasks like web searches, adding calendar appointments and looking up movie showtimes over an Internet connection.What are the differences between Google Home and Amazon Echo?Google has yet to share many important details, including a price tag, about Google Home, which is scheduled for release this fall. However, from the announcement we can glean a few differences:Home, which can easily be held in one hand, is shorter and more compact than Echo.AdvertisementBoth speakers have a cylindrical shape, but the top of Home is slanted downward, whereas Echo’s top is flat. Google is allowing consumers to choose from different colors for the bottom part of Home, while Echo comes only in black. (Amazon also sells a smaller voice-controlled speaker called Tap.)AdvertisementMost important, the brains of Home will be Google’s virtual assistant, which draws from Google’s extensive search database, whereas Echo relies on Alexa, Amazon’s assistant. In other words, consumers can expect voice commands that already work with Google’s assistant to work with Google Home.In a recent test comparing virtual assistants from Amazon, Apple, Google and Microsoft, Google’s assistant was the most capable of performing basic tasks, largely because it drew data from Google’s search engine.Is Home smarter than Echo?Thanks to Home’s reliance on Google’s search engine, it will probably be a smarter speaker than the Echo when it comes to basic tasks like web searches and looking up traffic data. However, when it comes to actions offered by outside companies — like the ability to order a pizza from a restaurant or to set your Internet-connected thermostat — Home’s success will depend largely on whether Google persuades third-party developers to create tasks that work with it.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“To do this well we really need to work with developers and third parties so we can provide these actions to our users,” said Sundar Pichai, Google’s chief executive, during his announcement of Home.By contrast, Amazon has already made great progress with third-party developers for Echo. Alexa is capable of summoning an Uber car, ordering a pizza from Domino’s, controlling smart light bulbs and much more. Time will tell which company’s speaker gets more third-party support, but Echo, which was released last June, has a major head start.What is Google’s assistant?Here’s where things get confusing. Google is referring to the virtual-assistant portion of its search product as “assistant.” Previously it was called Google Now, and later it was renamed to just Google.The problem was that many consumers had trouble distinguishing Google search from its virtual assistant because the assistant lacked a friendly name like Siri or Alexa. The difference now, Google says, is that its assistant is more capable of being naturally conversational than other assistants. Adding to the confusion: Google’s assistant is what comes with Google Home and Allo, the new messaging app. But you won’t summon it by saying “Google assistant.” You’ll just say “Google.”What is Allo?Allo is Google’s forthcoming messaging app, which has Google’s assistant built into it. Inside the app, you will be able to type “@google” and say conversational things like “Let’s go out for some Italian food.” Google will then respond with some suggestions for tables to reserve at Italian restaurants using, for example, the OpenTable app.What’s more, you will be able to have conversations with friends and type “@google” with questions or requests inside those conversations; all people in the conversation will see how Google’s assistant responds. The Allo app will be released this summer for iPhones and Android phones.A version of this article appears in print on May 23, 2016, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Google Home vs. Amazon Echo.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »