
Bits By                     
 JIM KERSTETTER
 
JULY 20, 2016
Cloud computing may seem like the new big thing in the technology industry. In reality, there’s nothing new about it. It has just had different names over the years.Long before Amazon, Microsoft and Google were talking up their competition for cloud customers, a number of young companies were talking up something called an Application Service Provider. It was smack in the middle of the dot-com boom, and the young A.S.P.s hoped to offer services to all the new internet companies that were popping up.Traditional tech companies like IBM were offering similar services. And if you want to get technical, people had been able to buy “timesharing” on old mainframes as far back as the 1960s.An A.S.P. was meant to do what a cloud computing company does today — connect people over the internet to software that is hosted in a giant data center. Instead of owning all that equipment or hiring all the people to manage it, you would pay the A.S.P. to do it for you.There were limitations. Internet connectivity was still slow for most people. Most software wasn’t designed to easily run over the internet, and the software used to manage those computer networks was still wonky. And running the A.S.P. operations was ghastly expensive.AdvertisementOne of the pioneers of this young business was Marc Andreessen, the Netscape co-founder who would later become one of the most influential venture capitalists in Silicon Valley. In between, Mr. Andreessen co-founded a company called LoudCloud with his Netscape colleague (and later venture capital partner) Ben Horowitz.AdvertisementThe idea was ahead of its time, and their timing was impeccably bad. LoudCloud had an initial public offering in March 2001, just as the dot-com bubble was popping. Still, they persevered. They sold off their expensive equipment and remade the outfit into a software company called Opsware.Opsware was eventually sold to Hewlett-Packard for $1.6 billion in 2007. And what did H.P. get for its money? “Software to help companies run big data centers managing corporate applications and their websites and internet applications,” The Times wrote at the time.The acquisition hasn’t changed the fortunes of HP, which has had more than its own share of troubles. But the A.S.P. concept lives on in the mainstream of computing.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »