By NICK WINGFIELDJULY 27, 2017
SEATTLE — Investors gave Amazon’s stock a bump early Thursday in anticipation of a strong earnings report later in the day, briefly making Jeff Bezos, the company’s chief executive, the world’s wealthiest person.By day’s end, Mr. Bezos had not returned the favor, with Amazon reporting profits that were less than a third of what Wall Street had expected.No matter. It was still the kind of performance that investors have come to expect from Mr. Bezos and Amazon: a 25 percent increase in sales and example after example of how the company is pouring money into original video programming, warehouses and shaping the future with new technology and products like its Echo family of gadgets.The company’s stock fell only about 3 percent in after-hours trading.The relative indifference to Amazon’s bottom line was another sign of why the company is so frightening to competitors and critics. Investors would almost certainly have pummeled any other retailer that turned in the kind of performance that Amazon reported Thursday. Instead, they give Amazon several miles of leash because of its history of turning investments into sales growth and technology leadership.Advertisement“Yes, we are continuing to invest and stepping up investments,” Brian Olsavsky, Amazon’s chief financial officer, said in a conference call with reporters, repeating a variation on a theme that company executives have expressed many times before.AdvertisementConcerns about Amazon’s mighty ambitions are on the rise at the moment, in part because of its pending plan to acquire Whole Foods for $13.4 billion, a deal that could put Amazon on a path to becoming a significant player in the vast grocery market. Although the deal has faced criticism from Democratic lawmakers, labor unions and consumer groups, there is no sign that it is in real jeopardy.Amazon’s shares have risen more than 8 percent since the deal was announced in June, helping to propel Mr. Bezos to the position of world’s second-wealthiest person, according to a ranking compiled by Forbes.According to a filing with securities regulators in April, Mr. Bezos holds nearly 81 million Amazon shares — almost 17 percent of the company. Forbes’s estimate of Mr. Bezos’s wealth also includes the value of his other investments — including his ownership of The Washington Post and the rocket company Blue Origin — and cash from the sale of securities.For a short time on Thursday, Forbes estimated Mr. Bezos’s wealth at $90.6 billion, compared with $90 billion for Bill Gates, a philanthropist and a co-founder of Microsoft, moving Mr. Bezos to the No. 1 spot for the first time.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.By the end of the day, Mr. Bezos had dropped back to No. 2.For the second quarter, ending June 30, Amazon said its net income was $197 million, or 40 cents a share, compared with net income of $857 million, or $1.78 a share, in the same period a year earlier.Analysts had expected a decline in profits, but not one that big. The average earnings estimate of analysts surveyed by Thomson Reuters was $1.42 a share. Mr. Olsavsky said the company’s operating income, a different measure of profits, was within the range of possibilities it had previously shared with investors.Mr. Olsavsky did not play down the fact that Amazon had found ways to invest in the growth of its business. The company’s revenue increased 25 percent, to $38 billion from $30.4 billion a year ago. That made analysts happy. Their average revenue estimate was $37.2 billion.Since the Whole Foods deal was announced, several members of Congress have raised concerns about its potential impact, expressing fears that it could accelerate consolidation in the food industry, eliminate jobs at brick-and-mortar retailers and further limit the availability of grocery stores in already underserved areas.AdvertisementThere has been much debate about how many jobs have been lost at physical stores amid the growth of Amazon specifically and online shopping generally, but Amazon is a jobs engine at the moment. It said it had hired 30,000 new employees in the second quarter, and it plans to hold job fairs next week at 10 of its warehouses as part of an effort to fill 50,000 open positions.Michael Keeley, an antitrust lawyer at the firm Axinn Veltrop & Harkrider in Washington who has represented corporate clients in the grocery business, said he did not foresee serious challenges threatening the Whole Foods deal, despite President Trump recently suggesting in a message on Twitter that Mr. Bezos uses The Post as a tool to discourage political scrutiny of Amazon.“I would be very surprised if this deal had really substantive problems with the F.T.C.,” Mr. Keeley said, referring to the Federal Trade Commission.Follow Nick Wingfield on Twitter @nickwingfield.A version of this article appears in print on July 28, 2017, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: Profits Sag  At Amazon; Wall Street Is Unfazed.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.