
Bits By                     
 QUENTIN HARDY
 
NOV. 1, 2016
Another day, another $25 billion technology merger — and further evidence of how fast the industry seems to be preparing for an even bigger networking future.As Leslie Picker writes, that’s how much CenturyLink, a communications and data service provider that is active in 37 states, is paying for Level 3 Communications, another telecommunications service provider.CenturyLink, which has its roots in a rural phone company with 75 subscribers, will pick up 200,000 route miles of high-speed fiber optic cable. That is on top of the 500,000 miles of domestic and international fiber that CenturyLink already operates.It makes CenturyLink one of the biggest service providers in the United States. You aren’t likely to encounter the company much. It sells mostly to business. Level 3, which barely survived the great telecom bust of 2000 and then went on to build a highly reliable network known for its security, also serves corporate customers, like Netflix.As companies live more online, providing networking solutions might seem like a good business. It’s not so simple, though: Level 3 was carrying a lot of debt from building up its network and became a takeover target after just two quarters of disappointing earnings. There are many upgrade costs, lots of competition and increasingly devious hackers to battle.AdvertisementThe deal is the latest big-money merger in the business of carrying bits. Less than two weeks ago AT&T proposed to buy Time Warner, a content company, for a stunning $85 billion. Then last week, Qualcomm, which makes semiconductors for smartphones, said it would pay $38 billion for NXP Semiconductors, with an eye to making a business in connected cars and sensors.AdvertisementOthers may be worried about costs. Also last week, Google Fiber, the search engine’s effort to build its own high-speed business, announced it was pulling back from its expensive national rollout to “focus on new technology and deployment methods.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Google Fiber is thought to be one of the largest ventures within the “Other Bets” group of its parent company, Alphabet. In the third quarter, Google reported on Thursday, that group had revenue of $197 million and a loss of $865 million.Unlike software and semiconductors, digging trenches and laying fiber does not become ever cheaper. Google is likely to be looking at new ways to deliver huge amounts of data wirelessly, something Facebook has already talked about doing.On Tuesday, in fact, Facebook is expected to announce its latest new telecommunications technologies. Should these prove popular, CenturyLink could find itself with a lot of customers, but a relatively expensive network.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »