By DAISUKE WAKABAYASHI and MIKE ISAACAPRIL 7, 2017
SAN FRANCISCO — Uber denied claims from Waymo, the self-driving car company spun out of Google’s parent company last year, that it is using driverless car technology stolen by a former Google employee.In a federal court filing on Friday, Uber said it started designing a key component for its own autonomous vehicle before hiring Anthony Levandowski, Uber’s head of self-driving cars whose departure from Google is at the heart of an intellectual property lawsuit between the two companies.The component is called lidar, for light detection and ranging sensors, and it helps a self-driving car navigate. Uber said its lidar system is significantly different from Waymo’s. For example, Uber said it uses four lenses while Waymo has a single-lens design.Uber was responding to a motion filed last month by Waymo asking the court to halt work on Uber’s self-driving car efforts with an injunction. At the time, Waymo said the injunction was warranted because Mr. Levandowski colluded with Uber and systematically stole 14,000 files of proprietary company documents before leaving Google to start his own self-driving truck company, Otto, in February 2016. He sold Otto to Uber for $680 million six months later.AdvertisementUber also said a temporary injunction was not justified because there was no urgency to Waymo’s claim, noting that Waymo did not ask for the injunction until last month despite knowing about the file downloads in October.Advertisement“Waymo’s injunction motion is a misfire,” Angela Padilla, Uber’s associate general counsel, said in a statement. “If Waymo genuinely thought that Uber was using its secrets, it would not have waited more than five months to seek an injunction. Waymo doesn’t meet the high bar for an injunction, which would stifle our independent innovation — probably Waymo’s goal in the first place.”A temporary injunction could be damaging to Uber, because it is rushing to catch up to Waymo and others in the rapidly shifting world of self-driving cars.Technology companies like Google and Apple are devoting extensive resources to putting self-driving cars on the road, while traditional automakers like Ford and General Motors are snapping up talent in the hopes of preventing technology companies from moving onto their turf.Uber’s lawyers have said they cannot find evidence that the files are in Uber’s possession. But there is a complication: Mr. Levandowski is not cooperating with Uber’s document search. He is invoking his Fifth Amendment right against self-incrimination, because there is, according to his lawyer in a hearing last month, “potential for a criminal action.”Uber said it couldn’t explain his actions, because Mr. Levandowski, who is not a named defendant in the suit, was pleading the Fifth.In its initial lawsuit, Waymo said that a supplier, on email, inadvertently copied it on blueprints of Uber’s circuit board design for its lidar. Waymo said that Uber’s designs bore “a striking resemblance” to its secret designs and that part of the documents it claims Mr. Levandowski stole pertain to its lidar designs. Uber said, however, that design is different than what it is actually developing.“Uber never possessed — and never used — any information Mr. Levandowski allegedly took from Waymo,” Uber said in its filing.AdvertisementJudge William Alsup in United States District Court in San Francisco said in a hearing earlier this week that since neither Uber nor Mr. Levandowski were denying that the documents were stolen, the fact that the documents had not been found in Uber’s possession was not enough to stave off an injunction.“Uber’s assertion that they’ve never touched the 14,000 stolen files is disingenuous at best, given their refusal to look in the most obvious place: the computers and devices owned by the head of their self-driving program,” Johnny Luu, a Waymo spokesman, said in a statement. He said Waymo had “clear evidence” that Uber was using or planned to use Waymo technology, “as seen in both circuit board blueprints and filings in the State of Nevada.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Uber said it should not have to stop work on self-driving cars because its lidar is still in development and is based on a 2015 design from one of its employees, while the one on Uber’s current self-driving car is an off-the-shelf version from a supplier.Separately, Waymo is pursuing arbitration with Mr. Levandowski and Otto’s other founder, Lior Ron, also a former Google employee, accusing them of building a competitor to Google’s self-driving car project while still working there.In arbitration documents, Waymo said the Otto founders tried to poach Google employees — a violation of their employment agreement. In one eye-popping detail, Waymo said Mr. Levandowski had acted disloyally even though it had paid him $120 million in bonus incentives for his work on the autonomous vehicle project.A version of this article appears in print on April 8, 2017, on Page B7 of the New York edition with the headline: Uber Denies Using Driverless-Vehicle Technology Stolen From Waymo.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.