By KATIE BENNERMAY 4, 2016
SAN FRANCISCO — Xfund, a venture capital firm formed in 2011 as technology start-ups boomed, began coming undone last year when the relationship between its two partners soured.The two venture capitalists, Patrick Chung and Hugo Van Vuuren, argued over the dismissal of an employee and who controlled the firm. The disagreements festered, setting off a chain of events including accusations of abuse, a restraining order application, revelations that a hidden camera was used to record an investor meeting, and an investigation by the fund’s investors.Now the firm, which manages more than $100 million and has put money into start-ups like the genetics company 23andMe, is in salvage mode. Even so, Xfund is in no danger of immediately shutting down.Xfund’s investors — which include Saudi Aramco and Jim Breyer, the Silicon Valley venture capitalist who helped fund Facebook — have halted its main fund from making investments, according to court documents. The investors are trying to amend the fund’s structure to push changes, including potentially removing one of Xfund’s venture capitalists. The proposed changes, if passed, would avert Xfund’s shutdown and would effectively mean its investors would remain wrapped up in the fund for at least 10 more years.AdvertisementXfund plans to “work through this transition and move forward,” a spokesman said.The contretemps offer a glimpse into the opaque world of venture capital, where partnerships are easy to form but are very hard to untangle. New venture firms often pop up, especially in boom times, when an investor decides to set up shop alone, or with one partner. But their funds, which are created as 10-year vehicles, rarely have to account for their actions and typically lack a strong corporate governance structure.AdvertisementEven when things go south, the venture funds can limp along for years, with investor money tied up in the structures. After the dot-com bust early last decade, which hurt many venture firms, the venture capital industry did not really shake out because of these factors. As of 2015, there were 1,224 venture funds in the United States, up from 1,009 a decade ago and nearly double from 1995, according to the National Venture Capital Association.Many of the ugly episodes among venture partnerships are hushed up, but Xfund’s situation has become public because of a restraining order application filed in Santa Clara County Superior Court by Mr. Chung against Mr. Van Vuuren.“There are no easy divorces in venture capital,” said Venky Ganesan, a partner at Menlo Ventures, a venture firm that is not connected to the Xfund. “The average venture capital fund is active for more than 15 years, so you can be stuck with your investment partners for longer than most average Americans will be with their spouses.”Mr. Chung, who will remain with Xfund, and Mr. Van Vuuren, who is being pushed out, declined through spokesmen to comment. Mr. Van Vuuren is considering legal routes to fight his removal, according to two people who have worked with the partners and who spoke on the condition of anonymity.The three people who represent Xfund’s investors — Mr. Breyer, Jenny Chen of Jasper Ridge Partners and David York of Top Tier Capital — also declined to comment.Xfund began with a small fund in 2011 called the Experiment Fund, originally to invest in start-ups in Boston, including at Harvard. Its primary backer was New Enterprise Associates, one of the nation’s largest venture firms.Mr. Van Vuuren, a Harvard alumnus, helped create Xfund from Cambridge, Mass. Mr. Chung, a Harvard Business School and Harvard Law School alum, co-founded and advised Xfund while working at New Enterprise Associates; he joined Xfund in 2014 and opened its Silicon Valley office on Sand Hill Road, the stretch of Menlo Park, Calif., where many venture firms reside.Together, the two men raised $100 million for a new fund and Xfund broadened its focus to Silicon Valley, investing in start-ups like the apartment rental platform Zumper. With tech start-ups soaring in value, Xfund turned into a potentially lucrative business for Mr. Chung and Mr. Van Vuuren. Venture firms take a fee of 2 percent of assets under management every year — that translated to about $2 million a year for Xfund and its four full-time employees.AdvertisementYet tensions surfaced between Mr. Chung and Mr. Van Vuuren over who had more control of the firm. Last May, the two started seeing a corporate coach and a psychologist.The control issue peaked when the two men disagreed last year over the firm’s operations head and executive assistant, Kristen Ostro. Mr. Chung claimed she was doing a poor job but Mr. Van Vuuren wanted to keep her, according to court documents. Mr. Chung eventually fired Ms. Ostro over Mr. Van Vuuren’s objections.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Chung had the upper hand because it turned out he had a tiebreaker vote for Xfund’s decisions, according to court documents. Mr. Van Vuuren claims in a statement filed with the court that he thought Mr. Chung had a tiebreaker vote only on investment decisions, not operational ones with the firm.Ms. Ostro did not respond to a request for comment. In an email sent to both men and included in court documents, she said Mr. Chung fired her in retaliation for her claiming that he had been “bullying, and mentally and emotionally abusing me and the entire team.” She wrote that she sought “medical treatment as a result of the workplace harassment.”Ms. Ostro negotiated a severance package with Xfund and signed a nondisparagement agreement, according to two people who were briefed on Ms. Ostro’s arrangement and who spoke on the condition of anonymity because the contract is private.In March, Mr. Chung filed a restraining order application against Mr. Van Vuuren, saying that his partner was acting erratically and had verbally threatened him and his family. Mr. Chung also said that Mr. Van Vuuren had physically threatened him in mid-January by trapping him in an alley in Palo Alto, Calif., and making violent motions.In court filings in response to the restraining order application, Mr. Van Vuuren said Mr. Chung’s accusations were smear tactics. Texts and emails show that Mr. Van Vuuren wanted a more equal 50-50 partnership at Xfund. Mr. Van Vuuren’s court submissions also included video of a meeting that Mr. Chung held with one investor who was worried about the fund, taken from a hidden camera.The restraining order application was later withdrawn.By mid-January, Xfund’s investors had learned of the deteriorating relationship between the men and decided to terminate the main fund’s ability to make new investments. But the investors had limited options to make wholesale changes because the structures of venture funds give the venture capitalists outsize power.AdvertisementMr. Breyer and others who represented the interests of the investors interviewed the fund’s lawyers, portfolio companies and employees to figure out next steps. A mediation attempt in March failed. Xfund’s lawyers later sent a letter to Mr. Van Vuuren saying he was fired. Mr. Van Vuuren’s lawyers shot back in a letter that the fund structure did not allow Xfund to fire his client.In March, Xfund’s accounts were frozen after conflicting orders to the fund’s bank by Mr. Chung and Mr. Van Vuuren.Xfund’s investors had devised a plan to salvage the fund. They proposed cutting the main fund’s size by at least half, with no new investments allowed, according to a letter to investors. The remaining money would be used to support start-ups that Xfund had already invested in, and Mr. Chung alone would oversee the portfolio until all the start-ups had been sold or gone public, which could take nearly a decade. A third party may be appointed to monitor Mr. Chung’s decisions, according to an investor in the fund who spoke on condition of anonymity.Xfund, under Mr. Chung, is taking other steps to prolong the firm’s life. In a letter to investors last week, Xfund requested $5 million for, among other things, expenses including legal fees for the fund and its investors, as well as expenses for Mr. Chung.A version of this article appears in print on May 5, 2016, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Infighting Threatens to Fell a Venture Capital Firm.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.