
Bits By                     
 QUENTIN HARDY
 
NOV. 2, 2016
If you can’t invent the future the way you used to, maybe you can help us get ready for it.John Markoff writes that on Wednesday Carnegie Mellon University is expected to announce the creation of a center to study the ethics of artificial intelligence. It’s an announcement rich in tech ironies. The main funding is $10 million from Pittsburgh’s K&L Gates law firm, where Bill Gates’s father worked until his retirement in 1998. And in February of last year Uber poached about 40 members of Carnegie Mellon’s robotics department.Carnegie Mellon is still strong in A.I. and robotics, but it’s rebuilding from that loss of talent. Elsewhere in Pittsburgh, Uber is running self-driving cars as part of its commercial fleet — almost certainly enabled by talent that once educated young minds at Carnegie Mellon.Good thing the new center won’t be dealing with the ethics of higher education and business in the modern world. The questions it will untangle will likely deal with simpler things, like the right way to use killer aircraft in war zones, or the correct role of people and machines in forming and delivering a medical diagnosis.As with all ethical questions, the real focus is on humans and how well they consider their intentions and acts. We are a long way, if ever, from really seeing autonomous and intelligent machines, the kind of things that will need schooling on their own. The tech industry, thanks to some woeful marketing, has simply made us think they really do make brains, and machines that think.In this case, the questions may be something like: At what point should a machine signal to a human that it soon will not control itself well? Should all lethal choices be given to a human? What if the humans on the other side aren’t programming their machines that way? Can we program a machine to not collect or analyze certain data sets? How would it recognize those? Every one of those questions is really about how we program.And they would all amount to a welcome amount of forethought, more than we have had in most of technology history. In Tuesday’s education section, I wrote about how to think about digital distractions in the classroom. These sprang up only after computers were common in classrooms, and now professors struggle to cope.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »