By KATIE BENNERSEPT. 14, 2016
Sapphire Ventures has closed on a $1 billion fund to invest in privately held start-ups, easing fears about a downturn in the venture capital industry.Sapphire Ventures, a venture capital firm in Palo Alto, Calif., with more than $2.4 billion in assets under management, has only one investor, the business software maker SAP. Sapphire Ventures was the corporate venture arm of SAP, and it has operated as a stand-alone firm since 2011.For the last year, investors have worried that the venture industry had become overheated and that there would be a freeze in fund-raising. But like Sapphire Ventures, several firms have raised more than $1 billion this year, giving them firepower to write big checks for start-ups, whose valuations peaked around the end of 2015.Last month, Technology Crossover Ventures announced a $2.5 billion fund. Earlier this year, Kleiner Perkins Caufield & Byers raised $1.4 billion across two funds and Andreessen Horowitz raised $1.5 billion. Founders Fund also raised $1.3 billion, Accel Partners garnered $2 billion and Norwest Venture Partners raised $1.2 billion.AdvertisementIn the United States alone, the venture industry raised nearly as much money in the first half of 2016 as it did in all of 2015, according to data from Thomson Reuters and the National Venture Capital Association.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Sapphire Ventures invests in start-ups that are past their earliest stages, and 38 of the companies that it has put money into went public or were sold since 2011, including the online storage company Box, the wearables maker Fitbit and the mobile payments company Square.Advertisement“At end of day you can build a great business, but exiting and making money for your investors is just as important,” said Nino Marakovic, chief executive of Sapphire Ventures.Sapphire also invests in other venture firms. Mr. Marakovic said that many venture firms scrambled to raise money this year as public markets dipped.“Everyone was afraid the music would stop,” he said. “They raised in anticipation of a downturn.”A version of this article appears in print on September 15, 2016, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: Sapphire Raises $1 Billion for Investment in Start-Ups.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.