
Bits By                     
 QUENTIN HARDY
 
JAN. 23, 2017
Online information moves fast. Emotions tend to linger. Snapchat wants to make a lot of money, so it is worrying about both.As Katie Benner writes, Snapchat is putting important restrictions on its news channel, Discover, in the interest of delivering to its audience more reliable information. Graphic and misleading images are now off limits, and the service clarified its ban on linking to questionable news sources.Discover was added to Snapchat two years ago as a way for conventional and newer publishers to reach Snapchat’s typically young audience. And it built on Snapchat’s core service, which is a way for friends to send each other ephemeral images and text.That self-deleting quality was intended to promote more natural communication between people: Friends could trust each other, confident that their communications would not be stored and mined for some unknown future use.Sustaining trust is important to Snapchat, which has been more vigilant than most social media companies in policing fake news. That’s why it wants Discover to be free of the kinds of salacious photos that are used lure readers into ordinary stories; a gimmick that has become all too common in online news.AdvertisementIf you’ve ever clicked on one of those pictures, you know the feeling when you find out you’ve been misled: a little cheated, a little cynical, a little less trusting of the site that took you there.AdvertisementSince it is preparing for an initial public offering, Snapchat’s reputation is of particular importance. Advertisers will generally pay a premium to sell their products near information consumers think is reliable.When outfits like Facebook make moves to control how much fake news is on their sites, they do so partly out of concern for their reputations, and what that means for ad dollars. And even with more than 1.5 billion users and great profit growth, a company like Facebook worries about fickle users moving to other social networks, like Snapchat.There is a continuing argument in the technology world about whether companies like Yahoo, Facebook and Snapchat are, at their heart, tech companies or media companies. Snapchat’s latest move underlines how pointless that discussion has become, since writing code and posting content are now both aimed at capturing hearts and minds.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »