By NICK WINGFIELDSEPT. 11, 2016
Big video games, like movies, are usually created by squadrons of people, including dozens or hundreds of artists and developers.And yet it is an individual that often stands out for creative contributions to the most successful games. For the Mario franchise and other Nintendo hits, it is Shigeru Miyamoto. For the Grand Theft Auto series, it is Sam Houser. Within the games industry and among die-hard players, they are admired in the way Steven Spielberg and Peter Jackson are revered in Hollywood.Rob Pardo earned a similar reputation during his 17-year career at Blizzard Entertainment, a game studio he left two years ago that has a rich legacy in the industry. Mr. Pardo was the lead designer on World of Warcraft, an online multiplayer fantasy game that came out 12 years ago and developed a following so passionate that players were willing to shell out $15 a month in subscription fees to kill orcs and goblins together.Since its release, World of Warcraft has generated from $12 billion to $13 billion in revenue, estimates Michael Pachter, an analyst at Wedbush Securities.Advertisement“It is literally the singularly most successful game in history,” said John Riccitiello, the former chief executive of Electronic Arts who now runs Unity Technologies, a game technology provider.“There’s always a lot of hands on success. I’ve been in the industry long enough to know that just about everybody credits him with the product,” he said about Mr. Pardo.Mr. Pardo will now have an opportunity to show whether he can translate his success inside a big company like Blizzard into a much smaller games start-up. On Monday, he plans to announce the formation of a new company, Bonfire Studios, with a handful of game veterans.Mr. Pardo, the chief executive of Bonfire, recently raised $25 million in funding for the company from the Silicon Valley venture capital firm Andreessen Horowitz and from Riot Games, a game studio owned by the Chinese internet giant Tencent that makes League of Legends, one of the most popular online games in the world. Mr. Riccitiello and others invested in Bonfire in an earlier round.Based in Irvine, Calif., Bonfire does not have a game in development yet. Mr. Pardo, 46, says it is safe to assume the company will make online multiplayer games, though he has not yet decided whether it will create them for mobile devices, PCs or both.Advertisement“We have a lot of confidence they’re going to build something fantastic,” said Brandon Beck, the chief executive and co-founder of Riot Games. “They’re pretty uncompromising when it comes to quality.”For now, Mr. Pardo says he is focused entirely on hiring people to begin generating ideas and making game prototypes. Min Kim, a former executive with Nexon, an Asian game developer, and several former colleagues from Blizzard joined him as members of Bonfire’s founding team. He wants Bonfire’s games to recreate the social connections that many players formed when banding together in clans in World of Warcraft, a game that allows players to fraternize with one another online.“We don’t want to be constrained by genre,” Mr. Pardo said. “We really want to create games that help us make those deeper connections with each other.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.After leaving Blizzard, Mr. Pardo spent time designing another project, a custom home he now lives in with his family in Irvine. Allusions to geek culture are sprinkled throughout the home. There are side-by-side men’s and women’s bathrooms labeled Horde and Alliance after the two character factions in World of Warcraft, and wooden floors inlaid with Tetris blocks.Mr. Pardo said his inspiration for creating a start-up with a small development team occurred while at Blizzard, during the making of Hearthstone, a digital card game that was a huge hit for the studio. At Blizzard, most game development teams were so large that some of the greatest challenges for Mr. Pardo, Blizzard’s former chief creative officer, were management oriented.The original team that created Hearthstone was unorthodox by Blizzard standards, consisting of a little over a dozen people. That relatively small size eliminated management layers that could make communication difficult and make some employees feel as if they did not have a stake in the project, Mr. Pardo said.“Everyone got to be completely involved in game design,” he said. “I feel like that team’s culture was one of the strongest.”Small game studios have produced some of the most remarkable successes in the industry in recent years. During his break from Blizzard, Mr. Pardo consulted with Mr. Riccitiello at Unity — through which Mr. Pardo was able to travel the world as a kind of good-will ambassador for the company, meeting with game developers, including Supercell, the Finnish mobile games start-up that makes Clash of Clans. Tencent recently bought a controlling stake in Supercell for $8.6 billion.Blizzard has preserved a reputation for maintaining its creative independence while being part of a larger game publisher, Activision Blizzard, which has been known to kill games in development when they fall short of its standards, rather than risk tarnishing its brand. And fans flock to Blizzard Entertainment’s annual convention, BlizzCon.Advertisement“They’re in many ways the Pixar of gaming, or at least the Pixar of five years ago,” said Geoff Keighley, creator of the Game Awards, an Oscars-like ceremony for the industry.“A lot of designers are typically known for one franchise,” Mr. Keighley added. “The great thing about Rob is he’s a bit of a polymath. He’s done a lot of different styles of games at Blizzard.”Other star game designers have left big companies before and failed to match or exceed their previous success. Although there are creative challenges to working in large game companies, they do have advantages in their promotional capacity and technological tools. Mr. Pardo’s supporters are not concerned.“If you could basically draft Kevin Durant and invest in Kevin Durant as an N.B.A. player, you’d be an idiot not to,” Mr. Riccitiello said.A version of this article appears in print on September 12, 2016, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: World of Warcraft Creator  Enters Fray With Start-Up.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.