
Bits By                     
 FARHAD MANJOO and
 

 MIKE ISAAC
 
FEB. 20, 2016
Each Saturday, Farhad Manjoo and Mike Isaac, technology reporters at The New York Times, review the week’s news, offering analysis and maybe a joke or two about the most important developments in the tech industry.Mike: Ahoy, Farhad! How goes it? In the final weeks before I move to San Francisco, I am making a point to eat the most “New York” foods I can think of. Today I will have cheesecake for lunch, and tonight I am in search of the best cannoli for dinner.Farhad: I assume you’ll be making a visit to some sidewalk hot dog vendors and greasy-spoon halal carts? And what about the Times Square Olive Garden? It sounds like you’re in for some gastric distress.Mike: Well, I’m saving Guy Fieri’s restaurant for last. It’ll be an excellent trip to “flavortown, U.S.A.,” as it were.AdvertisementOn with the show! If you haven’t noticed, this week is all about Apple, Apple, Apple. The company is in the midst of a standoff with the F.B.I. on whether or not it will help the agency gain access to an iPhone used by attackers in the San Bernardino, Calif., shootings in December. It’s a tricky mess, and we’re unpacking new facets practically by the hour.AdvertisementFarhad: Beyond the legal and national security implications of this story, I found the tech-industry dynamics interesting. Apple’s position is far more impassioned than I can ever recall seeing from a tech company; it really seems like Tim Cook, Apple’s chief executive, is personally animated by the privacy debate. That position is also, of course, compatible with Apple’s business model, which does not rely on data-mining and ad sales, as Mr. Cook is quick to remind people. Reaction from the rest of tech was mixed. Google’s response to the case was muted, I thought — in a series of tweets, Sundar Pichai, Google’s chief executive, offered what sounded like halfhearted support for Apple’s position. Facebook and Twitter, meanwhile, sided more clearly with Apple.I’m curious if the other tech giants will stick by Apple’s side as the showdown with the F.B.I. gets more heated. What I mean is: I have no idea what will happen.Mike: That’s pretty much par for the course for you, yeah?In other security news, a Los Angeles hospital paid a ransom of about $17,000 — in the form of 40 Bitcoin — to a gang of hackers who unleashed malware on the hospital’s network. The most shocking part of this story was hearing that people still use Bitcoin.Yahoo continues to lay off people, and it axed a bunch of verticals it promoted heavily under Marissa Mayer, the company’s chief. And Facebook’s Instant Articles product is going wide, which could spawn a whole new generation of underpaid bloggers.Farhad: Hey, Mike, you did it again. You forgot Zenefits! This week there was lots more news about this once highflying insurance start-up. In a column, I argued that the company was plagued by an obsession with hypergrowth, one that was spurred by its huge investment rounds. And Will Alden of BuzzFeed reported on a whole bunch of frathouse shenanigans at the company. Also, David Sacks, the new C.E.O., banned drinking on the job!Mike: Sorry, but I have a setting in my brain that lets me sleep with my eyes open when hearing the phrase “highflying insurance start-up.”Here’s the big thing I want to get to: Kanye West. Or more specifically, what Kanye is doing for Tidal, the streaming music service that most everyone thinks is completely doomed, save for Jay-Z, who owns the service, and a handful of pop stars who support it.AdvertisementKanye teased his newest album, “The Life of Pablo,” this week before releasing it more widely through the classic modes of distribution — namely, the music labels. Tidal got an exclusive window in which the album is only available through its service, something that other stars have pledged to do on Tidal in the future. As a result, Tidal has shot to the top of the download charts on the App Store.The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.So does this make Tidal a viable service? Can it actually have a shot with this celebrity practice of “windowing,” something that other companies like Vessel are trying as well?Before you answer that, I want to note that the new album is good, and Kanye is totally nuts on Twitter. Like, worse than you and I.Farhad: I have taken a bold stance on this: Kanye is bad at Twitter. Really bad.About Tidal: Yes, I think that it can have a shot at getting subscribers with these high-profile, short-term exclusives — but I’ve got to say, I really hate it. I think what we’re seeing here is the terrible future of media: Lots of different services with slightly different libraries of stuff, so that consumers have to either get several of them or just live without access to certain entertainment (or wade into the sin of torrenting).This is already the case with TV. Unbundling and cutting the cord and Internet streaming was supposed to make everything cheap and available, but in fact I probably pay more for media today than I ever have. I like the exclusives on Netflix, Amazon, HBO enough that I subscribe to all three. They’re all getting better, and I don’t see myself relying on any single one of them for all my TV any time soon.That’s probably going to happen with music, too. The highest-profile artists will always have an incentive to offer exclusivity periods to one or two services. We listeners are either going to have subscribe to several or just do without. I really, really, really like Taylor Swift. I agonized for months about whether to go with Apple Music, which has Taylor but an annoying interface and not-great playlists, or Spotify, which has a wonderful user interface and an amazing weekly playlist tailored to a user’s tastes — but no Taylor.I chose Spotify in the end. But I really miss Taylor.Mike: The structure for consumers is bad. I, personally, would love one subscription to get everything — all my favorite shows, all that jazz — without having to pay for 19 plans. It would be wonderful.But there is zero indication that structure will ever go away. Even à la carte options in the TV world add up to ultimately be much more costly than it would be to buy a cable subscription. I don’t think cord-cutting is worth it, unless you’re willing to go all-in on one or two networks.AdvertisementAnd that’s sort of the point, right? Independent networks exist because they look for the best content and differentiate themselves based on providing that content as a service. If you find the shows — or music, or whatever — good enough, you will pay for it.That’s why I think exclusives and windowing is a fair practice, even if it is a pain for me having to sign up for a new service. In this case, it’s the artists essentially fighting against Spotify and the labels which, in the former case, artists claim they see too little in royalties for each song played. In the latter case, artists see little after the labels and distributors take their cut. The whole reason Tidal exists is to put some of the leverage back in the hands of the artists themselves with their own distribution platform.The big problem with that is that there are not enough artists who create huge enough albums to maintain that leverage in the long term. There is only one Lady Gaga, only one Jay-Z, and so on. And if Apple can cut a deal with Taylor, Tidal loses even more leverage when it sees other huge pop stars work with competing services.In sum, Tidal is doomed, but I do think it is a noble effort. Maybe the artists will figure out a different way to gain leverage in the wake of physical album sales falling and profits from streaming music not able to make up for that gap.Or maybe not. I won’t cry for Kanye. He’s famous.Farhad: And did I mention he’s bad at Twitter? He is.Mike: O.K., tonight I leave in search of the ultimate ramen shop. Do you know of any good ones in Brooklyn?Farhad: You know what? I’ve never been to Brooklyn. Honestly. And hopefully I never will. Bye!We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »