AdvertisementSupported byBy Nick WingfieldSEATTLE — Cloud computing is seen by many investors as Microsoft’s salvation, the growing business that has convinced many there’s a bright future for the company beyond the troubled PC market.But Microsoft’s cloud business didn’t grow quite fast enough during its last quarter to keep investors happy. The company missed Wall Street estimates, though Microsoft executives said it would have beaten them without the impact of unexpectedly high taxes.For its fiscal third quarter, which ended March 31, Microsoft reported net income of $3.76 billion, or 47 cents a share, down from $4.99 billion, or 61 cents a share, a year ago. Revenue fell to $20.53 billion, from $21.73 billion.Microsoft’s traditional profit engines, like Windows, have weakened considerably as sales in the PC market have remained in a multiyear slump. Last week, the research firm Gartner reported that worldwide PC shipments in the first quarter fell 9.6 percent from a year ago.Weak PC sales are affecting many large tech companies. On Tuesday, Intel, the chip maker that for many years was Microsoft’s inseparable partner in the PC business, reported disappointing earnings and said it would cut about 11 percent of its work force, roughly 12,000 people.The revenue Microsoft gets from licensing Windows to PC makers did better than the market over all, but it still fell 2 percent, excluding the impact of foreign currency fluctuations.Yet Microsoft has convinced many investors that it has found a way to adapt to technology changes, in part by vigorously embracing cloud computing. Shares of Microsoft, which is based in Redmond, Wash., are still trading near their price in 1999, their high, even with a 5 percent drop in value Thursday evening.The optimism stems from its success in transitioning legacy software businesses like Office to a cloud business model in which customers subscribe to the applications. There are now 22.2 million subscribers to Office 365, the subscription version of its Office business, up from 12.4 million a year ago.Microsoft has become a credible No. 2 to Amazon in the business of renting computing infrastructure to other companies in Microsoft-owned data centers, a business it calls Azure. “It remains clear we’re one of two leaders in this market,” Satya Nadella, Microsoft’s chief executive, said in a call with investors on Thursday.One of the brightest spots at Microsoft during the last quarter was its intelligent cloud business, which includes Azure. Revenue in that group increased 8 percent, excluding the impact of foreign currency, to $6.1 billion.Brad Reback, an analyst at Stifel Nicolaus, said that the company didn’t do quite as well as he had forecast in its cloud business, but that he believed that area was still performing well.“I think they’re doing a good job of focusing on areas where they can make healthy returns,” Mr. Reback said.To some extent, Microsoft’s success in the cloud has overshadowed its struggles in the mobile market. The company tried for a time to compete in handset sales against Apple and others by acquiring the mobile business of Nokia, but it has greatly scaled back the number of phones it sells and laid off many of the employees in that business after weak sales.Microsoft said its phone revenue fell 46 percent in the quarter, excluding the impact of foreign currency. On the positive side, revenue from Surface, the company’s family of mobile computers, increased 61 percent.Microsoft’s results reflected a $1.5 billion deferral of revenue related to its Windows 10 operating system. Without the impact of that deferral, the company’s earnings were 62 cents a share and revenue was $22.1 billion.Microsoft’s quarterly results were slightly shy of the 64 cents a share that was the average earnings estimate of Wall Street analysts, compiled by Thomson Reuters. The average revenue estimate was $22.09 billion.In an interview, Amy Hood, the chief financial officer, said Microsoft would have exceeded analysts’ estimates without a 4-cent-a-share negative impact from changes in its tax rate.Ms. Hood said the tax rate stemmed from an unexpected shift in Microsoft sales to countries with higher tax rates, along with a shift to revenue from cloud computing, which is taxed at a higher rate than traditional software licenses.Advertisement