By DAVID STREITFELDAPRIL 21, 2016
European regulators brought the hammer down on Google this week, and investors barely blinked. But when the company’s first-quarter numbers came in a little light on Thursday afternoon, its stock immediately plummeted.Both revenue and profit rose sharply from 2015 but missed analysts’ forecasts. Revenue, at $20.26 billion, was about $120 million less than expected. Earnings per share, excluding certain items, were $7.50 when the consensus estimate was $7.96.The result: The stock fell about $46, or about 6 percent, in after-hours trading.Shares of Google were priced for perfection, and the first quarter was a little less than perfect. Whether that means anything substantive is more doubtful.“There’s nothing wrong with this company,” said Colin Gillis of BGC Partners. “They spent a bit more and took in a bit less than we thought, so Mr. Market is having a mood swing. But it was a fine quarter.”AdvertisementThe Silicon Valley company, which reorganized itself into a holding company called Alphabet last year, gets nearly all of its revenue and all its profits from the core Google search and advertising business.AdvertisementGoogle is in the middle of a multiyear transition from desktop ads to the harder game of mobile ads. In the latest quarter, aggregate cost per click fell 9 percent from a year ago.Revenue from what the company calls “Other Bets” — including its fiber business and the Nest thermostat — was $166 million, more than double what it was in the first quarter of 2015. Losses for Other Bets rose to $802 million from $633 million.The number of employees jumped to 64,000 from 55,000 last year. “The vast majority” of them, the company stressed, were engineers and product managers.Aside from the troubles in Europe — antitrust authorities there said this week that the company was unfairly using its Android mobile software to promote its products over those of rivals — the last year has been generally sweet for Google fans.The company brought in Ruth Porat from Morgan Stanley as chief financial officer, a sign it wanted to rein in spending. The results for the second quarter of 2015 offered evidence that the core advertising business was succeeding on mobile, igniting one of the largest one-day jumps in capitalization for a Nasdaq stock ever. A reorganization in the fall that separated the core business from the ambitious “moonshots” was met with approval by investors and analysts.In a conference call with analysts on Thursday, Ms. Porat seemed to indicate that, if there ever was an Anything Goes era at Google, it is now over.In some areas, she said, investments will be increasing only “if teams meet milestones we set as part of our 2016 budgeting process.” In other areas, where Google has had multiple teams developing different approaches to a similar technology, she said, “we have been evaluating how to rationalize these approaches.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Some of that attempt at rationalization has spilled over into stories in the media, with tensions and corporate infighting on display at Nest as well as at the robotics subsidiary Boston Dynamics.AdvertisementBut Google will still invest in unlikely things. For one thing, it can afford to. Its cash on hand is now $75 billion, up $10 billion in a year.“What seemed like a moonshot a decade ago has grown into a booming community of engaged users, creators and brands, unlike any other video platform,” said Sundar Pichai, the chief executive. He was referring to YouTube, of course. He noted that on mobile alone, YouTube now reaches more 18- to 34-year-olds in the United States than any broadcast or cable network.A question hanging over Google is its ventures in cloud computing. This is the growth market where Amazon is far ahead of everyone. Amazon Web Services is more exciting to investors than the retailer’s core business. Microsoft, meanwhile, is mounting an aggressive challenge.Google is far behind at No. 3, or perhaps even No. 4 after IBM, said John R. Rymer, an analyst at Forrester Research. Last fall, Google hired Diane Greene, an industry veteran, to run all of its cloud businesses.“This is their third try to really become a cloud powerhouse,” Mr. Rymer said. “They certainly seem more serious this time, but we’ll have to see if they move beyond digital natives to airlines, utilities, trucking companies, governments — the enterprises where the real money is.”As for Europe, no mention was made of it by either Ms. Porat or Mr. Pichai, and not a single analyst asked about it.A version of this article appears in print on April 22, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Alphabet’s Shares Decline After First-Quarter Earnings Missed Estimates.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.