
Bits By                     
 QUENTIN HARDY
 
APRIL 18, 2016
Tech companies may have to take stock of giving stock.As Katie Benner reports, Wall Street is increasingly wary of the amount of equity that publicly traded technology companies award their employees every year. Particularly the stock they give when those companies stumble.LinkedIn, the popular careers site, has projected lower growth for this year, but for the last two years has awarded an increasing amount of stock to its employees. In 2014 it gave them an amount equal to 14 percent of its revenue; last year that figure rose to 17 percent of revenue.It is not known how much LinkedIn will award this year, though the question may come up when the company reports its earnings next week.LinkedIn is hardly alone. Twitter, Yahoo and Workday all appear to be particularly generous with stock to workers, even in cases where revenue is sliding.AdvertisementIt is a knotty problem in Silicon Valley, where the value of a company is so often tied up in the intellectual firepower that walks through the door each morning. It has become increasingly important, too, as tech companies primarily make online software subject to continual change and upgrades.AdvertisementLose your people, and you’ll lose your future: This is the common fear. Giving them stock is thought to be a particularly useful way to get them to hang around and make more and better products.Presumably, most investors in these companies know what is going on and buy shares with their eyes open. But the issue could do with revisiting, particularly when the stocks of many of these companies have fallen. Compared with the average U.S. company, tech companies award about 80 percent more restricted stock to employees.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Tech companies may feel like this is simply the cost of doing business in this industry, but it’s a price they do not fully pay.The cost of stock grants to executives and employees (which are, after all, something the company owns and is giving away) are frequently excluded from earnings many tech companies billboard, using nonstandard accounting.In one notable example, Salesforce.com reported a $574 million operating profit in fiscal 2015, which excluded $565 million of stock grants.How long this continues is, of course, up to the company shareholders, who can vote to force management to stop these large awards, which tend to go especially to top management. That usually happens when times get really tough and stock prices are under significant pressure.Perhaps by that time, however, the employees will have so many grants that they’ll be the chief shareholders, too.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »