AdvertisementSupported byTech TipBy J. D. BiersdorferQ. Just got the latest upgrade for Windows 10, and my installed LibreOffice disappeared. What do I do?A. Operating system updates have been known to cause problems with existing programs, because of software incompatibilities or installation issues. The recent Windows 10 Fall Creators Update was no exception, with a community forum thread on missing apps and other problems generating several hundred posts since October.Microsoft released an update on Nov. 14 that attempts to fix the missing-apps issue. If you have not applied any updates in the past several weeks and want to see if the company’s patch improves things, run Windows Update on your PC and install the latest software.If you have not been able to update your computer or want to attempt a manual workaround, earlier suggestions from Microsoft have included repairing or uninstalling (and then reinstalling the app) from the Windows Store or from your original installation files. For those comfortable using the Windows PowerShell utility, another workaround may let you restore several missing apps at once through typed commands, though it may not do much if you have already tried repairing or reinstalling the programs. Instructions for using the PowerShell approach can be found here.Because software updates can create unexpected issues, it is a good idea to regularly back up your system. For future software upgrades that cause problems with your computer or device, you may be able to roll back to the previous version of the operating system — as long as it is within 10 days from when you installed it. To see if this is a possibility, go to the Settings area, select Update & Security, then Recovery. If you can roll back, you should see a “Go back to your previous version of Windows” option.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.Advertisement