AdvertisementSupported byTech TipBy J. D. BiersdorferQ. Microsoft Word 2016 comes with plenty of templates, but none of them are quite what I want. Is there a way to modify one of the stock business letters into a multipage document with my own letterhead?A. Microsoft Word 2016 for Windows and Mac comes with a variety of page templates you can use to create different types of documents like letters, reports, résumés, brochures, labels and fliers. If you have not found a template that suits your needs, you can modify one and save it. You can also look in the online template library on Microsoft’s site at templates.office.com, or you can create your own template from scratch.To design your own template, create a new Word document just as you normally would and set it up as letterhead with your name, address, logo graphics, headers and footers, and anything else you want. You can insert a page break and put in placeholder text to create a multipage file.When the document looks the way you want it, go to the File menu and select Save As. In the Save As box in the Windows version of Word, choose the option to store the file on your computer and give it a recognizable name, as you normally would with a new document. In the Save as Type menu, click the drop-down menu and choose Word Template instead of the regular document format. Click the Save button to store the new template in Word’s folder for custom Office templates. (In Word 2016 for Mac, go to the File menu and choose Save as Template.)Later, when you want to use your new letterhead template, open Word. In the Windows version, go into the File menu to New, choose Personal and select your template. In the Mac edition, go to the File menu, choose New from Template and select your creation from the thumbnails. A new document opens based on your template design, and this time you can save it as a standard Word document and start writing.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.Advertisement