AdvertisementSupported byTech TipBy J. D. BiersdorferQ. I missed switching over to the new version of Google that separates different categories of messages. Is it too late to get set up like that? The number of emails I get is overwhelming.A. Even if you declined Google’s invitation to revamp your Gmail mailbox structure with the company’s “priority inbox” system when the pop-up offer occurred, you can change your mind. Just log into your Gmail account on the web, click on the gear-shaped Settings icon on the right side of the window and select Configure Inbox from the menu.In the Configure Inbox screen, you can enable up to five tabs that automatically sort incoming mail into separate categories: Primary, Social, Promotions, Updates and Forums. Once you have selected your preferred tabs, click the Save button in the box.Gmail classifies Primary messages as one-to-one conversations with correspondents that do not fall into another category, like Facebook updates.Facebook updates themselves traditionally get sorted into the Social tab, which also collects automatic email notifications from LinkedIn, Twitter, YouTube and other social-networking sites. The Promotions tab is where marketing messages, special offers, sale announcements and other deal advertisements are grouped.Mail containing reservations, confirmations, bills, account statements and other automatically generated transaction messages fall under the Updates tab in the full Gmail Priority Inbox setup. If you choose to show the Forums tab, click it to see messages from mailing lists, discussion forums and other online groups with which you engage.Gmail Priority Inbox has been around in some form since 2010. In addition to dividing your mailbox into tidy categories, you can have Gmail add “importance markers” — little attention-getting yellow flags next to the names of frequent correspondents — to incoming messages.To do so, click on the gear-shaped Settings icon in the mail Gmail window, choose Settings and then the Inbox tab. On the next screen, click the button next to Importance Markers and decide if you want Google to use your past interactions to determine who earns an importance marker. Click the Save Changes button when you are finished.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.Advertisement