
Bits By                     
 JIM KERSTETTER
 
MARCH 23, 2017
A common piece of wisdom in business circles is that regulation is bad and stifles innovation.But that leaves us with the curious case of electric cars, as Farhad Manjoo writes. Electric cars are becoming less expensive and more reliable. The typical range they can drive on a single charge is extending, and charging stations are becoming more commonplace.What’s more, electric cars are spreading from innovative high-end companies like Tesla, an automaker based in Palo Alto, Calif., to mainstream manufacturers in the United States, China, Japan and areas of Europe.“There are lots of reasons for this, but one above all: The whole industry is being pushed by regulation, both at the federal level and in the nine states that have adopted a zero-emission plan created by regulators in California,” Mr. Manjoo writes.Not surprisingly, many auto companies disagree with that sentiment, arguing that gradual acceptance of the technology and more affordable prices have contributed to the cars’ popularity.The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.So what prompted the initial investments? There is a theory: Regulations prodded companies to invest in technologies they might otherwise have ignored. This led to the commercialization of the technology.AdvertisementWould shifts in technology occur if companies did not get a shove? Sure. But regulation can force change to happen more quickly than if it were left to the market.AdvertisementMore tech news:AT&T and Johnson & Johnson are pulling ads from YouTube. The companies say Google is not doing enough to prevent their brands from appearing next to offensive material, like hate speech.Why big banks and tech firms are battling over your data. The banks, citing the need for more oversight and security controls, are pushing for new agreements on the customer data they share with technology start-ups like Mint and Betterment. The tech firms say the banks are worried about increased competition.Federal prosecutors are investigating North Korea’s possible role in the theft of $81 million from the central bank of Bangladesh, in what security officials fear could be a new front in cyberwarfare.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »