AdvertisementSupported byBitsBy Quentin HardyTwenty-one years ago in the comic strip “Calvin and Hobbes,” the brat-savant hero complains, “Six minutes to microwave this! Who’s got that kind of time?!”Twenty-one years ago, you have to understand, this was a joke.We’ve sped up significantly since then in both our technology and our expectations, as John Herrman and Mike Isaac illustrate in an article about the explosion of live video on Facebook.Started in February with relatively little fanfare, the service is seen as a good way to get, and hold, viewers on their mobile phones, and of course get more traction with Facebook’s audience of 1.6 billion. (By the way: When the number reaches “pretty much everybody,” is it still an audience, or just where we all are?) Facebook is now promoting the feature forthrightly, aiming at media companies and celebrities and giving the live feeds prominent display.So far the content can be made only on a mobile app, and is of variable quality. Yet for all the rough edges and frequent boredom, there is something about the idea that something is live, happening right now, that seems to give it an allure.We all know the feeling, in this twitchy online world — to witness yesterday’s Twitter feed and feuds would be excruciating, just as most of the Periscopes would be stale. Yet people are fixated when they are happening in real time. The YouTube live feeds of things like the 2014 standoffs between protesters and police officers in Ferguson, Mo., riveted millions, even though much of them would now seem hardly worth watching — just as the weatherman’s live storm updates that Mr. Herrman and Mr. Isaac describe in their story probably aren’t aging very well by now.As they say, you had to be there. And now that you can, and “there” is “pretty much anywhere,” content is increasingly lunging at things happening just this minute.It affects how we think about things, seeing the world as a series of sharp actions that crave attention. Little wonder presidential candidates now do well by promising powerful, instant responses, even to complex things.Writing at the dawn of the machine age, William Wordsworth wrote of poetry as created from “emotion recollected in tranquillity.” If he were to pen that now, it would come with a live feed of him writing it on a grassy hill.Advertisement