
Bits By                     
 FARHAD MANJOO and
 

 MIKE ISAAC
 
AUG. 27, 2016
Each Saturday, Farhad Manjoo and Mike Isaac, technology reporters at The New York Times, review the week’s news, offering analysis and maybe a joke or two about the most important developments in the tech industry.Farhad: How’s it going, Mike? I’m in the midst of a whole lot of traveling — I just got back from Atlanta, I’m on the way to Portland for a wedding and next week I’m heading to Detroit. All I want to do is stay home and do nothing for a day. You know, kind of like your life.Mike: Funny you say that, as I’m typing my half of the newsletter this week from inside Terminal 2 at the San Francisco airport. As of 5 in the morning. I, too, would like to stay home and do nothing for a day. Alas, duty calls. And by duty I mean “Mexican food with my family in Texas.”Farhad: O.K., so here’s what happened in tech this week. Let’s start with Uber, which continued to lose a lot of money while growing a whole lot. That’s according to a report from Bloomberg News, which got hold of the ride-hailing company’s second-quarter financial numbers.AdvertisementMike: It was a good, very numerical scoop. I got it, too, so here’s a link.Farhad: Apparently Uber lost at least $1.27 billion in the first half of 2016. Under generally accepted accounting principles, that is known as a boatload of money. As Bloomberg points out, Uber’s losses are without precedent in the tech industry. The only other loss by a start-up that comes close is Amazon, which burned $1.4 billion in all of 2000.AdvertisementMike: It’s sort of like that scene in “The Dark Knight” when the Joker sets that giant pile of money on fire, but with more Toyota Priuses involved.Farhad: Um, sort of. But there are a few things to keep in mind. First, Uber is growing — revenue increased 18 percent from the first quarter to the second. Also, it just pulled out of the Chinese market, which by many accounts was the cause of a large portion of its losses. And then there’s the fact that it has the money to burn.Mike: See? I told you. The Joker.Farhad: Shh, a grown-up is talking. I suspect one reason Uber is willing to lose a lot of money is that it raised it to spend it, and it’s now doing so lavishly.So, knowing nothing, I don’t think these numbers are too bad for Uber. But you’re the Uber expert. What do you think?Mike: You don’t have to preface this with “knowing nothing,” by the way, as that’s pretty much assumed.Yeah, the report looks bad on its face if you’re focused on the losses, which are really enormous. I can’t see any public company getting away with this sort of spending without its investors freaking out. I’m sure it is even making the private investors involved nervous, which is why this information leaked in the first place.One other thing: Its rival Lyft keeps spending cash to subsidize rides in American cities where it wants to gain market share. That’s another reason Uber has to turn on the cash subsidy spigot every once in a while, just to tamp down any gains Lyft makes. And that burn also hurts Uber’s pocketbook.The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But as you said, there’s light at the end of the tunnel. China is going away, and that was Uber’s single largest cash drain. I imagine losses will look much better next quarter — unless, that is, they decide to start throwing cash into some other very expensive pursuit.AdvertisementAlso, they have access to about $9 billion or $10 billion in cash reserves, so I don’t think they’re sweating the losses too much right now.Farhad: Another big topic: Your iPhone has a huge security flaw and you really, really must download the security update, like right now. (Your phone should remind you of the update; don’t ignore it.)What’s the big deal? This week we learned that an Israeli company called the NSO Group, which makes spying software for governments, had been using three previously unknown flaws in the iPhone to track human rights activists and journalists. No one is quite sure, but this could be the way the F.B.I. got into the phone of a mass shooter after it pulled back legal action against Apple this year.Mike: I have no grand insight here other than to say flaws in my phone are bad.Farhad: Uh, right. Also, speaking of privacy: WhatsApp, the huge messaging app that Facebook bought two years ago, said it would begin to share some of its members’ information with its parent company. The purpose, of course, is to start making money. WhatsApp’s founders have long been opposed to collecting their users’ data for advertising purposes, a departure from much of the rest of the tech industry. Do you think their users will revolt?Mike: I want to say I’m wholly surprised at the change of heart, but there are 22 billion reasons I am not.What WhatsApp will most likely argue all day is that the “spirit” of its agreement with users — not to mention the Federal Trade Commission — has not been violated, and probably not the actual agreement itself in the strictest of terms. WhatsApp won’t share message content, names, addresses and other personal content.My counterargument to that would probably be an eye-roll, or perhaps a thinking face emoji.Farhad: Finally, I wanted to update you on the state of the internet: It’s still terrible.AdvertisementRemember how a couple months ago, Leslie Jones, one of the stars of the new “Ghostbusters” movie, was targeted by vicious trolls on Twitter? This week it happened again. Her website was hacked, with the attackers posting nude photos and her personal information online.Also, they posted a picture of Harambe, the gorilla that was killed at the Cincinnati Zoo this year. Harambe had already become a weird meme on Twitter, but the Jones attack added another dimension — basically, Harambe is now a racist trope.I don’t know what to say other than, why are any of us still online, Mike?Mike: I agree it was probably the worst thing I’ve heard this week — and that includes election coverage.Clearly there are racists and misogynists all over the web who take great pleasure in knocking famous women down for no reason whatsoever.But perhaps even worse are the hangers-on who do it for no reason — for “the lulz,” as one hacker group used to say. It’s this weird code — or lack thereof — of internet nihilism, a willingness to attack targets just because they’re visible. Ms. Jones did not do anything to provoke this. She’s just herself online. And no one should be the target of an attack just because they have a Twitter account.In an unrelated matter, please never look at my Twitter account.Farhad: Oh, I didn’t even know you had one. Happy travels. Also, R.I.P. Harambe.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »