By CECILIA KANGJUNE 27, 2017
Cable giants are increasingly pushing aggressively into the wireless industry.In the latest example of that trend, Comcast and Charter are negotiating with Sprint to offer wireless services to their cable and high-speed internet customers, according to three people familiar with the talks who asked to be anonymous because they were not authorized to speak publicly. The talks were earlier reported by The Wall Street Journal.The discussions are early and could take on various forms, but we talked to industry analysts and consumer groups about the implications of a partnership between the cable and wireless giants.Sprint, Comcast and Charter have been talking about several potential partnerships, according to the people familiar with the talks. One scenario would involve the cable operators buying access to Sprint’s nationwide wireless service in order to bundle mobile service with cable and high-speed internet service.It’s happening because of the convergence of tech, media and telecom. AT&T bought DirecTV in 2015 and is now trying to buy Time Warner for $85.4 billion so it has a foothold in the mobile industry, television distribution and content. Verizon recently bought Yahoo with an eye toward mobile advertising and video.AdvertisementCable companies understand that more people are watching videos on their mobile phones, and they don’t want to get edged out.AdvertisementIf Comcast and Charter strike a deal with Sprint, they will probably promote a bundle of wireless, cable and internet services that would be cheaper than buying each service separately. But not everyone wants to buy a bundle, and the companies would have more power to raise prices down the road.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Like most of these tie-ups, this is an agreement that investment bankers might love but internet users don’t need,” said Matt Wood, a policy director at consumer interest group Free Press. “They don’t want forced bundles.”If it ends up being another deal for access to wireless services, it won’t be new. Many of these cable companies already have such deals in place. Comcast recently began to offer wireless services through a resale agreement with Verizon, for example.The disruption in this scenario is inside-industry baseball. What this deal provides is a way for Comcast and Charter to expand wireless offerings and under better financial terms than they have with Verizon.The real disruption may be how Sprint’s negotiations with the cable companies put a potential merger with T-Mobile USA in limbo. The parent companies of Sprint and T-Mobile, SoftBank of Japan and Deutsche Telekom of Germany, have been in negotiations to merge their American wireless companies. If Comcast and Charter are bidding for a stake in Sprint, then those Sprint and T-Mobile negotiations will be affected.Emily Steel and Michael de la Merced contributed reporting.Follow Cecilia Kang on Twitter @ceciliakang.A version of this article appears in print on June 28, 2017, on Page B7 of the New York edition with the headline: What’s at Stake in the Discussions Between Comcast, Charter and Sprint.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.