
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
DEC. 11, 2017
Q. Can I transfer my landline telephone number — one I’ve had for years — to a new wireless smartphone?A. Moving your landline telephone number to a mobile phone is possible if you are staying in the same geographic area, but you should check with the wireless carrier you want to use to make sure the company can handle it. (However, if you have a separate long-distance calling plan for your old home- telephone service, expect it to get left behind as your new carrier takes over.)Advice and tips on the technology changing how you live.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In addition to moving landlines, the Federal Communications Commission says you can also keep the same wireless number if you are switching service providers. The agency’s website has a consumer guide to taking your phone number with you.Most of the major national wireless carriers have their own online guides to lead you through the process of transferring (or “porting”) your existing telephone number to their networks. And AT&T, Sprint, T-Mobile and Verizon Wireless all have pages on their sites where you can type in your number to check its transfer eligibility.You should also be able to make the move by visiting a retail store run by your prospective carrier. Have a copy of your current phone bill or other account information available to prove the number legitimately belongs to you. Once the transfer is in the works, it may take a few days to fully transition over and both the landline and the smartphone may ring when a call comes in during this period.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.A version of this article appears in print on December 14, 2017, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Switching Your Landline To a Cellphone.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »