
Bits By                     
 MIKE ISAAC and
 

 SAPNA MAHESHWARI
 
JAN. 21, 2017
Each Saturday, Farhad Manjoo and Mike Isaac, technology reporters at The New York Times, review the week’s news, offering analysis and maybe a joke or two about the most important developments in the tech industry. Farhad is away this week, so Sapna Maheshwari, a Times media reporter, is filling in. Mike: Ahoy, Sapna! Farhad is currently in Bangalore, so I appreciate you pinch-hitting for him. How’s the media world doing? Still all fake news, all the time?Sapna: Hi, Mike! As much as I love the real news, the tide of fake news is hard to resist. I might need to take a break after writing this story that featured fake news spread by our new president over the past few years.Mike: It has me questioning even my high school alumni newsletters. All of my former classmates can’t be that happy with their lives, right?AdvertisementO.K., on to tech. We found out that in Snapchat’s expected initial public offering in the coming months, new investors won’t be getting any voting shares or say in governing the company. It’s not a shocker — Evan Spiegel, the chief executive, is notoriously bent on controlling every detail of his company — but it’s interesting to see the tech company trend continue, from Facebook to Google and others, with dual-class stock that gives virtually no power to shareholders outside of the executives.AdvertisementSapna: The line that jumped out at me was how Google’s founders defended that in 2004; they said it would protect the company’s “ability to innovate and retain its most distinctive characteristics.” I’m sure corporations in other industries wish they could use that line and still successfully raise lots of money in public markets.Mike: Mmmhmm. “Give me your money and just trust us” is a bold stance, but investors seem to be fine with it as long as it gives them decent returns.Sapna: It’s Wall Street FOMO.Mike: Elsewhere in tech, the Federal Trade Commission filed the world’s most boring complaint against Qualcomm, the microprocessing megafirm responsible for making many of the chips that power the world’s smartphones. Essentially, the F.T.C. claims Qualcomm engaged in monopolistic practices, boxing out the rest of the chip-making industry.Also, Apple sued Qualcomm this week about how it licenses its chips. So it’s been quite a week for Qualcomm.Meanwhile, Craigslist-like start-ups like Letgo keep raising oodles of cash to become the next place for people to sell their old stuff, much like, um, Craigslist.I tried using them once to sell a desk and a dresser when I moved from New York to San Francisco. Most of the offers I got were super lowball, and for some reason I’m still getting offers nine months after I left the state. If you can’t tell, I don’t have much faith in those kinds of sites.Craigslist has lasting power, but I think these start-ups see a vulnerability in Craigslist’s continued lack of an official mobile app. Letgo, Wallapop and OfferUp are all mobile-app-centric marketplaces. I don’t really buy it.The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Sapna: It probably speaks to the popularity of these platforms that though I covered retail for four years, I’ve only vaguely heard of OfferUp, let alone the other two. Now that I cover advertising, I’d love to hear the sales pitches these companies are making to venture capitalists to convince them the public is dying for better ways to get rid of old junk — and that they have the solution.AdvertisementMike: Other items of note: Google Plus somehow continues to live on and release new features like Events, officially becoming the world’s most unkillable zombie social network.Sapna:  Did you ever see that story about the strangely large number of people still using Second Life, the virtual world, in 2014? I wonder if that’s how it is for Google Plus.Mike: I’m pretty sure my Sims family is still alive and well, despite having abandoned them years ago.More stuff: There’s a rumor going around that Facebook won’t be re-upping its live-streaming deals with publishing partners, in which they started paying news orgs — including The Times — to get the initiative off the ground. Can’t say I’m shocked that Facebook is deciding to change its mind in partnership deals, since that’s pretty much always been the case. My question is, what happens to the staff these organizations have hired to work on the efforts?Sapna: It’s sad to consider, having been in the room when the infamous watermelon exploded at BuzzFeed. (Will never forget how good that smelled.)Two thoughts: One, it’s yet another reminder of how much power Facebook wields over media companies. Second, it’s a bit unsettling given the recent ads encouraging me to go Live when I’m alone at home with the pet I don’t have.Mike: The other big thing I wanted to talk about is still about Facebook. I flew to Dallas last week to cover the testimony of Mark Zuckerberg, who appeared in a trial because of a civil lawsuit against Oculus, the virtual reality company that Facebook bought in 2014. It’s a complicated case, but it boils down to a games publisher suing Oculus for theft of intellectual property.AdvertisementFor me, the least interesting part of the trial was the debate around property theft. As part of his testimony, Zuckerberg gave amazing insight into just how some of Facebook’s biggest deals were done, often in the course of a weekend, for multiple billions of dollars.The plaintiff’s lawyers harped on how crazy it was that Zuckerberg’s emails to his assistant laid out a four-day timeline for buying Oculus, for instance, and how that speedy purchase plan highlighted a complete lack of due diligence.I found it fascinating because it seemed like a reminder that some of Silicon Valley’s biggest deals happen quickly and extremely competitively, a seemingly stark contrast from other mergers and acquisitions outside of tech. Am I crazy, or do we just do things differently here?Sapna: Four days! That is incredible. Especially for such a huge deal.Kind of brings us back to the earlier part of our conversation. Makes sense to have those dual-class stock structures if you’re going to operate like this.Mike: Indeed. And with that, I vote we close our newsletter. My next vote will be to keep Farhad on a permanent international travel agenda. Thanks for joining!We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »