
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
MARCH 8, 2017
Q. I notice the Mac Mail program includes “stationery” templates for jazzing up messages. Does this show up reliably on other mail programs?A. Mail programs that can display messages formatted with HTML (the same Hypertext Markup Language used on web pages) should be able to handle the Apple’s stationery styles without any major problems. Depending on the mail systems and the templates you use, your recipients may see substituted fonts or have to widen the message window to get the full effect.Not everyone wants or uses mail programs that display HTML mail, however. Some people prefer to get their mail in the plain-text format for security or aesthetic reasons. In a plain-text world, the written content of your message should come through, but decorative borders, photos and type styling will most likely get reduced to file attachments and not be assembled within the message body as designed.For those who were not aware that Mac Mail includes stationery templates and want to try them out, create a new message and click the Stationery icon on the far-right side of the toolbar at the top of the window. Click a category name on the left side of the window to see samples of each template. Once you select a template, click the Stationery icon again to dismiss the row of samples. You can then type your own words over the template’s sample text and drag in your own photos.If you choose to design and format your own stationery on an open message, you can save it as a new template. Go to the File menu and select Save As Stationery to have your design appear in the Custom category in the Stationery list.You can also find third-party stationery templates online.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »