
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
MARCH 1, 2017
Q. Do Microsoft Word for Windows and Apple Pages work together and can I open the same files with either program? I’m getting a new Mac but don’t know if I want to buy the Mac version of Word just to work on documents I send back and forth to myself from a PC.A. Pages, Apple’s word-processing program for its iOS and Mac operating systems, can open Microsoft Word files but does not fully support every Word feature. While fonts and certain types of formatting may not translate properly, Pages can probably handle basic Word files from the PC if you open and edit them on the Mac.When you are finished editing on Pages, you can export the files back into Word’s native format before sending them back to the Windows computer. If that sounds tedious (or seems as if it poses the potential for scrambled formatting), taking advantage of a free online service might make for an easier and more convenient experience in bouncing the documents back and forth between different platforms and programs.You can use Apple’s free web-based iWork for iCloud service to open Pages and Word files on both the PC and the Mac, as long as you sign up for a free Apple ID account, You typically get an Apple ID anyway when setting up a new Mac or using Apple services like the iTunes Store or the App Store.AdvertisementHowever, if you are creating the documents in Microsoft Word on the PC, just staying in Word might be the smoothest approach. Microsoft’s free Office Online apps (including Word) work right in the web browser — as long as you sign in with a Microsoft account. If you use Hotmail, Skype, Outlook.com or another Microsoft service, you should be able to use the same Microsoft user name and password for Office Online.With Office Online, the files can be stored on Microsoft’s OneDrive cloud server or in a connected Dropbox account. You can edit the files online on the computer or on mobile devices — or download them. And if you find that the online version of Office is not robust enough for your needs, Microsoft’s various Office 365 subscriptions and software offer better compatibility for a monthly, annual or one-time price.AdvertisementUsing open-source software with both Windows and Mac versions is another approach if you are not fully tied to Microsoft Word on the PC. LibreOffice and Apache OpenOffice are two such suites.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »