
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
FEB. 28, 2017
Q. I use the mail program that came with Windows 10 and I notice that at the bottom of every message I send, the program sticks in a line that says “Sent from Mail for Windows 10.” How do I get rid of that?A. As with other mail programs, if you have not added a customized signature in the settings, the Mail for Windows 10 program inserts a default line at the bottom of each message — in this case, one that advertises the name of your email app. To lose this generic sentence appended to your outgoing messages, you can replace it with the text of your choice or turn off the signature feature altogether.To take either action, open the Mail app on your PC and select the gear-shaped Settings icon on the bottom-left corner of the windows. When the Settings pane appears on the right side of the Mail windows, select Signature from the list.At the bottom of the Signature setting screen, you can replace the boilerplate “Sent from Mail for Windows 10” line with more personal text, like your name and contact information, a favorite quote, a disclaimer, or anything else that comes to mind. If you use multiple accounts with the Mail app, you can include the signature with all of them by turning on the “Apply to all accounts” option at the top of the settings box.The Windows 10 Mail app does not allow you to change the font or font color in your signature file, nor can you insert images or web links. If you would rather skip the signature at the bottom of your messages, change the button from On to Off in the “Use an email signature” section of the settings box.Mac users can add signatures to outgoing messages in Apple’s built-in Mail app. Open the program, go to the Mail menu and choose Signatures to get to the settings.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.A version of this article appears in print on March 2, 2017, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: Ditching a Signature Added by Default.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »