By NICK WINGFIELDJUNE 28, 2016
SEATTLE — For years, Amazon has been chiseling away at the irritants that keep many people from switching to e-readers. The company has improved the legibility of the text on Kindle screens to make it nearly indistinguishable from print, and fiddled with the ergonomics of the new Kindle Oasis to make using it feel more like holding a book.On Tuesday, Amazon will make a small change to its Kindle software that could solve a vexing issue for people who prefer the intuitiveness of navigating a print book. The update to the software for Amazon’s own Kindle devices as well as apps that run on iOS and Android will include a feature called Page Flip that effectively mimics the near-universal habit of using a thumb to temporarily mark the page of a printed book where the reader left off.The update will be available free on Tuesday.Page Flip is designed for those moments when you’re reading and need to quickly glance at another section of a book with photographs, maps or family trees. This is especially useful for nonfiction, but also comes in handy for books like “A Game of Thrones” that feature large casts of characters who inhabit a bewildering array of fictional lands.In a recent demonstration of Page Flip, Jeff Kunins, vice president for Kindle Reader at Amazon, says the company regularly surveys people with Kindle devices and software to find out how to improve them. Readers of nonfiction have been clear about where they’d like to see changes.Advertisement“The No. 1 thing they’ve been telling us to get better at is navigation,” Mr. Kunins said.In the past, someone using a Kindle device or app who wanted to save their place could bookmark a page, which works well enough but can get disorienting if you have digitally dog-eared a lot of pages.With Page Flip, Kindle automatically saves the page you’re reading when you tap the screen of your device, pinning it to the side of the screen. You can also easily shift the book to what Amazon calls a bird’s-eye view, which shows thumbnail images of a handful of pages at once so you can skim quickly to find the reference page you’re looking for.Here’s an Amazon promotional video of how it will work:There has been much chatter in the publishing industry about slowing e-book sales and the unexpected vitality of print book sales. Amazon is notoriously stingy with data about many of its businesses, but it is eager to convey that the Kindle business is still growing.Mr. Kunins said that 2015 was a record year for the Kindle business at Amazon; customers bought more Kindle books and read more of their pages than ever before. He said the company had paid more than $160 million in royalties over the last 12 months to independent authors who participated in Kindle Unlimited, a $10-a-month digital reading service (the company didn’t provide comparable data for the year before).Advertisement“Kindle keeps growing year after year,” he said.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.