
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
JUNE 24, 2016
Q. Is it possible to use Remote Assistance to look at a Windows 10 computer from a PC running Windows 7?A. The Remote Assistance tool has been part of the Windows operating system for years, and you should be able to use it between computers running differing Windows versions. For those unfamiliar with it, Remote Assistance allows one computer user to connect to the computer of someone else, via an internet connection, to see that person’s screen or even take control of the system for technical support. It can be a very useful tool if one member of a family is more technically inclined than the others but lives far away.The Windows 7 computer should be able to view the screen or even temporarily assume control of the Windows 10 machine — as long as the Windows 10 PC is set up to allow remote-assistance connections. To check if it is set up, the Windows 10 user should go to the search box on the desktop, type in “remote assistance” and choose “Allow Remote Assistance invitations to be sent from this computer” from the results list.In the control panel that appears, check the box next to “Allow Remote Assistance invitations to be sent from this computer” and click the O.K. button to enable the feature. Next, press the Windows and R keys to call up the Run box, Type in “msra” (without quotation marks) and press the Enter key to open a box that gives you the choice of sending an invitation to someone asking for help, or responding to someone else’s request for you to help.AdvertisementChoose the “Invite someone you trust to help you” option and follow the directions on screen to email an invitation to whomever you want to grant access. Windows Remote Assistance also displays a password on the screen, which the person receiving the invitation will need to tap into the Windows 10 computer. (You should call the Windows 7 user and recite the password over the phone.)Once the person running Windows 7 responds to the help invitation and enters the password, he or she can see the screen of the Windows 10 computer. If guidance over the phone is not enough, the Windows 7 user can click the Request Control button on screen and ask to remotely take over the Windows 10 computer to speed up the troubleshooting. Once the technical-support session is finished, click the Stop Sharing button on screen and break the connection between the computers.AdvertisementRemote Assistance is a helpful tool for providing live help to Windows users who need it, but be careful when using it, as fake tech-support scammers calling randomly may try to talk you into a session. Always make sure you know exactly who is tapping into your PC.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »