
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
JUNE 20, 2017
Q. I get a message when I open Chrome and use Gmail or Facebook every day that says that my Chrome version is out of date and that I need to upgrade. When I go to Chrome to check the version, it says I have the latest one. Why do I keep getting these messages?A. Update hiccups with Google Chrome can happen for a number of reasons, but start by checking that your computer’s operating system meets the requirements for the latest version of the browser. For the current version of Chrome, you need at least Windows 7, Mac OS X 10.9 (Mavericks) or 64-bit editions of the major Linux distributions (like Ubuntu, Debian, openSUSE or Fedora) that were released in the past few years.If your operating system is outdated, Chrome may have moved on without it. Windows users should check the browser’s Properties box to make sure the program isn’t set to run in compatibility mode for an earlier version of the system. Those using Chrome on an office network may be at the mercy of the corporate I.T. department as to when updates can actually be installed on company computers. Firewall settings and other security software could also prevent Chrome from updating properly.The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Adware or malware may be another source of the problem, with variations of the “Urgent Chrome Update” pop-up plaguing some users as it tries to hijack the browser. Scanning your system with antivirus and antimalware software may root out the source of the messages.If none of these issues seems to be causing the problem, uninstalling the browser and reinstalling it with a fresh copy might take care of the situation. You can get the latest version of Google Chrome at www.google.com/chrome. Be sure to restart after you install the software.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »