
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
NOV. 28, 2017
Q. I have two Twitter accounts — a personal one and a more professional one I just created for my job. Can I use them both on the same phone?A. The Twitter apps for Android and iOS allow you to be logged into multiple accounts on the same device. If you are using the Twitter app with your original account, you need to add the second account in the app’s settings in order to switch back and forth.Advice and tips on the technology changing how you live.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Open the Twitter app and tap your profile icon or the three-lined menu icon on the screen; you may see one or the other depending on the version of the app you are using. When your profile panel opens, tap the downward-pointing arrow (or, on the iOS version, the More icon with the three dots) to open a menu with links to create a new Twitter account or to add an existing one.Tap “Add an existing account.” Enter the user name and password for your work Twitter account, and then tap the Log In button to add it.After you have added the second account, you can switch between them by selecting the profile or menu icon and tapping the downward-pointing arrow again to reveal the icon for your other account.Those using iOS devices can switch between accounts by long-pressing the account’s profile icon and tapping the other account from the menu that pops up from the bottom of the screen. Tapping the profile icon and then the More dots and choosing the other account’s icon switches you over, too.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.A version of this article appears in print on November 30, 2017, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: How to Use Multiple Twitter Accounts.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »