AdvertisementSupported byTech TipBy J. D. BiersdorferQ. My phone camera has gotten me interested in photography, but I’m afraid of the learning curve on an expensive digital S.L.R. What’s the easiest way to get started?A. Moving up to a digital single-lens reflex camera (D.S.L.R.) is a big step from the relative simplicity of using a smartphone camera. However, it can be rewarding if you want higher-quality pictures, more control over how your images look and to learn more about the technical aspects of photography. But you should plan time to educate yourself on how the camera works and be prepared to spend at least a few hundred dollars on equipment, including for the camera body and interchangeable lenses.Before you plunk down the money for expensive gear, do some research on popular models and check out the user reviews to get an idea of how D.S.L.R. cameras work. Visiting a camera shop or electronics store with display models to sample can give you a feel for using the bigger devices.If you are shopping for an entry-level D.S.L.R., Wirecutter, a product review site owned by The New York Times, recommends the $500 Nikon D3400 as the best D.S.L.R. for beginners thanks to image quality, ease of use and other factors — including Bluetooth connectivity for wirelessly sharing photos to a smartphone with the SnapBridge app. To get started, Nikon’s site offers a $15 online course on the basics of using its cameras. Classes on more advanced topics are also available in Nikon’s online school, and some areas host in-person photography courses as well.If you find D.S.L.R. cameras too intimidating, other options for higher-quality pictures include smaller, lighter midrange mirrorless cameras like the Olympus OM-D E-M10 Mark II (around $600) or advanced point-and-shoot compact cameras like the Panasonic Lumix DMC-LX10 (available for around $600). If you are looking to spend less than $500 on a camera, Wirecutter recommends the Canon PowerShot G9 X, which can be found for around $400.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.Advertisement