By NELLIE BOWLESNOV. 26, 2017
SAN FRANCISCO — As Twitter has tried to draw bright lines between what is acceptable and not acceptable on its platform, it has stumbled over them itself.The company was criticized after it froze the account of the actress Rose McGowan in October, when she included a phone number in one of her tweets about misconduct by the movie producer Harvey Weinstein. Then, after verifying a white supremacist this month, the company paused the entire verification program and now has new rules: the company can revoke verification for behavior both on and off the platform.This weekend, Twitter locked The New York Times’s international team account. The account was blocked on Saturday afternoon and unlocked about 24 hours later, on Sunday afternoon.The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The social network said that a @nytimesworld tweet violated Twitter’s rule against hateful conduct. The tweet promoted an article about Prime Minister Justin Trudeau’s apology to indigenous people in a Canadian province, where for much of the 20th century their children were compelled to attend boarding schools that separated them from their families and cultures.The post said, “Left out of an apology a decade ago, native people in Newfoundland and Labrador get an apology from Justin Trudeau.”AdvertisementIn a statement, shortly after the Times account was restored, Twitter said: “After reviewing the account, it appears that one of our agents made an error. We have flagged this issue so that similar mistakes are not made going forward.”The company apologized “for any inconvenience this may have caused.”The New York Times international reporting team uses Twitter to promote its coverage to nearly two million followers, usually posting 50 to 100 tweets a day.AdvertisementTwitter has experienced increased public and government scrutiny over the past year. Earlier this month, Donald Trump’s personal account was disabled for 11 minutes, causing an uproar. Executives later discovered that it was a contractor who was leaving Twitter that day who had disabled the account.An earlier version of this article referred incorrectly to Newfoundland and Labrador. It is a single Canadian province, not two separate provinces.A version of this article appears in print on November 27, 2017, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: Twitter Blocked Times  In ‘Error’.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.