

      By MARK SCOTT

FEB. 23, 2017

We responded to readers about Facebook, smartphones, 5G and more.
Hey there! I’m Mark, the European technology correspondent for The New York Times. I’m tasked with keeping tabs on all things tech across the Continent and, sometimes, beyond.I’m in Barcelona for Mobile World Congress, a weeklong powwow of company bigwigs, senior politicians and tech start-ups, and I’m excited to answer your questions.Ask me about anything – the future of 5G mobile networks, the fight over net neutrality, the latest mobile devices or what the likes of Facebook and Netflix are up to. Just send in your questions below, and I’ll be back on Monday at 10 a.m. Eastern time to answer them.I’ve spent the weekend criss-crossing Barcelona, attending news conferences, meeting executives, eating my weight in tapas and hanging out at landmarks like the Plaça de Catalunya, below. (Yes, it’s a hard life.) But my initial sense from this year’s Mobile World Congress is “meh.”For sure, there are fancy new phones, internet-connected gadgets (including, for some unknown reason, a toothbrush with artificial intelligence) and enough driverless car demos to sink a battleship, but much of the technology on show is an incremental step forward from what’s already out there. In short, there’s no “iPhone moment” as in 2007, when the product’s release set off a dramatic shift in how we all use phones.That’s mostly because the mobile technology world is in a state of flux. Many of the world’s carriers are still trying to figure out how to make money from the increasing use of mobile data, while also investing the billions of dollars required for high-speed networks to stream the likes of Netflix and Hulu on our phones. Annoyingly, such changes take time. So while this year’s gathering in Barcelona will have a few surprises, my take is that this is a year of transition, not of revolution.

Hola from Barcelona, and welcome to this Q. and A. I’m Mark, the European technology correspondent for The New York Times, and I’m looking forward to answering your questions. Thanks to those of you who sent in questions early; we’ve received more than 100 responses over the last three days. I’ll be answering some of those while also taking your live questions during the chat. Be gentle.I’ve just rushed over from a Facebook news conference – not a company that you would typically expect to see at a trade event dominated by cellphone carriers and cable operators. Yet the social network has spent years cultivating ties with these companies, signing deals with many of them in the developing world to offer Facebook’s suite of services, among others, for next to nothing. (For the backstory, take a look at this dispatch from India by my colleague Vindu Goel).Facebook is already one of the world’s most important companies. And  that power will only grow with its growing interest in making the internet work (The company tried to launch a satellite last year to offer connectivity across Africa, but the rocket blew up during launch). There are still some serious questions still left unanswered: what are Facebook’s motivations, beyond bringing the internet to the masses, and what type of internet is Mark Zuckerberg helping to create? This is definitely an area to keep tabs on.Best phone at the MWC is?I guess that depends on how you define “best.” The likes of Sony and Huawei, a Chinese brand, both came out with high-end phones with fancy high-definition displays and enough processing power to support a small village. But these aren’t transformative. They’re incremental changes.A number of device makers here also are going after the low end of the market, trying to break the $50-$75 price barrier that would make smartphones accessible to the burgeoning middle class across Africa, Asia and Latin America. These phones are arguably are more powerful than the iPhone was when it was first released in 2007, but they pale in comparison to the latest Android or iOS phone.Indeed, it shows you what a funk the phone industry is in when the most talked-about phone in Barcelona is one based on a device released in 2000: Nokia’s 3310, a so-called dumb feature phone with no internet connectivity. Will that be a success? My quick answer is no: Why buy one of those when you can get a low-end smartphone for just a little more money? But its unveiling here certainly got the nostalgia flowing for when Nokia was the big beast in the phone world.Will the wearables trend flame out? Are watches just a fad?I, like many others, was super excited when smartwatches hit the market. But as my Pebble smartwatch sits in my bedroom collecting dust, these devices haven’t caught on like many had expected – despite the sale of millions of Apple Watches each year.There’s a new bunch of smartwatches on show at the Mobile World Congress, but the biggest selling point is that the batteries of these new devices will last up to a month. That longevity, however, requires turning off almost all of the “connected’”services: So companies have basically created, well, a normal watch, but one with a $400 price tag.Going forward, I see wearables taking on different forms, moving away from traditional watches to jewelry, eyewear or something completely different. Basically, a wearable that doesn’t feel like a big piece of technology sitting on your wrist. I’d welcome that.We’re just at the start of 2017, but for companies like BlackBerry and Nokia, it might as well be 2009. Both brands are making big splashes this year at Mobile World Congress, unveiling a stable of new phones in the hopes of tapping into nostalgia for a time when both names were still big in the mobile world.This isn’t what you might think, though. Instead of building the phones themselves, Nokia and BlackBerry have licensed their brands to others, basically outsourcing the production of these (Android) phones to reduce costs and avoid the mistakes of the past. These once-popular cellphone makers fell well behind Samsung and Apple; BlackBerry currently has zero percent of the global smartphone market, according to Gartner, a research firm.For tech specs on these new phones, see here and here. It’s hard to see these “zombie phone brands” coming back from the dead. Yes, there are (a small number of) people who would want a BlackBerry and Nokia phone. But can they bring back the good old days? That ship has sailed.When will longer testing batteries be available? Ones that don’t catch fire!You’ve hit on the holy grail of mobile technology, and it has come up a lot at the Mobile World Congress. Samsung’s recent problems with Galaxy Note 7s that kept catching fire are only one example of how batteries have become a major obstacle to advancement in smartphones.How long will it take to get longer-lasting batteries? It’s hard to say, though my colleague John Markoff wrote recently about “solid state” lithium batteries that could be safer and give engineers greater flexibility. People here in Barcelona say that’s years away.It’s worth remembering that this problem isn’t new. Here’s what Thomas Edison had to say in 1883: “The storage battery is one of those peculiar things which appeal to the imagination, and no more perfect thing could be desired by stock swindlers than that very selfsame thing.”How soon 5G infrastructure and terminals can be commissioned into commercial service ?Before we get started, here’s a refresher: “5G” is a new type of mobile technology that could eventually allow us to download high-definition movies to our smartphones and other devices in just a few seconds, among other benefits. (For more on 5G, check out an article that I wrote last year.)You’ll start to hear more about 5G this year when AT&T, Verizon Wireless and other carriers worldwide start trials of the technology. But be careful with these boasts. The tests aren’t really 5G because the standards for how the technology will work haven’t been agreed to, and much of the geeky mobile infrastructure that’s needed to make these superfast networks work hasn’t been built yet.Even industry watchers and executives here in Barcelona admit that 5G networks are still three to five years away, at least when it comes to a widespread rollout. Sure, we’ll get test projects here and there – countries are making big investments to offer “5G-style” services around events like the World Cup or Olympics –  but everyday use of 5G won’t happen before 2020, at the earliest.When do see the VR devices from sony and others really taking off for the mass market?  Are mobile phone makers already positioning themselves to bring a mobile device to market with more immersive accessories? All device makers (from Samsung and Sony to lesser known brands) are working to get virtual reality devices into customers’ hands. So far, it’s been a tough sell. The technology is still temperamental, and users’ initial (bad) experiences with the technology have put off the mass adoption of these weird-looking devices.Another issue is content. Having an expensive headset is all well and good. But if there’s nothing to use it on beyond a handful of high-profile video games, then that’s just another reason to pass on virtual reality.My view is that virtual reality will stay a niche product until someone figures out how to not only offer better equipment at cheaper prices, but also to give people the content – games, movies or something else – they will want to interact with.Concerned about new F.C.C. head overturning Obama net neutrality law. … How can we change that and protect net neutrality?First, here are the CliffsNotes on net neutrality: Rules passed in 2015 by the Federal Communications Commission, the American telecommunication regulator, required internet service providers to treat all online traffic equally (for more details, check out this video).Ajit Pai, the new F.C.C. chairman, is to speak here in Barcelona tomorrow. There’s growing concern that he may rein in net neutrality protections in the U.S., allowing internet providers to sign deals with companies to offer digital services like movie streaming at faster speeds than those offered by rivals.Yet such changes would take years and are unlikely to undo all of the current rules. While Mr. Pai is no fan of the current standards  – he voted against them in 2015 – he has also said that he believes in an “open and free internet.” So expect any changes – and there will be changes – to be more nuanced than both sides currently expect.Live streaming from mobile. Is this going to continue to dominate or is it going to be a fad like 3D TVThe answer to this question depends on whom you talk to. Facebook and Twitter, for example, are betting much of their future growth on live streaming from cellphones, so they are doing all that they can to make us try video streaming – including paying celebrities and media organizations, including The New York Times, to use these streaming video services.But for the average person, I see the future of live video in more personal terms. That could be sending a video to group of family members on WhatsApp, or something similar to your partner on SnapChat. For me, that adds value beyond a one-time use of Facebook Live, which still feels pretty gimmicky.Will live streaming be the next 3-D TV? No. But will it become a must-have? The jury’s still out.


Thanks for all your great questions, and apologies to those of you we didn’t get to. I’m now heading off to the conference’s main auditorium, where Reed Hastings, the Netflix chief executive, is about to give a speech that I’m expecting will touch on several issues that we’ve talked about over the last hour.Mr. Hastings is just one of the growing number of television and digital content executives who now attend the Mobile World Congress each year, a sign that the worlds of telecommunications and content are increasingly becoming intertwined. How does that work? Well, here’s something I wrote about Netflix’s close ties with carriers and cable operators worldwide, and how such connections have helped the streaming service expand rapidly around the globe.Thanks for spending the last hour with me. ¡Hasta pronto!Advertisement