
App Smart By                     
 KIT EATON
 
JUNE 22, 2016
NUMEROUS video game titles were showcased at the E3 industry show last week, and many exhibitors emphasized mobile gaming. I recently looked through some app stores to find games that are innovative, beautiful and meaningful.One that fits that bill is Liyla and the Shadows of War, which is free on iOS and Android. At first glance, this looks like a traditional two-dimensional platforms-and-ladders game, albeit with dark and moody graphics and a bleak soundtrack. But it is far from typical.Based on true events in Gaza, Liyla and the Shadows of War places you in control of a family trying to traverse a war-torn urban landscape and survive. You leap from level to level, beat obstacles and avoid threats. By giving the silhouetted family a personality, adding threats like sniper fire, drones and missiles, and adding burning cars to the landscape and desperate cries and frantic breathing to the soundtrack, the developer Rasheed Abueideh has created an app that is more of an educational experience than a game.The mood captures some of the horror of conflict in the region and may emotionally affect players or observers. My 7-year-old son, an accomplished gamer, watched me play for a while and said the game was different because it felt “very sad.”AdvertisementVoez, free to download on iOS and Android, is a rhythm music game like Tap Tap Revenge or Band Hero. You respond to icons on the screen that move in time to the throbbing soundtrack and must tap on icons that fall down vertical sliders in time with the beat, scoring points based on the accuracy of your timing.AdvertisementUnlike other apps in the genre, Voez has graphics and a background story line that borrow heavily from Japanese manga; you play the game as part of a Japanese pop band.The imagery is smooth, the electronic music jangles all the right nerves in your brain and the game is fast-paced. Everything on the screen moves all the time, including where you have to tap in time to the music. You may find your fingertips and attention dancing all over the place, and as you complete levels, you get to see more of the cartoon story line about the band you are helping.Another pleasing game is Brothers: A Tale of Two Sons. A $5 adventure game that is new on Android and long popular on iOS, the app has traditional features like a complex 3-D environment and puzzles to solve.But the titular brothers do not communicate in a language you can understand. You also have to control the movements of both players at once, using two thumbs on your device’s screen, which is difficult.For younger players, Finding Dory is a new Disney game ($4 on iOS, Android and Windows). Previous games from this brand involved bland or unimaginative gameplay, but Finding Dory delights with cute 3-D cut-screen animations that are inspired by the new sequel to “Finding Nemo.” You, as Dory, must keep swimming to avoid obstacles, collect bubbles and find various lost cast members. It is simple fun and the youngest phone fanatics will love it.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.And check out Romans From Mars (free on iOS and Android). This is a classic tower defense game that works as expected on your phone’s screen — until you download the “360” virtual reality version (for iOS and Android) and slot your phone into a virtual reality peripheral like Google Cardboard. In virtual reality, your battles against waves of bad guys will feel even more tense and adrenaline-inducing, despite the game’s cartoony graphics.Happy gaming.Public is a new free iOS app that tries to bridge the divide between private digital chatting that happens between friends and the broader social media discussion that celebrities take part in on Twitter. The app is a public chat arena for famous TV celebrities or sports stars to interact in a way you can watch and even take part in via your own comments.A version of this article appears in print on June 23, 2016, on Page B7 of the New York edition with the headline: Music, Adventure and 3-D Battles: Standouts in Mobile Gaming.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »