With less than a month to go before the European Union enacts new consumer privacy laws for its citizens, companies around the world are updating their terms of service agreements to comply.By J. D. BIERSDORFERBarnes & Noble’s line of digital-book hardware offers a few ways to keep and store your expanding collection.With a little help from an installer app, you can use new typefaces with certain programs on Apple’s tablet and other mobile devices.By J. D. BIERSDORFERIf your phone uses a single port for the charger and headphones, you can still power the battery while you listen to music — with the help of some additional gear.By J. D. BIERSDORFERYou can attach one to a post or a status update, but only if you are using a certain type of Facebook page.By J. D. BIERSDORFERDevious code is sending people to fraudulent quiz and contest pages, so ignore that “lucky winner” notice and run a security scan.By J. D. BIERSDORFERIf your screen has become jumbled with too many open files, folders and programs to manage, you can quickly sort the pile.By J. D. BIERSDORFERThe incognito and private browsing modes built into most modern browsers shield your online activity at home — but maybe not to the rest of the world.By J. D. BIERSDORFERIf your Windows 10 lock screen changes daily or slows you down in getting to your desktop, you can change its behavior.By J. D. BIERSDORFERGoogle’s smartphone software includes a set of tools to help you type — but if they trip you up, turn them off.By J. D. BIERSDORFERInternet con artists hope their crafty coding will fool you into asking for their fraudulent tech-support services, but you can often escape with a few keystrokes.By J. D. BIERSDORFERIf you can’t get your printer on the network, you may be able to get assistance without waiting for a human to come to the phone.By J. D. BIERSDORFERPhotographers who want to leave the bulky laptop at home can edit and save images in the uncompressed RAW format right on Apple’s tablet.By J. D. BIERSDORFERIf a scammer has swiped your password and is using your account to spew spam, take action and add measures to help stop it from happening again.By J. D. BIERSDORFERFacebook’s “post tabs” try to keep you in the conversation your friends are having about your posts, but you can turn off the tabs.By J. D. BIERSDORFERMany financial institutions offer fraud alerts by text, but if you’re not sure the message is real, call the company directly or check your account online.By J. D. BIERSDORFERIf you are getting ready to upgrade your e-reader or tablet and want to take your existing e-book library along, consider your options.By J. D. BIERSDORFERHard drives don’t last forever, but utility programs and careful observation can help you decide when it’s time to replace a backup drive.By J. D. BIERSDORFERSearching for a balance between too much advertising and just enough to make money, some ad-blocking programs now allow “acceptable” advertisements.By J. D. BIERSDORFERThe Mac’s Mail app and other programs can retain outdated contact details, but you can delete or update the information as needed.By J. D. BIERSDORFERWith less than a month to go before the European Union enacts new consumer privacy laws for its citizens, companies around the world are updating their terms of service agreements to comply.By J. D. BIERSDORFERBarnes & Noble’s line of digital-book hardware offers a few ways to keep and store your expanding collection.With a little help from an installer app, you can use new typefaces with certain programs on Apple’s tablet and other mobile devices.By J. D. BIERSDORFERIf your phone uses a single port for the charger and headphones, you can still power the battery while you listen to music — with the help of some additional gear.By J. D. BIERSDORFERYou can attach one to a post or a status update, but only if you are using a certain type of Facebook page.By J. D. BIERSDORFERDevious code is sending people to fraudulent quiz and contest pages, so ignore that “lucky winner” notice and run a security scan.By J. D. BIERSDORFERIf your screen has become jumbled with too many open files, folders and programs to manage, you can quickly sort the pile.By J. D. BIERSDORFERThe incognito and private browsing modes built into most modern browsers shield your online activity at home — but maybe not to the rest of the world.By J. D. BIERSDORFERIf your Windows 10 lock screen changes daily or slows you down in getting to your desktop, you can change its behavior.By J. D. BIERSDORFERGoogle’s smartphone software includes a set of tools to help you type — but if they trip you up, turn them off.By J. D. BIERSDORFERInternet con artists hope their crafty coding will fool you into asking for their fraudulent tech-support services, but you can often escape with a few keystrokes.By J. D. BIERSDORFERIf you can’t get your printer on the network, you may be able to get assistance without waiting for a human to come to the phone.By J. D. BIERSDORFERPhotographers who want to leave the bulky laptop at home can edit and save images in the uncompressed RAW format right on Apple’s tablet.By J. D. BIERSDORFERIf a scammer has swiped your password and is using your account to spew spam, take action and add measures to help stop it from happening again.By J. D. BIERSDORFERFacebook’s “post tabs” try to keep you in the conversation your friends are having about your posts, but you can turn off the tabs.By J. D. BIERSDORFERMany financial institutions offer fraud alerts by text, but if you’re not sure the message is real, call the company directly or check your account online.By J. D. BIERSDORFERIf you are getting ready to upgrade your e-reader or tablet and want to take your existing e-book library along, consider your options.By J. D. BIERSDORFERHard drives don’t last forever, but utility programs and careful observation can help you decide when it’s time to replace a backup drive.By J. D. BIERSDORFERSearching for a balance between too much advertising and just enough to make money, some ad-blocking programs now allow “acceptable” advertisements.By J. D. BIERSDORFERThe Mac’s Mail app and other programs can retain outdated contact details, but you can delete or update the information as needed.By J. D. BIERSDORFER