
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
NOV. 13, 2017
Q. I recently discovered the keyboard shortcut in Windows 10 that automatically zooms in the whole screen, but it’s often a little too close-up. Is there a way to adjust this zooming?A. Pressing the Windows and plus (+) keys together automatically activates the Magnifier, the built-in Ease of Access utility for enlarging the screen, and yes, you can adjust the level of magnification. (For those who have found the shortcut by accident, pressing the Windows and Escape keys turns off the Magnifier.)Advice and tips on the technology changing how you live.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.To change the magnification level, press the Windows, Control and M keys to open the Magnifier settings box. (You can also take the long way by going to the Start menu, clicking the gear-shaped settings icon on the left side, choosing the Ease of Access icon and then selecting Magnifier.) When the settings box opens, go to the Magnifier options area and under “Zoom level increments,” select a smaller percentage than the default 100 percent.Choosing a lower number — like 25 percent — gives you smaller degrees of magnification for zooming. For example, instead of zooming in by 100 percent each time you press the Windows and + keys to turn on the Magnifier and then increase the zoom level of the screen, you can zoom in more gradually in 25-percent increments as you repeatedly press the keyboard shortcut.The Magnifier utility has quite a few shortcuts of its own, which can save you from fiddling with the mouse while you enlarge parts of the desktop for easier reading. To see the list of commands, scroll down to the Keyboard Shortcuts section of the Magnifier settings box.Mac users have a similar screen-magnification tool that comes with macOS. To turn on the Zoom feature and adjust its behavior, click the System Preferences icon in the Mac’s desktop dock and in the System Preferences box, click Accessibility. On the left side of the Accessibility box, click Zoom to get to the feature’s settings.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.A version of this article appears in print on November 16, 2017, on Page B7 of the New York edition with the headline: Enlarge the Screen In Windows 10.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »