
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
JUNE 8, 2017
Q. What’s the point of using a keyboard that’s different from the one that came with the smartphone?A. While the virtual keyboard that came with your phone may be fine for typing and may include a few shortcuts to emoji characters, keyboard programs from other developers often include additional features. These can include support for “swipe typing” — in which you glide your finger from key to key on the screen to form words, instead of pecking at each key. Better predictive tools for suggesting words, buttons to insert images and animated GIFs, and other timesaving tools are typical features of many third-party keyboards.Several developers make their own keyboards for use with Android and iOS devices, so check your app store to see what is available. Google has its own keyboard app, called Gboard, for both Android and iOS. Gboard offers real-time translation into other languages as you type, emoji search, voice typing and a shortcut to Google Search among its tools; Google includes a privacy warning about its data collection, however.Microsoft makes an alternative keyboard of its own for iOS, too. The company’s Word Flow keyboard is designed for fast typing by tapping or gliding (including a layout that can be used easily with one hand). Customizable backgrounds are included in addition to other features.AdvertisementThe Swype keyboard for Android, iOS and other platforms, and SwiftKey, also for Android and iOS, are other type-by-sliding apps, with strong predictive text algorithms and autocorrect functions. The colorful Fleksy keyboard supports extensions (like an app launcher and “rainbow keys” that pop up as you type), gestures and different onscreen layouts; like other popular keyboards, it is also available for Android and iOS phones and tablets as well as for Amazon’s tablets.When you find a keyboard app you would like to try, download and install the software on your device. Once the software is in place, go into the phone’s settings for keyboards and input methods and select the new app as the default. You may need to enable the app’s optional features as well.AdvertisementIf certain apps default to the phone’s standard keyboard, that is most likely because those apps do not work with third-party keyboards. Depending on your phone, you may also find some third-party keyboards can freeze or feel slow, but you can always switch back to the phone’s original keyboard or find a different app.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »