
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
AUG. 1, 2017
Q. How do I change the browser that opens when I click my desktop shortcut bookmark icons? I want them to open in Google Chrome.A. The steps vary based on your operating system. To select Google Chrome as your default on a Windows 7 or Windows 8 computer, go to the Start menu and choose Control Panel. Select Programs, Default Programs and then “Set your default programs.” Select Google Chrome on the left side of the screen, click “Set this program as default” and then click O.K.If you have a Windows 10 PC running the most recent version of the operating system, open the Start menu and click the gear-shaped Settings icon. In the Settings box, choose Apps and then Default Apps. Scroll to the bottom of the box, to Web browser, and click the Microsoft Edge icon (or whichever app is your current default browser). In the “Choose an app” area, select Google Chrome.On a Mac, open the Chrome browser and click the three-dot More menu icon on the top-right corner of the window. On the menu, choose Settings. Scroll down the Settings screen until you get to the Default Brower section and turn on the checkbox next to “Make Google Chrome the default browser.”Many browsers, including Apple Safari and Mozilla Firefox, include a “make me the default program” button in their settings. Once you select it, the system opens that browser when you click links in messages or open desktop bookmark shortcuts. You can usually find this button on the General tab of the browser’s options or preferences screen.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.A version of this article appears in print on August 3, 2017, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: How to Choose A Go-To Browser.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »