
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
NOV. 7, 2017
Q. Do you need a paid subscription to use the Microsoft Office mobile apps? I thought they were free for Android and iOS devices.A. The ability to use the Microsoft Office mobile apps without having to pay a subscription fee depends on the device you are using — and what you want to do with the programs. The free touch-screen editions of Word, Excel and PowerPoint allow you to do basic tasks (like create a file and enter text into it) on most smaller tablets and phones. You do need to sign up for a free Microsoft account to use Microsoft Office Mobile for Android, or the iOS versions of Word, Excel and PowerPoint on an iPhone, iPad or iPod Touch. The files are stored on Microsoft’s OneDrive cloud server.Advice and tips on the technology changing how you live.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.However, if you have an iPad Pro, you get a full-feature version of the software for a free 30-day trial. After the trial ends, you’d have to sign up for one of Microsoft’s Office 365 subscription plans. Prices start at $6.99 a month.If you are working with the free versions of apps and want to unlock the rest of the editing features on an Android or iOS device, you also need to sign up for an Office 365 subscription. Once you convert to a paid plan, you can do things like track and review changes made to documents, insert page and section breaks, use more colors, make maps out of Excel data, and take advantage of all the tools included in the Office Mobile suite. A subscription for home or personal use does include other benefits, like one terabyte of OneDrive file storage, desktop applications and technical support.If the price is too steep for you, Apple iWork, Google Docs, Dropbox Paper and Zoho’s office apps are among the free or inexpensive alternatives.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.A version of this article appears in print on November 9, 2017, on Page B8 of the New York edition with the headline: Microsoft Office Mobile Apps.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »