
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
DEC. 21, 2016
Q. Can I make folders in the web version of Gmail so I can sort messages?A. Unlike some mail systems and software that let you create folders for grouping messages, Gmail uses what it calls “labels” for organizing mail. (Note that Gmail labels are different from the inbox categories and tabs that sort messages for promotional offers and other common types of mail.) You can name your labels as you would folders, say, Work, Home, Renovation Project and so on, and then assign the appropriate label to a message.To create a label, open your browser and log into your Gmail account. In the left pane of the Gmail window toward the bottom of the list, click the triangle next to the More menu. When the additional menu items appear, select Create New Label. In the box that pops up, enter the name for your label and click the Create button. Repeat the process until you have made the labels you want to use.When you get a message you want to tag with a newly made label, open it and click the Labels button at the top of the Gmail window. On the Labels list, choose one of your fresh labels — or create yet another label. Click the Apply button to affix the label to the message. When situations overlap, you can add more than one label to a message.You can add labels to outgoing messages you are composing too. Click the small black menu triangle in the bottom-right corner of the new message window, select Label and then choose the appropriate one from the list.Even when you have added labels to incoming messages, the tagged mail still mixes in with the rest of your inbox. When you want to see all the labeled messages, click the label name on the left side of the Gmail window to display them in a list. The grouped result is not unlike opening a folder and looking inside for the sorted mail.Google’s Gmail Help site has an article with more information about labels (including how to rename or delete them). If you are new to Gmail, the site has additional tips for organizing messages.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »