
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
MARCH 18, 2016
Q. What do I do when I try to play a track in iTunes and I get a message that says, “the song could not be used because the original file could not be found,” and it asks me if I’d like to locate it? A. When files get moved from their original locations outside iTunes, the program does not know how to find them again and issues an alert when you try to play the relocated track. You may also see the message if the music was originally stored on an external or network drive that is not currently connected to the computer, or if the original music files were deleted.To see just where iTunes is looking for a missing file, select the track and press the Control and I keys (on a Windows PC) or the Command and I keys (on a Mac). When the Get Info box for the song opens, click the File tab in the box. The file’s last known location on the computer should be listed at the bottom.You can use this information to point iTunes back to the file when it asks if you want to locate it. If the files were accidentally moved to the Recycle Bin or Trash and you have not emptied it, find the items within, right-click (or Control-click) on the file or folder you want to rescue, and choose the Restore option (Windows) or Put Back (Mac). If the file’s location path points to an unconnected external or network drive, connect it to the computer so iTunes can see the tracks again.If all the songs in your iTunes library show the exclamation error, the program has probably lost the location of your iTunes Music/Media folder; this can happen if you copy the iTunes folder to an external drive to free up space on your main computer. To point the program to the iTunes Music/Media folder’s new location, press the Control and comma keys (Windows) or Command and comma keys (Mac) to open the iTunes Preferences box. Click the Advanced tab, and in the “iTunes Media folder location” section, click the Change button and navigate to the folder’s new location on the external drive.If you update the iTunes program and do not see any of your content the first time you open the new version, there is a problem with the program’s iTunes Library file. Apple has posted a series of steps to take to correct that problem on its support site. The company also offers tips for organizing and consolidating your iTunes music and media files in one place to make moving your library easier.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »