At the end of May, eight New York Times product managers and engineers participated in Matter’s media startup accelerator bootcamp. Over four strenuous days, we learned the process of design thinking: a human-centered, prototype-driven approach to creating something that fills a meaningful need in someone’s life.The bootcamp was a chance to collaborate with some of Matter’s other media partners: my team for the week included a photo editor from the Associated Press, the public editor of the Kansas City Star, and the CEO of PRX. Even though we all had vastly different professional backgrounds, the design thinking exercises we learned allowed us to start working as a productive team quickly.Of all the techniques we learned in the course of the week, I want to focus specifically on some that can be applied to engineers working on cross-functional product teams.Engineers are often partially immersed in product development, but writing code doesn’t feel like a user-focused task compared to a role like design or product management. Design thinking encourages the sort of radical collaboration that values diverse skill sets regardless of specialization.As an early part of the design thinking process, we ventured onto the streets of Manhattan to talk to potential users and learn about their needs. We set aside our assumptions about what we expected to find and started by simply asking questions, listening, and then looking for patterns and insights in what we heard. Our subsequent ideation sessions and prototype development were informed by the perspective we’d gained.This type of user empathy can help with technical decision-making as well. Performance considerations and other technical details that are delightful parts of a good user experience gain traction from an empathetic viewpoint. Plus, basing as many decisions as possible on feedback from real (or potential) users helps not only to ensure the success of the product but to prevent any individual’s preferences or biases from arbitrarily influencing it.In our bootcamp ideation sessions, we set explicit norms around generating at least a hundred ideas and building on others’ suggestions rather than critiquing them. Once we had a hundred options to choose from, we concluded our brainstorming and voted on two or three we found most exciting and meaningful.Most teams have some sort of hierarchy, with a limited number of decision-makers. Opportunities to widen the range of contributions — to include engineers and others less frequently invited to brainstorms — can be a valuable way to generate new ideas. Constructing a space with the shared understanding that everyone’s ideas are welcome permits that range of contributions.When engineers actively participate in user research, facilitated brainstorms, or product ideation sessions, they have a larger stake in the team’s success, and that success is grounded in creating meaning for users.The open-ended, exploratory nature of the design thinking process underscored the importance of adopting techniques that the entrepreneurs in Matter’s program use on a daily basis. Building low-res prototypes, testing them early, and iterating quickly all help to avoid investing resources in an untested product, which is just as important for large, risk-averse organizations as for small startups. We already use many of these techniques on the Beta team, but the Matter bootcamp reinforced the need to use them even more widely and consistently.As media changes rapidly, we understand the need for lots of experiments. We’re participating in Matter’s partner parallel program to experiment more with design thinking, in an effort to find new ways to make The Times more useful to readers. Each month during the 20 weeks of the program, we gather with other partner companies and the entrepreneurs in Matter’s accelerator to pitch our ideas and receive feedback. It’s exciting to be surrounded by a community of innovators tackling similar challenges in media and technology — all with the goal of making media that matters.Alex Ording is a software engineer on the NYT Beta team. She works on product development for Well. You can find her on Twitter at @alexording.