
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
DEC. 20, 2016
Q. Is there a way to move the strip of icons at the bottom of the computer screen over to the side where it’s more convenient?A. Both the Windows and Mac operating systems let you reposition the row of frequently used program icons and folders to other sides of the screen. Within the system settings, you can make other changes as well, like changing the size of the icons or making the whole panel go away when you are not using it.Windows refers to this area of the screen as the taskbar. To move the taskbar, right-click on an empty section along the strip. In the menu that appears, make sure “Lock the Taskbar” is not selected. You can then drag the taskbar to another edge of the screen.For a deeper level of control, right-click in the empty part of the taskbar and choose Settings. (On a touch-screen PC, press and hold the empty section of the taskbar with your finger to get to the settings.) In the Taskbar Settings box, go to the Taskbar Location section and pick Left, Right, Top or Bottom. On this settings screen, you can change the size of the taskbar buttons, or set the whole thing to hide itself when not in use.In Mac terminology, the strip of icons is called the dock. To drag it quickly to a new side of the screen, hold down the Shift key on the keyboard, click the thin divider rule that separates program icons from folders, and drag the dock to the place you want it to go; you cannot put it at the top of the screen, though.As an alternative approach, click the System Preferences icon in the dock, select the Dock icon in the top row, and use the Preferences box to move the dock, resize its icons, automatically hide it or change other ways it behaves.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.A version of this article appears in print on December 22, 2016, on Page B7 of the New York edition with the headline: Get Your Icons in a Row.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »