By NIRAJ CHOKSHIJULY 24, 2017
When Microsoft previewed Windows to InfoWorld magazine in 1983, two years before the now-ubiquitous operating system was first sold, the company showcased just one application: a pared-down painting program.Now, more than three decades, billions of dollars and dozens of iterations later, Microsoft plans to stop developing that iconic Paint program, nudging it a step closer to death.Microsoft announced last week that it will stop actively developing Paint starting with a fall update to Windows 10, its flagship operating system. As a result, Paint could be removed altogether in future updates: The once vital component is now vestigial.In a statement, Microsoft played down the news, noting that Paint will continue to be available for free download and many of its features will remain in other places, including Paint 3D, a three-dimensional drawing application it unveiled last year.Advertisement“MS Paint is not going away,” the company said. “In addition to the new 3D capabilities, many of the MS Paint features people know and love like photo editing and 2D creation are in Paint 3D — the new app for creativity, available for free with the Windows 10 Creators update.”AdvertisementStill, the news was greeted online with real and exaggerated dismay as people mourned the loss of what, for many, was their first introduction to Microsoft’s globally dominant computer operating system. The word “Paint” even began trending worldwide on Twitter.
            still reeling from this MS paint news        
            Goodbye Paint, goodbye CHILDHOOD pic.twitter.com/oDHj26TbpN 
            Microsoft might be getting rid of Paint after 32 years. LIFE CAN BE SO CRUEL #RIPpaint pic.twitter.com/KGAHueZV9a 
            As an 8 year old kid, MS Paint was literally the most exciting thing you could do on a computer https://t.co/jYEcpRgu5c Paint continued to be popular among users of Windows, even though the operating system’s offerings have grown exponentially and feature-rich alternatives abound. The original Paint program boasts more than 100 million monthly users, Microsoft said in a blog post earlier this year.Simple though it is, the classic paint application has attracted artists who have used it to create intricate and sometimes popular works.
            Say hello to the meatheads and misfits of Camp Redblood!#mspaint #campredblood pic.twitter.com/KEeMHqcuSB Pat Hines, an author and illustrator who gained recognition for his use of Paint, explained its appeal in a 2014 blog post.For someone not naturally technically inclined, he found in Paint a precise way to create illustrations, he said: “It’s the one medium where the end result always lived up to what I had in my head.”In an interview on Monday with Inverse, a media website aimed at young men, he also praised it for its simplicity. “It’s just a nice, charming little program that you can make quick stuff in,” he said.
            Nic Cage Mt Rushmore - requested by Nick Butler. Hows about some more 5 words or less requests? Post them in the comments. pic.twitter.com/v4zIU5Zfh1 Despite the decision to end active development of the classic Paint program, Microsoft has bet big on design in recent years with hardware and software offerings focused on the creative process.Microsoft did not immediately respond to a request for comment.A version of this article appears in print on July 25, 2017, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Early Microsoft Program Moves Closer to Extinction.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.