
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
OCT. 26, 2017
Q. Are there any inexpensive Android apps that let you take a picture of a document and convert the photo to a Microsoft Word-compatible file that can be edited and printed?Advice and tips on the technology changing how you live.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.A. Optical character recognition (O.C.R.) apps are designed to convert images of letters in documents or other printed sources into text files you can edit in Microsoft Word or another word-processing program. O.C.R. apps for Android are available in the Google Play store, just as similar programs for iOS, Windows 10 Mobile and desktop systems can be found in the respective app stores. Some apps can even translate photographed text into different languages.If you use the Microsoft Office suite for writing and editing documents, however, a combination of Microsoft Word for Android and the separate Office Lens app is one way to snap, scan and edit when you are on the go. When you have both apps on your Android device, open Office Lens and take a picture of the page or printed material you want to convert into a Word file; the app can also convert a photograph of notes scrawled on a white board into text files.When you are asked to save and store the photo, choose Microsoft Word from the list of apps and services. The Android version of Word then takes over to open the file, covert the text into type you can edit — and then open the content in a word-processing document on your phone or tablet. You can edit it there, email it to yourself for use elsewhere or park it in a linked online storage site like OneDrive. The process works about the same way with the apps on an iOS or Windows-based device.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »