
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
JAN. 26, 2017
Q. Using Photoshop on the computer, how can I get a good black-and-white image out of a digital color photo? Converting it to grayscale takes out the color, but it doesn’t look like a real black-and-white picture.A. For the last 10 years or so, Adobe Photoshop has included a Black and White Adjustment Layer tool, which gives you much more command over the depth and richness of monochromatic photographs than you get by simply stripping out the colors in a grayscale conversion. The Black and White Adjustment Layer feature has been around since at least Adobe Photoshop CS3 in 2007, so if your software is less than a decade old, you should be able to use the tool.Steps will vary based on the version of Adobe Photoshop you have. In the CS6 edition of the program, one way to get there is to open a picture file, go to the Layer menu, choose New Adjustment Layer and then Black & White. A panel of sliders appears and you can use these (as well as styles from the preset menu) to fine-tune the appearance of the black-and-white image.Adobe’s site has short video tutorials and instructions demonstrating the technique, which is used by some professional photographers, among other methods for working in monochrome. (Adobe’s site also has a guide for converting color photos to black-and-white using the Adobe Photoshop Elements software for home users.)AdvertisementUsing dedicated add-on software for Adobe Photoshop is another way to convert your color snapshots into moody black-and-white images. Some of these plug-ins cost money and some may not work with your version of the program, but there are plenty to choose from online.Google’s Nik Collection of seven different specialty plug-ins is one set to consider. The software is free and works with Adobe Photoshop versions CS4 through CC 2015 for Windows and Mac systems. It runs on several versions of Adobe Photoshop Elements, Adobe Lightroom and Apple’s discontinued Aperture program, too.AdvertisementThe Silver Efex Pro plug-in is part of the collection and includes tools to emulate the look of certain film types — along with plenty of other adjustment controls to unleash your inner Ansel Adams or Berenice Abbott.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »