
Bits By                     
 QUENTIN HARDY
 
JUNE 2, 2016
What are we to make of Saudi Arabia’s investment in Uber?The desert kingdom agreed last week to put $3.5 billion into the ride-sharing service. It is one of the single largest investments in a start-up ever, and Saudi Arabia’s 5 percent stake values Uber at $62.5 billion, making it by far the most valuable pre-I.P.O. company in Silicon Valley.But the comparisons don’t end there. For example:■ Saudi Arabia pumps about 9.7 million barrels of oil a day, according to the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries. With oil at close to $50 a barrel, this was about seven days’ production. That doesn’t sound like much.■ At this valuation, Uber is worth $10 billion more than Ford, $20 billion more than General Motors, and twice as much as Tesla. It’s worth more than three times as much as American Airlines, and four times as much as United Airlines. That sounds like a lot, provided Uber someday turns those make-believe values into real ones.■ Uber’s value is about the same as the value by which Google increased in one day last July. Tech really is magical! So maybe this valuation, for a ride-sharing company that increasingly draws investors and consumers worldwide, is not so much.Advertisement■ In April, Uber agreed to pay up to $100 million to its drivers in a dispute over whether the drivers should be considered freelancers or employees. That is about 3 percent of what the kingdom just gave Uber, so it doesn’t sound like much.■ Driving from San Francisco to San Jose, the span of the Silicon Valley, costs about $200 on Uber. For the price of its investment, Saudi Arabia could treat its entire population of 31 million to that ride, if folks didn’t mind doubling up. Or one Saudi could just go across Midtown Manhattan 2 billion times. That’s a lot.AdvertisementAdmittedly, some of these comparisons are absurd. It is just not entirely clear which ones. If Uber is really changing both transportation and work worldwide, maybe Saudi Arabia just bought into something bigger than we can imagine. If not, well, at these prices the failure will be a big deal, too.A version of this article appears in print on June 6, 2016, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: What Saudis’ $3.5 Billion in Uber Buys.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »