
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
MAY 31, 2016
Q. Are there any zooming controls in the iOS 9 Camera app? If so, they are not immediately obvious as in alternative iPhone apps like Camera Plus.A. Apple’s own Camera app for its iOS 9 software does include a zoom function among other discrete controls that you can use to affect the look of your pictures as you snap them. When you have the Camera app open and a subject in frame, put two fingers on the screen and pinch them together or apart to make the app’s zoom slider appear.Once you see the zoom slider, you can move it with your finger to get in a little closer on your subject before you press the shutter button. In addition to tapping the shutter button on the screen, you can press either of the volume buttons on the side of the iPhone to take the picture.Apple’s Camera app has an equally subtle control for manually adjusting the exposure of the photo you are preparing to take, should you want to override the software’s automatic exposure system. When you have your subject framed, tap the screen to focus the camera where you want it. Once you tap to focus and the yellow box on the screen confirms your focus area, put your finger on the small sun icon that appears next to that yellow box and slide it up or down to adjust the exposure.If you are taking pictures of a moving object or have fluctuating lighting conditions, you can lock the exposure and focus for your shot. Just press your finger on the area of the image you want to use for exposure and focus until a small yellow banner that reads “AE/AF LOCK” appears on the screen. When you want to unlock the setting, tap the screen again.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.A version of this article appears in print on June 2, 2016, on Page B7 of the New York edition with the headline: Getting Up Close With Camera on iOS.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »