AdvertisementSupported byBitsBy Quentin HardyOracle Corporation may well be the single most important technology firm for businesses. Over 300,000 companies around the world use its database, and 100,000 customers have purchased its business applications. Even companies gunning for Oracle — like Amazon, Google and Salesforce — have used Oracle’s technology.Why does that matter, though, in the world of cloud computing, and what will Oracle’s approach look like? Perhaps like a Google search, only for every business decision.In a story I wrote, Thomas Kurian, who is building Oracle’s cloud, talked about how the company is deploying its $9.3 billion purchase of NetSuite through its little-known global network of 21 cloud computing centers. That is only the start of what Mr. Kurian has in mind.Besides selling applications more efficiently, he said, Oracle has pooled a large amount of information derived from over 1,500 data providers. “Marketers and brands find this very powerful,” he said in an email, as Oracle targets “over 45,000 different dimensions (demographic, geography, online and offline behavior).”In other words, what Google and Facebook know based on your online life, as well as what companies learn from your shopping habits, credit and warranty behavior, among other things. Oracle will also have data on what customers do after an ad campaign, so advertisers can check the outcome of a Google ad blitz.The same data-heavy approach can be used in functions of business like procurement, human capital management, sales and service, Mr. Kurian thinks. “We know how payrolls change around job titles, the rate of salary changes in Silicon Valley versus Bangalore, or how many people in a company are buying a $10 printer cartridge,” he told me in an earlier interview.This data analysis could become a valuable adjunct to many of Oracle’s database and applications businesses. Equally, it drives home how the competition in cloud computing is moving from cost savings — Amazon Web Services started by selling cheap computing and storage — to value creation through better insight.In that business, large amounts of data are a critical asset — what Mr. Kurian termed “trying to be at the center of data gravity.” Oracle definitely has a place there, perhaps a better one than any company.Other elements of success will most likely include reliability, ease of use and price. Oracle may be challenged there, precisely because it has built a big and complicated system of databases, bigger than anything Amazon, Microsoft or Google sells. It has to keep those older customers happy, even as it makes data easier to move around, in and out of the cloud, for different kinds of analysis.In that, Oracle has a powerful and little-noted asset: Despite its reputation as a hard-edge company, it has good engineers with decades of experience. Employees fly in and out of Google or Facebook, but they seem to stay longer, on average, at Oracle.That can be an advantage when it comes to working on complex projects. “Understanding complex software takes a year,” Mr. Kurian said. “Understanding the intentions behind it, which you need if you’re going to adapt it, takes even longer.”Slow, steady and reliable may make people at the fast, young tech companies snicker. Even as Oracle’s customers agree with Mr. Kurian’s point.Advertisement