
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
MAY 25, 2017
Q. How do I delete the list of things I’ve looked for with the Google search engine on Android?A. If you have a Google account that you use with the company’s search engine (or other properties like Gmail and YouTube) you can delete your search history list in the My Activity area. The My Activity area is Google’s record of your interactions with its products, and holds not only your past search queries and browsing history, but any requested Google Maps directions, watched YouTube videos and more.On your Android tablet, you can get to the My Activity area by opening the Chrome browser app and logging in at myactivity.google.com. When you are on the My Activity page, tap the three-dot More menu in the blue toolbar at the top of the screen and choose “Delete activity by.” If you want to wipe everything, click the “Delete by date” menu and choose All Time. If you just want to erase your Google search history, select Search from the drop-down list below the dates.To zap your past experiences with Google’s other sites and tools, select All Products from the menu instead. Tap the Delete button.The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.If you just want to delete the history of things you have searched for on the tablet using the Chrome browser, click the More icon in the top-right corner of the Chrome window and select History. Choose History from the top of the submenu and on the next page, click “Clear browsing data.” In the box that appears, select browsing history and any other data you would like to wipe and click the Clear Browsing Data button.The steps are similar for erasing your Google account and Chrome history on a desktop computer.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »