
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
MAY 23, 2017
Q. I uploaded a panorama picture to Facebook and it turned it into one of those interactive photos you can move around. Is there a way to make it just be a really wide photo?A. Facebook typically converts a panoramic photo with a field of view wider than 100 degrees into a “360 photo.” The 360 Photo feature, introduced last summer, creates interactive images. A viewer drags a finger or the mouse over it (or tilts the phone) to move through and see the full picture from different angles.If you do not want your panoramic shot to be a 360 photo, you can disable the interactive controls from your computer’s web browser. To do so, go to the posted picture, click the small gray menu icon in the top-right corner and choose Edit Post. In the thumbnail version of the image, click on the small circular icon in the bottom-right corner. Next, click the Edit icon (which looks like a paintbrush) and then turn off the checkbox next to “Display this as a 360 photo” before you click on Save.The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Facebook 360 photos can be created with the panorama feature that comes with camera apps for smartphones like the Samsung Galaxy S5 or later, or many of Apple’s recent iOS devices. Google has several camera apps that can take panoramic photos, including Google Street View for Android and iOS. Third-party panorama programs and photo-stitching apps also let you create images that capture much more of the scene.For those interested in creating high-quality panoramic and 360-degree photos, specialty cameras with multiple lenses and sharp image quality are another option — although they often cost between $175 and $325. The Wirecutter, a product-review site owned by The New York Times, recommends the Ricoh Theta S as its pick for the best 360-degree camera currently available.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.A version of this article appears in print on May 25, 2017, on Page B7 of the New York edition with the headline: Making a Still Photo From an Interactive.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »