By NICK WINGFIELDJULY 17, 2017
Nearly the entire board of Hampton Creek, a high-profile food start-up responsible for the Just Mayo condiment, resigned last month, leaving the company’s founder and chief executive, Josh Tetrick, as its only member.The resignation of the four board members was the latest sign of turmoil at Hampton Creek, a San Francisco-based company that has said it is using high-tech methods to create healthier, environmentally friendly foods.While Hampton Creek did not say why the board members resigned, their departures followed an effort by several Hampton Creek managers last month to change the company’s corporate bylaws in a way that could have given more control to investors, Hampton Creek has said.Still, the reason for the mass resignation of the board members was not clear. When Bloomberg reported new details of the departures on Monday, it said the board members had left because of friction with Mr. Tetrick.AdvertisementThe four board members who resigned last month were Samir Kaul, a partner at Khosla Ventures; Kathleen Sebelius, the former secretary of the Health and Human Services Department; Fedele Bauccio, chief executive of Bon Appétit Management Company; and Mustafa Suleyman, a founder of DeepMind, an artificial intelligence start-up acquired by Google.AdvertisementAndrew Noyes, a spokesman for Hampton Creek, provided what he said was a joint statement from the four board members in which they said they would remain advisers to the company.“We continue to fully support Hampton Creek and its C.E.O., Josh, in their exciting and important mission to change the food industry for the better of all people,” the statement said. “We will advise Josh and the team on strategies across all areas of its business moving forward.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Two other people — Bart Swanson of Horizons Ventures, an investment firm, and Lynne Benioff, the wife of Marc Benioff, the Salesforce.com chief executive and a Hampton Creek investor — left the board before the recent round of departures.Representatives for Ms. Benioff and Mr. Bauccio declined to comment while the other former board members or their representatives did not immediately respond to requests for comment.In a post on Hampton Creek’s website on June 5, the company said it had recently uncovered an attempt to “derail” its mission. It added that “three senior managers have been terminated for attempting to change our company’s corporate governance, which in the process would have stripped our employees of the autonomy to direct our long-term mission.”Mr. Tetrick told The Guardian at the time that the changes could have meant investors could gain greater sway over Hampton Creek, allowing them to pressure the company into accepting buyout offers and creating products that were not in harmony with its values.“Ensuring our employees maintain their ability to direct our mission is as critical as the technologies we deploy and the products we launch,” Mr. Tetrick said in a statement last month after firing the managers. “We will always protect this principle.”Mr. Noyes, the Hampton Creek spokesman, said the company was seeking to add new members to its board.A version of this article appears in print on July 18, 2017, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Board Members Abandon Hampton Creek Start-Up.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.