
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
JAN. 25, 2017
Q. I just got a Facebook friend request from someone who has been dead for at least a year. What is going on?A. Your existing contacts and Facebook’s algorithms sometimes send suggestions for potential new friends based on mutual acquaintances. All of these offers are listed under the same menu as direct friend requests, but if you are sure the invitation from the deceased did not originate as a suggestion from a third party, the person’s Facebook account was most likely either hacked or cloned.Facebook accounts are compromised in such ways for the usual reasons — to send spam, to facilitate identity theft or to buy things through a connected credit card. When no account owner is regularly logging in to use the profile page, some illicit behavior can go undetected for longer than it should. If you do get a friend request from someone who has passed away, report it to Facebook.To alert Facebook’s staff about the impostor, go to the profile page of the account that sent you the friend request. Click the menu button in the lower-right corner of the account’s main photo, choose Report and follow the steps. Facebook’s Help Center also has a form for those who do not have their own accounts with the social network, but want to report bogus friend requests sent by email.Like other social media services, Facebook has a way to convert the account of the departed into a memorial page so that friends are informed. However, the account owner needs to designate a legacy contact before death. The legacy contact can then do some administrative work on the profile page, like updating the profile photo and composing a pinned post for friends to see.Facebook’s Help Center also has instructions for reporting a user’s death to the company and having the account permanently deleted.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »