
Bits By                     
 QUENTIN HARDY
 
JAN. 25, 2017
Work may indeed be coming back to the United States. The real issue is whether human beings will do it.As Farhad Manjoo writes, American manufacturers now produce over 80 percent more than they did in 1987, using just two-thirds as many workers. The reason is automation, and here, political browbeating comes up against the laws of economics — robots are cheaper and often more efficient than people.Farhad’s statistic looks over a 30-year period. That underplays more recent advances like cheap and abundant sensors, cloud-connected computing systems and better algorithms. All of those things mean that robots are getting better at a fast rate. Throw in artificial intelligence, and robots are even faster at doing ordinary human tasks.That’s why we now see factories with just a few workers and lots of machines. Even the cloud data centers that sometimes power the robots don’t need that many workers. They are usually located in rural areas, sometimes in the shells of old factories, but they are full of robots.If you believe lots of Americans should work in American factories, it gets worse. As Farhad notes, many of the robots that are doing American work are built in China. China, eager to keep people employed and stay on top of all manufacturing, has made a business of making robots. Farhad doesn’t say whether the robot factories are automated.AdvertisementSo, how bad is this for American workers? Maybe not dire. According to one recent study, robots are likely to take away parts of tasks, but not entire jobs. People need to learn to work alongside robots.AdvertisementAdditionally, a big reason to have automated factories in the United States, instead of manufacturing in China, is to have a better grip on quality control and local distribution to major customers. That means jobs in operations management, loading and shipping. (Self-driving trucks are still a long way off, whatever the visionaries say.)Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Then there is the prospect that factories, like farms before them, will become largely automated and that people will find other work. Eric Schmidt, the executive chairman of Google’s parent company, Alphabet, has called this “outracing the robots,” which he sees as a global challenge to make people better at new science and math.There is also evidence that our highly automated, digital society has come to value human moments. Think of the rise of artisanal beers, the boom in personal trainers or the rising prices for live music. They are all signs that the valuable and scarce things people pay for have become exactly what a robot can never be: human.We can build a society of work around that, perhaps. At least until they build a robot that grows a nice, bushy, authentic-seeming beard, lives in Brooklyn and makes handcrafted cabinets. No sign of that out of China.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »