
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
JAN. 23, 2017
Q. My iPhone turns itself off when I’m in the middle of using it. Is this a battery issue?A. If you have an iPhone 6s model, you may be experiencing the technical issue that caused Apple to announce a battery-replacement program last month. The battery defect is not as serious as the problems with Samsung’s Galaxy Note 7 phones last year, and a note on Apple’s site states, “This is not a safety issue and only affects devices within a limited serial number range that were manufactured between September and October 2015.”If you suspect your phone might be one of the affected models, go to Apple’s site and search for the page titled “iPhone 6s Program for Unexpected Shutdown Issues.” Once there, you can type in your iPhone’s serial number to see if the device qualifies for a free battery replacement. Should your phone be eligible, you can have the work done at one of Apple’s retail stores, at an authorized Apple service provider or through Apple’s mail-in repair facility.If you have a different iPhone model (or an iPhone 6s unaffected by the battery problem), the unexpected shutdowns could be caused by a number of things. Make sure your phone is up-to-date with the latest version of the iOS software by opening the Settings app and tapping Software Update — or by connecting the phone to the computer and letting iTunes check for you. Update your apps as well.The condition of the iPhone’s lithium-ion battery could also be the culprit. Batteries do wear out after a period of regular use and recharging, and the power cell in an older model may need to be replaced. Apple charges $79 for a battery swap, but can also diagnose different power issues (as can other repair shops) if the battery is fine. The weather may also be a factor: Using the iPhone in extremely cold temperatures can temporarily decrease its battery life.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.A version of this article appears in print on January 26, 2017, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: Defective Battery in iPhone? Maybe.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »