By MICAH MAIDENBERGJUNE 28, 2017
Samsung said it plans to open a factory in South Carolina, as President Trump has tried in recent months to entice manufacturers into creating more industrial jobs in the United States.The Korean conglomerate said on Wednesday that it would hire over 950 people for the $380 million plant, which would make washing machines and other home appliances, in addition to conducting research and development. Samsung plans to open the plant in a former Caterpillar factory in the town of Newberry, about 40 miles northwest of the state capital in Columbia.Samsung joins a growing list of international companies that have said they would aid job creation in the United States, which was a central tenet of Mr. Trump’s election campaign. His statements about renegotiating free-trade agreements and potentially imposing import duties alarmed manufacturers overseas, which were suddenly faced with potentially losing access to the biggest consumer market in the world.In February, South Korean company LG said it would open a similar 600-person factory in Tennessee to make washing machines. Alibaba’s founder, Jack Ma, the Japanese tech investor Masayoshi Son and Terry Gou, the head of Foxconn, have also made big public plans to invest in America.AdvertisementWhile many international companies and business owners have promoted their plans to add jobs in the United States in recent months, a confluence of economic trends has been pushing them to invest in plants in America for years.AdvertisementTim Brown, a managing director of a supply chain research center at the Georgia Institute of Technology, said those factors include rising labor costs in China and demands from some retailers, such as Walmart, for more American-made goods. Pleasing the Trump administration would most likely be a “tiebreaker” after those concerns, Mr. Brown said.“It’s staying on the good side of the administration, keeping stability in global trade by shifting a bit more onshore,” he said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.South Carolina has been a major beneficiary of foreign investment. The state is home to factories from overseas companies including Rolls-Royce and BMW, which said on Monday it would add an additional 1,000 jobs to the state.South Carolina’s manufacturing jobs have grown 16 percent to 244,700 positions from June 2009 to May of this year, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, the fifth-fastest growth rate in the country. The state has attracted the investment in part because of its lack of unions and its transportation networks, which include the Port of Charleston.Samsung said in an email that it has been considering opening a home-appliance manufacturing plant in the United States for about three years. The company also operates a call center in South Carolina, where 800 people work in full-time and contract positions.With the investment, Samsung will receive financial incentives from the State of South Carolina tied to job creation.In a statement Wednesday, Gov. Henry McMaster of South Carolina said Samsung “will now be an important partner in ushering in an unprecedented period of economic growth and prosperity in our state.”Follow Micah Maidenberg on Twitter @MicahMaidenberg.A version of this article appears in print on June 29, 2017, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Samsung Joins Ranks of Foreign Firms Adding Jobs in the U.S.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.