By MIKE ISAACMARCH 28, 2017
SAN FRANCISCO — Snapchat pioneered a feature named Stories, which lets people share their photographs or videos to tell a tale about their day or trip or event. After 24 hours, the Stories disappear.The feature soon became so popular for the ephemeral messaging app that Instagram, the photo-sharing app owned by Facebook, took notice. Instagram adopted a feature similar to Snapchat Stories, called Instagram Stories, last year. Facebook’s Messenger service later followed suit, as did WhatsApp, another messaging app owned by the social network.On Tuesday, Facebook completed its mirroring of Snapchat Stories by rolling out Facebook Stories. The feature lets people share videos and photographs in the Facebook app, which will appear on top of the News Feed. After 24 hours, the Facebook Stories also disappear.Facebook introduced Stories as part of several changes to help its nearly two billion users around the world share more photographs and videos on its mobile app. Apart from Facebook Stories, the social network also promoted a new in-app camera that has visual effects like filters.Advertisement“We want to make it fast, fun and easy for people to share creative photos and videos with whomever they choose, for however long they choose — and the more we share with each other, the more open and connected our community can be,” Connor Hayes, a Facebook product manager, wrote in a blog post as part of the rollout.Facebook and Snap, the parent company of Snapchat, have had a complicated history. Facebook offered $3 billion to buy Snapchat in 2013, which a Snapchat co-founder, Evan Spiegel, turned down. Snapchat’s user base is much smaller than Facebook’s, but Snapchat has turned some of social networking’s conventional wisdom on its head, with ephemerality and more authentic connections.AdvertisementSnap went public earlier this month in what was one of the biggest technology public offerings for several years. Some investors have been skeptical of Snap’s prospects, given that the company is unprofitable and faces competition from a giant like Facebook. Snap’s stock has since fallen below the $24 at which it opened on the stock market, though shares remain above the I.P.O. price of $17 a share.Because of an editing error, an earlier version of this article misstated the timing of Snap’s initial public offering. It was this month, not last month.Because of an editing error, an article on Wednesday about a new Facebook feature that emulates a product by Snap, the parent company of Snapchat, misstated the initial public offering price for Snap. It priced its I.P.O. at $17 a share and opened trading on the stock market at $24; its I.P.O. price was not $24 a share.Follow Mike Isaac on Twitter @MikeIsaac.A version of this article appears in print on March 29, 2017, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Facebook Mimics a Feature From Snapchat.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.