

      By AUDREY CARLSEN and 
    
FAHIMA HAQUE

OCT. 13, 2017

Have you ever seen a post on Facebook that you were surprised wasn’t removed as hate speech? Have you flagged a message as offensive or abusive but the social media site deemed it perfectly legitimate?Users on social media sites often express confusion about why offensive posts are not deleted. Paige Lavender, an editor at HuffPost, recently described her experience learning that a vulgar and threatening message she received on Facebook did not violate the platform’s standards.Here are a selection of statements that combine examples from a Facebook training document with real-world comments found on social media. Most readers will find them offensive. But can you tell which ones would run afoul of Facebook’s rules on hate speech?Hate speech is one of several types of content that Facebook reviews, in addition to threats and harassment. Facebook defines hate speech as:Facebook’s hate speech guidelines were published in June by ProPublica, an investigative news organization, which is gathering users’ experiences about how the social network handles hate speech.Danielle Citron, an information privacy expert and professor of law at the University of Maryland, helped The New York Times analyze six deeply insulting statements and determine whether they would be considered hate speech under Facebook’s rules.Would this statement meet Facebook’s criteria for hate speech?YesNoWould you consider the previous statement hate speech?0%Yes0%NoWould this statement meet Facebook’s criteria for hate speech?YesNoWould you consider the previous statement hate speech?0%Yes0%NoWould this statement meet Facebook’s criteria for hate speech?YesNoWould you consider the previous statement hate speech?0%Yes0%NoWould this statement meet Facebook’s criteria for hate speech?YesNoWould you consider the previous statement hate speech?0%Yes0%NoWould this statement meet Facebook’s criteria for hate speech?YesNoWould you consider the previous statement hate speech?0%Yes0%NoWould this statement meet Facebook’s criteria for hate speech?YesNoWould you consider the previous statement hate speech?0%Yes0%NoDid any of these answers surprise you? You’re probably not alone.Ms. Citron said that even thoughtful and robust definitions of hate speech can yield counterintuitive results when enforced without cultural and historic context.“When you’re trying to get as rulish as possible, you can lose the point of it,” she said. “The spirit behind those rules can get lost.”A Facebook spokeswoman said that the company expects its thousands of content reviewers to take context into account when making decisions, and that it constantly evolves its policies to keep up with changing cultural nuances. In response to questions for this piece, Facebook said it had changed its policy to include age as a protected category. While Facebook’s original training document states that content targeting “black children” would not violate its hate speech policy, the company’s spokeswoman said that such attacks would no longer be acceptable. Illustration by Tracy Ma. Additional work by Sam Jacoby.Advertisement