AdvertisementSupported byState of the ArtBy Farhad ManjooThere’s a new form of digital censorship sweeping the globe, and it could be the start of something devastating.In the last few weeks, the Chinese government compelled Apple to remove New York Times apps from the Chinese version of the App Store. Then the Russian government had Apple and Google pull the app for LinkedIn, the professional social network, after the network declined to relocate its data on Russian citizens to servers in that country. Finally, last week, a Chinese regulator asked app stores operating in the country to register with the government, an apparent precursor to wider restrictions on app marketplaces.These moves may sound incremental, and perhaps not immediately alarming. China has been restricting the web forever, and Russia is no bastion of free speech. So what’s so dangerous about blocking apps?Here’s the thing: It’s a more effective form of censorship.Blocking a website is like trying to stop lots of trucks from delivering a banned book; it requires an infrastructure of technical tools (things like China’s “Great Firewall”), and enterprising users can often find a way around it. Banning an app from an app store, by contrast, is like shutting down the printing press before the book is ever published. If the app isn’t in a country’s app store, it effectively doesn’t exist. The censorship is nearly total and inescapable.But that’s not the end of this story. The banning of apps highlights a deeper flaw in our modern communications architecture: It’s the centralization of information, stupid.“I think the app store censorship issue is one layer of ice on the surface of the iceberg above the waterline,” said Eben Moglen, a professor at Columbia Law School and a leader in the free software movement of activists who have long been warning about the dangers of centrally managed, commercial software.For more than a decade, we users of digital devices have actively championed an online infrastructure that now looks uniquely vulnerable to the sanctions of despots and others who seek to control information. We flocked to smartphones, app stores, social networks and cloud storage. Publishers like The New York Times are investing in apps and content posted to social networks instead of the comparatively open World Wide Web. Some start-ups now rely exclusively on apps; Snapchat, for instance, exists only as a mobile app.Compared with older forms of distributing software, apps downloaded from app stores are more convenient for users and often more secure from malware, and they can be more lucrative for creators. But like so much else online now, they risk feeding into mechanisms of central control. In most countries, the Apple and Google app stores are the only places to find apps for devices running their respective operating systems. (There are more choices for Android app stores in China, where Google does not offer its store.)The internet’s earliest boosters considered it a magical tool to liberate people from restrictions on speech. The easy banning of apps suggests that if we let it, the internet could instead become something quite the opposite — one of the most efficient choke points of communication the world has ever seen.This was not how it was supposed to be. Decentralized communications was once a central promise of the internet. In the 1960s and 1970s, with the world on the brink of nuclear Armageddon, a cadre of academic and military engineers set out to create a communications system that contained no single point of failure or control. The network they came up with, which evolved into the modern internet, connected every machine to every other through many different paths. That way, if any portion of the network were wiped out by an attack, traffic would simply route itself to a new path.As the threat of nuclear attack diminished and the internet grew, its decentralized design became as much a political selling point as a technical one.“Ours is a world that is both everywhere and nowhere,” the activist John Perry Barlow argued in his 1996 manifesto, “A Declaration of the Independence of Cyberspace.” He predicted that because of the internet’s everywhere-ness, the world’s governments would never be able to lasso the digital realm. The computer scientist and activist John Gilmore told Time magazine in 1993, “The Net interprets censorship as damage and routes around it.”What the creators and early proselytizers of the internet did not foresee was the rapid commercialization of the network. The internet that Mr. Barlow and Mr. Gilmore envisioned was built and maintained by collectives of users; the one that users flocked to was tamed by companies whose very success turned them into some of the largest corporations on the planet.The internet is now no longer “everywhere and nowhere.” Just about all of its economic value is instead connected to two very specific somewheres: the San Francisco Bay Area and Seattle, the homes of Apple, Amazon, Google and Facebook, the four monstrously large companies that own the internet’s central information platforms. As these companies began to build ever-larger empires online, they have evolved into convenient choke points — the very points of control that the internet was designed to eliminate.Like all companies, online companies must offer some level of deference to governments. They obey local and national laws, court orders and national security authorities, and bend to other, less transparent means of coercion. They can fight governments — as Apple did when it battled the F.B.I. over unlocking a terrorist’s iPhone last year — but they often must pick their battles and balance their interests. Apple makes a significant fraction of its profits from China. Can it really risk all those billions to protect a handful of apps?Apple offered this statement in response to my queries on how it decides to take down apps: “For some time now the New York Times app has not been permitted to display content to most users in China, and we have been informed that the app is in violation of local regulations. As a result, the app must be taken down off the China App Store. When this situation changes, the App Store will once again offer the New York Times app for download in China.” Google declined to comment.But Eva Galperin, the director of cybersecurity at the Electronic Frontier Foundation, a digital rights activist organization, said the internet giants were not without leverage in this fight.“The flip side of that is, is China going to block the entire Apple App Store over a single app?” she asked. Interestingly, the internet giants’ hold on every aspect of online life works toward their advantage in battling governments.“The bigger a company is, the bigger the risk that blocking them will lead to riots in the streets because you have come between people and their pictures of cats,” Ms. Galperin said. “Those are the companies that governments are going to be more wary of blocking, and they should be the ones that stand up to government pressure. They have a special responsibility.”Users and app developers who are now at risk of being censored also bear some responsibility. When I asked Mr. Moglen at Columbia about app bans, he was incensed that I didn’t recognize The New York Times’s own complicity in this story.The Times, he argued, could have stuck with the old way of publishing news. The company could have declined to create a downloadable app and instead invested all of its engineering resources into making its news available on the web, anonymously. The Times could have refused to profile users for advertising purposes, or to have its articles hosted on Facebook, or to monitor what people read in order to recommend more articles to keep people engaged. In short, The Times could have refused to play the modern digital-publishing game. But like every other publisher, it went along.“What did you expect would happen?” Mr. Moglen asked. “China didn’t have to build a Great Firewall to do this. You all offered them an opportunity to piggyback onto your disrespect for the privacy and integrity and autonomy of your readers and users.”I don’t agree with Mr. Moglen that The Times disrespects its readers by offering a news app. (I think it’s a very nice app.) But he is right that a lot of people online walked blindly into the no-win position we are in now, where our only recourse against censorship might be the good will of a few giant corporations that control most of the internet.There has to be some other way. Let’s maybe work on finding it.Email: farhad.manjoo@nytimes.com;Twitter: @fmanjooAdvertisement