
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
JAN. 17, 2017
Q. I found a link to the Windows Insider program in my Windows 10 settings the other day. What is involved in participating?A. Windows Insider is Microsoft’s free preview program for its users to try out new works-in-progress versions of the operating system. This type of prerelease software is also known as a beta version and it usually still has bugs to be worked out before the final release to the public. Apple has a similar venture for volunteers called the Apple Beta Software Program.If your PC meets the system requirements and you join to become a member of the Windows Insider team, Microsoft allows you to download each new build of the next Windows version to learn, test and share your feedback. Microsoft is currently developing the new Creators Update of Windows 10, to be released this spring.Proceed at your own risk. On the sign-up page, Microsoft warns that you will be working with experimental software and that, “You might experience crashes, security vulnerabilities, data loss or damage to your device.” You need to share information about your use of the software with the company and you can pick a “ring,” or frequency of updates.If you have only one computer with specific programs you rely on to get things done, you may want to skip the Insider program and wait for the final version of the software to be publicly released. If you have a secondary PC (or a separate hard-drive partition) that is not vital to your computing needs — and you do not mind working with potentially unstable code — the program gives you a jump-start on new versions of the operating system.You can sign up using the Windows Insider option within the current Windows 10 Settings app — in Settings, go to Updates and Security, then Windows Update and select Advanced Options. You can also sign up for the program on the Windows Insider page on Microsoft’s website.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.A version of this article appears in print on January 19, 2017, on Page B7 of the New York edition with the headline: How to Beta Test for Windows.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »