AdvertisementSupported byTech TipBy J. D. BiersdorferQ. My husband and I started using the same account and password for iTunes years ago, before iCloud, but now it’s a problem. Neither of us wants to lose the music or apps on our authorized shared devices, but it is a real hassle that my phone messages get sent to him, and a variety of other issues have cropped up from sharing this account and password. How can I get my own account and still share the music and apps that our household has paid for?A. Apple’s Family Sharing feature for iTunes may help here, as long as the devices and computers used meet the hardware and software requirements. Family Sharing allows up to six people with separate Apple ID accounts to share one another’s iTunes, iBooks and App Store purchases as part of a “family group.”The family group is managed by one person, who plays the part of “family organizer” to set up the group and add members. All iTunes purchases within the group must be made on the same credit or debit card, so whoever controls the card linked to your existing iTunes account may want to play the part of family organizer. The other person can then create a separate new Apple ID to use for iMessage and other personal services.To use Family Sharing, the original Apple ID should be signed into iTunes and iCloud on a Mac running OS X Yosemite (10.10) or later. Any iPads, iPhones or iPod Touch devices in the mix need to be running iOS 8 or later.On a Mac, the family organizer can set up the group by opening the System Preferences icon from the desktop Dock (or choosing System Preferences under the Apple Menu in the top-left corner of the screen) and then clicking the iCloud icon. In the iCloud settings box, click the Set Up Family button and follow the instructions onscreen.To set up Family Sharing from an iOS device instead, tap the Settings icon on the home screen, tap iCloud and then tap the Set Up Family Sharing option. Proceed through the setup screens.Once you have set up the family group, the family organizer can invite the person with the newly created Apple ID to join the group and start sharing iTunes content. Apple notes that not all items can be shared, like in-app purchases or songs added to iTunes Match that were not purchased in the iTunes Store.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.Advertisement