AdvertisementSupported byBy David StreitfeldSAN FRANCISCO — In this season of random assassinations and political uproar, who could resist the temptation to supplement a high-strung and frightening reality with some gentle make-believe?In a few years, Silicon Valley assures us, we will have virtual reality, an all-encompassing escape into fantasy and illusion. In the meantime, as a sort of baby step, there is Pokémon Go, a game for children now reconfigured into a high-tech sport for all.It is, in essence, digitally enhanced bird-watching: Find fantastic creatures like Weedle and Golbat in the wild, collect as many as possible, and get personal satisfaction and bragging rights from doing so.You have probably seen the articles and photos that announced the arrival of a spontaneous, authentic and widespread obsession. Clumps of people swarming an area, staring intently at cellphones. A video of a Pokémon-playing driver sideswiping a Baltimore police car. Anecdotes about people falling off cliffs, discovering dead bodies and wandering unthinkingly into the street. And so perhaps you, too, have wondered if this is a game for you.To answer that question, I downloaded the Pokémon Go app, which involved giving up my rights to trial by jury, agreeing that my content could be the game’s content but the game’s content would never be my content, and stating I was not on the United States government’s list of prohibited or restricted parties. There were also many other clauses I didn’t bother to read.Then I charged my phone and proceeded to Dolores Park, a deeply green expanse in the center of the city that was the site of San Francisco’s first large planned Pokémon Go event on Wednesday.More than 9,000 souls avowed on Facebook they would be attending. If there were deeper mysteries to be plumbed about this new sensation, it would be here.It was 69 degrees, a perfect summer evening. The app told me I was passing the place where the poet Robert Frost was born. A plaque marked the spot, which was a location in the game. Pokémon quoted Frost:Such was life in the Golden Gate:Gold dusted all we drank and ate,And I was one of the children told,“We all must eat our peck of gold.”This was a promising omen, Pokémon telling me interesting things I never knew about a locale steps from my office. In the park, people spread languidly, smoking dope and playing with their dogs, not a care in the world. Slowly a group congregated near a statue of Miguel Hidalgo, the father of Mexican independence. It was nearly all young and overwhelmingly white. In other words, it looked like Silicon Valley — although with a greater female presence.Everyone stared down at their phones, catching the creatures that the app superimposed on the landscape. Aaron Orcino was drinking a can of beer he had brought along. The appeal, he said, “was the randomness. You don’t know what is going to happen.”But surely he had other excellent options for an evening’s entertainment?“No, this is the best thing,” he said.He was kidding, a bit. Mr. Orcino works at Facebook, and so at least some of his interest was professional. “I am studying it, learning the dynamics,” he said. “I want to see how long people can continue playing before Pokémon has to introduce a new game play element” — up the stakes, in other words.Fifty years ago, the F.B.I., worried that the youth of America might foment revolution, would infiltrate San Francisco demonstrations. Now the tech companies are doing the monitoring, wondering if games like Pokémon represent a threat that must be neutralized or an opportunity to be exploited. That’s progress for you.For what seemed like a long time, it wasn’t clear if anything would actually happen in the park. Television journalists did interviews. Haagen-Dazs distributed free ice cream. Less than three weeks old, Pokémon Go was fulfilling its destiny as a marketing and media opportunity.Finally we set off, perhaps 200 of us. A larger and somewhat more diverse crowd, maybe 600 or so, departed from the opposite terminus, the Ferry Building, and marched in our direction. Like just about everything else involving new technology, the size of the projected crowd had been seriously overhyped.We walked, collecting Pokémon along the way. Sergio Gonzalez was carrying a bottle of Veuve Cliquot Champagne, which he generously shared. “This is my childhood coming into fruition,” said Mr. Gonzalez, a sommelier who was 9 in 1996 when the original Pokémon debuted. “I’m reconnecting with my generation.”He turned to the woman he was walking with. “If we’re going to hang out, let’s be formally introduced,” he said. “My name is Sergio.”I read an email from Michael Saler, the author of “As If: Modern Enchantment and the Literary Prehistory of Virtual Reality” and an expert on the augmented life that technology companies are creating for us.He was guardedly optimistic. “Pokémon Go is making everything new again,” he said. “It’s not just the enticement of the hunt, but coming across other people doing the same thing. These apps are going from pure fantasy games to helping us appreciate reality a bit more. It shows that nature and fantasy aren’t opposites, that they can come together.”Mr. Saler added: “We always think of these innovations as a new heaven on Earth or the ninth level of hell. But it’s never one or the other, there are always disadvantages and advantages.”Actually, reading over the voluminous online commentary about Pokémon Go, I saw little criticism beyond some privacy concerns. Denunciations about the infantilizing of American culture? Not found. The triumph of pop culture is so complete no one even notices it anymore.Instead, there was widespread enthusiasm for getting people outdoors by any means possible. People on our trek agreed this was little short of a miracle.“If you had told me a week ago I should go outside, I would have said, What?” said Anton, a programmer who declined to give his last name. He said he now played Pokémon Go for hours at a time, running in parks to collect the animals.That’s one way to look at it. Another, of course, is that the game tethers people even more firmly to their devices in the one place they used to be able to at least partly escape from them: outdoors. On the Pokémon Crawl Survival Kit, posted on the Facebook page, among the items to bring was a “phone charger and portable charge.” Many did, their phone cables disappearing into their backpacks.We passed the Pokémon throng heading for Dolores Park. Our destination, the Ferry Building, was in sight and the hour was growing late. I had captured a few Pokémons, and Apple (which sold me my Pokémon balls), Nintendo (which originally developed Pokémon), Google (which is an investor in Niantic, which developed Pokémon Go), all had captured a little more of my money and attention and data. Such is life in the Golden Gate.“Interesting how one game can increase the stock price,” Anton observed in a heavy Russian accent. One analyst projected that Apple alone could take in $3 billion from downloads of Pokémon Go.I tried to take the train home to the East Bay, but something was obstructing the track. BART, perpetually overcrowded and frequently overwhelmed, said there would be no trans-bay service, perhaps for hours. It recommended a trans-bay bus but, in the crowd-counting spirit of Silicon Valley, I’d estimate there were at least 9,000 people at the terminal.There was nothing to do but summon Uber, which informed me that surge pricing was in effect and that normal fares would be somewhere between double and triple. My usual $5 trip home cost $76. Another peck of gold for Silicon Valley.Advertisement