By MIKE ISAACJULY 14, 2016
Silicon Valley techies have made little secret of their dislike for Donald J. Trump. On Thursday, they took their antipathy to the next level.A group of more than 140 tech entrepreneurs and executives published a scathing online letter opposing Mr. Trump’s campaign for the presidency and criticizing the presumptive Republican nominee for his potentially negative effect on innovation. The letter was signed by tech company chief executives like Stewart Butterfield of Slack and Aaron Levie of Box, as well as Evan Williams, co-founder of Twitter, and Steve Wozniak, an Apple co-founder, among many others.The letter specifically targeted some of Mr. Trump’s ideas about how to handle issues typically seen as central to Silicon Valley, including immigration, open communication on the internet and investment in technology infrastructure.“We believe in an inclusive country that fosters opportunity, creativity and a level playing field,” the group stated in the letter. “Donald Trump does not.”AdvertisementThe letter is notable for the show of unity by the diverse cross-section of technology denizens who signed it, who also included venture capitalists, technologists, academics and policy experts. But the letter lacked the signatures of some of the highest-profile figures in technology: the chiefs of the biggest Silicon Valley companies like Apple, Facebook and Google, among others.AdvertisementMany of the largest tech companies have taken pains to appear impartial in matters of politics. In May, allegations that Facebook was suppressing conservative content in portions of its site sent the company scrambling to repair relations with conservatives.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Thursday’s letter included a disclaimer that those involved were not speaking on behalf of their companies.Katie Jacobs Stanton, an executive at Color Genomics, a biotech start-up, and an organizer of the group that signed the letter, said her peers came together in recent weeks to draft the statement.“We wanted to optimize the letter and participants to show the diversity of the tech sector — from founders of the internet to founders and C.E.O.s of companies, from leaders of innovative social enterprises and start-ups to civil rights leaders that work on technology and social empowerment,” Ms. Stanton said in an email.Few in Silicon Valley have voiced support for Mr. Trump, at least openly. The exception is Peter Thiel, a venture capitalist and Facebook board member, who is set to speak  next week at the Republican National Convention.A version of this article appears in print on July 15, 2016, on Page A14 of the New York edition with the headline: More Than 140 in Silicon Valley Sign a Scathing Letter Against a Trump Presidency.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »