
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
OCT. 2, 2017
Q. Since Outlook for Android doesn’t offer text formatting for Microsoft mail accounts, what other email apps do?A. Microsoft’s Outlook app for Android puts its focus more on keeping up with a user’s inbox and schedule and less on mobile message composition. But if this is a personal mail account or your employer does not require you to use the official Outlook app for Android, consider sending and receiving your messages in another program. Several alternative apps offer text formatting and support a “unified” inbox‚ a sort of mail station for multiple services.If you are using an Android device, you probably already have Google’s own Gmail mail software installed. The current version of the Gmail app includes text-formatting options, and it allows you to add Outlook, Hotmail, Live, Office 365 and Exchange accounts to use right alongside your Gmail account. Yahoo Mail and other services can be added to the Gmail app, too.Advice and tips on the technology changing how you live.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.To make the move, open Gmail on your Android device and tap the menu button in the upper-left corner. When the menu pane opens, tap the small black triangle next to your existing user name and then tap Add Account. On the “Set up email” screen that appears, select the service you would like to add: Outlook, Hotmail and so on.The setup screens guide you through entering your user name and password for your Microsoft mail account. You may need to add a verification code if you have added extra security to your account, but when you are done, you should be able to read, write and format messages within the Gmail app but send them from your Microsoft mail address.If you do not use Gmail or do not care for the app, you can find other unified mailbox apps with more visual features in the Google Play store. VMWare Boxer, myMail and TypeApp are some to consider.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.A version of this article appears in print on October 5, 2017, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Apps That Support a ‘Unified’ Inbox.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »