
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
JAN. 9, 2017
Q. I have two different Instagram accounts. Is there a way to use both on my phone at the same time without constantly entering the name and password?A. If you are running version 7.15 or later of the Instagram app for Android or iOS, you can add up to five different accounts within the program. You can then switch among them without having to repeatedly log in and out of each account.To add multiple accounts, open the app and log into one of your Instagram identities. Once you have logged in, tap the icon on the far-right side at the bottom of the screen to go to your profile page. If you are using the Android version of the app, tap the Options button in the top-right corner of the screen. If you are using Instagram on an iOS device, tap the gear-shaped icon in the top-right corner.On the Options screen, scroll down to the bottom and tap Add Account. The following screen presents you with the Instagram login box, where you can enter the user name and password for the account you want to add. Once you supply the information, the app logs you into the second account.To switch between the accounts you have added, go to your profile page. A small black arrow (signifying that more than one account is available) should be visible next to the name at the top of the profile page. Tap the current account name and choose the alternate profile you would now like to use. The drop-down menu has an Add Account button if you would like to configure another account right there.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.A version of this article appears in print on January 12, 2017, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Multiple Accounts on Instagram.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »