
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
JAN. 5, 2017
Q. I want to download specific files from my iCloud account in order to have them physically on my laptop and delete them from iCloud. How do I do this?A. If your iCloud storage allowance is getting tight, downloading files to your computer’s hard drive and then deleting them from iCloud.com is one way to free up space. The steps for downloading files vary based on the apps and operating system you are using, but in this method, start by logging into your account at iCloud.com.If you have upgraded to and are using the iCloud Drive feature to store files, select its icon in the iCloud window. Find a file you want to download and click its icon once to select it. Next, click the download icon at the top of the browser window — the icon looks like a cloud with a downward-pointing arrow. A copy of the selected file should then transfer to your computer and land in the place you have designated downloaded files to go, like your computer’s desktop or its Downloads folder.If you have files created with Apple’s iWork for iCloud apps tucked away in the Pages, Numbers or Keynote folders within iCloud Drive, you can download those files the same way, by selecting them and clicking the Download icon. When you have checked the copies of the files you have downloaded to make sure they open properly and are now stored in a safe space on your computer, delete the iCloud Drive copy by selecting each file and clicking the trash can icon at the top of the window. You will see an alert box asking you to confirm your decision to delete.For instructions on downloading other types of files from iCloud, like photos, videos, mail, notes and contacts, visit Apple’s online guide to archiving or downloading copies of iCloud data. The page also includes steps for specific operating systems and devices using the iCloud Drive app.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »