
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
MAY 16, 2016
Q. Is it possible to post photos in other shapes besides square on Instagram?A. While the square format has been an Instagram hallmark since the service started in 2010, the company announced last year that it will allow users of its app to share photos and videos taken in the rectangular horizontal landscape and vertical portrait orientations. Specifically, Instagram now allows images with aspect ratios between 1.91:1 and 4:5. (Those who once preferred not to crop their photos for posting in earlier times had to resort to third-party apps.)To use the different shapes for your photos, you need to be using at least version 7.5 of the Instagram app for Android or iOS; a Windows 10 Mobile beta version of the official app was released this spring. When you have selected a photo to use from your device’s photo library, tap the small round icon in the bottom-left corner of the image to change from the square format to its natural landscape or portrait shape. (Tap the icon again if you change your mind and want to return to the square.)After the photo has expanded into its new aspect ratio, you can use your fingers on the screen to zoom in and reposition it. When you are satisfied, tap the Next button to move on to the filter-application-and-posting process. When you share the photo, it will then appear in its new rectangular shape in public, but you will see it as a cropped square in the collection of posted images on your Instagram profile page within the app.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.A version of this article appears in print on May 19, 2016, on Page B7 of the New York edition with the headline: Shape-Shifting in Instagram.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »