AdvertisementSupported byBitsBy Quentin HardyYes, Pokémon Go is a big deal. But not just for the reasons you think.The mobile game officially made its debut last week, and it has been a great success, with millions of downloads, avid fans and one of the first great applications of so-called augmented reality, in which digital objects are imposed on the physical world.In this case the objects are Japanese game characters, and the means by which they are “seen” is mobile phone screens in conjunction with geolocation technology. None of this is new: We have had augmented reality, geolocation and hit mobile games for several years.What is new about Pokémon Go is both momentous and banal: It is proof that millennials, for years the young generation, are getting old. Pokémon Go is their first mass-consumption nostalgia product.Mike Isaac, a reporter for The New York Times and a certified millennial, writes about his own obsession with Pokémon Go. (The link is available only to subscribers with Times Insider access.) He wasn’t wild about Pokémon when it was just on playing cards in the 1990s, but it’s clear he is highly familiar with the characters. Meeting the characters on the street through his smartphone is a little like revisiting his youth — like the pleasure we get on Facebook from reconnecting with people we knew glancingly in high school.He also writes about the fun of meeting other fans playing the game. While this isn’t in the article (I asked him; it’s an advantage of working in the same office), almost everyone he ran into who was also playing the game was also a millennial. One exception was a 15-year-old — but he was out with his older sister. There are no official statistics on who is playing this, but the anecdotal evidence, checking Twitter and the people writing about the phenomenon, is compelling.There have been other examples in tech, like the return of Polaroid cameras and Atari console video games from the 1980s repurposed for mobile phones. The Apple iPhone has 25 “classic” ring tones, including “old phone,” which makes a sound like a rotary phone ringing. There are also 28 “classic” alert tones. Who knew mobile phone alerts had been around long enough to be classic?Advertisement