By NICK WINGFIELDJULY 13, 2016
Most game players have never heard of Unity Technologies, but its software was used in the creation of a large number of the world’s top mobile games, including the current hit Pokémon Go.Now Unity has a much bigger war chest to strengthen its position as new categories of games, like augmented reality and virtual reality, start to take off.On Wednesday, Unity announced that it had raised $181 million from investors led by DFJ Growth. Others in the round include the China Investment Corporation, FreeS Fund, Thrive Capital, WestSummit Capital and the technology entrepreneur Max Levchin.Investors valued the company, which is based in San Francisco, at about $1.5 billion after the latest fund-raising round, according to two people briefed on the matter who asked for anonymity because the valuation was confidential.AdvertisementUnity makes what is known as a game engine, the code beneath the graphics and sound of a game that handles its basic operations. Game engines are essential for developers, greatly accelerating the completion of a game.AdvertisementUnity’s game engine is especially common among mobile games, which are growing far more quickly than traditional console games. Unity estimates that its engine is used in more than 31 percent of the 1,000 top grossing mobile games.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The company also estimates that its software is used in about 90 percent of the content created for Gear VR, a virtual reality platform designed by Samsung and the Facebook-owned Oculus that uses mobile phones as a screen.An even more promising area of growth for Unity in the near term could be augmented reality, which burst into the mainstream in the last week with the release of Pokémon Go.While Unity declined to comment on its valuation, the company’s chief executive, John Riccitiello, said in a phone interview that the company, which was founded over a decade ago, did not have an immediate need for the money. “On other hand, if we ever need that much money, it’s generally dumb to wait until you need it,” said Mr. Riccitiello, who was previously the chief executive of Electronic Arts, a game publisher.Unity also faces competition from other game engine makers with deep pockets. A few years ago, Tencent Holdings, one of China’s biggest internet companies, took a sizable stake in Epic Games, the maker of the Unreal Engine. Amazon has also released a game engine called Lumberyard with code licensed from Crytek, using it as a way to encourage developers to connect their games to Amazon’s cloud computing and Twitch streaming services.Unity previously raised $25.5 million from investors, including Sequoia Capital and WestSummit Capital. Barry Schuler of DFJ will become a Unity board member after the latest fund-raising round.A version of this article appears in print on July 14, 2016, on Page B7 of the New York edition with the headline: Unity Technologies Surges as Mobile Games Take Off.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.