
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
NOV. 29, 2016
Q. I got an email from Amazon for something I didn’t order. Should I be worried my account has been compromised? So far, nothing has happened.A. As with other large organizations like the Internal Revenue Service or financial companies, online thieves have created fraudulent Amazon names to try to fool people into divulging account passwords and other personal information. These phishing messages typically prey on common account-security fears, like someone ordering things and charging them to your credit card, notices of your password being changed or requests for you to update your payment information because of suspicious activity.Some phishing messages immediately give themselves away as bogus through bad grammar, typographical errors, a spoofed return address or other incorrect information. If you can easily spot it as a fake, report it to the company by forwarding the whole message as an attachment to stop-spoofing@amazon.com.As with other out-of-the-blue account notices you may get, do not click links in the message or open any attached files, even if it looks legitimate. If you are concerned about your account security or merchandise orders you may have forgotten, go directly to the Amazon site and log on under the Your Account menu at the top of the page.On the Your Account page, you can see a list of your past and pending purchases in the Your Orders menu — in case there is one you forgot. The Your Account page serves as a dashboard for all your Amazon account settings, so you can also change your password for the site in the Login & Security Settings.With the holiday gift-giving season in full swing now, expect to see more of these phishing messages. Amazon has its own guide to dealing with the problem and a page of tips to help avoid payment fraud.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.A version of this article appears in print on December 1, 2016, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Skip the Phish on This Menu.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »