
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
MAY 1, 2017
Q. In Windows 10, how do you make the screen and window backgrounds black instead of white?A. Windows 10 includes a “dark” theme that flips the backgrounds of some apps from white to black. The operating system also has a high-contrast mode available in the Ease of Access settings that inverts the white background with black, while also changing the colors of buttons and menus to make them stand out against the dark background.You can get to either option by pressing the Windows and I keys to open the Settings area, or by going to the Start menu and selecting the gear-shaped Settings icon. In Settings, choose Personalization and then Colors. In the Choose Your App Mode area toward the bottom of the window, select Dark; you can pick a custom accent color for your windows here, too.The dark theme works with several Windows 10 apps, but does not give everything a black backdrop. For example, the File Explorer and browser windows keep their white backgrounds. Some versions of Microsoft Office have their own dark themes, too, as does the Edge browser. Other browsers have similar add-ons; Google offers its own High Contrast extension for its Chrome browser.The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.For a more universal system switch from white to black, click the High Contrast Settings link under the app mode options in the Personalization box, or click the Ease of Access icon in the main Settings area. In the Ease of Access box, select High Contrast and choose a color combination that suits you from the drop-down menu.You can turn off or adjust either the dark theme or the high-contrast mode by returning to Settings.Apple includes its own contrast and color settings for the Mac in the System Preferences. To make adjustments, open the System Preferences icon in the desktop dock, click the Accessibility icon and choose Display.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.A version of this article appears in print on May 4, 2017, on Page B7 of the New York edition with the headline: Switching Windows From White to Black.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »