AdvertisementSupported byBy Farhad Manjoo and Mike IsaacEach Saturday, Farhad Manjoo and Mike Isaac, technology reporters at The New York Times, review the week’s news, offering analysis and maybe a joke or two about the most important developments in the tech industry.Farhad: Hey, Mike! How’s it going? I’ve been in Africa for three weeks. I bet you missed me a lot. It must be difficult to try to decipher the week’s tech news without me to guide you along. Well, dry your eyes, I’m back!Mike: I started going to therapy to deal with your absence. Turns out you and I are fine, but I have a whole lot of other issues. I hope we have good insurance.Farhad: So, on to the news. Remember the huge battle between the F.B.I. and Apple over the San Bernardino, Calif., terrorist’s phone? It all sort of fizzled this week: CBS News reported that after the F.B.I. finally got into the phone (without Apple’s help), it found nothing of significance on the device.Mike: LOL. After all that, nothing. It’s almost too perfect of an ending to the saga.Farhad: But nothing didn’t come cheap! The bureau spent at least $1.3 million to get into the phone, James Comey, the F.B.I.’s director, told a security conference this week.Has anyone spent so much for so little before? I mean, other than what our bosses pay you?Mike: I considered the free sandwiches left in the conference rooms at N.Y.T. HQ to be part of my “benefits package.”Farhad: O.K., so there were a lot of corporate earnings this week. Let’s run through them in a flash. The first three tell a familiar story — the era of personal computers is well and truly over.IBM reported a huge decline in revenue and profit, but the numbers were in line with what analysts were expecting. Intel, on the other hand, whiffed on its earnings numbers, and it announced layoffs of 12,000 workers, around 11 percent of its work force. And if Intel didn’t prove that surviving the crash of the PC business isn’t easy, Microsoft came along to underscore the point, announcing a dip in sales and profits.Mike: I still have no clue what these companies are going to do to, like, stop firing people. I guess just become a lot smaller?Oh also, I started watching back episodes of “Halt and Catch Fire” on Netflix and man, that show rules. It deals with the rise of the PC and the era when IBM, or Big Blue, reigned supreme. A different era entirely.Farhad: Oh — I kind of hated it. Anyway, newer tech companies aren’t faring any better. Google also missed analysts’ earnings expectations, in part because of lower prices paid for Internet ads. And Google was hit by another storm — European regulators announced the start of what looks to be a long-running investigation into whether the company is using its Android operating system to block competitors from users’ phones.Finally, there was Yahoo, the perennial basket case of the web industry. Its earnings report was also dismal: revenue fell 11 percent since last year, and the firm lost $99 million in the quarter. But the report was essentially overshadowed by Yahoo’s efforts to sell its Internet businesses. Bids for those beleaguered assets were due this week; among the contenders are Verizon and a few private equity firms. Yahoo’s board will now have to look through the bids to figure out which, if any, could save this ailing patient. Wish them luck!Mike: Poor Yahoo executives will only have their tens of millions of dollars in prenegotiated severance packages to turn to for comfort after their company is sold for parts. What a tragedy.Meanwhile I’m literally buying cases of ramen on Amazon to save money.Farhad: But let’s leave today’s tech giants — and your dinner plans — aside for a bit. Instead let’s talk about tomorrow’s giant: Uber. As you reported, the ride-sharing company settled a long battle in California and Massachusetts this week over the legal status of its drivers. So does this finally put to rest the controversy over Uber’s practice of keeping its drivers as contractors rather than employees?Mike: In short, not really. The settlement — which still is subject to the acceptance of the judge presiding over the case — applies only to California and Massachusetts drivers. There are still lawsuits in a bunch of other states, including Arizona, Florida, Pennsylvania. I’m sure more will pop up over time, since everyone loves to sue a company with deep pockets.Here’s what matters: Aside from the $100 million Uber said it would pay drivers involved in the suit, the company conceded to a bunch of new rules and policies that make things at least slightly better for drivers.For one, drivers can ask for tips now, something they weren’t able to do before (unlike Lyft, where they can get tips inside the app). Uber will also create a union-style “drivers association” in California and Massachusetts — just don’t call them unions! — so that drivers can air their grievances. And drivers won’t automatically be deactivated for canceling too many trips over time.That seems like a list of ways Uber can defend itself in other states in which it faces lawsuits. Essentially, the further away Uber gets from acting like actual employers with drivers — that is, the less control it exerts over the work force — the more room it has to call its drivers “partners” and not employees.Farhad: Those actually sound like pretty good reforms. If Uber does use this settlement as a template for other states, it seems like it could be creating what some labor experts had been calling for when this contractor-versus-employee dispute first came along — a new, third category of employment that sat somewhere between full-time and independent contractor work.This settlement sounds a bit like that situation: Uber drivers get some perks of employment, including people to complain to, and some measure of job security (even if it’s probably pretty weak). But they don’t get to be full employees — meaning the company does not have to pay them benefits, and the drivers are free to work as much or as little as they’d like.Am I wrong to see this as a pretty good middle-of-the-road fix to a thorny problem that had been vexing lots of on-demand companies?Mike: Only partly! As usual.The counterargument for some of this is that Uber can still shut drivers out of the app for short periods of time if they make too many trip cancellations. That’s a level of control that one could argue should be reserved for an employer-employee relationship.Anyway, the moral of the story is this seems to have been largely defused, though not entirely over and done with. Watch other states and the subsequent litigation closely.Good to have you back in town! Also, thank you for the bag of biltong you brought back. I ate every last bit and have yet to develop a stomach bug.Farhad: You’re welcome! I look forward to snacks from your next vacation. Actually, more than that, I look forward to your vacation.Advertisement