AdvertisementSupported byTech TipBy J. D. BiersdorferQ. How do I make a PDF out of a web page?A. If you are using Windows 10 or a recent version of Mac OS X, you can create a PDF from an open web page with the system’s Print command. For other systems, certain browser extensions or other software will do the job,In Windows 10, press the Control and P keys to call up the system’s print dialogue box, and under the Printer menu, select Microsoft Print to PDF. Make your other adjustments in the browser’s Print box, including the number of copies or the scale settings. Next, click the Print button. Instead of sending the page to the printer, Windows 10 creates a PDF of the page on your PC, depositing the file wherever you choose in the dialogue box.The OS X operating system for the Mac works the same way. When you have the page you want to convert to PDF open in your browser, press the Command and P keys to open the Print box. In the bottom-left corner of the box, click the PDF drop-down menu to get several conversion options. The OS X Print box also includes a menu command to save the PDF to the Mac’s Web Receipts folder, a handy place to store order information and invoices from online purchases.Those using older versions of the Windows operating system that do not have the Microsoft Print to PDF command can save web pages in other ways. For example, free software like CutePDF Writer enables most Windows programs that print to make PDF files; similar programs and browser extensions are also available around the web.Other programs can handle PDF conversion, too. The Google Chrome browser for Windows and OS X has a Save as PDF setting in its Print-command box, and the full Adobe Acrobat application (not the free Adobe Reader software) has an Adobe PDF toolbar for most browsers.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.Advertisement