AdvertisementSupported byTech TipBy J. D. BiersdorferQ. I was browsing online and noticed a small letter “i” in a circle. What does that mean? I use the Chrome browser.A. The web is full of sites that do not use the strongest security, and some browsers — including Google Chrome and Mozilla Firefox — now warn users when the page they are visiting may put their information at risk. In Chrome, that “i” symbol indicates a site may not be secure because it is using an unencrypted connection to exchange data with your computer. When you click the “i” on the left side of the Chrome address bar, you can see more information about the site, adjust some settings and possibly see a “Your connection to this site is not secure” warning.As you may have noticed from online shopping, sites with secure connections use a form of the HyperText Transfer Protocol Secure technology to encrypt data between their web servers and your computer; this helps protect your credit-card number and other personal information from being intercepted by someone else. These sites also have a security certificate from a presumably trusted authority that verifies the website’s identity and protects it from being modified. You typically see a padlock icon and a URL that starts with https:// when you have a secure connection.Chrome labels sites that use a plain HyperText Transfer Protocol connection (http://) without the encryption factor as “nonsecure,” because a third party could intercept your information — or the site could be masquerading as something else; try adding an “s” to the end of the http:// prefix to see if the site has a secure version. Sites that Google considers dangerous because of major security lapses or possible malicious intent get a red alert triangle in the address box, and sometimes a full-page warning.Google announced in September that it was “moving towards a more secure web”, and Mozilla recently added insecure-password warnings to the Firefox browser. Many sites around the web (including NYTimes.com and other news organizations) have also switched to https:// connections to improve user privacy and security.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.Advertisement