By STEVE LOHRJULY 6, 2017
Microsoft is overhauling its big sales and marketing organization in a move that will cut 3,000 to 4,000 jobs, mostly outside the United States.A Microsoft spokesman confirmed that “roles will be eliminated” and that most of them will be abroad, but he declined to be specific. The precise number is uncertain partly because in some countries, especially in Europe, labor laws require negotiations. The possible total was described by a person familiar with Microsoft’s plans, who was not authorized to speak on the record about them.Microsoft workers were notified on Thursday if their current job was affected. Some of the workers will get other jobs within the software company.“This is being done mainly to evolve the skill sets we need,” said Frank Shaw, a Microsoft spokesman.AdvertisementLast week, Microsoft described a sweeping realignment of its sales and marketing arm, which employs about 50,000 people worldwide. At the time, there were reports that “thousands” of jobs might be eliminated. CNBC reported on Thursday that “up to 3,000 jobs” would be cut as a result of the reorganization.AdvertisementIn an internal email last week, Judson Althoff, a Microsoft executive vice president, described the reorganization and its rationale. He wrote that there was “an enormous $4.5 trillion market opportunity” for Microsoft in the coming years.The sales and marketing changes, Mr. Althoff wrote, were intended to “enable us to align the right resources for the right customer at the right time.” Key areas of opportunity, he said, included expanding its cloud offerings in data analysis and artificial intelligence, and helping companies in every industry to become digital businesses, using Microsoft tools.Microsoft’s global head count is 121,500, a number that has increased in the last few years.The one major work force cutback at Microsoft came in 2014, when 18,000 jobs were eliminated.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.That followed shortly after Satya Nadella succeeded Steven Ballmer as chief executive. Mr. Nadella quickly determined that Microsoft’s $7.2 billion acquisition of Nokia’s mobile phone business in 2014 was a failure and started selling off pieces and closing it down. Most of the jobs cut at the time were related to Nokia. A year later, Microsoft took a $7.6 billion write-off.Microsoft is competing with Amazon, Google and other major technology companies, like IBM and Oracle, in the fast-growing business of delivering software as a cloud service instead of as traditional software loaded onto computers.Under Mr. Nadella, Microsoft has made that transition to cloud software delivery, and its personal computer software business is no longer considered an engine of growth.New capabilities are being built into the cloud services, notably big data analysis and artificial intelligence. And businesses require specialized cloud software, tailored for their industry.The Microsoft email last week said the reorganization was intended to sharpen its focus on “six priority industries”: manufacturing, financial services, retail, health, education and government.Sales and marketing jobs in the future will often require more technical and industry-specific knowledge than before, Mr. Shaw said. The reorganization and job cuts, he added, were an effort to match the company’s skills with the changing marketplace.A version of this article appears in print on July 7, 2017, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Microsoft to Cut Up to 4,000 Sales and Marketing Jobs.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.