AdvertisementSupported byBitsBy Farhad Manjoo and Mike IsaacEach Saturday, Farhad Manjoo and Mike Isaac, technology reporters at The New York Times, review the week’s news, offering analysis and maybe a joke or two about the most important developments in the tech industry.Farhad: Hello, Michael! Does anyone call you that? Were you always Mike? I’m just realizing I know nothing about you. And I’d like to keep it that way.Mike: Dad calls me Michael. Mom calls me Mikey. Brother usually signals that he wants to talk to me with grunting noises. Everyone else simply elides my first and last name to refer to me as “MikeIsaac.” I think I’m O.K. with it.Farhad: O.K. then, let’s run through some tech news. It was a big week for the big tech companies. Facebook continued to fend off fallout from the allegation that its “trending” news section suppressed conservative points of view. The outcry got so heated that Mark Zuckerberg, Facebook’s chief executive, arranged a kind of summit meeting with conservative pundits this week. From reading your story, I gathered that the right-leaning thinkers shared a lot of their grievances and Zuck smiled and nodded, but he didn’t agree to any substantive change in how Facebook runs its site. Also, they had fancy snacks. Is that right?Mike: Yeah! Cheese and fruit and everything. As you can probably imagine, it was mostly political theater by both Facebook and conservatives. Most of those in attendance used the moment to try and parlay it into meetings with Google and Twitter, which Republicans said they also felt slighted by. Now that I think about it, Silicon Valley is a lot like Washington, only with fewer suits.Farhad: It reminded me of one of the good old privacy dust-ups that Facebook regularly encountered during its rise. Those stories always followed the same pattern: Facebook would go too far with some privacy-invading feature, Zuck would beg forgiveness, the controversy would die and ultimately people would forget that they had any problem with the company and just keep using it more.By the way, to me, the best take on the question of Facebook’s bias came from The Onion: “Facebook Clarifies Site Not Intended To Be Users’ Primary Information Source,” read the headline.Mike: Wait a minute, no one ever told me The Onion was parody. I see it shared all the time in earnest on Facebook.Farhad: O.K., other companies. Amazon is expanding its slate of store-brand items — the company will now reportedly make food, diapers and other household goods, a move that should send shivers through execs at every consumer product brand.Mike: Did you know they were testing that private label under the name “Mama Bear” at one point? I find that deeply unsettling, despite having chosen a literal “mama bear” as my Twitter avatar for the last three years.Farhad: Jeff Bezos, Amazon’s head honcho, told a shareholder meeting that the company is planning to open more physical stores and add additional services to its Prime service. Also, if you were wondering, Amazon is still against the idea of its workers forming unions.Mike: Amazon doesn’t want to pay its waged workers more money, for fear of cutting into its bottom line? Color me shocked.Farhad: Also, Apple reported some huge, groundbreaking news, at least judging by the many dozens of tech reporters tweeting about it: The company opened a new store in San Francisco.Mike: Free marketing, right there. At least they have new shrubbery, I guess.Farhad: Finally, there was Google, which overflowed with announcements at its annual developer conference, which took place near its headquarters in Mountain View, Calif., this week.What’s new from the search giant? Mostly some updated takes on stuff you’ve seen before. There’s a voice-controlled assistant in the mold of the Amazon Echo; it’s called Google Home, and it will go on sale later this year. Google also showed off a new virtual-reality project called Daydream, which works something like Facebook’s Oculus. And the company unveiled some improvements to Android, its mobile operating system, and revealed it was working on a messaging app called Allo. Yes, a tech giant has released a messaging app — and they say Silicon Valley can’t innovate anymore.I’m kidding. Though there was a lot of me-too stuff at Google’s show, and though a lot of the stuff it showed off won’t be out for a while, I came away impressed by the range of Google’s ambitions. Google wants to add artificial intelligence to just about every digital experience we have, a goal that I think will make computers far easier to use. Does all this make you happy?Mike: Happy? I guess. I liked the shape of Google Home. It was pretty and light, sort of like I want to put a vase of flowers next to it. I started buying flowers for my living room from this guy, Guy, every week. It’s really pleasant, and probably the least metal thing I’ve done in my life.Anyway, Google’s Home device really cemented the idea that everyone is duking it out for control over the living room these days. And, theoretically, if any company could interpret and interact with human speech idiosyncrasies, it would be Google. They’ve had voice search for years. Perhaps it would work better than Alexa, Amazon’s assistant, which seems to not really understand a lot of voice commands — right now, at least.Funny thing is how all these tech companies seem to decide one path forward will be the way the future is supposed to play out. Facebook has a messenger app. Apple has iOS. Google, Yahoo, Twitter, kind of. Then the living room devices come from a few of these companies, plus virtual reality and cars. It’s as if all the tech C.E.O.s gather at some conclave every few years and decide what the future is supposed to look like, then spend the next decade competing with each other to get there.Farhad: It is interesting how when one company finds even a little bit of success with something, everyone else jumps on the bandwagon and soon we have 30 different versions of some dumb wearable that tells you that you forgot to take a walk this week.But I get why they do it: In tech, like in Hollywood, no one knows anything. I’m not saying tech execs aren’t smart — they’re probably smarter than you and me, though that’s not saying much — but I bet they’d all acknowledge they’re mostly lucky. And paranoid. You never know what’s going to be a hit. So you try out a lot of stuff, and when one thing looks like it’s gaining any traction, you pour a bunch of money into it because if you don’t, you might miss out on the next big thing.Mike: I will say, the nerd in me was most excited by this thing Google rolled out called “Instant Apps” — essentially a way to try to use apps on your phone without having to download them and set them up. It’s supersmart, considering I download a bunch of apps that I might use once, then delete a few weeks later after never opening them again. Google executives said my excitement did in fact betray my nerdiness, but that’s just fine.Anyway, what do you think the future holds for us, Farhad? Do you ever get called anything besides Farhad? I call you “Fhad” on Twitter a lot, so that counts.Farhad: Nope, other than a painful period in the third grade that I don’t care to recall, people have mostly just called me Farhad. I like it that way. And the future? For me, it holds one more week of not chatting with you! Until then, Mikey.Advertisement