By STEVE LOHRAPRIL 18, 2016
IBM delivered a quarterly performance that shows the steady headway it is making in new businesses led by cloud computing and data-analysis software, like its Watson artificial intelligence technology.But the company’s transformation remains very much a work in progress. The erosion of some of its hardware and software products continues to be a drag on growth and profits, overshadowing the gains in the new fields.IBM on Monday reported a 21 percent decline in net profit from continuing operations, to $2.3 billion in the first quarter that ended March 31. Its operating earnings per share fell 19 percent, to $2.35 a share, though that was above the average estimate of Wall Street analysts of $2.09 a share, as complied by Thomson Reuters.The company’s first-quarter revenue declined 5 percent, to $18.7 billion. But that was ahead of analysts’ consensus forecast of $18.29 billion. After adjusting for the impact of currency translation, revenue was down 2 percent.AdvertisementUntil IBM turns the corner, with the new businesses growing faster than older lines decline, the outcome of the company’s renewal campaign remains in doubt.Advertisement“They may be doing the right things, but the jury is still out on whether the transformation is afoot,” said A. M. Sacconaghi, an analyst at Sanford C. Bernstein & Company.IBM shares fell about 5 percent in after-hours trading, a retreat from a recent uptrend for the stock. In the first three months of this year, IBM’s stock price had increased 17 percent.The report for the quarter was cluttered with special gains and charges. The gains included a $1 billion rebate from the Japanese tax authorities for a previous overpayment. IBM’s revenue was helped somewhat as the businesses of recently acquired companies were counted, including the data and computing assets of The Weather Company.IBM took a $1 billion charge in the quarter for severance and other payments for workers who are being laid off. Analysts have estimated the number of affected workers at 14,000 or more worldwide.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.For the last decade, IBM has taken yearly charges of $500 million to $1.5 billion for these cutback programs, which it calls “work force rebalancing.” As it is laying off workers in some parts of the business, it is typically hiring elsewhere. Yet in the last two years, IBM’s total employment has declined 12 percent, to 377,757 workers at the end of last year.Martin Schroeter, IBM’s chief financial officer, characterized the big restructuring charge as a step to accelerate IBM’s moves into new fields. He said there were many thousands of open positions at IBM, and that by the end of the year, the company’s total employment could be as high as it was at the end of last year.“This is part of the shift into new growth areas that require different skills,” said Mr. Schroeter, who added that “90 percent” of the layoffs in this round were outside the United States.IBM has also changed the way it reports its financial results. Starting with the first quarter, the company is breaking out its data analytics business — “cognitive solutions,” in IBM’s phrase — as a separately reported division, and adding another group that includes its cloud computing business. Hardware and software are no longer reported as individual businesses, but are blended into the other divisions.AdvertisementIBM says it made the reporting change to more accurately reflect its recast collection of businesses, like Watson, which is part of its cognitive unit.But analysts say the new reporting structure complicates the task of tracking some effects of IBM’s strategy. For example, it is not easy to tell if its overall software business — new products and old — is growing or shrinking.The businesses IBM has targeted for growth and investment, like Watson and cloud, grew by 14 percent in the quarter. Still, these so-called strategic initiatives, while showing encouraging gains, are not yet large enough to turn around the fortunes of the company as a whole.A version of this article appears in print on April 19, 2016, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: IBM Shows Progress in New Businesses.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.