By KATIE BENNEROCT. 20, 2016
SAN FRANCISCO — The chairman of Sequoia Capital, a prominent venture capital firm in Silicon Valley, caused a hubbub late last year when he said the firm did not have female investors in the United States because it did not want to lower its standards.Now Sequoia says it has hired its first female investment partner in the United States.She is Jess Lee, 33, an entrepreneur and the former chief executive of Polyvore, a fashion start-up that allowed customers to clip, save, style and shop for clothing online. She begins at Sequoia in November and will be a partner in the firm’s current fund. Her hiring was reported earlier by Bloomberg.“We’re thrilled to welcome Jess to Sequoia,” said Roelof Botha, a partner. “Her rare blend of product and design sensibility, leadership and grit will make her a tremendous asset to Sequoia founders and our team.”Ms. Lee said in a statement that she “couldn’t be more excited to join Sequoia to help the next generation of founders build transformative companies.”AdvertisementThe number of female venture capitalists and how they are treated has been a topic of intense debate in Silicon Valley. Last year, the venture firm Kleiner Perkins Caufield Byers went to trial over allegations of gender discrimination filed by Ellen Pao, a former partner. Ms. Pao lost the case.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Michael Moritz, Sequoia’s chairman, spoke to Bloomberg  late last year about female investors, saying, “what we’re not prepared to do is to lower our standards” for hiring. He added, “But if there are fabulously bright, driven women who are really interested in technology, very hungry to succeed, and can meet our performance standards, we’d hire them all day and night.”A spokesman for the firm declined to address the comments by Mr. Moritz. Sequoia has been an early investor in companies such as LinkedIn and WhatsApp.AdvertisementWhile Ms. Lee is Sequoia’s first female investment partner in the United States, Sequoia has three female investment partners in China and two in India.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.