
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
DEC. 26, 2017
Q. How long does the camera record when you take a Live Photo on the iPhone? Can you change the amount of time captured in the file or make a video out of one?A. The Live Photos feature captures 1.5 seconds of the scene before and after the picture is taken, including a snippet of audio and any movement on the part of the subject. Live Photos have been available since the iPhone 6S model arrived in 2015, but for those who prefer unmoving pictures, you can turn off the effect by tapping the Live Photos bull’s-eye icon in the Camera’s menu bar.Advice and tips on the technology changing how you live.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.If you are running iOS 11 on your iPhone, you have additional editing features you can use with your Live Photos if you want to make them play longer. When you have a Live Photo open on your phone, put your finger on the screen and swipe up to see the Effects panel, where you have the choice of Loop, Bounce or Long Exposure. Tap an effect to add it to your image.The Loop effect turns your Live Photo into a repeating video. The Bounce effect plays the photo’s motion forward and then in reverse, and Long Exposure blurs the motion in the image, which gives the picture an artsy look. You can change or remove any of the effects you add to a Live Photo by swiping up and returning to the Effects panel.Third-party apps like Lively and Motion Stills also give you the ability to edit Live Photos on your iPhone and turn them into animated GIFs to share with friends. The latest version of the Photos program that comes with the High Sierra version of the Mac operating system can also edit the Live Photos shared to the computer with the iCloud Photo Library or imported from the phone. The Loop, Bounce and Long Exposure effects are available on the desktop as well.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.A version of this article appears in print on December 28, 2017, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Adding Even More Life to Live Photos.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »