
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
DEC. 25, 2017
Q. The cards in the Google app on my Android phone show me recipes, but I recently became a vegetarian and many of the suggested dishes include meat. How can I get meatless suggestions?A. The personalized information cards displayed in the Google app show you things based on your stated interests or past search history, but you can update your dietary preferences in the app’s settings. Start by opening the Google app.Advice and tips on the technology changing how you live.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In the Android version of the Google app, tap the Menu icon in the upper-left corner of the screen and choose Customize from the menu. Scroll down to the More Preferences section and select Cooking. On the Cooking preferences screen, you can turn the recipe recommendations on or off — and you can also choose to see only vegetarian, vegan or pork-free recipes displayed in your feed. Tap the Done button in the upper-right corner when you have made your adjustments.Google has been highlighting recipes in search results for years, but some users first began to notice a regular “Culinary Inspiration” card offering recipes in the Google app feed earlier this year. The recipe cards, likely catered to those who have searched for cooking information, recipes or food before on Google, were spotted not long after the company announced it was rolling out a more visual way to display results from recipe searches. Last April, Google also introduced a recipe audio narration by its Google Assistant software running on the Google Home speaker.The Google app is also available for those using iOS devices, although the customization controls are not as specific. To make adjustments to your feed, tap your profile photo in the upper-left corner of the screen and on the Setting screen, tap Feed.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.A version of this article appears in print on December 28, 2017, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Telling Google That Meat Is Off the Menu.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »