
Bits By                     
 JIM KERSTETTER
 
MARCH 24, 2017
Those rules meant to protect the privacy of your internet activity that you may have heard about? Never mind.In a 50-48 vote mostly along party lines on Thursday, the Senate moved to strip consumer privacy rules that had just been created in October. Next week, the House is expected to go along with the Senate measure, and the rule changes would then head to President Trump for his signature.The move by the Senate means telecommunications carriers can “continue tracking and sharing people’s browsing and app activity without asking their permission,” Cecilia Kang writes. “An individual’s data collected by these companies also does not need to be secured with ‘reasonable measures’ against hackers.”The rules were supposed to go into effect at the end of this year.Washington’s zeal for privacy protection may have cooled, but that doesn’t mean you don’t have other means to keep what you do out of other people’s hands.AdvertisementVarious types of software can help protect internet traffic from prying eyes. A number of browsers, for example, have “stealth” settings that make it difficult to track a web surfer’s activities.The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Other software can make it difficult to pinpoint where that traffic is coming from. Perhaps the best known is Tor. Created and managed by a nonprofit digital privacy group called the Tor Project, it is used by a wide range of people, from activists trying to avoid government censorship or surveillance to people conducting illicit business on the so-called dark web.AdvertisementThere are also a number of apps that can encrypt internet messages. Signal, free software offered by a company called Open Whisper Systems, may be the best known of them.Another example among many free software packages designed to prevent eavesdropping and hide a user’s internet address is the Hotspot Shield software offered by AnchorFree, a company based in Mountain View, Calif.Hotspot Shield gained popularity among activists during the Arab Spring in 2011 and since then has been widely used amid unrest in Turkey, Brazil and — since the presidential election in November — the United States. Well over 500 million copies of the software have been downloaded around the world, the company says.More tech news:The C.I.A. developed tools to spy on Mac computers by injecting software into the chips that control the computers’ fundamental operations, according to t classified government documents published on Thursday by WikiLeaks.Hours after the terrorist attack in London, online sleuths thought they had identified the assailant. In Twitter posts, Facebook messages and a television news program, people pointed to Abu Izzadeen, a radical British cleric who was imprisoned last year. But they were wrong.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »