By FARHAD MANJOO, MIKE ISAAC and DAISUKE WAKABAYASHISEPT. 3, 2016
Each Saturday, Farhad Manjoo and Mike Isaac, technology reporters at The New York Times, review the week’s news, offering analysis and maybe a joke or two about the most important developments in the tech industry. This week, they needed extra help and roped in new tech reporter Daisuke Wakabayashi.Farhad: Good morning, Mike! How was your week? The highlight of mine was a reply-all-apocalypse that struck The New York Times. Someone accidentally sent an email to the whole company (it was about travel deals), and then reporters stationed all over the planet started emailing back to ask to be removed from the list. For about 10 minutes on Thursday, the paper of record ground to a halt. It was fabulous.Mike: I briefly considered trolling everyone on the list, but did not want to end up memorialized on some internet gossip rag. It was a good call, in retrospect.Farhad: O.K., on to tech news. Mark Zuckerberg was traveling the globe this week to talk about Facebook’s commitment to connectivity and world peace and whatever other stuff billionaires say. He went to Italy to meet the pope, and then he stopped in Nigeria, where he pointed out that Facebook would soon offer internet connectivity to sub-saharan Africa through a satellite to be launched this week.AdvertisementThat was the plan, at least. On Thursday morning, the rocket carrying the satellite blew up on the launchpad in Florida. The rocket was made by SpaceX, Elon Musk’s private space company. I’m no rocket scientist, so I have no insight into how this happened, but I do think there’s a lesson here: This is what happens when you try to put memes into space.AdvertisementMike: That sounds fairly scientific to me.Farhad: Now some news from the world of venture capital: Andreessen Horowitz has doubled its investors’ money, but that’s kinda sad, bro.Mike: Don’t call me that.Farhad: That’s according to The Wall Street Journal, which found that one of the top names in tech investing lags some of its competitors in the industry’s most important metric — how much green they return to their investors.To understand this story it helps to go over the Andreessen Horowitz back story. The firm was founded in 2009 as a new kind of V.C. Rather than just give start-ups money, Marc Andreessen and Ben Horowitz, storied tech entrepreneurs, would also help companies with hiring, communications and other functions that young firms need. The model has been widely copied and hailed as game-changing, and A16Z, as the firm is known, is now recognized as one of the Valley’s elite investors.But apparently its returns don’t match its reputation. The Journal said other top V.C.s had made a lot more money for their investors. Two funds raised by Sequoia Capital last decade have returned eight times their investors’ money, and its 2010 fund is up 5.5 times. Benchmark’s 2011 fund has rung up returns of 11 times’ investors’ money. A16Z, by comparison, is at around two times its investors’ money so far. That’s better than a lot of other venture firms, but not earth-shattering.Mike: For what it’s worth, A16Z got one of its partners to write a very long takedown where they use a lot of math to explain why The Journal is wrong.I think the Journal story is ultimately a small stain on the firm’s reputation, but it won’t deter the firm from raising another giant fund in another year or two. And, um, entrepreneurs will probably still accept the millions of dollars that A16Z wants to give them. So this is more about pride than it is dollars. And if there’s one way to get under a venture capitalist’s skin, it’s to ding their egos. (Same goes for me, too.)Farhad: Finally, let’s talk Apple, which is in the news for a couple reasons. First, it’s holding an event next week to introduce a new iPhone and a new Apple Watch. Second, it was hit with a $14.5 billion tax bill in Europe, after officials at the European Commission concluded that Ireland had unfairly given the company a tax break. Apple denies any wrongdoing and has vowed to fight the ruling.The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Given your general inability to discuss anything intelligently, Mike, I thought it would be a good idea to invite an expert Apple watcher to help us out.AdvertisementMike: Fair.Farhad: Say hello to Dai Wakabayashi, the newest tech reporter at The Times. Dai joined us to cover Google, but he made a name for himself as an ace reporter on all things Apple.So, Dai, tell us: Is Apple’s event next week going to be as boring as we’ve all been hearing for months?Dai: First of all, I feel so honored to be included in this newsletter. It’s always been a dream of mine to make a cameo here — although I feel like a third wheel to your Bert and Ernie routine.Mike: If it makes you feel any better, I’ve always considered you our very own Grouch.Dai: Uh, thanks. So, here’s my take on Apple. The vast majority of Apple events these days are boring in the sense that many of the new features leak in advance and, even if they don’t, it all seems incremental compared to the jump from BlackBerrys and flip phones to the iPhone.That said, boring doesn’t mean that there won’t be meaningful changes. Take Touch ID. When it came out, people weren’t losing their mind over it, but I think it’s significantly improved the iPhone experience and it’s allowed for things like Apple Pay. Step by step, little by little, a lot of boring announcements culminate into interesting things.For this coming iPhone, we’re looking for the headphone jack to go away, the introduction of dual lens cameras and, of course, there will be the usual assortment of thinner, lighter and better. Saying goodbye to the headphone jack is already controversial. And I’m sure it will spawn hot takes aplenty. I’m curious to see how Apple walks the tightrope to justify why the jack needs to go away.Mike: I had the hottest take ever over this, as it may literally make me take my cellular service elsewhere and switch to Android. I can’t imagine a life without my cheap, crummy headphones.AdvertisementDai: Ultimately, the collective yawn over the new iPhones is troubling for Apple. It reminds me of when I used to cover consumer electronics in Japan. A few years after televisions shifted from bubble-butt to flat, the “new innovations” from Sony, Panasonic and others couldn’t move the needle. Your new TV is 20 percent thinner and 10 percent brighter? It has better audio and comes equipped with Wi-Fi? Zzzzzz.I realized at some point that nothing could beat that initial change of your TV, which once weighed as much as an N.F.L. lineman, becoming sleek enough to mount on a wall. Before you knew it, prices were plunging and TV businesses were losing money by the billions.Mike: So you’re saying my 3-D, 4K TV is not going to appreciate in value over time? I make the worst investments.Farhad: I pretty much agree with Dai, except I do think there’s one more revolutionary feature left for smartphones — it’s just that nobody has figured out how to achieve it yet. I’m talking about much longer battery life, something like twice or longer than we get now. Until some company delivers that, most smartphone innovations will be incremental rather than revolutionary, because for most people, battery life is the only major problem with the current crop of phones. In all other ways, they work pretty miraculously.Mike: I think Samsung tried to do that and it literally exploded in their face.Farhad: Oh man, I think I just said too much about my love of smartphones.Mike: Anyway, thanks for coming in, Dai, and welcome to the tech team. Happy Labor Day weekend!We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.