AdvertisementSupported byBy Steve LohrIBM delivered fresh evidence on Tuesday of the financial challenge it faces in navigating a difficult transition to new technology businesses. Yet the company’s leaders insisted its performance also showed that its strategy was succeeding.The corporate computing giant reported declines in fourth-quarter profit and revenue. Its results were depressed by a strong dollar. But even without the currency impact, IBM is struggling as its new growth areas like data analytics and cloud computing are not yet big enough to overcome the slippage in its traditional hardware, software and services businesses.“IBM says this is all part of the transition process, and it may well be,” said A. M. Sacconaghi, an analyst at Sanford C. Bernstein & Company. “But as far as evidence that the transition is really taking hold, we haven’t seen that yet.”IBM reported a 19 percent drop in net profit to $4.5 billion. Its operating earnings fell by 17 percent to $4.84 a share. That was slightly above the average forecast of analysts of $4.81 a share, as compiled by Thomson Reuters.Quarterly revenue fell 9 percent to $22.1 billion, just ahead of the $22.02 billion forecast by analysts. Excluding the currency effect, revenue was off by 2 percent.For the full-year 2016, analysts had expected IBM to earn $14.97 a share on revenue of $79.44 billion. But in a conference call, Martin Schroeter, IBM’s chief financial officer, said the company expected to make about $13.50 a share in 2016.The foreign exchange effect would most likely reduce profits by $1.10 a share this year, Mr. Schroeter said in an interview, adding that many Wall Street analysts had not taken account of the surging dollar, which reduces the reported value of sales abroad.In after-hours trading, IBM shares fell by more than 3 percent. During regular trading, IBM fell $1.92 a share, closing at $128.11.There are some signs the IBM strategy is unfolding as planned, if more slowly than investors would like. The new businesses are showing encouraging growth. During 2015, the company’s gross profit margins grew slightly and its cash flow increased.In a statement, Virginia M. Rometty, IBM’s chief executive, focused on the rapid growth in the new businesses. “We continue to make significant progress in our transformation to higher value,” Ms. Rometty said.Under Ms. Rometty, IBM has invested aggressively in new fields, despite the near-term impact on quarter-to-quarter profits. Those bets are beginning to pay off. For the full year, IBM said that its so-called strategic growth initiatives — big data analysis, its Watson artificial-intelligence software, cloud computing, mobile applications and security — grew by 26 percent.Those products now account for $29 billion in yearly revenue, or 35 percent of corporate sales.The new offerings typically combine software and services, IBM’s two largest businesses. So real success for the IBM strategy will be when the software and services groups, as a whole, are growing. That would be the financial proof that IBM’s future is arriving faster than its legacy products are eroding.That has not happened yet. Revenue for the software group fell 6 percent, after adjusting for a stronger dollar.Mr. Schroeter described the software slippage — down more than analysts had anticipated — as another byproduct of IBM’s commitment to the long term. The company is offering its large corporate customers more flexibility in their contracts, as more of them want to buy software as a cloud service rather than in traditional software licenses.The shift, Mr. Schroeter explained, makes sense as IBM increasingly supplies its software as a cloud service. This way, he said, customers are more likely to keep using IBM’s technology rather than switch vendors.“It’s the right thing to do for our clients,” he said. “In the long term, we think we will benefit from that.”IBM’s cloud business grew by 57 percent in 2015, and it now operates 46 cloud data centers worldwide.This year, analysts say, will probably be another one of challenge and transition for IBM. The current executive team, led by Ms. Rometty, still has more time, they say.“IBM’s management is convinced they have the right strategy,” said Steven Milunovich, an analyst at UBS. “And they are going to get another year or so to prove it.”Advertisement