
Bits By                     
 PUI-WING TAM
 
MARCH 28, 2017
Uber released a report on Tuesday detailing the diversity of its work force. The numbers starkly show the lack of women and minorities at the ride-hailing company.About two thirds of Uber’s employees are men. Of the company’s technology jobs, 85 percent are held by men. Half of the company’s workers in the United States are white.These statistics are not surprising. Silicon Valley technology companies have long grappled with improving diversity. At Google, 69 percent of the overall work force is male; 81 percent of the company’s tech jobs are filled by men. In the United States, 59 percent of Google’s employees are white. The ratios are similar at Facebook, Apple and other tech companies.The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The backdrop of Uber’s report is important to remember. The company is releasing diversity numbers for the first time as it faces tremendous pressure to revamp its workplace culture. Uber has faced criticism for an internal culture that promotes performance at all costs, and it has been accused of doing little to clamp down on sexual harassment.AdvertisementMike Isaac, a technology reporter at The New York Times, writes that Tuesday’s diversity report is just one step that Uber plans to take toward fixing its company culture.Advertisement“What has driven Uber to immense success — its aggressions, the hard-charging attitude — has toppled over,” Liane Hornsey, Uber’s human resources chief, told The Times. “And it needs to be shaved back.”More tech news:Facebook mirrors Snapchat (again) with Facebook Stories. The new feature lets people share videos and photographs in the Facebook app that will disappear after 24 hours.There is some evidence that robots are winning the race for American jobs. Last year, two leading economists described a future in which humans come out ahead. But now they’ve declared a different winner: the robots.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »