AdvertisementSupported byBy Katie BennerSAN FRANCISCO — John Doerr, one of Silicon Valley’s most prominent venture capitalists, is stepping back from the day-to-day management of his firm, Kleiner Perkins Caufield & Byers, in a changing of the guard.Mr. Doerr, 64, who joined Kleiner Perkins in 1980, will become its first chairman. The shift reflects a reprioritization of his time from managing the firm to grooming the next generation of leaders.While Mr. Doerr will continue to focus on the investments that he has already made and the board seats he currently holds, he is no longer responsible for the success of new investments made out of new funds.“I see this chair role as a ‘player coach,’” Mr. Doerr wrote in a blog post on Thursday. “I’m super enthused about our next gen leaders and the future.”It’s unclear who will replace Mr. Doerr as the person who oversees Kleiner Perkins, a 45-year-old investment firm that helped put the venture industry on the map and made Silicon Valley the center of the technology start-up world. Mr. Doerr raised the profile of the firm in the late 1990s and in the early 2000s with his hugely profitable investments in Amazon and Google.In his blog post, Mr. Doerr said his management duties will be split for now among several Kleiner partners — Ted Schlein, Beth Seidenberg and Mary Meeker. Mr. Doerr also highlighted the firm’s younger generation, including Mike Abbott, Eric Feng, Wen Hsieh and Mood Rowghani.Kleiner Perkins has hit a rough patch in the last decade or so with investments in the green energy sector, such as the electric-auto company Fisker Automotive. Fisker filed for bankruptcy and was bought by a Chinese auto parts company.At the same time that Kleiner Perkins was focused on clean technology, rival firms including Accel Partners and Greylock Partners were betting on new Internet companies including Facebook, which ended up proving to be hugely successful. Kleiner Perkins has since de-emphasized its investing in green technology and has refocused on tech investments.More recently, Kleiner Perkins was thrust into an unwelcome spotlight for its treatment of women. A former employee, Ellen Pao, sued the firm for gender discrimination in May 2012. The case resulted in a high-profile trial that Kleiner won last year.Mr. Doerr did not refer to the case in his blog post.“The venture industry is changing all the time,” he wrote. “We must keep changing to better compete and serve entrepreneurs.”Advertisement