AdvertisementSupported byTech TipBy J. D. BiersdorferQ. Do any digital video recorders provide a fix for the “Heidi Bowl problem,” where recorded shows are cut off because of live programs running late?A. For those who are unfamiliar with it, the Heidi Bowl conundrum refers to a 1968 event in which many football fans missed the thrilling end of a televised game between the New York Jets and the Oakland Raiders because NBC switched to a children’s movie about a young Swiss girl promptly at 7 p.m. Eastern time. Decades later, incomplete recordings continue to frustrate viewers on both sides of the situation, as others are dismayed to find the late game has bumped the start time of the Sunday-night television programs — and recording stopped before the end of the delayed show.While American DVRs cannot automatically adjust themselves to real-time programming changes, the technology to extend recording times for live events has arrived. In 2015, the entertainment-data company, Gracenote, announced a DVR Extend service it was offering to cable- and satellite-television providers to automatically adjust the DVR to record the whole game. Check with your provider about the availability, as your options will vary based on your service.Many companies are starting to step up to the problem. Last year, Comcast introduced the DVR Auto Extend feature for its Xfinity X1 platform, which gives you the option of adding an extra half-hour of recording time (if needed) when you set up the DVR to grab a live event. TiVo and DirecTV offer a similar tool for some DVR models when you set up a recording.Even without a prompt to automatically extend the recording time for live events, most DVRs give you the power to tack extra time beyond a show’s standard time slot when you schedule the recording. (Just adding an extra hour of recording time to whatever you want to snag on Sundays may serve as a workaround during football season.)Some providers also let you select a channel (instead of a specific show) in the electronic programming guide and record it for hours to make sure you get what you want on the DVR. If you are not at home and have the mobile DVR-management smartphone app from your service provider or TiVo, you can use it to add more recording time on the go.Mangled recordings are not a universal problem. Digital video recorders in some parts of the world can automatically adjust to unplanned schedule changes when live events run long, thanks to agreements between broadcasters and service providers. In this system, called “accurate recording,” the broadcaster transmits signals that mark the beginnings and ends of shows so the recorder knows when to actually start and stop instead of relying on preprogrammed start and stop times.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.Advertisement