

      By BRIAN X. CHEN

UPDATED September 13, 2017

At Apple’s special event commemorating the 10th anniversary of the iPhone, the company announced upgrades for the iPhone, including a premium model that starts at $999, and the Apple Watch, which will include cellular connectivity in some models. Brian X. Chen, our lead consumer technology writer, has responded to some of the most notable questions about the new devices submitted by hundreds of readers.
I have an iPhone 5S and though it is small...what do I gain from the new iPhone coming out tomorrow? What is the $1K about? I am maybe an overage user of iPhone functions but feel I need a university degree in iPhone to keep up.Gail, the upshot of the $999 iPhone is that you will have more buying options than you did before. In the past, when Apple announced new iPhones, your options were to get the iPhone with the standard-size screen or the one with the bigger screen. With the addition of the $999 iPhone, known as iPhone X, your options will now be to get the normal-size iPhone, the big-screen iPhone, or the iPhone X with some fancy features that you won’t get on the cheaper models.What will you gain? That depends on your preferences. If you are a gadget enthusiast who needs the latest and greatest cutting-edge technology, the premium iPhone would benefit you. But if you’re just in the market for a phone that is superior to your iPhone 5S in terms of speed, camera performance and so on, you will be happy with a normal iPhone.Will there be a replacement for the SE? Will it be more like the iPhone 7 or the new phones? Will it be available at the same time as the larger phones?Lee, I have heard there will not be an update for the iPhone SE, the model with the 4-inch screen. That doesn’t mean the product is dead — it could be refreshed at a future event. Or Apple could always release a new one and announce it on the Apple Store website.How much longer can Apple sustain creating increasingly expensive iPhones? At some point they will become inaccessible to the average consumer.Hi Evelyn -- while Apple is adding a premium tier to its iPhone family, the iPhone overall isn't getting much more expensive. The base model of the iPhone costs $699, up from the $649 starting price of past iPhones.The big question will be: How good are the normal iPhones compared with the premium one? Will they be so unappealing in comparison that it would be foolish not to get the premium iPhone? I imagine that Apple would want the vast majority of customers to continue buying the $699 iPhone, while the tech enthusiasts gravitate toward the premium one. But we will have to see.Once Apple releases this iPhone do you think they will present it as an iPhone edition type product as they did with the Apple Watch and discontinue it after its year of sale do to its price point or do you believe that they will continue this trend of releasing high end products for the niche market.Malhar, it’s a sharp observation that Apple tested this strategy with the Apple Watch. When it released the Apple Watch, the premium gold Apple Watch Edition cost upward of $10,000. Apple quietly discontinued that model about a year later. However, last year it introduced a ceramic version of Apple Watch Edition that costs about $1,300. I presume that Apple used the watch pricing to conclude that a good number of people would buy a $999 iPhone.Will the new Apple Watch let one listen to an audio book without needing the iPhone nearby?In theory, yes. Apple did not demonstrate an audiobook playing on an Apple Watch at the event, but the point of the Apple Watch gaining cellular capability is that it can work independently from the iPhone. Assuming an audiobook provider like Audible offers an Apple Watch app, you should be able to stream audiobooks with just a cellular Apple Watch.Without a home button how will Touch ID work for banking and other apps?On the $999 iPhone X, Touch ID has been replaced with Face ID, a feature that uses an infrared camera system to scan your face. That will unlock the phone and also log into sensitive software like banking apps. On the cheaper iPhone 8, which starts at $699, Touch ID remains.Any indication whether a data plan for Apple Watch 3 will be necessary to take advantage of cellular connectivity features?The Apple Watch will share the same phone number as your iPhone. However, carriers will have different pricing structures, so you will have to look up your carrier on Apple’s webpage to see your options. On AT&T;, for example, a feature called NumberSync will fold your watch’s cellular plan into your iPhone’s. Adding the watch to your account will incur an additional charge of $10 a month to share your phone plan’s data, voice and texts on the watch.Does the facial recognition work in the dark?According to Apple, facial recognition on the iPhone X will be able to scan your face in the dark. It works by spraying infrared dots all over your face to get a good scan. It remains to be seen how well this does in bright sunlight, like at a beach. Experts say infrared gets blown out by bright light.Are all the features of the 8 Plus that you write about also available in the iPhone X?There are many differences between the iPhone 8 Plus and the iPhone X. The iPhone 8 Plus has an LCD screen, and the iPhone X has an OLED display that takes up nearly the entire face of the device by eliminating the borders around the screen. Both the iPhone 8 Plus and iPhone X have glass bodies, the ability to be charged wirelessly and a dual-lens, depth-sensing camera system. But the main difference is that the iPhone 8 Plus has a home button and a fingerprint sensor for unlocking the device. The iPhone X eliminates the home button and fingerprint sensor and scans your face to unlock the device.Will there be an iPhone X Plus ?There is only one screen size for the iPhone X: 5.8 diagonal inches, which is bigger than the 5.5-inch screen on the iPhone 8 Plus.Does iPhone X have cordless charging?The iPhone X and iPhone 8 phones support magnetic induction, a method of charging also found on the Apple Watch. You can basically place the phone on a pad and it will charge without plugging a cable into the device. However, it is misleading of Apple to call this “wireless” charging, because a wire still needs to be plugged into the inductive charging medium, such as a charging pad or mat.Will there be more data, photo space in the new phones?The base model of the iPhone 8, which costs $699, includes 64 gigabytes of storage, which is double the 32 gigabytes of storage included on the base model of the iPhone 7. However, the maximum capacity for the new iPhones remains at 256 gigabytes.Screen and facial recognition aside, it looks like the hardware between the X and 8 are similar. Any reason someone who is unimpressed by the facial recognition would still upgrade to the X over the 8?I suspect the vast majority of iPhone customers will be happy with the iPhone 8, whereas technology enthusiasts with disposable income will prefer the iPhone X. The main differentiator, aside from the facial recognition features, will probably be the screen technology: The OLED display technology on the iPhone X has better color accuracy and higher contrast ratio while being thinner and lighter than the LCD on the iPhone 8.I was wondering if the iPhone 8 and iPhone X will support the traditional lightning cable wired charging? Thank you and I look forward to hearing from you!Yes, all the new iPhones still include a Lightning connector in addition to supporting inductive charging through their glass bodies.Is the iPhone X unbreakable? I'd hate to pay $1,000, drop it, have have to replace it. A few years ago I heard about unbreakable sapphire technology, but not so much anymore.Apple did not claim that the iPhone X is unbreakable. It is very unlikely that the device, which has a glass body, would be unbreakable. I always recommend putting a protective case on a smartphone.Face ID —  if you need someone to open your phone will they be able to?  Apple did not demonstrate the ability to add an extra face, like a spouse’s, to your iPhone. However, you could still share your passcode to let someone else unlock your phone.IPhone 8 looks like an incremental change to the 7, still lagging on Samsung quality screens and edge-to-edge display -- why isn't Apple leapfrogging the competition with “wow” innovation? Your insight, please.Indeed, the new Samsung phones, the Galaxy S8 and the Galaxy Note 8, have edge-to-edge displays using OLED technology. By contrast, Apple’s iPhone 8 and 8 Plus still have bezels, or borders, and use LCD technology; only the iPhone X has the edge-to-edge OLED screen. It may come down to supply constraints. Analysts say Samsung manufactures the vast majority (more than 90 percent) of OLED displays. There is also bad blood between the two companies: They have fought each other over copyright infringement. So catching up with Samsung’s screen technology is proving difficult for Apple.Does it make sense to buy a phone through your wireless service provider or should I go straight to the Apple store? And does it make sense to pre-order? Do we know when phones will be in stores?In my experience, it makes little difference to buy your phone from your carrier or from Apple directly. The only notable difference is that Apple offers its own protection plan for the iPhone and a less-confusing option to buy the phone unlocked outright at full price. If I’m buying online, I prefer to order iPhones directly from Apple, but if I’m lining up at a retail store on Day 1, I prefer buying from a carrier because the lines tend to be shorter than the typical line at the Apple Store.Will any of the new models have a headphone jack?Say R.I.P. to the headphone jack, at least on Apple products. None of the new iPhones have headphone jacks, and I don’t think Apple will turn back on its commitment to wireless audio accessories.When I bought my iPhone 6 The New York Times advised on the most economical way to purchase a new phone. What is your advice now?No matter how you pay for an iPhone — buying it outright for full price or choosing an installment plan in which you spread out the cost in monthly payments — you will end up paying the full price of it. There are no interest fees incurred for paying through an installment plan, so that is a fine option if you don’t have $700 to $1,000 to burn on a new iPhone right away. If you like to upgrade every year, there are annual upgrade installment plans that let you trade in your phone for a new phone each year. The issue with that is you are essentially leasing the phone like you would a car; you get on a constant treadmill of buying phones. As for me, I’m an advocate of buying your smartphone outright and holding onto it for as long as you can.Is the battery better?Apple says the iPhone X has two more hours of battery life than the iPhone 7. The iPhone 8 has the same battery life as the iPhone 7, and the iPhone 8 Plus has the same battery life as the iPhone 7 Plus. I would take these estimates with a grain of salt: Because the phones are faster, you will probably use them more, and battery life may feel shorter as a result.Entering passwords to open various apps and sites is one of the real burdens of technology. Is facial recognition a potential replacement for passwords? A few of my apps and sites are opened by fingerprint recognition but these are few in number.Yes. Password management apps like LastPass and 1Password, which use one master password to access a vault of all your passwords, will be able to use Face ID to enter the master password. Any app that uses Touch ID, Apple’s fingerprint recognition software, to log in with a password will be able to support Face ID.What angle does iPhone X have to be at to unlock it? I check my phone often as it lies on my desk. Does Face ID mean having to actually pick up your phone each time you want to unlock it? If so that would be a huge step backward!Apple hasn’t yet clarified what the angle limitations are for Face ID. However, it did say that Face ID would work when the phone is flat on a desk.How much better is the camera? I am starting a photo project that will be shown on my web page. I am looking for best resolution possible, and maximum richness in presentation from taking to adjusting then showing again.I will reserve judgment of the cameras until after I have reviewed the new iPhones. However, I will point out that the iPhone 8 Plus and the iPhone X have a new feature called Portrait Lighting. It uses a dual-lens camera system and an image-signal processor to analyze a scene and blur out the background and focus on the subject, a DSLR-like effect. The iPhone 7 Plus had Portrait mode, which was the same effect, but Portrait Lighting is supposed to do a better job at separating subjects from the background because the software maps out your face. As for the resolution, the new iPhones have 12-megapixel sensors, the same as the last iPhones.Does the iPhone facial recognition work while you are wearing glasses? Or do you have to take them off for the phone to recognize you? Apple says Face ID will work even if you are wearing glasses or a hat. The system learns more about your face over time. Face ID should also work in the dark and be able to scan your face when the phone is laid down flat on a table.When are the new phones available? If I am eligible for an upgrade do I have to pay full price?The iPhone X arrives in stores Nov. 3. The iPhone 8 and 8 Plus arrive Sept. 22. If you are eligible for an upgrade on a contract, you should be able to pay a subsidized price. However, many carriers will probably offer some discounts if you switch from your network. You should also be able to save some money if you trade in your old smartphone.What's the difference between iPhone X and Samsung Galaxy S8? Other than facial recognition and the screen, I don't see much difference, especially for the price.  Indeed, both the Galaxy S8 and iPhone X have a 5.8-inch edge-to-edge display. The main difference will be what’s inside. Apple’s A11 chip is expected to be significantly faster than the Samsung Galaxy S8’s processor. Other than that, the obvious difference is that the iPhone is tied to Apple’s ecosystem of apps and services, whereas the Samsung phone relies on Google’s Android platform.When watching movies and video on the iPhone X in full screen, will the video play under and around the camera notch or will the video be reduced and played just on the border of the camera notch?The video will play under and around the camera notch. The notch is a bit of an eyesore, but Apple demonstrated apps and photos filling up the entire screen.Hi Brian! I'm retired and hanging on to a 5S, although I'm ready for an upgrade. My clumsy fingers are struggling to hit keys for texting. I'm interested in the iPhone 8, is there a $100 benefit to the 8 Plus for casual texts? I slip the 5S in my front pocket, but it sounds like I might need to switch to a rear location like all the skinny teens. Thanks in advance.Frank, I think the larger screen on the iPhone 8 should help you type more easily — the bigger keys will probably be easier for you to see and press. For what it’s worth, I use the iPhone 7, which is about the same size as the iPhone 8, and have no trouble fitting it in my front pocket. (And yes, I wear skinny jeans!)Will wireless charging work through a phone case: Does it matter what the case material is?Yes, you will be able to charge via induction through many phone cases. But thickness may be a factor. Belkin, for example, says that with its induction charging pad for iPhone 8, cases up to 3 millimeters thick will work. The good news is that if you owned an iPhone 7, the same cases will fit snugly on the iPhone 8. The Wirecutter, a product recommendations site owned by The New York Times, has a nice guide on the best iPhone cases.Advertisement