By TIFFANY HSU and NELLIE BOWLESAUG. 30, 2017
GEORGETOWN, Del. — Travis Kalanick, the former chief executive of Uber, won a preliminary victory on Wednesday in his nasty legal clash with the venture capital firm trying to oust him from the ride-hailing company’s board when a judge ruled that the dispute should be moved to arbitration for now.The decision, by Judge Samuel Glasscock III of Delaware Chancery Court, was the first in a high-profile case brought this summer by the venture capital firm, Benchmark, one of Uber’s earliest and largest shareholders. The ruling will enable Mr. Kalanick to shield some, if not all, of the squabble — and any potentially damaging disclosures — behind closed doors.The judge declined to dismiss the complaint, instead sending it to an arbitrator to decide whether the full case should be handled in arbitration or moved partly back to court at a later date. Benchmark lawyers, who had argued for trying the case in open court, said the company was willing to arbitrate parts of its complaint.Judge Glasscock said he was concerned that stockholders excluded from the arbitration process might still be able to seek legal recourse and said he would revisit the issue if any came forward.AdvertisementIn its suit, Benchmark has accused Mr. Kalanick of fraudulently obtaining control over board seats in 2016 by withholding information about internal company operations.AdvertisementThe judge said there was “overwhelming evidence” that Uber’s voting agreement had been drawn up with the intention that an arbitrator weigh whether disputes should continue in arbitration, rather than taking controversies straight to court.“Mr. Kalanick is pleased that the court has ruled in his favor today and remains confident that he will prevail in the arbitration process,” a spokesman for Mr. Kalanick said. “Benchmark’s false allegations are wholly without merit and have unnecessarily harmed Uber and its shareholders.”A Benchmark spokeswoman said: “We look forward to presenting the facts as the case proceeds. This case is fundamentally a question of integrity and values, and the facts will fully support Benchmark’s position.”On Tuesday, Uber announced that Dara Khosrowshahi, the current head of online travel company Expedia, would  be its new chief executive.The battle over Uber — the world’s most valuable privately held company, at $68.5 billion — is being closely watched in Silicon Valley and beyond. In a cozy courtroom in this small city in southern Delaware, lawyers for both sides overflowed into the gallery. Shervin Pishevar and Stephen Russell, early investors in Uber, were on hand as well.Mr. Kalanick resigned as chief executive in June amid a series of scandals, including a trade secrets lawsuit filed against Uber by the autonomous-car developer Waymo, accusations of a smear campaign against a rape victim in India, a federal investigation into a secret software program, and accusations of rampant sexism and bullying within the company. This week, Uber confirmed that it was cooperating with a Justice Department inquiry into whether company managers had violated the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act, an anti-bribery law.Benchmark, which has also invested in tech firms like eBay and Twitter, is seeking to immediately remove Mr. Kalanick from the board.AdvertisementMr. Kalanick was not in the courtroom on Wednesday. Instead, he was at Uber’s headquarters in San Francisco, introducing Mr. Khosrowshahi to a staff meeting.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Khosrowshahi, who plans to move into his new job on Tuesday, told the group that Uber should go public in the next 18 to 36 months. He also alluded to Uber’s recent scandals, saying: “This company has to change. What got us here is not what’s going to get us to the next level.”Mr. Khosrowshahi, who is also on the board of The New York Times Company, was accompanied by Mr. Kalanick, who introduced his successor. Mr. Kalanick “choked up,” according to the company; he had released a statement on Tuesday signaling his support of the new leadership.“Casting a vote for the next chief executive of Uber was a big moment for me,” Mr. Kalanick wrote. “And I couldn’t be happier to pass the torch to such an inspiring leader.”The Benchmark suit, filed on Aug. 10, accuses Mr. Kalanick of failing to inform investors about mismanagement at Uber. The venture capital firm argues that special powers Mr. Kalanick negotiated in 2016 — which gave him control over three board seats, including one he occupies — were bestowed under false pretenses and should be nullified.Mr. Kalanick responded on Aug. 18 with a motion to dismiss the case or move it to arbitration, where he can avoid being forced to go on the record.In court, Benchmark lawyers raised the possibility of a so-called status quo order, which would have prevented Mr. Kalanick for now from filling the two empty board seats.But Donald J. Wolfe Jr., one of Mr. Kalanick’s lawyers, argued that Benchmark should not be able to prevent Mr. Kalanick from performing his current duties.“If the status quo order is intended to maintain the status quo, the status quo is that Mr. Kalanick is a director,” he said. “What we have here is a political battle that belongs in the boardroom, not the courtroom.”AdvertisementThe judge did not grant the order.On Aug. 24, Mr. Pishevar and Mr. Russell filed a motion to intervene in Benchmark’s complaint against Mr. Kalanick. They claimed that the venture capital firm was trying “to unscrupulously gain control of Uber’s board of directors and the Company at the expense of other investors for little more than the cost of a lawsuit.”Benchmark, the motion said, has “benefited spectacularly” from its involvement in Uber, with its stake ballooning to $8.4 billion from $27 million under Mr. Kalanick’s leadership. Mr. Pishevar and Mr. Russell said in their motion that the firm was now orchestrating a greedy “power grab.”Several of Uber’s mutual fund investors have downgraded their valuation estimates for the company in recent weeks. The company has also entertained proposals to sell shares to several investment groups.Tiffany Hsu reported from Georgetown, and Nellie Bowles from San Francisco. Katie Benner contributed reporting from San Francisco.A version of this article appears in print on August 31, 2017, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Judge Sends Uber Investor’s Lawsuit Against Kalanick to Arbitrator.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.