
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
AUG. 30, 2017
Q. I’m going on vacation next month and plan to mostly ignore the work email inbox on my iPhone, but I am expecting messages from a couple of people that I do need to answer. Is there a way to divert those contacts into my personal mailbox so I can just check there instead of having to plow through all my inboxes and possibly get pulled into work drama?A. Apple has built a few ways in iOS for finding important messages. If you are using the Mail app that came with the iPhone, one way to isolate mail from specific people is to add them to the program’s V.I.P. mailbox list. When a message from one of the designated email addresses arrives, it appears in a mailbox labeled “V.I.P.” on your Mailboxes screen, along with your work, personal and other accounts. You then only have to open the V.I.P. mailbox to see the messages you want.To add someone to your list of very important personal correspondents, open the Mail app on your iPhone and select a previous message from one of the people you wish to hear from on your vacation. Tap the sender’s name and on the screen of contact details that appears, scroll down and tap “Add to V.I.P.”If you have done all that and do not see a V.I.P. mailbox listed in the Mail apps’s list of mailboxes, it may be hidden from view. To find it, tap the Edit button on the upper-right corner of the Mailboxes screen and tap the button next to V.I.P. to make it visible in the list, then tap the Done button.AdvertisementYou can also add people to your V.I.P. list by tapping the encircled “i” on the right side of the V.I.P. mailbox line in the Mailboxes list. On the next screen, select “Add V.I.P.…” and choose an address from your contacts list.AdvertisementTo get push notifications that someone on your V.I.P. list has sent a message, tap the V.I.P. Alerts button and choose the style of onscreen alert you wish to see. (You can also get notifications when people who are not on your V.I.P. list reply to an ongoing mail conversation — just open a message in the thread, tap the Flag icon in the bottom-left corner and select “Notify me…”)If you prefer a hands-free approach to dealing with email, you can also ask the Siri assistant on iOS if you have new messages from specific people in your contacts list.If you do not use Apple’s native iOS Mail app on your iPhone, check your preferred app’s options for filtering messages. Inbox by Gmail, for example, offers its own take on notifications for important messages.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »