
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
MARCH 9, 2017
Q. Google Calendar automatically warns me 10 minutes before my next appointment, but I’d like a little more notice. How do I increase the amount of time between warnings and meetings?A. You can increase or decrease the time settings before a scheduled event in your Google Calendar settings. This can happen either in your computer’s web browser or in the calendar settings on a mobile device, and the alert will appear in both places.To change the amount of lead time using a desktop browser, go to your Google Calendar page and click on the cog-shaped icon in the top-right corner. Choose Settings from the menu. On Settings page, click the Calendars tab. In the Calendar section of the page, go to the calendar you want to use and click Edit Notifications on the right side. In the Event Notifications area, enter the amount of time you prefer to be alerted before an event and click the Save button.If you want to adjust your notification time on the Google Calendar app on an Android or iOS device, open the app and tap the Menu icon in the top-left corner of the screen. When the menu panel opens, select Settings. On the Settings screen, choose the name of the calendar you want to edit. On the next screen, select Default Notifications to change the amount of time; tap Custom if you do not see the time period you want to use listed. (If you use Apple’s Calendar app for iOS, open the Settings app on the home screen, select Calendar and then tap Default Alert Times.)To change the notification settings for an individual event on your calendar, select the event. On the page of details for that event, look for the Notifications or Alerts area and make your adjustments before saving the updated event.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »