
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
JUNE 26, 2017
Q. My old Nook e-reader died. Did all the books I purchased on it go with it? Can I get the books again on a new Nook?A. The demise of your Nook hardware does not mean that the e-books you purchased from Barnes & Noble’s online store are lost forever. Like other e-book shops (including those for the Amazon’s Kindle, Apple’s iBooks app and the Kobo eReader), the titles you purchased are connected to your account with the company — and not tied to any particular device.When you purchase a new tablet or e-reader and set it up for the first time, log in with the old username and password you used on the previous device. Once you have logged in on the new screen, you should see the list of titles you previously purchased with the account. If you wish, you can download each book again to keep on the new gadget.The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Keep in mind that files not stored in your online account — like documents you copied manually from the computer or had stored locally on a microSD card — will need to be recopied (or the memory card moved) to the new device.Barnes & Noble sells a variety of Nook-branded devices on its website and in its stores, including a $50 basic color tablet model with a seven-inch screen, several Galaxy Tab Nooks made by Samsung and a traditional e-reader with the monochrome screen. The company also makes free mobile reading apps that you can download and use to read your Nook books on Android, iOS and Windows hardware.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.A version of this article appears in print on June 29, 2017, on Page B7 of the New York edition with the headline: Putting Old Books On a New Nook.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »