By NICOLE PERLROTH and ADAM GOLDMANAUG. 24, 2017
The Justice Department on Monday charged a 36-year-old Chinese national, Yu Pingan, with conspiring with two other Chinese nationals to hack the computer networks of three unnamed companies in the United States.Among the hacking tools Mr. Yu was accused of using was malicious code that was later connected to an attack on United States government computers at the Office of Personnel Management and a number of insurance companies, including Anthem.The case was one of the first brought against a Chinese national since a 2015 agreement between President Barack Obama and President Xi Jinping of China to refrain from computer-related theft of industrial trade secrets.Mr. Obama warned Mr. Xi in 2015 that the United States would pursue and punish perpetrators with traditional law enforcement and potentially resort to sanctions.AdvertisementA complaint unsealed in federal court on Tuesday in San Diego did not name the cyberattack victims but said they were based in Los Angeles, San Diego and Massachusetts.AdvertisementMr. Yu was accused of using malicious software known as Sakula as far back as December 2012. At the time of those attacks, the F.B.I. had identified only one previous use of Sakula malware, in November 2012, suggesting that Mr. Yu was among a small group of hackers using the malicious code, the complaint said.The Sakula malware was later found in a series of other cyberattacks against United States government computers.Those attacks, which were discovered in 2015, allowed hackers to steal extensive personal information on government employees and insurance databases, including addresses, health and financial histories, fingerprints and other private details from millions of people who had been subjected to American government security-background checks.The complaint does not otherwise tie Mr. Yu to the hacks of the Office of Personnel Management and Anthem, and it does not mention the names of the three companies.However, the complaint noted that hackers used a misspelled version of the domain of one Los Angeles-based company, Capstone Turbine, to target their victims.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The same technique was used by Chinese hackers in the Anthem attacks and assaults on other health insurers.Capstone Turbine did not respond to requests for comment.Mr. Yu was arrested Monday at the Los Angeles International Airport and made his first appearance on Tuesday in federal court in San Diego.His lawyer, Michael Berg, said Mr. Yu was expected to have a detention hearing on Aug. 31.According to the complaint, Mr. Yu, who lives in Shanghai, was an expert in computer network security and computer programing. His lawyer said Mr. Yu was a computer science teacher.AdvertisementMr. Yu, who goes by the online alias “goldsun,” sold various hacking tools, including so-called zero-day exploits that allowed other hackers to remotely seize control of victims’ computers and websites, the complaint said.Mr. Yu and his co-conspirators used those tools to breach the networks of companies in the United States and Europe, and in some cases take over their websites, according to the complaint.Mr. Yu’s arrest was unusual. In previous cases, Justice Department indictments against Chinese nationals were largely symbolic, since there was little chance the Chinese government would turn them over.The last high-profile indictment of Chinese nationals occurred in 2014, when the Justice Department indicted five members of the Shanghai-based People’s Liberation Army hacking unit, known as Unit 61398. China has not turned over the accused hackers to the United States and has denied culpability.The F.B.I. said it tracked the attacks back to Mr. Yu and the two unnamed hackers by tracing their internet addresses and hacking tools, and by monitoring their web communications as far back as 2011.A version of this article appears in print on August 25, 2017, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Chinese National Is Arrested in Connection with U.S. Cyberattacks.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.