
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
NOV. 29, 2017
Q. When I get a call on my iPhone, sometimes I have a button to decline the call and sometimes I just get a “slide to answer” option. Why is this, and how can I send a call to voice mail that I don’t want to answer if I don’t have a Decline button to ignore it?A. When the iPhone is unlocked and you have an incoming call, you see the red Decline and the green Accept button on the screen. However, if the screen is locked because you are not using the phone at the moment, you just see the “slide to answer” control.Advice and tips on the technology changing how you live.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.While the lack of a Decline button on the lock screen may be an effort to stop accidental hang-ups when you are fumbling around with a ringing phone, Apple has included a few ways to dump a caller to voice mail without having to unlock the phone. When the screen is locked and an unwanted call comes in, you can decline to answer and punt it to voice mail by quickly pressing the Sleep/Wake button twice; its location, on the top or side of the phone, varies depending on your model.If you are listening to music through your earbuds when a call comes in, press and hold the center button on the cord’s volume controls. When you hear two beeps, the call has been declined and sent to voice mail. (You can have the phone announce calls through your earbuds or the car dashboard by opening the Settings app, tapping Phone and then selecting Announce Calls.)Some carriers may disconnect declined calls instead of sending them to voice mail. If you want to silence the ringer until voice mail takes over, press the Sleep/Wake or the volume button once to mute the ringer for that call.The iPhone’s incoming-call screen also includes buttons for other actions. The Remind Me button lets you set up a reminder to call the person back, and the Message button sends a prewritten text message to the caller. You can set up a custom message in the Respond With Text area in the Phone settings.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »