By CADE METZNOV. 28, 2017
SAN FRANCISCO — A letter that detailed a secretive effort at Uber to gather intelligence on competitors and cover its tracks has the ride-hailing company on the defensive in a legal fight that has gripped Silicon Valley since February.On Tuesday, the discovery of the letter caused a federal judge to delay a trade secrets trial — a day before jury selection was set to begin — between Uber and Waymo, the self-driving car unit of Google’s parent company, Alphabet.Judge William Alsup of Federal District Court in San Francisco was alerted to the letter’s existence by the United States attorney’s office in Northern California. The judge accused Uber’s lawyers of withholding evidence, forcing him to delay the trial until Waymo’s lawyers could gather more information.“I can no longer trust the words of the lawyers for Uber in this case,” Judge Alsup said. “If even half of what is in that letter is true, it would be an injustice for Waymo to go to trial.”AdvertisementWaymo sued Uber in February, claiming that a former engineer, Anthony Levandowski, conspired with Uber to steal trade secrets from Waymo. On Tuesday, Judge Alsup repeatedly rebuked Uber’s lawyers for not sharing the document with the court. “You should have come clean with this long ago,” he said.AdvertisementThe letter was written in May or June by a lawyer for Richard Jacobs, a former Uber employee, to Angela Padilla, deputy general counsel at Uber. Uber hired Mr. Jacobs in March 2016 as its manager of global intelligence and fired him in April of this year, Mr. Jacobs testified in court on Tuesday. He is now a paid security consultant for Uber, after receiving a $4.5 million settlement following his dismissal.In discussions with other Uber employees, Mr. Jacobs testified, he learned of an internal organization that gathered trade secrets, code and other information about its competitors. It was called the “marketplace analytics team,” according to the letter, which had been redacted by Uber. The group frequented the code-sharing site GitHub, searching for private material that may have been accidentally revealed by competitors.This Uber team also led efforts “to evade, impede, obstruct, influence several ongoing lawsuits against Uber,” according to the letter. The team also tried to find out what other companies were doing. And in 2016, Uber hired a man named Ed Russo to help recruit employees of competitors to steal trade secrets, according to the letter.This group relied on “anonymous” servers separate from the rest of the Uber network, and some employees were expected to rely on devices that encrypted or automatically deleted messages after a certain amount of time, Mr. Jacobs testified. Email was a last resort.This system, Mr. Jacobs said in his testimony, “was to ensure there was no paper trail that would come back to haunt the company in any criminal or civil litigation.”Mr. Jacobs said this effort focused solely on overseas competitors and that he was not aware of the unit obtaining trade secrets from Waymo or other competitors in the United States. That contradicted an assertion in his letter, which said he was aware that this team had at least stolen trade secrets from Waymo.Waymo claims in its suit that Mr. Levandowski downloaded more than 14,000 confidential files from company servers before leaving the Alphabet unit and eventually joining the autonomous vehicle project at Uber.The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The involvement of the United States attorney’s office is a peculiar twist, because federal prosecutors do not usually get involved in civil trials between two companies. The inclusion of the letter suggests that federal authorities discovered it during their own investigation into Uber’s business practices.AdvertisementWhat the United States attorney’s office is investigating is unclear. A spokesman for the office did not immediately respond to a request for comment.“The evidence brought to light over the weekend by the U.S. attorney’s office and revealed, in part, today in court is significant and troubling,” said Johnny Luu, a Waymo spokesman. “The continuance we were granted gives us the opportunity to fully investigate this new, highly relevant information.”This is not the first time the United States attorney’s office has been involved in the case. Earlier in the year, Judge Alsup, citing what he said was compelling evidence against Mr. Levandowski connected to the theft of trade secrets, referred the matter to federal authorities.In May, Uber fired Mr. Levandowski after he failed to turn over evidence related to the suit, citing his Fifth Amendment right not to incriminate himself.An Uber spokeswoman said nothing that Mr. Jacobs said on Tuesday impacted the merits of the case against the company. “Jacobs himself said on the stand today that he was not aware of any Waymo trade secrets being stolen,” said Chelsea Kohler, the company spokeswoman.The systems Mr. Jacobs described seemed to mirror those uncovered by reporters over the last year. In April, it was revealed that Uber used an elaborate system to track and sabotage Lyft, a top competitor in the ride-hailing business.The program, known inside Uber as Hell, helped the company locate drivers who also drove for Lyft, allowing it to offer financial incentives to get drivers to work for Uber instead of Lyft. They used software that was developed by a group known inside Uber as COIN, short for “competitive intelligence.” The Federal Bureau of Investigation is investigating Uber’s business practices regarding the Hell program.AdvertisementThe letter from Mr. Jacobs’s lawyer, parts of which were read in court, also said three Uber employees had gone to Pittsburgh to instruct the company’s autonomous vehicle group, which is testing self-driving cars in the city. The research group was told to use the special communication practices with the Uber security group to prevent sensitive information from emerging in potential legal disputes.Mr. Jacobs said in testimony on Tuesday that an outside company had supplied Uber with devices for hiding communications. The company also ran a separate effort to hide communications via Wickr, a service that deletes communications after a given amount of time, he said.Judge Alsup asked Uber’s lawyers to supply an unredacted copy of the letter from Mr. Jacobs’s lawyer and a list of all Uber employees who used the Wickr service, including employees with the autonomous vehicle group in Pittsburgh. The judge also said he was considering making the entire letter public.Mr. Russo, who works on Uber’s security team, provided an alternative version to the events Mr. Jacobs described. In testimony on Tuesday, Mr. Russo said the team did not gather information from people at competitors and did not steal trade secrets. Mr. Russo acknowledged that he had worked with some of the security companies that Mr. Jacobs mentioned during his testimony.Mr. Jacobs testified that Uber demoted and later fired him after he refused to embrace the company’s security techniques. Two people familiar with his employment at Uber, however, said he was discovered downloading files that he was not authorized to access on Uber’s network, an offense the company considered cause for dismissal.Mr. Jacobs said he later reached the $4.5 million settlement with Uber that stipulated he would not discuss the company’s practices with the media, but he believed that this did not prevent him from discussing the situation as a part of a criminal investigation. Mr. Jacobs traveled by plane from Seattle for the hearing, and he testified that Uber paid his way.Follow Cade Metz on Twitter: @CadeMetzMike Isaac and Nicole Perlroth contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on November 29, 2017, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Uber Trial Is Delayed As Letter Roils Case.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.