By DANIEL VICTORMARCH 3, 2017
Early reviews of the Nintendo Switch were largely positive, but most of the enthusiasm was tempered by reviewers’ inability to test key aspects of the gaming console, including online play and game downloading.Naturally, there is plenty of disagreement among reviewers about the hybrid system, which will allow gamers to alternate between playing on their home TVs and playing on the go. Several reviewers said the system, released on Friday has enticing potential, but Nintendo has more to prove before it becomes a must-buy for gamers.Brian X. Chen of The New York Times called the Switch “mediocre as a portable gaming device, with short battery life and an O.K. screen.” But he said it “excels as a powerful and compelling home console.”Buying the Switch is “a risk worth taking,” he said, but added that most people would be better off waiting. Gamers may not have a choice but to wait, anyway, if the initial supply is as limited as expected.The biggest deterrent to buying the Switch could be how tough it will be to get your hands on one. Nintendo said that it planned to make two million systems available worldwide this month — but if my fun experience with it is any indication, it might be hard to find one left on store shelves.AdvertisementOn Engadget, Devindra Hardawar said the lack of full testing didn’t inspire confidence.Clearly, Nintendo was in a bit of a rush to launch the Switch. That’s a shame, because it’s tough, as a reviewer, to completely weigh in on a system that’s not quite finished. It’s also particularly worrying after the failure of the Wii U, a console that launched with a series of baffling issues, as well. If Nintendo wants to make shoppers more confident about its abilities to launch new hardware and networking capabilities, this isn’t a good start.That’s the bigger question. Reviews were uniformly positive about The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild, the biggest title available right away. But most noted the light catalog of games.AdvertisementNathan Olivarez-Giles of The Wall Street Journal said that “the Switch’s versatility will make it a must-have console like the legendary original Wii” if it can deliver exciting games. But for now, it’s too early to tell.As incredibly versatile as the Switch’s hardware and technical capabilities are, the console feels incomplete at launch without a strong lineup of games, access to Nintendo’s rich back catalog of iconic titles and really any online services to speak of. The Switch has the potential to be a console for everybody. But most everyone but die-hard Nintendo — well, Legend of Zelda — fans should wait to see if it shapes up.On The Verge, Ross Miller said that the “Switch has all the makings of something truly great” and that Nintendo “has innovated upon some of its best ideas,” but that the company would still have to prove it would support the console.The most shocking thing about the Switch might be how many obvious pitfalls Nintendo has managed to elegantly avoid. Going from playing on the tablet to the TV is completely effortless, and there’s no sense of compromise whichever way you choose to play. Once you hold and use the Switch, it just makes sense.Does it truly work as a hybrid gaming system?The staff at Polygon said it meets its basic promise “of a platform that will move without fanfare or effort across the hand-held and home console spaces.”There is something remarkable about seeing The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild running in portable mode, followed by that “wow” moment of docking the console and continuing on a television. It’s hard not to wonder if we’re staring at the future of portable gaming, with Nintendo and the Switch promising to bridge the gap between mobile and console.At TechCrunch, Devin Coldewey said the Switch “almost immediately felt like something that was missing until now — something midway between a ‘real’ console and a ‘real’ hand-held.” It was “something I didn’t even know I’d wanted,” he said.It was a small but substantial “Eureka” moment: I’d been playing Zelda for a couple hours like I’d play a normal console game, and I was vacillating between going to bed and finishing whatever task I was occupied with in the game. “Wait,” I thought. “I can do both!” Without trying, I’d stumbled upon one of the many situations where you’d like to play a game but don’t feel like sitting down in the same spot staring at your TV.What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.At Ars Technica, Kyle Orland said the system “seems to pull portable gaming upward more than it drags home console gaming downward.”Though Nintendo marketing seems intent on describing the Switch as a home console that it just so happens you can take with you, I’ve found myself using the system as a portable much more often than on the TV. In the week I’ve spent with the Switch, the system has replaced my iPhone as the source for flexible gaming when I have a few minutes to spare regardless of location.Vince Ingenito at IGN said the Switch was “an attractive and powerful but oversized portable gaming system that struggles to be a convincing or reliable home console.”As a hand-held, the Switch is a powerful piece of hardware with a gorgeous screen, but it’s too large and power hungry to feel like you can really take it anywhere. As a console, it’s underpowered, unreliable and lacking basic features and conveniences that all of its competitors offer. It’s nicely built and cleverly designed to be used in a variety of ways, but the bottom line is that the Switch doesn’t do any one of the many things it can do without some sort of significant compromise.Rebekah Valentine of AppTrigger said the system was lacking too many features that had become standard in gaming consoles.The negatives of the Nintendo Switch aren’t attached to what’s there, but rather to what’s not. Minuscule storage, concerns about online play, no media streaming or other known apps at launch and the price of accessories for future titles spell trouble if Nintendo doesn’t reveal a better hand soon.AdvertisementReviewers were split on the Joy-Cons, the new multiuse controllers. Several said the left Joy-Con became unresponsive during play; Nintendo has not indicated whether the problem will be fixed in the wider release.Chris Kohler of Wired said the Joy-Cons “are quite simply the most versatile and clever controllers that it has ever shipped with a machine.”Kirk Hamilton of Kotaku said that they were “a nifty idea,” but were uncomfortable, and that they “don’t always work as well as I would’ve hoped.”At The Guardian, Keith Stuart said the idea of “sitting in a park with a whole bunch of people playing Mario Kart is a really fun proposition.” The Switch is “playing in a very different space” than the Pc, Xbox One and PlayStation 4, he said.Whatever happens, Nintendo has once again done its idiosyncratic best to challenge the way we think about games hardware. Right now, it has the best launch game in at least a decade, and enough compelling possibilities on the horizon to warrant enthusiasm and hope.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.