By KATIE BENNERNOV. 8, 2017
More than a year after Apple battled the F.B.I. over the unlocking of an iPhone, a new skirmish may be brewing between the authorities and the company over privacy and strong encryption on its devices.Devin P. Kelley, who shot 26 people to death in a church in Sutherland Springs, Tex., on Sunday, owned an iPhone. That phone may contain evidence that could help law enforcement officials, but the authorities have not unlocked the device to peruse its contents.In a news conference on Tuesday, the F.B.I. said that it had not been able to get into the device owned by the gunman, but it did not specify the type of phone or the operating system.Apple said that it was “shocked and saddened” by the shooting and that it worked with law enforcement every day. “We offer training to thousands of agents so they understand our devices and how they can quickly request information from Apple,” the company said.AdvertisementApple devices are some of the most secure on the market, and people typically lock them with passwords. Fingerprints can also be used to unlock the device on a biometric scanner.AdvertisementIf a user has enabled an iPhone’s data-erase function, someone trying to break into the device would have 10 attempts at typing in a password. If all of those attempts failed, the iPhone would automatically wipe itself clean as a safeguard for its owner’s privacy.The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.After the F.B.I.’s news conference on Tuesday, Apple said, it immediately reached out to law enforcement. “We offered assistance and said we would expedite our response to any legal process they send us,” Apple said.The situation is a reminder of last year’s fight between Apple and the F.B.I. At the time, law enforcement wanted to get into the iPhone used by Syed Rizwan Farook, who along with his wife killed 14 of Mr. Farook’s co-workers at a holiday party in San Bernardino, Calif., in late 2015.In that case, a federal judge ordered Apple to help the F.B.I. The judge asked Apple to “bypass or disable” the security feature that wipes a phone clean after 10 incorrect password attempts. Apple argued that creating the technology to bypass its own security would compromise its users’ safety.Tim Cook, the chief executive of Apple, penned a 1,100-word letter to customers, warning that the government’s request would lead to a “chilling” breach of privacy.In the aftermath of the Sutherland Springs shooting, the authorities could have used Mr. Kelley’s fingers for up to 48 hours after he last opened his iPhone to activate the biometric Touch ID function to gain access to the device. It is unclear why officials did not do so. After 48 hours, law enforcement would need a pass code to open the phone.In the San Bernardino case, the F.B.I. was ultimately able to open the iPhone without help from Apple. It’s unclear what methods law enforcement has tried in the Texas case.Whether or not the government finds evidence on Mr. Kelley’s iPhone, the case could again thrust Apple into the middle of a debate over how we balance the needs of citizens and their right to privacy with the needs of law enforcement working on tough cases.An earlier version of this article referred imprecisely to the circumstances under which an iPhone automatically wipes itself clean. A phone’s data will be erased after 10 incorrect login attempts only if the owner has enabled its data-erase function. It is not the case that 10 unsuccessful logins alone will result in erasure.Adam Goldman contributed reporting.Follow Katie Benner on Twitter: @ktbennerA version of this article appears in print on November 9, 2017, on Page A10 of the New York edition with the headline: New Debate Seems Likely Over iPhone Of Gunman.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.