
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
OCT. 6, 2016
Q. Do the trackpad shortcuts on a MacBook work the same way on an iMac if you buy an external trackpad to use instead of the included mouse?A. If the iMac is running at least OS X 10.7 (Lion)and you have a trackpad accessory that supports Apple’s Multi-Touch gestures, you should be able to use most of the same finger taps, swipes and other moves that you use to navigate on the Mac laptop. Several third-party trackpads are available, but make sure the trackpad is compatible with OS X or macOS Sierra, as many models are designed for Windows systems.Apple’s own $129 Magic Trackpad 2 brings Multi-Touch gestures to the company’s desktop hardware and also includes the Force Touch functionality that responds accordingly to different levels of pressure. The Magic Trackpad 2 requires a Mac running at least OS X 10.11 (El Capitan) and that uses Bluetooth 4.0 wireless technology.Once you connect the Magic Trackpad 2 to the iMac over a Bluetooth connection, you can tap its surface to click, scroll through web pages by sliding two fingers, zoom in with a two-finger double-tap, pinch, zoom and all the other familiar gestures you use on your MacBook. You can adjust the trackpad’s settings by opening the System Preferences icon in the Mac’s dock and clicking the Trackpad icon. (You may need to visit the settings to turn on the “three-finger drag” Force Touch gesture for moving an active window on the Mac’s screen.)If you have older iMac hardware, Logitech’s discontinued Rechargeable Trackpad for Mac supports many Multi-Touch gestures and can still be found on some sites for around $100. The original version of Apple’s Magic Trackpad also pops up in some places online for about $70. However, these older products may not be fully compatible with newer versions of the Mac operating system.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »