
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
AUG. 21, 2017
Q. In Windows 10, is it possible to get the screen where the apps are displayed as they were in Windows 8?A. The “Start screen” introduced with Windows 8 in 2012 was such a departure from the traditional Windows desktop interface that many users complained — which led to the return of the more traditional Start button and its expanding menu in later updates of the system. If you prefer the Start screen view that shows your pinned tiles or apps all at once, you can return to it.In Windows 10, go to the Start menu and select the gear-shaped Settings icon (or press the Windows and I keys as a shortcut). In the Settings window, choose Personalization and then Start. Next, turn on the option for “Use Start full screen.” When you click the Start button now, the full Start screen appears, with icons to click for opening menus and for seeing your pinned tiles or the screen of all your apps. (Having the full Start screen in place can also make the Windows 10 Tablet mode easier to use.)If you want to stick with the Smart menu but see more tiles on it, you can resize it. Just open it and drag the top or side of the menu to adjust the size to your liking.Mac users who would like to see all their installed programs at once can do so by pressing the Launchpad key on the keyboard; the key is not included on every Apple compatible keyboard, but it is often on the F4 key — and can be added to a shortcut key in the Mac’s Keyboard system preferences. A Launchpad icon is usually available by default in the Mac’s desktop dock, and you can also open the Applications folder right from the Go menu in the Finder.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.A version of this article appears in print on August 24, 2017, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Opening Windows The Way You Like It.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »