
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
NOV. 21, 2017
Q. How do you convert an R.T.F. file to PDF? There seem to be a number of programs that claim to do this. A. A rich text format (R.T.F.) file is a popular format because it allows you to get basic font style and some images and yet is still compatible with many word-processing applications. Microsoft developed the format in the 1980s and has supported the format in its Word software for years.Advice and tips on the technology changing how you live.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.If you are interested in converting your R.T.F. file into a PDF, you have multiple options. You can find a number of utilities online (like CutePDF), and Microsoft Office programs also have their own PDF-creation tools. If you just want a simple conversion, you may not need to get any extra software for the job. Recent versions of the Window and Mac operating systems allow you to save open files on your screen as PDF documents with a setting in the standard Print dialogue box.On a Windows 10 machine, open the file you want to convert. Press the Control and P keys to open the system’s print dialogue box. In the box, under Printer, select Microsoft Print to PDF and click the Print button to save a copy of the R.T.F. file as a PDF to your computer.On a Mac, open the R.T.F. file and press the Command and P keys to summon the macOS print box. At the bottom of the box, click the PDF pop-up menu and choose “Save as PDF.” You can then put a name on the new PDF file and decide where you want to store it.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.A version of this article appears in print on November 23, 2017, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Turning Rich Text Into a PDF.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »