AdvertisementSupported byTech TipBy J. D. BiersdorferQ. I want to convert more of my compact discs before moving them to long-term storage, but I find the MP3 format doesn’t make for very rich-sounding audio files. What other formats can I use instead?A. The MP3 format — short for MPEG Audio Layer III, with MPEG itself short for Moving Pictures Experts Group — has been around for more than 20 years and rose to popularity around the turn of the 21st century, thanks to portable music players and internet file-sharing services. One of the reasons MP3 was used so often was that it created small, listenable audio files that took up a tenth to a quarter of the space of the original file, thanks to an audio-compression process that discards data deemed unnecessary.MP3 is known as a “lossy” compression format because of the discarded audio data. AAC (Advanced Audio Coding), OGG (Ogg Vorbis) and WMA (Windows Media Audio) are other lossy formats. Increasing the bit rate — the number of bits per second encoded into the file when it is copied from a CD — in the settings of the audio program you are using to convert the disc can improve the sound quality of a lossy file somewhat, but the file size gets larger with the additional data saved.If you really want high-fidelity audio files, consider a format that uses lossless compression to maintain the sound quality of the original source. In lossless compression, redundant data is removed instead of actual audio information, so the file size is smaller than the original — but not as small as lossy compression can typically achieve.FLAC (Free Lossless Audio Codec), Apple Lossless and Windows Media Audio 9 Lossless are among the common formats around. If you are considering a lossless format, make sure the files will play on the audio devices you use. For example, Apple’s iPod hardware and iTunes software do not natively support FLAC files. Not all digital-audio conversion software supports every format out there either, so pick a program that meets your needs.If you just want to convert your CDs to individual digital files regardless of size and want to maintain the highest possible audio quality, you can convert tracks on the disc into an uncompressed format. AIFF (Audio Interchange File Format) or WAV (Waveform Audio) are formats that do not compress and discard data.Converting a large amount of music takes time. To avoid being disappointed with the results, you may want to first test out the formats you are considering to make sure you are satisfied with the audio quality. As a Beethoven symphony may have more (and more varied) audio data than a garage-band punk single, try converting a few albums in different musical styles and genres. Then give the results a close listen before you plow into ripping your whole CD collection to digital audio files.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.Advertisement