MARCH 23, 2015
TO THE EDITOR:Re “Out of the Woods, Into the Dark” (Life, Interrupted, March 17): As a 15-year cancer survivor, I would like to thank Suleika Jaouad for her honest and brave description of the terror of survival. It took me years to get over the fear that my cancer was back and no one but me knew. I didn’t voice this because I didn’t want to freak out my children or have people think I had become a hypochondriac. Once the active treatments are over and your visits stretch to six months and then a year, you are increasingly isolated with these thoughts. We live in a culture that expects grief to last for a month at most when a loved one dies, and for you to just get over it when a long-term illness is finally, possibly cured. Acknowledgment of this issue is important to all survivors. Ms. Jaouad may never again be B.C. — before cancer — but writing about this, speaking about this, talking about this will help her and others move on. Good luck.Patricia Kruger Ridgewood, N.J.TO THE EDITOR:My heart goes out to Suleika Jaouad. Her exquisitely written struggle with surviving leukemia and the completely lost feeling that has accompanied it brings me back to my own similar struggle after chemotherapy treatments for testicular cancer more than 30 years ago at the same hospital. Similarly, there was no emotional preparation for surviving cancer and all the sympathy and attention it brought. The guilt associated with the absence of joy and thankfulness was painful enough. The insecurity associated with a possible relapse was haunting, to say the least. The sudden silence of an empty room when all the invitations suddenly dried up was unnerving. It probably took me much longer than it should have to get back on my feet. Counseling is essential although in my case, 30 years hasn’t fully diminished the experience. I gave myself time and finally made some difficult decisions to restart my life. My hope is that Ms. Jaouad will be able to do the same before too long.Mitch Brodsky Princeton, N.J.TO THE EDITOR:Re “What Patients Prefer to Know” (Second Opinion, March 17): Physicians have a difficult job of deciding when and how much information to give a patient, but this decision depends on the readiness of patients to listen.Newly diagnosed cancer patients are not always able to absorb the general diagnosis, let alone specific details regarding prognosis, in the beginning. This does not mean that patients do not want honesty. Patients always want honesty, compassion and clear and prompt communication regarding treatment plans and test results. When the shock and tears dissipate and the patient begins asking more technical questions, that is the time to open up. Timing is everything for communication and treatments.AdvertisementIn my seven years of leukemia care, my best physicians have been the ones who communicate well and know what to say when.AdvertisementDana Tourreau West Linn, Ore.TO THE EDITOR:Perhaps the problem is not, as the article suggests, that patients with late-stage cancer react negatively to doctors who tell the truth about there being no cure for their disease, but rather that doctors, in spite of training in how to be compassionate, remain largely uncomfortable with patients’ feelings and expressions of rage and sadness about the fact that they are dying. Instead of conducting more studies to help doctors find “ways to tell the truth that will be less painful,” I think a better direction might be to help doctors bear the understandable pain they and their patients feel when, despite best efforts, there is no cure. The capacity to bear witness to and tolerate one’s own and another’s pain can be healing medicine indeed.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Judy Byck Durham, N.C.The writer is a clinical social worker and psychotherapist.TO THE EDITOR:Re “The Trouble With Advance Directives” (The New Old Age, March 17): While I applaud the clarity of Paula Span’s argument, I must respectfully and wholeheartedly disagree with her conclusions. For me, a man who has spent all of his 52 years with a “terminal” condition called spinal muscular atrophy, the problem with Polst forms is precisely that they ARE binding. How can you know in advance what interventions will be tolerable as a condition worsens? What if you change your mind? People like me are too often assumed to have such a poor quality of life that death would be welcome. It’s not so. Further, though administered by a medical professional, Polst can’t guarantee that the patient understands. It doesn’t ask why you would refuse treatment, or under what conditions you might want to reconsider. The only real protection a Polst form offers is to protect doctors and facilities from being sued.Ben Mattlin Los AngelesTO THE EDITOR:“Untreated Dental Decay Is Falling Among Children” (March 5) and the recent Centers for Disease Control and Prevention report it examines quietly exclude Native American youth like myself, ignoring the serious oral health disparities we face.While there may be a national decline in dental decay, it is worsening for Native youth, 72 percent of whom have untreated tooth decay. The University of Colorado reports that 84 percent of Oglala Lakota, 70 percent of Navajo and 50 percent of Santo Domingo Pueblo children experience such decay.Despite those challenges, tribally driven solutions, like adding dental therapists to provide quality and safe care, are addressing the easily ignored but extremely serious oral health issues facing Native youth.Joaquin Gallegos WashingtonThe writer is a member of the Jicarilla Apache Nation/Santa Ana Pueblo and a policy fellow at the Center for Native American Youth at the Aspen Institute.Science Times welcomes letters, comments on nytimes.com and social media posts from readers. Email should be sent to scitimes@nytimes.com.A version of this article appears in print on March 24, 2015, on Page D3 of the New York edition.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.