AdvertisementSupported byScienceTakeBy James GormanVelvet worms undulate through leaf litter on many stubby legs until they find an insect or other small prey. Then the creatures, which are not worms at all, strike. They squirt slime in a wavy, oscillating stream, trapping the prey in a sticky net.They will do the same to anything that threatens them, like a bigger predator or a finger poking them.Scientists since Darwin have studied the creatures, in the phylum Onychophora, because they have an ancient evolutionary lineage, and may be closer to insects than to worms. But until Andrés Concha and his colleagues investigated the squirting mechanism, nobody had pinned down how the creatures did it.Dr. Concha, now an assistant professor at Adolfo Ibáñez University in Santiago, Chile, was doing postdoctoral work at Harvard in the laboratory of L. Mahadevan when he and Paula Mellado, also in the lab and now also at Alfredo Ibáñez University, started working on the velvet worm. They began with high-speed video from the BBC program “Life in the Undergrowth” that Dr. Mahadevan had noticed, and then collected specimens in Costa Rica, studying them in the lab and making their own video.The researchers, including Julián Monge-Nájera, of the University of Costa Rica, discovered that the velvet worm had no sophisticated control mechanism.Instead, it was the speed of the slime being squeezed out of a large internal reservoir that made a biological nozzle, or papilla, wave around like a loose garden hose.Dr. Concha and his colleagues, who published their findings March 17 in Nature Communications, calculated the physics of the slime attack, and also made a synthetic papilla, a kind of tiny garden hose, to test their findings.“On the biological side, we are looking for new species” that use the same technique, Dr. Concha said.But there could be applications in making nanofibers, or creating microdrops for drug delivery. For that, he and his colleagues need to work on further miniaturizing the synthetic system they constructed. At a fifth to a third of an inch, it is much too big to be useful.Advertisement