AdvertisementSupported byReactionsTO THE EDITOR:Re “What Patients Prefer to Know” (Second Opinion, March 17) and “For Cancer Patients, a Lost Opportunity” (Personal Health, March 24): I agree that physicians and other health care personnel have a difficult task in deciding when and how much information will benefit a patient’s understanding and coping strategies. My research investigated the concept that a patient’s “information processing style” can influence those issues. There is no universal style of coping with diagnostic and treatment information. In my clinical practice with people facing acute and chronic illnesses, I ask each patient about learning preferences. The responses guide me in establishing the pace and thoroughness of information I share.A case in point was offered by Jane Brody in citing resources on clinical trials. This information, quickly supplied to those with a receptive learning style, would be invaluable. Given too soon or to a person who is not prepared to investigate the possibilities, it would be a waste of time.When a clinician is familiar with a patient’s learning style, information sharing can be a source of effective treatment — for patient and clinician.Nancy M. Giles Traverse City, Mich.TO THE EDITOR:Re “How Exercise May Aid Cancer Treatment” (Phys Ed, March 25): I wish I could count how many times I have heard cancer survivors and patients refer to exercise as “a lifeline.” As someone who works in exercise oncology, I have seen the overwhelmingly positive outcomes that exercise can have: reduced fatigue and pain and increased stamina and strength, not to mention the psychological benefits. We operate out of a small clinic at the University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, called Get Real and Heel. Cancer may seem like something that has power over you, but each day we witness people taking their lives back, and it is an amazing and inspiring thing to see.DJ Amatuli Raleigh, N.C.­Science Times welcomes letters, comments on nytimes.com and social media posts from readers. Email should be sent to scitimes@nytimes.com.Advertisement