By JOHN SCHWARTZMARCH 31, 2015
Utilities are making progress in reducing leaks from their natural gas distribution networks, a new study has found, but the industry and regulators can do more.Methane, a major component of natural gas, is a powerful greenhouse gas, having some 85 times the effect of carbon dioxide on climate change over a 20-year period. The Obama administration has promoted the use of natural gas as a power source, since it produces far less carbon dioxide than burning coal, but has also pressed for industry to measure and reduce leaks.The new study from Washington State University, released on Tuesday, involved direct measurements at 13 gas distribution centers around the country, including 230 underground pipeline leaks and 229 metering and regulating facilities.It is one of 16 studies performed with the participation of the Environmental Defense Fund to get an overall sense of the methane problem, from natural gas production sites to the broader distribution network. Jonathan Peress, the group’s air policy director for natural gas, noted that the amount of methane escaping each year from these local natural gas systems was comparable to the amount of carbon dioxide produced by 19 coal-fired power plants.AdvertisementStill, the report found, the amount of methane being released is 36 percent to 70 percent less than estimates published in 2011 by the federal Environmental Protection Agency. Those earlier estimates were based on data from the 1990s. The researchers suggested that the reduction was largely a result of equipment upgrades, including replacement of leaky old cast-iron or unprotected steel pipe. Three leaks produced half of the total measured emissions from pipelines.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The stemming of methane emissions could also be attributed to improved leak detection and maintenance. Metering and regulating stations checked for the earlier Environmental Protection Agency estimates and checked again for the current study experienced as much as a 90 percent reduction in leaks — “very dramatic changes,” said Brian Lamb, lead author of the report.AdvertisementDr. Lamb, a professor in the department of civil and environmental engineering at Washington State University, who took part in the 1990s E.P.A. measurements, said he was “surprised” by the results.Mr. Peress of the Environmental Defense Fund said the study showed that where regulators and business respond to problems, “you’re seeing leak reductions.”The study was conducted with the cooperation of and partial funding from industry and published in the peer-reviewed journal Environmental Science & Technology.A version of this article appears in print on April 1, 2015, on Page A13 of the New York edition with the headline: Gas Utilities Reduce Leaks of Methane, Study Finds.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.