APRIL 6, 2015
TO THE EDITOR:Re “Learning to Say No to Dialysis” (The New Old Age, March 31): A survivor of 40-plus surgeries and 13 years of dialysis, and now living with my fourth kidney transplant, I’m a fierce advocate for patients knowing the risks and benefits of treatment options. I know that saying “no” to a lifesaving treatment is more complex than this article suggests. The stakes are high: An individual whose kidneys fail faces a life-and-death decision. It isn’t like wishing you hadn’t eaten that sushi for dinner. The will to live is strong. Faced with life-or-death choices, most people choose life. I had tough times while ill, and now I’m doing well. This unpredictable and inconsistent health cycle is the reality for many with chronic kidney disease. Positive stories of people who have chosen life can become beacons of hope for others.Lori HartwellGlendale, Calif.The writer is the founder of the Renal Support Network.TO THE EDITOR:Almost four decades ago, this is how my family was introduced to the prospect of dialysis: If my father did not start treatment, he would be dead by Monday. (It was a Friday afternoon.)My father spent most of the next year suffering and struggling — restricted in liquid intake, he was forever thirsty; a man who craved hot dogs and Italian food, he dreamed of lost foods; a man who loved to read, he sat surrounded by blaring TVs in a large treatment room. It was a long, sad year, one that seemed to benefit no one. My father, a physician, would have resisted all of it, but he was too sick at the time to make the decision, and his family was not informed, only given an ultimatum.This is not to say that dialysis is not worth it for some. But patients and their families need to be warned of the realities before they undertake such a massive regimen.AdvertisementCathy BernardNew YorkTO THE EDITOR:For many patients, kidney failure comes as a complete surprise. It is vital that all at-risk people understand that kidney disease is a progressive condition that should be identified and monitored well before it reaches kidney failure. The National Kidney Foundation recommends that people over 60 have their kidney function checked annually by a doctor, done by a simple urine and blood test. It is important to look beyond the statistics and understand that no two patients are the same, and no two patients experience kidney failure and treatment the same. Dialysis is a lifeline for many patients, and there are a number of different dialysis options that can accommodate a variety of lifestyles.AdvertisementFor decades, the National Kidney Foundation has supported the empowerment of the patient and provided resources to help patients and their family members make educated decisions.Kevin LonginoNew YorkThe writer is interim chief executive of the National Kidney Foundation.TO THE EDITOR:Re “Young, Suffering and Ignored” (March 31): I have lived with endometriosis since I was 13. I’ve dealt with severe pain, and many other symptoms that no one understood and often didn’t accept were as bad as I described. I’ve also suffered loneliness and the innate sense that I would never be normal. I was primed to accept this as my lot in life, solely because of being a woman. At 36 I was finally correctly diagnosed.Too many girls are dismissed for too long when they complain about pain. Endo also affects a girl’s self-esteem and emotional well being. I founded the Endometriosis Foundation of America with Dr. Tamer Seckin because I don’t want the next generation to go through this.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.We’ve made presentations to 6,300 high school students through our ENPOWR program in New York to combat issues discussed in this article. Thank you for shedding light on this important health crisis.Padma LakshmiNew YorkTO THE EDITOR:Re “Longtime Nursing Pay Gap Hasn’t Budged, Study Says” (March 25): While it is not surprising that female nurses make significantly less than their male counterparts nationally, there was what I assume to be an unintentional inference that unions are complicit with the current wage disparity. An interviewee implied that she must have experienced the gender pay gap in both union and non-union hospitals, leaving the reader to assume by context that labor unions participate in wage inequality. Nothing could be further from the truth. Union contracts set the rate of pay based on experience and education. Every new hire with the same credentials starts at the same rate of pay with the same step increases. Hospital administrators cannot negotiate a higher or lower salary beyond the proscribed formulas stated in the bargaining contract; doing otherwise would be grounds for filing a grievance and an unfair labor practice complaint.Women as a whole make less than men, women of color even less. In an environment where unions are under attack in this country, the union contract is perhaps the greatest protection from such blatant wage discrimination.Barbara RosenEmerson, N.J.The writer is secretary-treasurer of Health Professionals and Allied Employees, AFT/AFL-CIO.TO THE EDITOR:Re “Science, Lost in a Legal Maze” (Raw Data, March 24): I entered medical school in 1978. Paul Brodeur had just published “The Zapping of America,” a book exposing the dangers of radio frequency radiation. Dr. Zorach R. Glaser, working for the Navy, had already cataloged 4,623 scientific studies, books and reports showing its health effects. Yet when I was injured and almost killed by this type of radiation, I was unprepared and uneducated. What amazed me most was that so vast a body of knowledge had not been taught to us in medical school.The statements about the safety of radio frequency radiation in the article about my court case may be reassuring to readers, but they are not supported by science. And the human aspect of the story was omitted. Ninety-four organizations from six continents, representing several hundred thousand individuals, filed a friends-of-the-court brief supporting my cause in the New Mexico Court of Appeals. They are people from Namibia, Colombia, India, Faroe Islands, Japan and elsewhere who, like me, are fighting for a right everyone else takes for granted: the right to live in one’s own home.AdvertisementArthur FirstenbergSanta FeScience Times welcomes letters, comments on nytimes.com and social media posts from readers. Email should be sent to scitimes@nytimes.com.A version of this article appears in print on April 7, 2015, on Page D3 of the New York edition with the headline: Letters to the Editor.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.