By SAM ROBERTSOCT. 14, 2015
Dr. Henry Krystal, who was forced into slave labor by the Nazis as a teenager and later focused his noted psychiatric career on the emotional scars carried by former concentration camp inmates, died on Oct. 8 at his home in Bloomfield, Mich. He was 90.The cause was complications of Parkinson’s disease, his sons said.In his decades of research, Dr. Krystal, as a professor of psychiatry at the Michigan State University College of Osteopathic Medicine, interviewed more than 2,000 survivors of the Holocaust, drew on his own wartime reflections and studied the responses of victims of the atomic bomb attack on Hiroshima, Japan.He concluded that because traumatized individuals complained primarily of physical manifestations, like headaches, they overlooked potential treatment for depression and other emotional symptoms, leaving themselves vulnerable to self-medication, like addiction and other impulsive behaviors.His work led to novel healing responses to post-traumatic stress disorder, like biofeedback and cognitive psychotherapy. The disorder was recognized in veterans after the war in Vietnam.Advertisement“During and after World War II, innumerable psychoanalysts had close encounters with the consequences of Nazi concentration camps,” Dr. Bessel A. van der Kolk, a leading authority on post-traumatic stress disorder, wrote in 1994, “but only a handful called attention to the ways in which devastating realities could deform the psyche.”In the 1970s, Dr. Krystal was among those lonely voices.Growing up in Poland near the German border, he was 13 when his grandfather was beaten to death in his country store during a pogrom against Jews, and 14 when the Nazis invaded in 1939. He was the only member of his immediate family to survive the war. His mother died in a death camp. His father and older brother fled east from the advancing Germans and were never seen again.In 1992, when Dr. William B. Helmreich of the City University of New York found that some Holocaust survivors tended to be more successful than other American Jews of comparable age, Dr. Krystal concurred, but with an important caveat.“If I had been part of Dr. Helmreich’s study, he’d probably see me as very well adjusted,” Dr. Krystal said. “But I don’t see myself that way; I have lots of post-traumatic stress-type problems. Many survivors look better from a sociological point of view than from a psychiatric one.”One study, conducted with Dr. William G. Niederland of the State University of New York Health Science Center at Brooklyn and published in 1965, found that former concentration camp inmates suffered from “survivor guilt,” which manifested itself as “a form of pathological mourning” and an inability to experience joy.Advertisement“Many of our patients were not only unable to afford themselves some of the most innocent types of pleasure (for example, going to a movie, concert or social gathering with others), but even considered it outright immoral that they should enjoy themselves when most of their families had been killed,” the authors wrote.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Dr. Krystal experienced similar feelings when he was liberated from a concentration camp as World War II ended.“I couldn’t muster the feeling of joy, of any celebration or joy or who to celebrate with, you know,” he said in a 1996 interview with the Holocaust Survivor Oral History Archive. “Maybe a day or two before I was liberated, a thought occurred to me, and that is that if I should die, nobody in the world would know and nobody would miss me.”He attributed the survival of some inmates to an almost childlike belief in their own indomitability.“I feel that ‘healthy’ infantile omnipotence is the most important asset for dealing with life’s stresses and potential trauma,” Dr. Krystal wrote in a chapter he contributed to “Living With Terror, Working With Trauma: A Clinician’s Handbook,” edited by Danielle Knafo and published in 2004. “It is the emotional mainspring of extraordinary reserves. It provides a profound, unshakable conviction of one’s invulnerability.”Henyek Krysztal was born in Sosnowiec, Poland, on April 22, 1925. His father, Herschel, was an accountant. His mother was the former Dora Grossman. From 1942 to 1945, he was a slave laborer, working at a factory operated by the Siemens company, and an inmate at the Auschwitz, Buchenwald and Sachsenhausen concentration camps.When the war was over, he was in the British occupied zone. He attended Goethe University, then immigrated to Detroit, where he lived with an aunt. He graduated from Wayne State University in 1950 and then from its School of Medicine.Survivors include his wife, the former Esther Reichstein; his sons, John, who is the chairman of the psychiatry department at Yale, and Andrew, who is a psychiatry professor at Duke; and three grandchildren.After the German government agreed to grant pensions to Holocaust survivors, Dr. Krystal started receiving referrals from the German Consulate to evaluate their eligibility.Among other publications, he wrote “Integration and Self-Healing,” “Psychic Traumatization” and “Drug Addiction: Aspects of Ego Function,” and edited “Massive Psychic Trauma.”A version of this article appears in print on October 17, 2015, on Page D8 of the New York edition with the headline: Henry Krystal, 90, Holocaust Trauma Expert and Survivor.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.