

 James Gorman
 

SCIENCETAKE
APRIL 13, 2015
Researchers analyzed how groups of rod-shaped E. coli bacteria dissolve their own cell walls and then, after generations, rebuild them.One of the most important structures in nature is the cell wall. Not every living thing has them. Mammals, fish, squid, and insects get along fine without them. But plants, fungi and bacteria depend on them for various reasons, like keeping the cells together.“Plant cells are swollen almost to the breaking point,” according to Kerwyn Casey Huang of Stanford University, and the rigid walls keep them from bursting.But many species of bacteria shed their cell walls. The reasons are not fully understood, said Dr. Huang, a professor of bioengineering, but there are theories. For instance, an attack by immune cells can make the bacteria cells shed their walls, perhaps because there are parts of the wall that the immune system recognizes and attacks. So the bacteria without a cell wall might be hiding, in effect, even though it may also explode because the membranes containing it aren’t strong enough.Even more surprising, bacteria like the much studied E. coli can grow the walls back.“How could this possibly happen?” Dr. Huang said. It’s a question he and Gabriel Billings, a doctoral student in his laboratory, are trying to answer, working with other colleagues at Stanford and Princeton.AdvertisementMicroscopic studies of how the process occurs and manipulation of the chemicals involved have shown that the most important actor in the rebuilding of the cells is a well-known protein called MreB.AdvertisementDr. Huang and colleagues reported in Molecular Microbiology that without MreB, E. coli never rebuilds its walls.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.When MreB is present, however, the cells under the microscope regain their cell walls in a matter of hours, or a few generations. MreB senses the shape of the cell and moves to where rebuilding is necessary.It is not an enzyme itself, but it coordinates the work of enzymes, as a kind of general contractor of wall construction. It was known to work to maintain cell walls, but it also seems to be able to build them from scratch.Dr. Huang said that the protein responded to a very simple signal. If there is an inward bulge in the wall, many MreB molecules arrive and construction begins. If there is an outward bulge, no MreB appears.He and his colleagues made the protein fluorescent to track its movement. Even when there seems to be no wall left, he said, the protein must be responding to fragments.There is no immediate application for the findings, but in the study of how cells work, such a complex process controlled by a simple rule may be a model for other aspects of cell biology.An earlier version of this article misspelled the given name of one of the researchers. He is Kerwyn Casey Huang, not Kerwin. It also erroneously included one group in a list of living things that have cell walls. Yeast do have cell walls.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »