AdvertisementSupported byScience Bookshelf1 Being Mortal by Atul Gawande. Metropolitan/Holt. The surgeon and New Yorker writer considers how doctors fail patients at the end of life, and how they can do better. (1)2 A Brief History of Time by Stephen W. Hawking. Bantam. The classic primer for nonscientists on the origins of the universe. (4)3 What If? by Randall Munroe. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt. Scientific, often humorous answers to hypothetical questions, drawn in part on the author’s website, xkcd.com. (3)4 Quiet by Susan Cain. Crown. Introverts — one-third of the population — are undervalued in American society. (9)5 The Power of Habit by Charles Duhigg. Random House. An examination of the science behind habits, how we form them and break them. (6)6 Thinking, Fast and Slow by Daniel Kahneman. Farrar, Straus and Giroux. The winner of a Nobel in economic science discusses how we make choices and when we cannot trust our intuitions. (10)7 The Immortal Life of Henrietta Lacks by Rebecca Skloot. Crown. A woman’s cancer cells were cultured without her permission in 1951. (5)8 Sapiens by Yuval Noah Harari. Harper. How Homo sapiens became Earth’s dominant species. (7)9 What the Dog Knows by Cat Warren. Touchstone. Canine powers of detection and the hidden things dogs can sniff out: truffles, bedbugs, bombs, disease.10 Asapscience by Mitchell Moffit. Scribner. Irreverent answers to questions that often are not asked in classrooms.11 Beneath the Surface by John Hargrove with Howard Chua-Eoan. Palgrave Macmillan. A former orca trainer for SeaWorld exposes the dark side of the multibillion-dollar marine park industry.12 Anatomy of an Epidemic by Robert Whitaker. Broadway Books. Psychiatric drugs and the rise of mental illness in America.13 Spring Chicken by Bill Gifford. Grand Central. A review of the science on — and myths about — aging, and advice on how to live longer. (12)14 Future Crimes by Marc Goodman. Doubleday. The world of cybercrime and corporate spying, with advice on protecting yourself. (8)15 Alan Turing: The Enigma by Andrew Hodges. Princeton University. The mathematician who cracked the German Enigma code during World War II. (2)16 Moody Bitches by Julie Holland. Penguin Press. The consequences for women of mood-altering medications.17 The Sixth Extinction by Elizabeth Kolbert. Picador. The New Yorker writer examines human influences in the planet’s current spasm of plant and animal loss. (13)18 The Future of the Mind by Michio Kaku. Doubleday. A theoretical physicist examines research suggesting that scientists will have soon a complete map of the brain. (17)19 This Idea Must Die edited by John Brockman. HarperPerennial. Scientific theories that are blocking progress.20 The Emperor of All Maladies by Siddhartha Mukherjee. Scribner/Simon & Schuster. An oncologist’s history of cancer and its treatment.About the Best SellersThe titles ranked here are selected by the Science Times editors from all adult nonfiction books reported to The New York Times for the month. These titles are fundamentally based on the sciences; those for which science is more tangential or peripheral are generally excluded. Rankings reflect sales for March 2015.An asterisk (*) indicates that a book’s sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above. A dagger (†) indicates that some bookstores report receiving bulk orders.Advertisement