AdvertisementSupported byReactionsTO THE EDITOR:Re “Planes Without Pilots” (April 7): The answer to the question of “pilots or robots in the cockpit?” will not come quickly, because it involves a cultural shift. The airline industry could benefit from the experience gained in the process industries (chemical, power, etc.), which in the past also faced the question of manual versus automatic safety controls.On an average flight, although the autopilot system is active all the time and the human pilot normally takes over for only a few minutes, the pilot can overrule the autopilot at any time. In the process industries we do the opposite. Under normal conditions, the operator is free to change the operation of the plant, but if conditions approach an accident-prone, life- or safety-threatening region of operation, the override safety control takes over — and cannot be turned off or overruled by anything or anybody. In the process industries, the override safety control has saved many lives, and in the future it could certainly prevent airliners, for example, from flying into mountains.Béla Lipták Stamford, Conn.The writer is a fellow of the International Society of Automation.TO THE EDITOR:Robot controlled airliners will automatically avoid flying into mountains and they won’t land at the wrong airport or make countless other unintentional and intentional deviations humans make from time to time. But robot pilots will never match Capt. Chesley B. Sullenberger III who glided his stricken Airbus A320 to successful water landing at the best possible spot in the Hudson River following double engine failure.The human touch in such rare, unprogrammed situations will always be superior. Designers hopefully will optimize the best robotic elements of flying while retaining the human touch.Arnold Reiner, Pensacola, Fla.The writer is a retired airline captain.­Science Times welcomes letters, comments on nytimes.com and social media posts from readers. Email should be sent to scitimes@nytimes.com.Advertisement