
Books By                     
DANA JENNINGS

APRIL 13, 2015
Christopher Marley’s “Biophilia” is much more than a sumptuous coffee-table pleasure. It is also an elegant manifesto meant to nudge us off our couches and easy chairs and out the door.“It is clear to me that we are designed to experience as much of the natural world as possible with all five of our senses,” Mr. Marley writes. And later: “Without meaningful interactions with nature, we begin to deteriorate emotionally and spiritually.”“Biophilia” offers hundreds of spectacular color images of insects, sea creatures, reptiles, birds and fossils and minerals (the last perhaps to remind us that we, too, eventually return to dust). Mr. Marley, an artist, designer and photographer who divides his time between Oregon and Malaysia, says that his “objective is to inspire people to see natural artifacts with fresh eyes.” Preserved specimens are his medium.
CreditChristopher Marley        “Biophilia” is a praise song to all of those lovely and often exotic fellow travelers whom at best we ignore and at worst thoughtlessly kill. It also rightly and subtly scolds us, insists that we are somehow less human when we’re too distracted and dazed by our digital semi-lives.AdvertisementThough Mr. Marley professes passion for all of nature, it is clear that insects are his purest animal love; his first book, “Pheromone” (2008), focused only on them. “They range in color, size, shape, texture and behavior like no other creatures,” Mr. Marley writes of insects, adding, “If the work I do provides no other benefit than to kindle a new appreciation of insects (and any other creatures that evoke trepidation in the human heart), that is enough for me.”AdvertisementHis lover’s gaze is contagious. Who, for example, can resist the rainbow dung beetle? Such a rare and phosphorescent beauty, born in a dung pile. And who cares what the cuckoo wasp’s eco-role is? It is a beguiling and buzzing rainbow.For Mr. Marley, insects embody a riotous infinity of color, architecture and design, a notion he bolsters by using them to create multispecies spheres, prisms and mosaics. This work is all head, abdomen and thorax, reveling in horns, wings and stingers; hooks, claws and pincers; spurs, barbs and feelers. Judging by Mr. Marley, evolutionary victory will indeed be winged (and shell-hard).Because he can harvest them where they live and thrive, Mr. Marley kills insects to make his art. All the other animals he works with have died in the wild or in captivity. Referring to sea creatures, he writes, “I was thrilled to realize that I could create beauty out of waste without adding to the pressure on wild populations.” In his art, he reclaims each animal’s physical body, then its spirit.One of the most striking images in “Biophilia” depicts the sad and unsuspected grace of a lone pink octopus tentacle plucked from the Atlantic. In one moment, it somehow evokes both sorrow and a shudder. Photographs of a preserved octopus and a barnacled sea urchin brought me up short, too; it is startling how alien some of the creatures we share this planet with can seem.Then there is the banded cat shark of Japan, which at just one meter long, looks cute and velvety enough to pet. But you could wind up missing a couple of fingers. “It is an opportunistic feeder,” Mr. Marley tells us.Yet the anthropomorphizing impulse reinforces Mr. Marley’s thesis that people hold “an instinctive sense of kinship with the rest of the living, breathing world.”Even — brrr! — with snakes, those serpents and dragons that skulk through our nightmares. Oh, we’ve got your milk snakes here, apricot pueblan and splotched Sinaloan; a Mandarin rat snake from China and rhinoceros viper from the Central African Republic; and man, there’s even a two-headed scarlet king snake from the United States.AdvertisementBut the winner of the serpent stakes may well be the vine snake from Malaysia. This svelte and virtually weightless coiler — it looks like a tangled extension cord — is mildly venomous and can extend most of its body horizontally while gripping its perch with its tail. Fortunately (for humans), it feeds only on lizards and frogs.Vine snakes and all, “Biophilia” is a stark memo on how little we know of what we claim is our world. It encourages us to repeat the names of these species that, mostly, we don’t have a clue about. It makes us peer into eyes we cannot fathom.One of art’s goals is to shock us awake, and “Biophilia” hits that mark soundly. It is a shame, though, that we still need works like Mr. Marley’s to remind us of how essential the natural world is.A version of this article appears in print on April 14, 2015, on Page D2 of the New York edition with the headline: Calling Cards From the Creature World.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »