

 Dennis Overbye
 

OUT THERE
APRIL 24, 2015
After 25 years, the Hubble Space Telescope is still surprising us. Hubble has been called the most important advance in astronomy since Galileo, and its greatest discoveries might still be ahead.Against all odds, it’s 25 years in space and counting for the Hubble Space Telescope this month.Few icons of science have had such a perilous existence, surviving political storms, physical calamities and the simple passage of time in the service of cosmic exploration.In 1946, the astronomer Lyman Spitzer Jr. had a dream. A telescope in space, above the unruly atmosphere, would be able to see stars unaffected by the turbulence that blurs them and makes them twinkle. It would be able to see ultraviolet and infrared emissions that are blocked by the atmosphere and thus invisible to astronomers on the ground.It took more than three decades for the rest of the astronomical community, NASA and Congress to buy into this dream, partly as a way to showcase the capabilities of the space shuttle, still in development then, and the ability of astronauts to work routinely in space. By the time the telescope was launched into space from the space shuttle Discovery on April 25, 1990, it had been almost canceled at least twice and then delayed following the explosion of the shuttle Challenger in 1986.When the Hubble was finally deployed, NASA’s spinmasters were instantly at the top of their game, hailing it as the greatest advance in astronomy since Galileo.AdvertisementAnd it might have been except for one problem: The telescope couldn’t be focused. Instead, within days it became a laughingstock — a “technoturkey,” in the words of some of its critics.AdvertisementDesigned using spy satellite technology, Hubble had an eight-foot mirror, just small enough to fit into the space shuttle cargo bay.But because of a measuring error during a testing process that was hurried to save money, that big mirror wound up misshapen, polished four-millionths of an inch too flat, leaving the telescope with blurry vision. It was the kind of mistake, known as a spherical aberration, that an amateur astronomer might make, and it was a handful of astronomers who first recognized the flaw — to the disbelief and then the dismay of the engineers and contractors working for NASA.For bright objects, astronomers could correct for the flaw with image processing software. But for the fainter parts of the universe, the Hubble needed glasses.NASA scientists shrugged off their heartbreak and worked to figure out a way to provide corrective lenses.Three years later, the space shuttle Endeavour and a repair crew led by Story Musgrave — astronaut, pilot, surgeon, spacewalker and Zen gardener — rode to the rescue.In five tense days of spacewalks, they replaced the telescope’s main camera and installed tiny mirrors designed to correct the Hubble’s vision.The rest of the universe snapped into crystalline focus. And NASA could stop holding its breath.The Hubble was the first big-deal telescope of the Internet age, and its cosmic postcards captivated the world. Trained on a patch of sky known as the Hubble Ultra Deep Field in 2010, the telescope’s keen eye discerned swarms of baby galaxies crawling out of the primordial darkness as early as only 600 million years after the Big Bang.AdvertisementAnd it took one of the first visible-light photos of a distant planet, Fomalhaut b, orbiting its star.In perhaps its most iconic image, called “Pillars of Creation,” the Hubble recorded baby stars burning their way out of biblical-looking mountains of gas and dust in a stellar nursery known as the Eagle nebula.These postcards were not without controversy. The Hubble’s camera records in black and white, through filters that isolate the characteristic light from different atoms, such as sulfur, hydrogen and oxygen. Then the different layers are assigned whatever colors look good to the eye and best show off the underlying astrophysics rather than their natural colors.“Pillars of Creation,” for example, is presented in earth tones of green and brown and is oriented to look like a Turner landscape, while the natural emissions from the nebula are shades of red.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Technological hiccups have also continued. In 1999, four of the six gyroscopes that keep the telescope pointed failed, and the Hubble went into “safe mode.” A crew was hastily dispatched to replace the gyros. That was the first of what would be three trips to the telescope by John M. Grunsfeld, an astronaut, astronomer and now NASA’s associate administrator for science, who would win the sobriquet “Hubble Repairman” for his feats.The telescope has been reborn again and again over the years, thanks to the efforts of astronaut servicing crews. Astronauts wearing the equivalent of boxing gloves have gradually learned how to do things the telescope’s designers had never dared dream of, fiddling with its innards, replacing circuit boards and performing the equivalent of eye surgery and computer repairs in space.The Hubble was hitting its stride, getting better and better, when the Columbia space shuttle disintegrated in 2003, killing all seven astronauts on board. That harkened the end of NASA’s space shuttle dreams.The agency’s administrator, Sean O’Keefe, canceled what was to be the final Hubble servicing mission on the grounds that it was too risky. Without it, the telescope would be doomed to die in orbit within two or three years when its batteries and gyros failed again.The decision was announced and defended by Dr. Grunsfeld, who was then NASA’s chief scientist. “Being an astronaut, there are not a lot of things that have really shocked me in my life,” Dr. Grunsfeld recalled later. “But I don’t think anybody could ever prepare themselves for, you know, trying to bury something that they have said, ‘Hey, this is worth risking my life for.’ ”AdvertisementMr. O’Keefe’s decision ignited a national outcry. Schoolchildren offered to send their pennies to NASA to help pay for the telescope.Behind the scenes, however, Dr. Grunsfeld and other astronomers and NASA engineers were working on ways to save the Hubble, perhaps by sending robots to work on it.The robotic approach was eventually rejected by a National Academy of Sciences panel, but it had served as a place holder to keep the teams of engineers together. In the end, Mr. O’Keefe resigned, and his successor, Michael Griffin, reinstated a servicing mission.In 2009, Dr. Grunsfeld led one last mission to the Hubble. He was the last human to touch the telescope, patting it as the shuttle Atlantis prepared to let it go again. But that does not mean the telescope has ceased to touch humanity. On the contrary, it continues to deliver news about this thing we are all part of — a universe — but barely understand.Earlier this spring, astronomers announced that the Hubble had seen a sort of cosmic mirage known as an Einstein ring, in which they could view multiple reruns of a star that died in a stupendous supernova explosion more than nine billion years ago on the other side of the cosmos.NASA is making a big deal of the Hubble anniversary, with a weeklong symposium in Baltimore, where the Space Telescope Science Institute is based.“This is a celebration partly about the telescope and partly about NASA,” Dr. Grunsfeld said, “but much of it is a celebration of people doing science.”The Hubble today is more powerful than its designers ever dreamed, and it has a good chance of living long enough to share the universe with its designated successor, the James Webb Space Telescope, due to be launched in 2018. The Hubble’s longevity is something few would have imagined 10 years ago, yet NASA is already planning a 30th-anniversary celebration in 2020, Dr. Grunsfeld said.After a quarter-century, the telescope’s future and promise are still as big as the sky and our ignorance of what lies behind it.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »