

      By MICHAEL ROSTON

OCT. 19, 2015

Natural history museums around the world have been growing beyond display cases and dioramas for years, and many are digitizing their vast collections. These efforts create lasting records of the natural world that might otherwise be inaccessible, unless you know a friendly curator willing to take you behind the scenes. Below are several notable digitization efforts that you can explore, and even contribute to. Do you have a favorite digitized science museum collection? Send it to us at scitimes@nytimes.com, and we’ll look to expand this guide in the future.What It Is: As its name implies, the Encyclopedia of Life aims to be a comprehensive resource of all the trusted information about all the named species on Earth. Online since 2008, the site contains millions of images, videos and audio files about nearly two million species.Why It’s Fun: Individual species are found on “taxon” pages that are organized based on their position in the tree of life, and that you can edit. You can, for instance, start on the page for the Tasmanian devil and work your way up to other mammals or down to related subspecies. Or you can start at the level of ”fungi” and work your way down until you find a species that needs more information and photographs.Where to Find It: eol.orgWhat Is It: London’s Natural History Museum has a collection going back 250 years. They are digitizing the 80 million specimens they hold in their archives. They have already put three and a half million online.Why It’s Fun: A particularly interesting collection is the butterflies and moths, totaling 8.7 million found in 80,000 drawers. Some go back to the 18th century.Where to Find It: data.nhm.ac.uk/What It is: Integrated Biocollections Digitization, better known as iDigBio, aims to be the most comprehensive collection of digitized natural history collections from museums and other institutions across the United States. Supported by the National Science Foundation, iDigBio has more than 45 million specimens on record, and around 12 million media files.Why It’s Fun: With so many institutions sharing their catalogs, you’ll almost feel as if you have received a behind-the-scenes pass to your favorite natural history museum’s storage units. Search the term “amber” to get an idea what you might find in these collections.Where to Find It: idigbio.org/portalWhat Is It: Begu in 2010, the atlas contains more than 55 million records of the unique biodiversity of the Australian continent and its surrounding waters. Why It’s Fun: A relatively welcoming interface makes it easy to study the surprises always found among the native life of Australia. A collection of iconic Australian species is one quick starting point.Where to Find It: ala.org.auWhat It is: The ZooSphere is a digitization project from the Museum of Natural History of Berlin. It describes itself as “in a very early stage.”Why It’s Fun: The technology of the project uses some advanced techniques that make up for its currently small collection. By “stacking” and “tiling” the images it records, ZooSphere allows a visitor to the website to inspect specimens from many angles.Where to Find It: zoosphere.netAdvertisement