
APRIL 27, 2015

Once thought to be a dull round rock with craters, Mercury turned out to be much more interesting. Here is some of what NASA’s Messenger spacecraft, 
doomed to crash this week, has revealed about the closest planet to the sun.
Related Article
While the surface on the day side of Mercury reaches 800 degrees Fahrenheit, it is much cooler near the poles. In some of the craters, daylight never shines, and temperatures remain extremely frigid, about minus 370 degrees. Radio telescope measurements from Earth had hinted at something reflective in the craters. Multiple measurements by Messenger confirmed that water ice is indeed there.(As hot as Mercury can get, it is not the hottest planet in the solar system. Venus, with its thick atmosphere of carbon dioxide, is hotter.)As Mercury cooled over the eons, it shrank, and as it shrank, its surface cracked. The planet is now 3,032 miles in diameter, a bit larger than Earth's moon. In its younger days, it may have been 14 miles wider.Flybys of Mercury by NASA's Mariner 10 spacecraft gave hints of volcanoes, but the pictures were not conclusive. Messenger's first flyby confirmed the suspicions, including a volcano larger than Delaware. The planet remained volcanically active for the first billion years after it formed, but appears to have been quiet since then.While volcanoes and ice-filled craters were expected, bright depressions which the scientists have named "hollows" were not. And they  do not know how to explain them. The hollows appear geologically young. "This speaks to some unstable material whose identity we're still working out," said Sean C. Solomon, the mission's principal investigator.Unlike Venus and Mars, Mercury has a magnetic field like Earth's, hinting at the churning of a molten iron core. But it is not exactly like Earth's. Mercury's magnetic field is offset from the center of the planet, more than any other planet, with the field markedly stronger in the northern hemisphere. "And we don't know why," Dr. Solomon said. Advertisement