APRIL 27, 2015
EbolaTO THE EDITOR:“Ebola Lying in Wait” (April 21) emphasizes the importance of strengthening health care systems to prevent the spread from future outbreaks. Fortunately, both the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, TB and Malaria and Gavi, the Vaccine Alliance have been doing just that. Coming legislation in Congress to address the global deaths of 6.3 million children under 5 will help as well. Strengthening families and communities in the process of saving lives is money well spent. A heads-up to your representatives about this legislation will help it pass and save the lives of children around the world, and protect all from these epidemics that spread globally.Willie Dickerson Snohomish, Wash.AstronomyTO THE EDITOR:It is fantastic that the Hubble anniversary is getting wonderful coverage (“25 Years Later, Hubble Sees Beyond Troubled Start,” Out There, April 24). I am somewhat disheartened that I have not seen John Bahcall mentioned during this anniversary. Dr. Bahcall played a huge role in the development of Hubble, and in the rescue of its optics. He was honored with NASA’s Distinguished Public Service Medal in 1992.Inga Karliner Urbana, Ill.Animal BehaviorRe “The Science of Puppy-Dog Eyes” (April 21):Everything necessary for mankind to come into his inheritance was present nearly 200,000 years ago. The genetics were identical to that which we have today. Yet another 170,000 years would pass with nothing much taking place. Lonely bands of casual fire starters with stone tools and minor artistic talents continued to wander behind herds of tasty antelope. Then the wolves who had been scavenging around our campsites gave birth to dogs who saw opportunity where their forebears had only seen fear. The rest is history.Of course they had to gaze into our eyes at great length. It takes a good deal of time to persuade a silly human to toss a tasty snack or rub a tender belly.Michael O’Neill Bandon, Ore., posted to nytimes.comDogs are con-men and grifters. I’ve got these wolves disguised as sweet little furry angels sleeping in my bed, lounging on my couch, eating my food and costing me a fortune at the vet. All this for a momentary blast of oxytocin!Betty S. Dallas, posted to nytimes.comEmail: scitimes@nytimes.com.A version of this article appears in print on April 28, 2015, on Page D3 of the New York edition.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.