AdvertisementSupported byBy John Noble WilfordIf you could find a Neanderthal or two to ask, you might get an earful on the current migrant rush to Europe.More than 40,000 years ago, Neanderthals dominated what is known today as Europe. Then, in came a number of people, more recently from Africa, who introduced new skills and creativity. Within a few thousand years, these anatomically modern humans, Homo sapiens, somehow drove Neanderthals to extinction.No one is suggesting that Europe’s present indigenous population is in danger of being displaced. But coincidentally, research reported last week in the journal Science adds heft to recent findings that the first modern human migrants arrived earlier than previously thought, perhaps at least 43,000 to 45,000 years ago.Two teeth found in separate archaeological sites in Italy appeared to tell the tale of the early effect of Homo sapiens in southern Europe. The teeth were those of modern humans who lived 41,000 years ago, scientists concluded. This seemed to settle a longstanding debate over whether the sharp stone blades and ornaments uncovered at the sites belonged to modern humans or Neanderthals.The scientists said the incisor from Riparo Bombrini matched the shapes of human teeth. The other incisor, from the cave Grotto di Fumane, contained some DNA of a modern human type. The scientists, led by Stephano Benazzi of the University of Bologna, said this shows “this individual was a modern human or had some ancestors who were modern humans.”The research team said the teeth represented the oldest remains in an archaeological context of an Aurignacian-related culture that produced artifacts defining the early spread of modern humans in southern and western Europe. This dispersal, Dr. Benazzi’s team wrote, “may therefore have been a cause (either directly or indirectly) for the extinction of the Neanderthals, at least in northern Italy.”Other paleontologists and archaeologists said the findings supported recent discoveries of the earliest arrivals of Homo sapiens in Europe.In an accompanying Science commentary, Nicholas J. Conard and Michael Boluss of the University of Tübingen, Germany, said that while there may still be skeptics, the research “looks reliable.”Calling the findings “a welcome step forward in establishing the narrative of the colonization of Europe by modern humans,” they said, “The archaeological and human fossil records will almost certainly prove to be more complex and fascinating than our current modes suggest.”Advertisement