AdvertisementSupported byBy Nicholas BakalarResearchers have now sequenced the genome of the woolly mammoth and have concluded that the last members of the species probably died on an isolated island, where inbreeding may have led to a population too small to be sustainable.The scientists used DNA from two specimens, the 45,000-year-old soft tissue remains of a woolly mammoth found in northeastern Siberia, and a 4,300-year-old tooth from one found on Wrangel Island, a Russian territory in the Arctic Ocean that was separated from the mainland by rising sea levels about 12,000 years ago.Researchers were able to sequence the complete genomes of these two well-preserved specimens. By measuring the amount of genetic diversity in each, they were able to draw some conclusions about the mammoth’s history and extinction.About 300,000 years ago, the population of woolly mammoths suddenly declined; it took more than 100,000 years to recover.At the end of the last ice age, about 10,000 years ago, the population declined again. By the time Wrangel Island separated from the mainland, the worldwide population was already disappearing.“We don’t know why,” said the senior author of the new report, Love Dalen, an associate professor of biology at the Swedish Museum of Natural History in Stockholm. “Human hunting, changes in the environment, warming of the temperatures. But it happens everywhere — that’s for sure — and at the same time.”This new genetic information, online in Current Biology, suggests that in the end inbreeding played a role as well. The parents of the specimen from Wrangel Island were very closely related.“By sequencing the 4,300-year-old, we find it has a 20 percent lower amount of genetic diversity than the older mammoth and a 28-fold higher amount of inbreeding,” Dr. Dalen said.Having the complete genome has another implication. “It is now possible to accurately compare the difference between the genomes of elephants and mammoths, and presumably create a mammoth,” said Dr. Dalen.“A group at Harvard has already begun to try to figure out where the genomes differ and then insert mammoth genes into the elephant genome at each variation.”Still, Dr. Dalen said, this does not mean that a Jurassic Park — or a Pleistocene Park, as it would have to be called — is around the corner.“There are of course many critical steps that might not work, so it’s not entirely likely to happen,” he said of the effort to birth a new woolly mammoth. “But it might.”Advertisement