MAY 4, 2015
Global HealthTO THE EDITOR:“Lack of Surgical Access Kills Millions Worldwide” (Global Health, April 28) highlights that many low- and middle-income countries don’t have sufficient numbers of doctors or surgeons to meet their citizens’ needs. “Task-shifting,” arming those who are not doctors with clinical and surgical skills, can and should be a central part of the solution. We are working closely with the government of Tanzania to prove it.For the past eight years we have run a maternal health program in rural regions of Tanzania, where maternal mortality is especially high. We train nondoctors known as assistant medical officers to provide emergency obstetric care, including cesarean section surgery when necessary. It works. These assistant medical officers save lives. The model we have implemented in Tanzania is both scalable and sustainable, and we hope to replicate it wherever it is needed.Lack of access to basic obstetric surgery is an entrenched global problem, but our experience shows that building capacity to perform routine yet critical surgeries with existing human resources is possible.Jose Luis Castro New York CityThe writer is president and chief executive of the World Lung Foundation and the Union North America.AdvertisementElder CareTO THE EDITOR:As a geriatric social worker for 33 years, I have continually heard from families that the hospital experience was one of the worst they have had to face with their elder loved ones. “Aid and Comfort Staying Put” (April 28) reinforces their sentiments. Hospitals can be scary, noisy and confusing places for elders, especially those with dementia. This unfamiliar, overstimulating atmosphere can cause an elder to become agitated and even combative, which can set off a cascade of events like overmedication and even falls. When your elder is hospitalized, immediately plan for the discharge. It often happens abruptly! Clarify what type of care and facility they recommend and tour the facility. Observe how the residents look, and ask pointed questions about staffing and how they communicate with family. Lastly, make sure that one person is designated as the advocate and be diligent about staying involved each step of the way.AdvertisementNancy Kriseman AtlantaTO THE EDITOR:My husband was 68 and physically strong when his dementia necessitated his move to a memory care unit. Every time he fell, though he suffered no pain or discernible injury, he was taken to the emergency room, where we simply waited for him to be discharged, since he didn’t want tests or treatment. The last time he fell and was taken to the ER, his dementia was so advanced that even my presence couldn’t alleviate his terror at being in what was now a totally unfamiliar and hostile environment. He never recovered from the experience; for the last six months of his life, he could not be soothed.Though too late for Bill, it’s good news that hospitals and nursing homes are at last paying attention to the research on the risks to older adults of hospitalization.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Cynthia Hicks San Leandro, Calif.NeurologyTO THE EDITOR:How refreshing and important to read the article by Emily Dwass on benign brain tumors (“Benign Growth, Real Threat,” April 28).Those of us who have been diagnosed with a benign brain tumor often feel like a stepchild in the brain tumor family. We are indeed fortunate to have dodged the bullet of a diagnosis of a malignant brain tumor, but as Ms. Dwass points out, there are many physical and psychological challenges we face which remain unaddressed post-surgery and radiation.This is where a brain tumor support group is helpful in providing a safe space where people with benign brain tumors feel understood and validated and help each other with concrete and emotional support.Rochelle Guttman New York CityThe writer is founder of the Nonmalignant Brain Tumor Support Group of New York.Science Times welcomes letters, comments on nytimes.com and social media posts from readers. Email should be sent to scitimes@nytimes.com.A version of this article appears in print on May 5, 2015, on Page D5 of the New York edition with the headline: Letters to the Editor and Online Comments.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.