OCT. 19, 2015
TO THE EDITOR:“The Chains of Mental Illness in West Africa” (Oct. 12) highlights the abuses that often constitute treatment of mental illness. Tragically, similar abuses occur under the guise of treatment for other marginalized populations such as people who use drugs and L.G.B.T. persons. In the Americas, sexual and physical abuse may form part of forced drug treatment regimens, and governments shirk their responsibility to monitor these centers. In Mexico, for example, we heard from one patient who saw another beaten to death for trying to escape, while in Puerto Rico, humiliation was a key method of so-called confrontation therapy to treat drug use.With more countries calling for a “public health” approach to drugs, we need to be clear about what health and treatment mean. From mental health care to drug rehabilitation, treatment should be voluntary and science-based. In the rare cases where short-term compulsory treatment is needed, it must be dictated through due process and based on international standards.John Walsh WashingtonThe writer is senior associate for the Washington Office on Latin America, working on the intersection of drug policy and human rights.TO THE EDITOR:The pastors who run these prayer camps no doubt bear substantial responsibility for the abuse — but there is blame to share. Government neglect of the psychiatric sector also plays a role in fueling demand for alternate forms of therapy. State-run psychiatric hospitals have a well-earned negative reputation. Hospitals are known to be understaffed, charge people for what should be free care, administer electroshock therapies without anesthesia and lack regular access to medications. A mental health law passed in Ghana in 2012 was intended to improve these conditions, but enacting it has been painfully slow.AdvertisementEfforts are also underway to regulate the prayer camps, but identifying, sanctioning and summarily closing these institutions will take decades. In the nearer term, governments should curb demand by providing viable and accessible alternatives to the prayer camps.AdvertisementLauren A. Taylor BostonTO THE EDITOR:Re “A Mission to Heal Minds” (Oct. 13): I commend this article’s explanation that innovative groups in Africa and Asia are successfully treating mental illnesses. However, not enough focus is given to the No. 1 mental illness in Africa, which is also the No. 1 disabler of African women: depression. Rates of depression among women in many African countries hover around 20 percent, and most have no access to treatment.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.My team uses a method of group interpersonal psychotherapy that was proved effective in Africa in a trial in 2002 to treat these women, and we are scaling our depression treatment today in Uganda, without medication. We have found that over 90 percent of patients are depression-free after treatment, and a majority remain so eight months later.The time to act for the tens of millions of depressed African women is now.Sean Mayberry Maplewood, N.J.The writer is founder and executive director of StrongMinds.TO THE EDITOR:Re “Saving Water With Nagging” (Oct. 13): Instead of nagging spouses and family members and neighbors for a small amount of water saved, an effective and intelligent use of time and energy would be to organize relatives and neighbors to pressure local and county governments to inform residents about how to recycle water in individual households (often known as Laundry to Lawn programs.) Or, on a larger scale, to follow the lead of California counties and locals in recycling wastewater, as Orange County, Silicon Valley and San Diego County have done. These wastewater treatment plants recycle hundreds of millions of gallons of wastewater daily. Organizing for wastewater management development is smarter and easier on family relations than the water conservation mindfulness as depicted in your story.Fiona McGregor San Francisco­Science Times welcomes letters, comments on nytimes.com and social media posts from readers. Email should be sent to scitimes@nytimes.com.A version of this article appears in print on October 20, 2015, on Page D3 of the New York edition.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.