AdvertisementSupported byRaw DataBy George JohnsonIt was 20 years ago that Art McDonald and I stopped at a Tim Hortons near Sudbury, Ontario, for coffee and doughnuts on our way to his job at the neutrino mine. Donning hard hats, we crowded into a rattling elevator cage and descended 6,800 feet to an underground laboratory that reminded me of the one in “The Andromeda Strain.”The Sudbury Neutrino Observatory sat at the end of a long corridor at the bottom of a working nickel mine. In the tunnels above us miners dug and blasted through granite. Dr. McDonald was after a far less substantial ore.Neutrinos are said to pass through Earth almost as easily as through empty space. During the flight, theorists believed, neutrinos were capable of changing their identity. Dr. McDonald’s job was to catch them in the act. It was six more years before he succeeded. Earlier this month he won a share of a Nobel Prize, a climax to a long and perplexing tale.I had come to Sudbury on a philosophical quest. I wasn’t entirely sure I believed in neutrinos, which were invented in 1930 to fill a hole in physics. In a type of radioactive decay, experimenters had measured more energy going in than coming out.That is supposed to be impossible, so the fix was to conjure forth an unseen particle with precisely the right characteristics to take up the slack. The particles had gone unnoticed, the argument went, because they had no handles for experimenters to grab onto — no charge and (it was believed at the time) no mass.Sometimes this explanation seemed a little too pat. I knew neutrinos were eventually detected, but in ways so oblique that I wondered how physicists could be sure they weren’t just seeing what they needed to see.By now neutrinos are woven so tightly into the mesh of physics that you would have to be a crank to doubt their existence. But when you start peeling away the layers of theory, reality can start feeling pretty abstract.Of all the particles in the universe, the only ones our senses can directly register are photons — particles of light that strike the retina and send electrical signals to the brain. Our cruder senses respond to whole globs of matter — larger globs for touch, invisibly tiny globs for smell. Sound, for its part, is the vibration of matter, a rumbling of the ground or a reverberation of the air.Revealing the existence of theoretical stuff like neutrinos means coaxing them into producing photons to be registered by our eyes or our instruments. It took a quarter century to figure out how to do that, and by a somewhat circuitous route.Like other particles, neutrinos, the theory goes, have antimatter counterparts. When an antineutrino collides with a proton, it should transform it into a neutron while an antimatter electron is kicked out. It quickly strikes a regular electron, exploding into two photons flying in opposite directions — tiny flashes of light.An instant later the neutron is sucked into the core of an atom, resulting in another flash. If the timing and energy of these scintillations are precisely in sync, you can say you have glimpsed a neutrino.In the mid-1950s two experimenters, Frederick Reines and Clyde Cowan, put it all together. They measured neutrinos spewing from a nuclear reactor. The reward was a Nobel Prize.Then things started getting messy. Now that it was possible to detect neutrinos, physicists had a way of testing their theory of sunlight — that it was generated by nuclear fusion. That meant neutrinos should be pouring from the sun in droves.In the inverse of the reaction used by Reines and Cowan, a neutrino striking a neutron should transform it into a proton and an electron. If the neutron is contained within the core of a chlorine atom, it morphs into an argon atom and emits gamma rays. Gamma rays are very high frequency light.With a vat of chlorine atoms (in the form of dry cleaning fluid), Raymond Davis Jr. was first to find this circumstantial evidence (resulting in yet another Nobel Prize). But his experiment is more famous for seeing only a fraction of the neutrinos required by solar theory — another hole in physics.Maybe the sun wasn’t really powered by fusion. Or maybe neutrinos were eaten by a black hole lurking inside. By the time I met Dr. McDonald, theorists had rallied around a less radical thought.By then there seemed to be three different “flavors” of neutrinos. Maybe as neutrinos streamed from the sun, they “oscillated” between the different types. Our instruments had been blind to all but one. That is where the Sudbury detector came in. It succeeded in registering all three flavors, as signatures of photons.This solution to the solar neutrino problem required a troubling trade-off. For years physicists had celebrated the neutrino’s massless purity, which allowed it to pass at lightspeed through anything in its path. But for neutrinos to oscillate they had to be saddled with a tiny dab of mass. “That can’t be — it’s too ugly,” the great physicist Hans Bethe remarked when he heard the proposal. But in the end the alternatives seemed worse.As I raise a doughnut and a cup of takeout coffee to Dr. McDonald and his crew, I still feel a little uneasy. Quarks, gluons, Higgs bosons — the story is the same. Behind the scenes, particles decay into other particles, until at the end of the tunnel you see the light. Whether we’re reading a meter or a computer screen, our knowledge ultimately comes down to photons.On that trip to Sudbury, Dr. McDonald gave me a nugget of nickel ore. Solid as it seems it is made of atoms that consist mostly of empty space. It shimmers a silvery gold because photons strike hollow shells of electrons and ricochet into my eyes. All of our knowledge of the world is so indirect.I find some satisfaction in Boswell’s famous description of Samuel Johnson disputing Bishop Berkeley’s contention that the world is all in our minds. Kicking a rock and maybe stubbing his toe, he declared of the theory, “I refute it thus.”Advertisement