By NICHOLAS ST. FLEUROCT. 22, 2015
Robert M. White, a meteorologist who revolutionized the nation’s weather forecasting system, was the first to lead the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration and warned of climate change long before it was widely recognized, died on Oct. 14 at his home in Chevy Chase, Md. He was 92.The cause was complications of dementia, his nephew David F. White said.Dr. White led the federal government’s weather agencies from the 1960s through the late 1970s in a career that spanned five presidencies, starting with that of John F. Kennedy.During that time, he helped construct a sophisticated satellite and computer network that fundamentally changed how people observe the atmosphere, leading to major improvements in early warnings for floods, tornadoes and hurricanes. He also represented the United States at the first global forum on climate change, held in Geneva in 1979.“Between 1945 and 2005, no one played a bigger role in weather and climate globally than Bob did,” Jesse H. Ausubel, an environmental scientist at Rockefeller University who once worked with Dr. White, said in a telephone interview.AdvertisementMr. Kennedy appointed Dr. White director of the United States Weather Bureau in 1963.In 1965, when President Lyndon B. Johnson merged the Weather Bureau with the Coast and Geodetic Survey and the Central Radio Propagation Laboratory to create the Environmental Science Services Administration (the first federal agency to have the word “environmental” in its name), he named Dr. White to lead it. The merger added ships, aircraft, satellites and radar to Dr. White’s weather-observing arsenal.AdvertisementHe served in that position until 1970, when he and his colleagues worked with Congress to expand the environmental agency’s atmospheric and hydrology work, a reorganization that gave birth to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. President Richard M. Nixon appointed Dr. White as its first administrator, a post Dr. White retained under Presidents Gerald R. Ford and Jimmy Carter.As the administrator, he championed marine conservation and helped establish some of the first government marine sanctuaries.He was also president of the National Academy of Engineering from 1983 to 1995.By using computers to analyze information from satellites and other tools about wind speed, moisture, humidity and pressure, Dr. White helped create some of the country’s first weather models. Forecasts became more precise: “Cloudy tomorrow, possible showers Saturday,” for example, was replaced by “There’s a 70 percent chance of rain tomorrow.”“When people look at the weather and decide to bring an umbrella with them, they don’t think about where the forecast comes from,” D. James Baker, a meteorologist who was the administrator of N.O.A.A. from 1993 to 2001, said in a phone interview. “It comes from these big billion-dollar satellites and hundred-million-dollar computers, and that is all a part of N.O.A.A., which Bob White established.”Robert Mayer White was born on Feb. 13, 1923, into a community that consisted largely of Jewish immigrants in the Dorchester section of Boston. He was one of four siblings. His father, David, was a politically active Socialist who had trained as a lawyer but was forced to collect rents for slumlords during the Depression to make ends meet. His mother was the former Mary Winkeller, and the family lived with her parents and other relatives in an eight-room house her immigrant father had bought.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.David White died when Robert was a child, leaving Robert’s older brother Theodore, who was 16, to help their mother take care of the impoverished family.Theodore H. White became a distinguished reporter and author and won the Pulitzer Prize in general nonfiction in 1962 for his book “The Making of the President, 1960.”In his 1978 memoir, “In Search of History,” Theodore White recalled that Robert, too, had to help support the family when he was 9, “conscripted to sell newspapers at the corners before going to school.”Advertisement“I had loved him almost as a son when he was the young brother of our poverty,” he wrote.After graduating from the Boston Latin School, Dr. White studied geology at Harvard University and received his master’s degree and doctorate in meteorology from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.He is survived by his wife of 67 years, Mavis E. White; a son, Richard; and a daughter, Edwina White. Theodore White died in 1986, at 71.During the Cold War, Dr. White forged scientific collaborations with his counterparts in the Soviet Union. He had access to one of only three direct telecommunication channels between Washington and Moscow, and used the so-called cold line to exchange atmospheric observations from ships, balloons, land stations and, eventually, satellites.The magazine Aviation Week & Space Technology called it “the most extensive technological cooperation between the two countries since World War II.”As the chairman of the First World Climate Conference in 1979, Dr. White gave a keynote speech that projected the possible consequences of human-induced warming of the planet. The speech, Dr. Baker said, was a turning point in the effort to promote global awareness of climate change.“Because of the foresight and ability of Bob White,” Dr. Baker said, “we are right at the forefront of understanding the complex atmosphere, weather and climate, and without him, we’d be much further behind.”A version of this article appears in print on October 23, 2015, on Page A24 of the New York edition with the headline: Robert M. White, 92, a Meteorologist Who Revolutionized Weather Forecasts.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.