OCT. 26, 2015
TO THE EDITOR:Re “Filtered Sunlight Known to Aid Infant Jaundice” (Global Health, Oct. 20): I was reminded of my granddaughter, who was jaundiced at birth and sent home with a light box in which she was placed most of her first days at home, resulting in limited physical contact with her parents. How much better it would have been for that initial infant-parent bonding if she had been treated with filtered sunlight while being held by her mother or father.Lurenda Melms, Scottsdale, Ariz.TO THE EDITOR:“Shake-Up in Study of Hearts” (Oct. 20) raises important issues about the funding of medical research. While it is important to use our limited research funds carefully, it is also important that funding not move too much toward an emphasis on large-scale treatment trials with a high likelihood of obtaining publishable results. Although such studies are useful, they also tend to be very conservative, focusing on relatively established methods and posing “safe” questions about them, and thus are unlikely to lead to truly innovative or surprising results.There are still many important gaps in our knowledge about heart disease, and many conditions for which we still do not have effective treatments. As one of the doctors quoted in the article pointed out, it is important to also reserve some funding for more exploratory studies, where the results are necessarily less certain, but where there is a higher long-term potential for making significant advances in understanding and developing more innovative treatment methods. Otherwise, we will not have new methods available for larger-scale trials in the future.Leon Axel, ManhattanTO THE EDITOR:“Gene Editing Takes a Big Leap” (Matter, Oct. 20) reports that a new gene-editing technique might make it possible to harvest organs from pigs for transplantation into humans, but says nothing at all about the ethical implications of using animals in this way. At a time when many people are finally beginning to recognize the indefensible cruelties of factory farms and slaughterhouses, we shouldn’t be so eager to embrace a new temptation to treat animals as mere utilities for us to exploit. Every day, it seems, scientific research offers further evidence of the intelligence and emotional experience of animals, from crows and octopuses to dogs and cows. It’s high time that we accord their lives a portion of the moral weight that we claim for our own.AdvertisementRobert Killheffer, Watertown, Conn.Re “A Fresh Look at Sleep Needs” (Oct. 20):You really can’t study sleep patterns in the Western world without factoring in stress. Most of the people I know spend seven hours in bed, but much of it is wakeful due to stress and job-related issues. Comparing first-world humans with hunter-gatherers only gives you a “what if” under perfect conditions. Unfortunately most of us are so keyed up, we’re lucky to get four hours of sleep.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.MJ, Michigan, posted to nytimes.comThe more memory consolidation and mental stimulation that occurs during the day, the more work the sleeping brain has to do at night. A complex day may then warrant more sleep. Sleep is needed as much for mental and emotional sorting as it is for physical rest, maybe more.Radellaf, Raleigh, N.C., posted to nytimes.comWhat is the life expectancy of these hunter-gatherers? What is the ratio of animal to plant protein in their diets? Do they become ill? What is the incidence and prevalence of chronic diseases? As an insomniac for the last 75 years, I don’t think that this paper is going to transform the field of sleep.AdvertisementRonald W. Gumbs, East Brunswick, N.J., posted to nytimes.com­Science Times welcomes letters, comments on nytimes.com and social media posts from readers. Email should be sent to scitimes@nytimes.com.A version of this letter appears in print on October 27, 2015, on Page D3 of the New York edition with the headline: Letters to the Editor.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.