AdvertisementSupported byFirst MentionBy Nicholas BakalarThe first telephone was not presented at an Apple-style product introduction extravaganza. Readers of The New York Times heard about the device gradually, in brief accounts of public, and often only modestly successful, demonstrations of its performance.The word first appeared on July 10, 1874, when an anonymous story on Page 2 of The New-York Times described a display of some new equipment at the Broadway office of the Western Union Telegraph Company.“Mr. Elisha Gray, of Chicago, a gentleman well known in the electric telegraph world” had succeeded in transmitting music over telegraph wires, and “the apparatus by means of which this extraordinary feat in telegraphy is accomplished has been named by Mr. Gray the telephone, or, an instrument designed for the purpose of transmitting sound to a distance.”This was the first mention in The Times of the telephone, a device that could transmit sound by wire — sound but not the human voice.Gray’s invention never progressed much beyond this, although there is still some dispute among historians about whether Gray should be given credit for the telephone’s invention. In any case, Alexander Graham Bell was issued a patent on March 7, 1876, for a device that could, among other things, enable “the telegraphic transmission of noises or sounds of any kind.”The Times did not mention Bell’s invention until Oct. 21 when readers first heard of “the record of the first conversation ever carried on by word of mouth over a telegraph wire.” On Oct. 9, the article said, Bell, in an office in Boston, had used a telegraph line to communicate with his colleague Thomas A. Watson at a factory in Cambridgeport two miles away.On May 12, 1877, an anonymous reporter described yet another of Bell’s demonstrations. The sounds, he wrote, “were too inaudible to be of practical utility” and in any case, “the beginner needs a little practice to become perfect on the telephone.” The Times did suggest a practical purpose for it, though.In Bell’s view, a telephone could conceivably be installed in someone’s home. The reporter paraphrased him: Mrs. Smith “is lonely of an afternoon, and the central office man having, by her request, joined her wire with Mrs. Brown’s, the two spend an hour very enjoyably in cutting up Mrs. Robinson. Its possibilities may be enlarged upon indefinitely.”Advertisement