By NICHOLAS ST. FLEUROCT. 28, 2015
The wild-caught salmon sold by restaurants and fishmongers is frequently farm-raised fish that has been mislabeled, said a report released Wednesday.Using DNA analysis, the nonprofit ocean conservation group Oceana studied 82 samples and found that two-thirds of the salmon appearing on restaurant menus were incorrectly labeled. Twenty percent of salmon from groceries was incorrectly identified, the group found.Over all, 43 percent of the salmon the group collected — in New York, Washington, Chicago and Virginia, from upscale and takeout restaurants, and from various neighborhood and chain groceries — was misidentified. The researchers reported that the most common mislabeling in their survey involved Atlantic salmon being sold as “wild salmon.” The group also found instances of chum salmon being advertised as costlier king salmon, and of rainbow trout sold as wild salmon.The study’s authors recommended that new policies be created to protect seafood consumers and honest fishermen from mislabeling.AdvertisementOceana performed similar investigations of fish in 2013, shrimp in 2014 and crab cakes earlier this year.AdvertisementThe most recent study is a follow-up to a nationwide survey of salmon labeling published by the group in 2013.“Our results are consistent and wide enough to know that this is a problem that can occur anyplace, anytime, with any type of seafood,” said Kimberly Warner, a senior scientist at Oceana and an author of the report.The earlier salmon study found lower rates of substitution, only 7 percent of 384 samples, which the group attributed to the different seasons in which the studies were conducted. The first study looked at salmon sold at the height of the commercial fishing season in 2012, while samples for the most recent report were collected out of season, during the winter of 2013-2014.When the authors combined the two study samplings, they found that time of year was a strong indicator of whether a restaurant would sell mislabeled salmon. During winter months, fresh wild salmon is less available, but diners’ appetite for the fish does not diminish, creating an incentive to substitute readily available farmed salmon. The researchers found that large chain groceries had the lowest percentage of misidentified salmon, and were eight times less likely to offer such mislabeled salmon than small groceries.The findings came as no surprise to Christa Hoover, the executive director of Copper River/Prince William Sound Marketing Association, which represents fishermen in Alaska who wrangle wild salmon. Ms. Hoover has seen several examples of faux Alaska Copper River salmon on the market, and said she hoped such studies would help government officials enact stronger label legislation.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“They need to know that this isn’t just anecdotal evidence, that our salmon is being plagiarized with farmed salmon and this DNA evidence shows that,” she said.Consumers looking to protect themselves from purchasing the wrong types of salmon should ask their sellers about its exact point of origin, its species, and whether it is fresh or previously frozen, the authors suggested.Salmon can go through many hands before it ends up on a dinner plate. The report found that United States fisheries could satisfy 80 percent of the country’s demand for salmon, but 70 percent of that catch is exported.AdvertisementIn 2013, for instance, the fisheries exported more than 85,000 metric tons of salmon to China, where processing is cheaper. The United States imports 37,000 metric tons from China, some of which is the same fish that was originally shipped. As the fish is gutted, filleted, further processed, shipped to distributors and then passed on to retailers and consumers, it loses its pedigree. The report did not state where along the supply chain the frauds are most likely to occur.To cut down on salmon mislabeling, the report’s authors are calling for stricter regulations on seafood imports, as well as complete tracking of all seafood sold in this country throughout its supply chain.Gavin Gibbons, a spokesman for the National Fisheries Institute, a trade group for the seafood industry, criticized the report for not identifying where along the supply chain fraud occurs. Between 2012 and 2013, the Food and Drug Administration performed genetic analyses on seafood at wholesalers that had not been sent to retail and found that 85 percent was correctly labeled. The survey did not include salmon, but did include cod, grouper and snapper.“We’re not talking about the crime of the century; if you have a menu, an invoice and a DNA test, you can tell if the product was mislabeled at the restaurant or before it got there,” he said in an email. “They’re only doing half an investigation at best and proclaiming it complete.”Beth Lowell, Oceana’s senior campaign director and an author of the study, said that because fraud can happen anywhere in the supply chain, protective measures need to address all entry points, and not just the final point of sale.A version of this article appears in print on October 29, 2015, on Page A24 of the New York edition with the headline: Though Labeled ‘Wild,’ That Serving of Salmon May Be Farmed or ‘Faux’.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.