

      As told to CLAUDIA DREIFUS

OCT. 4, 2015

Beginning Monday and throughout this week the committees that select the winners of the Nobel Prizes will announce their choices sometime around noon Swedish time. With the Eastern part of the United States six hours behind Sweden and the West coast nine hours behind, American researchers tend to be asleep when that life-changing call comes. Here is how eight scientists learned about their Nobel Prizes.If you’re fortunate enough to do good work, people do this terrible thing to you — they start saying, “Hey, you might get the Nobel Prize.” Then, when the first week in October rolls around, you lose a little sleep. Last October, I didn’t sleep well the night before they announced the medicine prize. But no call came. They announce the chemistry prize two days later. Well, on that night, I heard this phone ringing in the distance but assumed it was a neighbor’s. So I woke at 10 after 6 the next morning and assumed the chemistry prize had gone to someone else. I then opened my laptop and went to Nobelprize.org to see who the schnook was who’d gotten it. And there I saw my name along — along with Osamu Shimomura’s and Roger Tsien’s. I was the schnook! Related: A Conversation With Martin Chalfie I don’t usually do the laundry so early in the morning, but I was already up, and there was all this laundry staring at me. I was supposed to later meet two women friends to take our morning spin class. People had speculated that sometime in the next five years, something like this might happen. And last year people said, “Maybe, it will be,” and it wasn’t. Reuters had made this prediction that we might get it this time. But I really didn’t have any idea. Maybe it would never happen. There are important fundamental discoveries that never get prizes. After I got the call, I sent my friend an e-mail: “I’m sorry I can’t spin right now. I’ve won the Nobel Prize.” Related: A Conversation With Carol GreiderThere were some clues that this would happen. Like getting invited to Sweden to give lectures. But at 5:30 a.m. on an October morning, the phone rang. “Hello, Professor Agre, this is Stockholm. You have just won the Nobel Prize in Chemistry. In about 10 minutes, we’re having a press conference and the whole world will hear — so you’d better get on with your day.” I sprinted into the shower, and my wife, Mary, called my mother, who said, “That’s very nice, but don’t let it go to his head.”Related: A Conversation With Peter Agre I was asleep. I got the call at 5:15 a.m. In days of yore, they never notified the laureates directly and people heard from news reports or from others that they’d won. Julie Axelrod once told me that he heard while sitting in his dentist’s chair! Shortly before I won it, the Nobel Prize committee decided that they would call the recipients about 45 minutes before the announcement to let them know. There was this history where people sometimes played practical jokes on potential winners by calling them and saying, “Hi, you’ve just won the Nobel Prize.”So, at 5:15 our time, they called me. I heard the phone ringing. Our daughter picked it up. Over the extension, I heard her say: “He’s sound asleep. Do you REALLY want me to wake him up?”And I heard someone say, “My name is Hans Jornvall and I am secretary of the Nobel committee.” I said, “Don’t hang up.” Related: A Conversation With Paul GreengardIt was close to 2 a.m. here in Seattle when they tried to reach me. The committee did not have my phone number, which is unlisted, but they managed to obtain the home number for the director of my division (chair of department). The Nobel member calling him said he was from Sweden and would like my number. Since I was on a faculty search committee, the director guessed it might be someone from Sweden who was calling about the faculty position, but wasn’t aware of the time difference. He therefore told the caller that if he was interested in inquiring about a job here, this was probably not the best way to go about it. The caller then told the director why he was calling, and the director responded, “That will get you a job here!”I heard about the Nobel Prize on the morning of Yom Kippur, Oct. 9, 2000, the highest Jewish holiday of the year. The phone is on Denise’s side of the bed. It rang at 5 a.m. and she shoved me in the ribs and said, “This call is from Stockholm, it must be for you, not for me.” I picked up and heard from Hans Jornvall, the secretary of the Nobel Foundation, that I have been awarded the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine together with Arvid Carlsson and Paul Greengard. The call seemed unreal. I was in a state of disbelief. Jornvall instructed me not to talk to anyone about this for the next hour. When I told that to Denise, she said let’s go back to sleep. But I, by this time, was already in a hyper-excitable state and in no condition to go to sleep, so when the hour was up I began to telephone and woke our two children, Paul and Minouche, and then I called Paul Greengard and my friends at Columbia.Related: A Conversation With Eric Kandel I was in bed asleep, of course! Actually, I was awakened not by a call from Sweden, but by a call from my brother. The Swedes were not able to get my phone number, but my wildly optimistic brother got up in the middle of the night to check the announcement of the physics prize on the Internet, and his congratulatory call woke me up. Since it was my brother, my first reaction was to go check the Internet to make sure he was not playing a practical joke.Note: Though Dr. Wieman is at Stanford now, he worked for the University of Colorado when he won. Related: A Conversation With Carl Wieman  I was in Munich to give a talk at a conference when the committee called to tell me about the prize.The Nobel was the furthest thing from my mind. When my cellphone rang, I wondered who the heck would call me at 5:30 in the morning East Coast time and immediately worried that there was a problem at home. They had actually called my ex-wife’s phone first, but my 16-year-old told them where to find me. After about 20 seconds of shakes and another 20 seconds to tell them “yes,” I hung up in shock. The closest analogy I can make is that it feels like getting hit by a bus. You know that you’ve just experienced a completely unexpected and life-changing event, and you have no idea how it will impact you and your plans for the future.  Related: A Conversation With Eric Betzig Advertisement