AdvertisementSupported byCoordinatesBy John MarkoffMenlo Park, Calif. — Almost half a century ago, the first autonomous robot project, dubbed Shakey, was started here at a laboratory that is now called SRI International. Shakey was the first machine used to pursue a range of artificial intelligence technologies such as planning, navigation, machine vision and even speech recognition. Funded by the Pentagon, it was originally modeled on the idea of an autonomous sentry for a military base.Last week, on a warm fall afternoon outside the offices of a venture capital firm not far from the original SRI experiments, a distant descendant of the original Shakey was wheeled out for a demonstration. While Shakey was mostly a bulky stack of electronics, the modern version is sleeker and more nimble, and looks like an oversize cooler on wheels with LED lighting and video cameras.It has been developed by Starship Technologies, an Estonian start-up created and funded by the Skype co-founders Ahti Heinla and Janus Friis. The two men are programmers and entrepreneurs who are planning to use reasonably straightforward autonomous navigation technologies to solve what is described as the “last mile” problem — getting goods like groceries, drugstore items and most small packages to suburban homes.Their task is simpler than the one facing designers of self-driving cars, because if something goes wrong, the Starship robot is much less likely to cause harm. While Amazon and Google are pursuing the idea of using airborne drones to deliver packages in urban areas, Mr. Heinla, who serves as the chief technology officer for Starship, believes his ground-based approach is more practical.During a demonstration last week, the robot didn’t do a lot. It rolled along jauntily while waving a protruding LED-lit antenna-like a flag to make it more noticeable.But it may be a glimpse of a future in which intelligent and autonomous machines transport humans, deliver packages and perform services.Mr. Heinla’s vision is that a customer will place an online order and then the pint-size Starship autonomous delivery vehicle will be automatically loaded at a compact warehouse made from a converted cargo container that can be placed in a parking lot or elsewhere in a shopping district. The Starship autonomous vehicle will then set out on sidewalks at a top speed of four miles an hour. It will have a range of up to two miles and be able to deliver packages in under a half-hour.“Currently the biggest problem the logistics companies have is with last-mile delivery,” Mr. Heinla said. “When the van is stopping every couple of minutes to knock on another door, this is the biggest source of inefficiency.”The idea is that the knee-high vehicle will roll up in front of homes and customers will walk outside and touch a button on their smartphone application to give them access to the groceries or packages inside. The six-wheeled Starship robotic vehicle, powered by an electric motor that consumes just 50 watts, will then trundle back to its modular warehouse to be recharged.The prototype has the capacity to carry a payload of 40 pounds, or roughly two bags of groceries. It will travel through neighborhoods that have been pre-mapped at high resolution and will have camera and radar to see the world around it as it travels. By not using costly Lidar sensors that are capable of detecting objects as small as a pebble hundreds of feet away and that are being used on Google’s and other autonomous vehicles, the robots will cost to less to build. It will also have speakers and microphones for communicating with any humans it might encounter.In theory, it will topple one more obstacle to online shopping. According to Brad Templeton, a software designer based in Silicon Valley and an adviser to Starship, a low-cost delivery robot like Starship will make it possible for customers to try out or try on products while the robot waits. If they don’t like what they have purchased, the robot can then return it at almost no cost.The system is not intended for crowded urban environments, Mr. Heinla acknowledged. Rather it is targeted for relatively affluent and uncrowded suburban neighborhoods, gated communities, assisted living facilities and campuses, where it will travel on sidewalks, programmed to mingle freely with pedestrians, bicyclists and cars.Theft is certainly a concern, but the Starship designers point out that any thieves will have to run the risk of exposing themselves to high resolution video cameras as well as a GPS tracking system that will need to be disabled.The biggest technical challenge will be crossing intersections. To help with this hurdle, each vehicle will have the ability to call on a remote human operator whenever it faces a navigation puzzle its autonomous software cannot solve. When it confronts a pedestrian on a sidewalk, the vehicle comes to a halt until the human passes. The Starship robot is designed to make deliveries for a cost of less than $1, which Mr. Heinla says is five to 15 times as cheap as current human-driven delivery vehicles.Mr. Heinla, who helped develop the Kazaa file-sharing service before Skype, says his 30-person Estonian firm will start its first experimental delivery systems in Greenwich, England, and the United States next spring. Commercial service is planned for 2017. The systems will also provide environmental benefits by reducing gas-powered vehicle traffic, he said.There are of course both practical and regulatory obstacles that need to be overcome. For example, today in the United States, only a handful of states would allow such an autonomous vehicle to travel on the sidewalk. In some cases, cities may be able to offer legal exemptions to allow the vehicles to travel on sidewalks in specific neighborhoods.Allan Martinson, Starship’s chief operating officer, notes that new technologies often require regulatory changes, and points out that the Segway two-wheeled motorized transportation vehicle was able to get such exemptions in many locations.For Peter Hart, an artificial intelligence specialist who was one of the leaders of the original Shakey project, there is a deeper message in the emergence of systems like the Starship robot.“After Shakey, artificial intelligence and robotics went their separate ways,” he said. “What we are seeing now is a long overdue convergence of the two fields.”Advertisement