AdvertisementSupported byReactionsTO THE EDITOR:The headline “Failing on Diabetes” (Oct. 27) should instead be “Failing Our Children.” Not only is the policy to reject or transfer children with Type 1 diabetes from public and private schools blatantly discriminatory, it highlights a pathetic misunderstanding of the condition. Type 1 diabetes requires blood sugar monitoring and insulin by injection or pump. It does not necessarily restrict a child from participating in any activity. I say this as a Type 1 diabetic and the mother of an active and healthy 21-year-old son whose diabetes was diagnosed when he was in kindergarten. Diabetes is only one of a number of health issues that children have to face.As an educator I feel it is our responsibility to take care of all students, regardless of their health issues. What does it say about our values if our schools cannot take care of our children when needed? The presence of a trained nurse in every school is not an option, it is the right of every child.Nan Riley,BrooklynTO THE EDITOR:This article is appropriately sympathetic to parents, while being rather dismissive of schools’ viewpoint. The fact of schools’ budget cuts is briefly acknowledged without allowing principals, superintendents and teachers to explain what this means for them. The real blame lies with too many Americans buying into the proposition that tax cuts are always good and that raising taxes is always bad.There used to be a nurse in almost every school system. Many cannot afford them now.Virginia Pastoor, Muskegon, Mich.TO THE EDITOR:I wonder how nurse-less schools reach out to the staff when seeking volunteers to care for children with Type 1 diabetes. Do the schools partner with someone experienced in diabetes care to empower the entire staff to realize that they can successfully handle the task?A diabetes educator, a nurse, a representative from the local health department, or a teacher with similar responsibility at another school could explain the specific responsibilities; describe the type of training, education and support that will be provided; discuss liability; and highlight the fact that the vast majority of people safely caring for someone with Type 1 diabetes have no prior medical background whatsoever. And though I hope the ultimate motivation would be altruistic, if absolutely all else fails the schools could appeal to self-interest.Given the number of people diagnosed with Type 2 diabetes or pre-diabetes, and therefore the number of people who will eventually need insulin (yes, many people with Type 2 use insulin), any training in diabetes management could come in very handy.Jill Sabin Garner, ManhattanTO THE EDITOR:“Pregnancy Protection Without ‘User Error’ ” (Personal Health, Oct. 27) is right about the several advantages of long-acting reversible contraceptives and the importance of offering them to all women. Nonetheless, decades of experience with contraceptive services demonstrates that three key aspects of high-quality delivery of LARCs, which should always be addressed, commonly are not.First, LARCs must be offered together with accurate information and choice among all other contraceptives, including some that may be less effective but more acceptable than LARCs for some women.Second, service providers must be well trained and willing to remove LARCs on request. Only when this criterion is met are LARCs actually reversible.Third, all women who choose LARCs must also be informed about H.I.V. and other sexually transmitted diseases, and be supported to use condoms. Male and female condoms are still the only contraceptive method that protects against S.T.D.s, which continue to increase in the United States and worldwide.Adrienne Germain, ManhattanThe writer is president emerita of the International Women’s Health Coalition.­Science Times welcomes letters, comments on nytimes.com and social media posts from readers. Email should be sent to scitimes@nytimes.com.Advertisement