By C. CLAIBORNE RAYNOV. 2, 2015
Q. If our normal body temperature is about 98.6 degrees Fahrenheit, or 37 degrees Celsius, why aren’t we most comfortable when the temperature around us is the same?A. It should be noted that the usual 98.6-degree normal reading is for core body temperature, not skin temperature, which is usually considerably lower, rising and falling with the ambient temperature.It is at the skin surface that much of the excess heat from the body’s metabolism is discharged into the air, through radiation, conduction and convection and through evaporative cooling, which depends on sweating. Heat is carried to the skin surface by blood circulating through dilating blood vessels.Heat flows from a warmer place to a cooler place, so if the temperature where skin meets air reaches a level at which the first three discharge systems cannot discharge enough heat, discomfort results. If the humidity is also elevated, interfering with evaporation, the discomfort is even worse.AdvertisementPeople moving from one climate to another can acclimate to function in an ambient temperature that is warmer (or cooler) than they are used to, but the process is gradual, and is not fully understood.The body’s internal and external systems normally work to keep the internal temperature relatively steady, from 97 to 100 degrees Fahrenheit, in spite of the ambient temperature, at least within the range of 55 degrees Fahrenheit to 130 degrees Fahrenheit.AdvertisementInterestingly, surgical patients often sustain accidental hypothermia — excessive heat loss — while their surgeons work comfortably in a cool operating room. Under anesthesia or sedation, the patients cannot do what they would normally do to warm up: increase their activity level to raise heat production or put on more clothes. Their internal heat-regulation systems are also depressed. question@nytimes.comQuestions of general interest will be answered, but requests for medical advice cannot be honored and unpublished letters cannot be answered individually.A version of this article appears in print on November 3, 2015, on Page D4 of the New York edition with the headline: One Body, Several Temperatures.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.