

 James Gorman
 

SCIENCETAKE
NOV. 9, 2015
High-speed imaging captures what happens when a laser ignites a bubble of methane.Among the enduring mysteries of science are the nature of the universe, the origin of life and how to get the attention of students.Victor Miller and his colleagues in the engineering school at Stanford University have not made headway on the first two. To be fair, they are not even working on them. But as to students — how about firing a laser at a methane bubble to set it aflame?Lighting up methane is not exactly science, but if you record the result at 10,000 frames a second with a technique called schlieren imaging — which the students themselves have to master — and then require them to figure out how to compute the speed at which the flame grows based on the video, you’re ready for graduate students at Stanford.Dr. Miller, a researcher at Stanford; Chris Goldenstein, another researcher; and Valerie Troutman, a Ph.D. student, recently worked with graduate students in engineering at Stanford to produce and analyze just such videos.AdvertisementThe videos, like one of a match firing up that was created last year by Dr. Miller and others, are in black and white, and the technique requires very exact placement of the camera, light source and mirrors to capture differences in density among the turbulent hot gases as the flame grows.AdvertisementDr. Miller said he and his colleagues were preparing for a lab course in “optical diagnostics and spectroscopy” in which graduate students must use schlieren imaging when they came up with the plan. Last year, Dr. Miller had done the match video for this course and it won an award at a meeting of the Division of Fluid Dynamics of the American Physical Society. It was also featured in ScienceTake.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.This time, he wanted to do something different, and Dr. Miller said that Dr. Goldenstein was the one who suggested, “we should fill up bubbles with methane and light them.” He had seen it done before, and Dr. Miller thought it seemed like a great idea. So they supervised the students setting up a camera, laser, light source and mirrors at exactly the right positions and angles, which is the difficult part.The students loved it, Dr. Miller said. Then, using the video, the students had to figure out a way to measure the flame speed. He sees a wider use for the technique, perhaps with less complicated analysis.“This could be a really fun thing to have in K-12 classrooms,” he said. He said that two smartphones could serve as camera and light source. They wouldn’t record at the same high speed as the camera he uses, but some smartphones have slow-motion abilities.And he says a 3-D printer could be programmed to make frames to hold the mirrors and cameras, solving the problem of getting exactly the right angles.Anyone want to go back to middle school?An earlier version of this article misspelled the surname of one of the researchers. As the accompanying video correctly noted, he is Chris Goldenstein, not Goldstein.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »