

      By THE NEW YORK TIMES

NOV. 8, 2015

The richest awards in science were handed out Sunday night when the Breakthrough Prize organization presented a total of $21.9 million to physicists, mathematicians, life scientists and one talented high school student. The awards take the form of seven $3 million awards, one of which was split among roughly 1,300 physicists; $500,000 split among eight early-career researchers; and $400,000 to a high school student for creating a video communicating a scientific concept.The Breakthrough Prizes were founded by Sergey Brin of Google; Anne Wojcicki of 23andme; Jack Ma of Alibaba and his wife, Cathy Zhang; Yuri Milner, an Internet entrepreneur, and his wife, Julia Milner; and Mark Zuckerberg of Facebook and his wife, Priscilla Chan.The awards were given out in an Oscar-style ceremony hosted by the founders and Graydon Carter, the Vanity Fair editor, at NASA’s Ames Research Center in Mountain View, Calif., with entertainment by Pharrell Williams and food by Thomas Keller of the French Laundry and Per Se. Seth MacFarlane was the M.C. for the awards presentation, which also featured boldface names like Russell Crowe and Hilary Swank.And the scientists were in their Oscar-worthy finest.It all began when Mr. Milner announced in 2012 that he would hand out $3 million apiece to nine theoretical physicists, in the belief that physicists are equal to rock stars and deserve to be paid and celebrated like them. Over the years, as more sponsors have joined, the prizes have spread to life sciences and mathematics. The winners each year are chosen by a committee of previous winners. “By challenging conventional thinking and expanding knowledge over the long term, scientists can solve the biggest problems of our time,” Mr. Zuckerberg said in a statement. “The Breakthrough Prize honors achievements in science and math so we can encourage more pioneering research and celebrate scientists as the heroes they truly are.”Here are this year’s Breakthrough Prize laureates. Karl Deisseroth, a professor at Stanford University and a Howard Hughes Medical Institute investigator, and Edward S. Boyden, a professor at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, each received $3 million for their roles in the development of optogenetics, a technique that allows scientists to use light to turn neurons and groups of neurons on and off.  The technique is transforming the study of the brain because it allows scientists to test ideas about how the brain works. It has already been used to turn a kind of aggression on and off in flies, and thirst on and off in mice, pinpointing the brain cells involved. The technique is universally praised, but the question of who will be recognized for its development is an issue for any prize committee. Dr. Boyden, Dr. Deisseroth and three other scientists published a paper in 2005 that is recognized as a breakthrough. They demonstrated how to reliably control mammalian neurons with light, making widespread use of the technique inevitable.  Their paper built on earlier work, as much of science does. Opsins, light-sensitive chemicals that are crucial to optogenetics, have been studied since the 1970s. And the fact that optogenetics could be done was demonstrated in 2002.  In 2013, the European Brain Prize recognized six scientists for work on optogenetics, including Dr. Boyden and Dr. Deisseroth. JAMES GORMANAlzheimer’s disease was a complete mystery in the late 1980s. In autopsies, pathologists could see the ravages left in patients’ brains, but how and why did the process start? There were rare families in which the disease seemed to be inherited, though, and perhaps there was a gene mutation that might provide a clue to what goes awry. The problem was finding those families.In the late 1980s, a woman who lived in Nottingham, England, contacted John Hardy at University College London and asked if he and his team wanted to study her family. Her father was one of 10 siblings, five of whom had developed Alzheimer’s disease, and she could trace the disease back for three generations. Their investigation led to the discovery of a gene mutation that, if inherited, always caused the disease. The gene’s protein was the amyloid precursor protein, or APP. Every person in that family who inherited the gene overproduced amyloid and got the disease. For the first time, scientists had a clue to what starts the horrendous destruction of brain cells in Alzheimer’s disease. And for the first time, by putting that gene mutation in mice, they could study Alzheimer’s in a lab animal, look for drugs to block the gene’s effects and finally use the tools of science to look for a cure. GINA KOLATAHelen Hobbs, a professor at the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center and a Howard Hughes Medical Institute investigator, and her colleague Jonathan Cohen were intrigued when they read a short paper describing a French family with stunningly high levels of LDL cholesterol, the dangerous kind, and early deaths from heart attacks and strokes. The family members turned out to have a mutation in a gene, PCSK9, whose function was unknown. Dr. Hobbs and Dr. Cohen began to wonder: If too much PCSK9 caused heart disease, would people who made too little be protected? They scrutinized genetic data from a federal study and found that about 2.5 percent of blacks had a mutation that destroyed one copy of the gene; 3.2 percent of whites had a mutation that hobbled a copy of the gene but did not destroy it. In both cases, less PCSK9 was made and LDL levels were low. The people with the mutations seemed almost immune to heart disease, even if they had other risk factors like high blood pressure, smoking or diabetes.What would happen if someone had both copies of PCSK9 destroyed? Dr. Hobbs found one young woman, an aerobics instructor, without PCSK9. She was healthy and fertile even though her LDL level was 14, lower than seemed possible (the average is 100). That discovery led to a race among drug companies to make cholesterol-lowering drugs that mimicked the effects of the PCSK9 mutations. The result is drugs that can make LDL levels plunge to the 30s, the 20s, even the teens. The first two such PCSK9 inhibitors were approved this year for people with high cholesterol levels who cannot get them down with statins and are at high risk of heart disease. GINA KOLATAThere was a time when scientists who study human evolution had to content themselves with bone fragments and stone tools from our distant ancestors. But today, scientists can also browse through the genomes of humans who lived tens of thousands of years ago. No one has done more to bring that ancient DNA back from oblivion than Svante Paabo. In the early 1980s, Dr. Paabo made his first search for old genetic material in a 2,400-year-old Egyptian mummy. He managed to retrieve a few fragments, which gave him the confidence to search much older fossils — first of animals, and then of ancient humans. In 1997, Dr. Paabo and his colleagues found snippets of DNA in Neanderthal fossils. In recent years, they have managed to reconstruct the entire genome of a Neanderthal with the same precision as the genome from a living person.Neutrinos are the spooks of the subatomic world, able to sail through walls and our bodies like moonlight through windows, changing identities like spies on the run. Next to photons, which carry light, they are the most abundant of the known particles in the universe, and they are the most elusive.The Fundamental Physics prize is being awarded to an entire community of some 1,300 physicists who have labored underground in tunnels and caverns over the last two decades to investigate these ghostly denizens of the cosmos.Five teams are being recognized. They are the Super-Kamioka Neutrino Detection Experiment in Kamioka, Japan, led by Takaaki Kajita and Yoichiro Suzuki; the Sudbury Neutrino Observatory in Ontario, led by Arthur B. McDonald; the Daya Bay Reactor Neutrino Experiment in China, led by Yifang Wang and Kam-Biu Luk; the KamLAND neutrino detector in Toyama, Japan, led by Atsuto Suzuki; and the KEK to Kamioka and Tokai to Kamioka Long Baseline Neutrino Oscillation Experiments in Japan, led by Koichiro Nishikawa.Neutrinos were once thought to be massless, but as a result of these teams’ work, physicists and cosmologists now know that neutrinos weigh about as much collectively as all the stars in the universe, and they know how the sun works.The neutrino community is having quite a moment: Last month, Dr. Kajita and Dr. McDonald received the Nobel Prize in Physics. DENNIS OVERBYEIf “manifold” makes you think of a car engine part first and foremost, let’s face it: You’re probably not cut out for geometric topology. In mathematics, “manifold” refers to any object that seems flat on a small scale. For example, people for centuries thought the earth was flat because on a small scale – what people can see around them – it is. Lines and circles are one-dimensional manifolds; forms like planes and spheres are two-dimensional manifolds.Ian Agol, a mathematician at the University of California, Berkeley, and the Institute for Advanced Study, focuses primarily on manifolds of four or fewer dimensions, a field of study known as low-dimensional topology. He was honored for what the prize foundation called his “spectacular contributions to low-dimensional topology and geometric group theory, including work on the solutions of the tameness, virtual Haken and virtual fibering conjectures.” An article on Monday about the Breakthrough Prize misidentified the gene that John Hardy discovered a mutation of in patients who had Alzheimer’s disease. He discovered a mutation in the amyloid precursor protein gene, not presenilin.Advertisement