AdvertisementSupported byReactionsPsychologyTO THE EDITOR:Re “Don’t Worry About Fretting” (Nov. 3): My entire life, people have been giving me advice on how I should prepare myself when I am anticipating news. I have discovered that assuming the worst and preparing for the best has saved me from a lot of anger and misery; so I am elated to know that I am not the only one in the world who has this mind-set.As a student, I am often taking exams, and occasionally I am unsure of my responses to questions. Assuming the worst makes it easier to cope with disappointment while making my successes more valuable.Sarah Mendenhall San Jose, Calif.TO THE EDITOR:As a writer, clinical social worker and natural pessimist turned “learned” optimist (with thanks to Martin Seligman and the Positive Psychology researchers) I loved this article. My one concern is the notion that “optimism” doesn’t necessarily mean the absence of what our culture views as negative emotions, but rather the diminishing (or absence, for some) of gratuitous negativity, worry and self-deprecating emotions without any basis in fact.In the face of my husband’s life-threatening hospitalization a couple of years ago (not the illness, the hospitalization, caused by misdiagnosis and maltreatment) I made it clear to those who encouraged me to “be optimistic” that my form of optimism meant assuming the worst could happen and doing everything in my power to try to steer it in a different direction. Optimism without worry — and action — would have killed my husband. Gratuitous worry drains energy, productivity, and focus. Appropriate worry can save a life.Carol Coven Grannick Evanston, Ill.TO THE EDITOR:Sad is not bad, but the implication in this article that anxiety can be acceptable and not worth defeating merits hefty skepticism.Sadness, anxiety and concern are different entities: Sadness and concern can motivate, anxiety can debilitate. By thinking in healthy ways, we have an active part in creating healthier emotions, minimizing emotional suffering and maximizing joy.In his groundbreaking work, Albert Ellis, who heralded in the cognitive revolution in psychology, taught the distinction between healthy negative emotions (e.g. concern) and unhealthy ones (e.g. anxiety). To create the healthy ones requires willingness to think in realistic (not Pollyannaish) ways, and to recognize when we are catastrophizing and then to dispute such thoughts.Allowing ourselves to maintain anxiety and worry, by telling ourselves that it is O.K., is regrettable when we can choose to suffer less by vigorously disputing irrational beliefs and by actively seeing things from a healthy perspective.To say “Don’t be happy, worry” may sound cute, but it may be a lazy person’s response to an often disabling emotion and tendency. How about saying instead: “Don’t worry, think wisely, be healthier and happier.”Debbie Joffe Ellis ManhattanMental HealthTO THE EDITOR:Re “Deadly Isolation” (Nov. 3): Many rural areas have limited mental health resources, but a telephone hotline could be a lifeline for someone who is having suicidal thoughts and urgently needs an understanding response. Trained workers can provide temporary and immediate support until other arrangements can be made. Help would be just a phone call away.Phyllis Bogen Cresskill, N.J.Many who commit suicide convince themselves that their family and friends either don’t care or will be better off without them. News stories about suicides and the suffering that follows can serve only to discourage suicide and encourage those seeking it to seek care.John Parken Jacksonville, Fla., posted to nytimes.com­Science Times welcomes letters, comments on nytimes.com and social media posts from readers. Email should be sent to scitimes@nytimes.com.Advertisement