By NICHOLAS ST. FLEURNOV. 19, 2015
The National Institutes of Health announced that it would end its support for invasive research on chimpanzees and retire the 50 chimps that it had set aside for future biomedical research.The decision, announced Wednesday, brings to a close years of controversy about federally funded primate experimentation, and follows a 2013 decision by the N.I.H. to retire all but 50 of its chimpanzees to animal sanctuaries.After two and a half years, no proposal requesting use of the remaining chimpanzees has moved forward, said Dr. Francis S. Collins, the director of the N.I.H., in a news briefing on Wednesday with reporters.“We find no evidence that there is a need to continue to do research of an invasive sort on chimpanzees, not now and not going into the future,” Dr. Collins said.AdvertisementHe cited two events that had led to the decision. The first was an extensive independent assessment published in 2011 that investigated the usefulness of chimpanzees for biomedical research. That report led the agency to retire a sizable portion of its chimpanzees in 2013 and set stricter requirements for research with the primates.AdvertisementThe second was the designation of all chimps as endangered under the federal Endangered Species Act in June. The regulations set by the designation require researchers to apply for permits to perform invasive research with chimps.“When you put those things together, it seems inescapable,” Dr. Collins said. “We have moved on beyond the time when research on chimpanzees was considered essential.”Animal rights activists who have fought for the release of chimpanzees from federal institutions for years called the news a victory. “When in 2013 they announced they would release the majority of chimps, some people focused on the 50 that would be left behind,” said Kathleen Conlee, the vice president for animal research at the Humane Society of the United States. “And I said, ‘Don’t worry, someday we will get them protected.’ And today, we did.”Stephen Ross, the director of the Lester E. Fisher Center for the Study and Conservation of Apes  and a member of the group that recommended that the N.I.H. retain 50 chimpanzees, said in an email that he applauded the decision to retire all of the federally owned chimps.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Given the lack of interest in conducting medical research with chimpanzees, it was clear that the need for this reserve colony did not justify their continued housing in laboratory environments,” he wrote.To date, the N.I.H. has retired 183 of its chimpanzees to a federally funded sanctuary in Louisiana called Chimp Haven. The agency said it planned to send an additional 308 chimpanzees, including the last 50 research chimps, to the sanctuary.The entire process could take several years, Dr. Collins said, during which the chimps will be kept in three federal facilities, including the Southwest National Primate Research Center, the Michale E. Keeling Center for Comparative Medicine and Research and the Alamogordo Primate Facility.Under the CHIMP Act of 2000, all federally owned chimps must retire at Chimp Haven. The N.I.H. will give priority in admittance to 20 chimpanzees in the Southwest National Primate Research Center, also known as the Texas Biomedical Research Institute, in San Antonio, because those chimps are closest to the sanctuary. The N.I.H. plans to move chimps together based on their family and social groups, taking into consideration their age and health.Advertisement“We absolutely look forward to welcoming these 50 chimps to our sanctuaries to join with their lab chimp friends,” said Erika Fleury, program manager of the North American Primate Sanctuary Alliance, which runs Chimp Haven and seven other primate sanctuaries in the United States and Canada that together care for more than 270 chimpanzees.Cathy Willis Spraetz, the president and chief executive of Chimp Haven, said in an email that the sanctuary had space to take 25 chimps immediately and planned to make space for 25 more in early 2016.Ms. Spraetz also said Chimp Haven would start a campaign to build four more forested enclosures of several acres to house 100 more chimpanzees.“Now it’s time,” she said, “to give them their freedom where they have self-determination and can decide how they will spend their days.”A version of this article appears in print on November 20, 2015, on Page A19 of the New York edition with the headline: National Institutes of Health to End the Use of Chimpanzees for Research.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.