

      By MICHAEL ROSTON

NOV. 24, 2015

One hundred years after Albert Einstein made public his theory of general relativity, many of us struggle to understand it, though we take it and its legacy for physics and our understanding of the universe somewhat for granted. But when Einstein and his work first became known to the broader public, articles in The New York Times often seemed to alternate between exasperation and fascination. If journalists could not always explain what general relativity meant in hundreds or even thousands of words, they eventually decided that Einstein’s work was groundbreaking and highly newsworthy. And a look through Times archives below shows how they talked about it.When Einstein first appeared in The Times, casual readers might have felt as if they had missed most of a complicated conversation. A dispatch on Sept. 8, 1913, from Birmingham, England, noted that the physicist Sir Oliver Lodge would “combat the ‘Theory of Relativity.’” The theory – now known as special relativity – was hardly defined in this short article. It said that a “Prof. Einstein of the University of Zurich” as well as Max Planck had argued against a belief held by Sir Oliver and his British colleagues in a universe containing “ether.” The report had earlier noted that Sir Oliver was best known in Britain for his beliefs in the “occult.”It took five years for Einstein’s theories to again appear in the paper. In 1918, W.W. Campbell of the Lick Observatory in California explained how an effort to photograph a solar eclipse would allow a test of Einstein’s newer theory of general relativity, which he said “occupied a foremost position in the speculation of physicists.” Dr. Campbell’s explanation of what Einstein’s theory meant remained terse, and he conceded that it was hard to say whether the experiment would produce meaningful data.At the end of 1919, the name “Albert Einstein” started to land in the pages of The Times on a repeat basis.A “special cable” from London on Nov. 10 of that year, reporting on efforts by British scientists to measure an eclipse in Africa and South America, began a theme of stating that readers could hardly expect to understand the theory of general relativity. After declaring that Einstein’s theory had triumphed, the reporter stated, “Efforts made to put in words intelligible to the nonscientific public the Einstein theory … so far have not been very successful.” The article was also notable for offering some of the physicist’s biography to readers for the first time.The next week, a report leading the paper’s business section imagined the lay reader asking, “Who is Einstein, and what is his theory, anyway?” A McGill University physicist, Dr. A.S. Eve, proceeded to walk readers though some basics of the theory over many column inches on two pages. In December, a Times correspondent visited Einstein at home in Berlin, and the physicist spoke to the paper’s readers for the first time: “I am trying to talk as plainly as possible.” A clock’s chime ended the interview, and the reporter observed the irony that “old-fashioned time and space enforced their wonted absolute tyranny over him who had spoken so contemptuously of their existence.”“Can’t Understand Einstein,” a short item declared several days after the Royal Astronomical Society endorsed the theory of general relativity. The brevity served to reinforce some of the evident consternation caused by Einstein’s theory becoming en vogue. An essay in the paper’s opinion pages compared the embrace of general relativity with Russia’s embrace of Bolshevism. “This same spirit of unrest has invaded science,” Charles Lane Poor of Columbia University wrote in November 1919, adding, “Today there is just as great a conflict in the realm of scientific thoughts as there is in the realm of social and political life.”Before the year’s end, The Times carried a detailed explanation of Einstein’s ideas from his colleague Hendrik Lorentz. Dr. Lorentz stated that Einstein had made it possible, “through a train of thought of great originality,” to understand that all things in the universe, whether they take the form of energy or matter, are affected by gravity.In subsequent years, The Times would publish other things that seemed to reinforce the complexity of Einstein’s theories. In one case in 1921, it noted a $5,000 prize had been awarded to a British patent clerk for his explanation of general relativity. After the scientist visited Warren G. Harding in Washington in 1921 (a candidate whom The Times had not endorsed, it must be noted), the paper put on its front page that the theory had puzzled the sitting president. And even Elsa Einstein was put forward as someone who didn’t grasp her husband’s work. She said it was too much for a woman, adding, “But it is not necessary for my happiness.”While The Times may have struggled to explain the theory of general relativity to readers, it became clear in the years that followed that there was an enduring public interest in Einstein, his thoughts and his subsequent work. In 1920, for instance, The Times took note of a French effort to study communication with other planets. Tacked on as a “shirt-tail” to the story was an explanation of Einstein’s thoughts on life on Mars and other planets, and how it would communicate with Earth.More substantively, Einstein’s subsequent work was the subject of much more thorough and intensive coverage in the paper. In January 1921, for instance, the emergence of the physicist’s new theory of the measurability of a finite universe warranted a brief mention at the bottom of that day’s front page. Within the next two weeks, a full column of the paper’s front page would be devoted to a statement from Einstein on his work, accompanied by an explanatory essay from a Princeton physicist on what the findings meant.The pattern would repeat itself in the years that followed through the conclusion of Einstein’s career and life.Advertisement