AdvertisementSupported byBy Natalie AngierWith the publication of his general theory of relativity a century ago, Albert Einstein swept aside traditional notions of a static and unchanging space and instead gave us the stretchy, supple miracle fabric of the space-time continuum.No longer could space be seen as a featureless void, the nothingness between the somethingness of galaxies and stars. Einsteinian space has heft, shape and a sense of place. It bends around giant suns and plunges down the throats of black holes. It expands restlessly in all directions and drags us along for the ride.Space refuses to be ignored, clamoring for attention even in human pursuits. In art, architecture, music, the designs of our cities and the psychology of the invisible, multistage privacy zones we construct around our bodies, space can speak volumes, and it demands to be explored.Think you’re comfortable with a colleague at work? Anat Perry, a postdoctoral fellow in psychology at the University of California, Berkeley, suggests you try this simple exercise. The next time you speak to the person, adjust the space between yourselves by the length of a pinkie, standing two inches closer or farther away than you normally would.“It changes everything,” Dr. Perry said. “You can’t interact the same way.”The sculptor Rachel Whiteread expresses the pushiness of space graphically by creating what are often called negative spaces. She uses resin, plaster or other material to fill in the area under a table, behind a bookshelf, or an entire room.The resulting three-dimensional impressions are like space trapped in amber, or the frozen ghost of a room, prompting the viewer to appreciate the specific power of interstitial space and to recall what it felt like to hide under tables as a child or to seek solace in the compartmentalized wilderness of a college library’s stacks.“Music is the space between notes,” the French composer Claude Debussy is believed to have said — that is, only by the grace of precisely articulated pauses can the character of individual notes be perceived and music distinguished from noise.In a slightly different take on the theme, jazz musicians often insist that the notes they choose not to play are as important as the ones they do. Music is tightly bound up with expectation, they say: You hear a sequence of notes in a familiar scale, and you anticipate the rest of the progression.But then, ha-ha! The musician doesn’t give it to you, and that absence of comfortable resolution is what transforms bromide into art.In a collaborative art form like jazz, the pianist Geri Allen said, a willingness to listen closely to the other musicians on the stage is essential to success, and sometimes “not playing can be a greater contribution to the flow” than grabbing every chance for a solo.Among painters, advances in spatial representation have often ushered in broad aesthetic revolutions. “The formulation of the laws of perspective in the 14th century gave artists permission to see everything in a new way,” the artist Matthew Ritchie said. “Now your sky isn’t flat. You’ve got a proper sky with depth, and now your angels can get up to some real mischief.”In the mid-19th century, painters discovered anew the two-dimensional nature of the canvas, sparking the rise of abstract art.“The flat surface was seen as a place for the arrangement of colors,” said Noam M. Elcott, an associate professor of art at Columbia University. For artists like Cézanne, he said, “the space between figures was granted equal weight to the so-called foreground.”The concern with spatial democracy reached its apotheosis in the work of Jackson Pollock, in which there is no foreground, no background, “and every square inch of canvas is equal to every other,” said Dr. Elcott, the author of the coming book, “Artificial Darkness: An Obscure History of Modern Art and Media.”Other modernist painters like Picasso, Marcel Duchamp and Kazimir Malevich became fascinated with the idea of a higher fourth dimension — not the dimension of time that, through Einstein’s general theory of relativity, was merged with three spatial dimensions into space-time, but a fourth dimension of space, said Linda D. Henderson, a professor of art history at the University of Texas at Austin and the author of “The Fourth Dimension and Non-Euclidean Geometry in Modern Art.”The theme arose from popular interest at the end of the 19th century with advances in geometry, the discovery of X-rays, and the 1884 publication of Edwin Abbott Abbott’s influential book “Flatland: A Romance of Many Dimensions,” an allegory of life in two dimensions.Einstein presented his general theory of relativity 100 years ago this month.“It becomes a huge cultural preoccupation,” Dr. Henderson said, “the idea that the human retina is seeing just a fraction of the electromagnetic spectrum, and that our world might be like Flatland or Plato’s cave, a shadow of a complex four-dimensional reality.”Hence a Cubist work like Picasso’s 1910 “Portrait of a Woman,” with its shifting, multifocal forms dissolving into one another. “Picasso is doing everything possible to keep the image from being read as three-dimensional,” Dr. Henderson said.Today, Mr. Ritchie and other artists seek to visualize even more exotic concepts like hyperspace or quantum space, and here, too, the quest can prove liberating.“If we’re only seeing 5 percent of the universe, you can state freely what the other 95 percent might be, and nobody can say that it isn’t,” said Mr. Ritchie, who has collaborated with the physicists Lisa Randall of Harvard and Neil Turok of the Perimeter Institute, and whose work was included in a major exhibition, “The Shapes of Space,” several years ago at the Guggenheim Museum.Mr. Ritchie stacks layers of semitransparent drawings that he later reshapes into sculptures and large installations — of lines snaking and wrapping together, for example, over the floor, up the wall, through the air, “like the traces we leave behind us, all the mistakes, all the good moments, that anticipate and follow us as we move through space and time,” he said.More pragmatically, our movements through space and time concern architects and urban planners, who try to determine the often unspoken desires and assumptions we bring to a given space.For example, said Tim Stock, a commercial anthropologist and a partner in the design research firm scenarioDNA, we want a hotel room to convey the sense both that we are at home and that we are the first person to use the room — an illusion fostered by small touches like the artful folding down of the bedspread to expose the sheets, as though to say, fresh and new and all for you.The uncertainties of the labor market are reflected in shifting trends in office design. Until recently, one’s position in a corporation was reflected by the size and location of one’s office, a large corner office with breathtaking views signaling high status.When Albert Einstein and his work first became known to the broader public, articles in The Times often seemed to alternate between exasperation and fascination.“Tech companies have changed all that,” Mr. Stock said. “The people in charge don’t necessarily have an office. They just float around, they just show up, they’re everywhere.”Yet for people who are not in charge, an open office where employees float from one workstation to the next holds less appeal. “There’s been some pushback against the Silicon Valley model,” said Alice T. Friedman, a professor of art and architecture at Wellesley College. “When possible, people tend to wall off a little area they can call their own.”After all, people do exactly that with the air around them, metaphorically claiming the region surrounding their bodies as a mostly inviolable personal space. Researchers have determined that the size of our preferred spatial bubble varies somewhat according to culture.“Israelis who travel to India might feel people were standing too close,” said Dr. Perry, of the University of California, Berkeley, who is Israeli. “But when they go to Europe, personal space is larger; people may seem too cold.”On average, however, one’s personal space — as measured by an experimenter walking slowly toward a subject until the subject feels on the verge of uncomfortable and says stop — extends about two feet in front of the body.That distance happens to correspond to the length of the arm, suggesting that personal space amounts to defensible space. Personal space has been found to enlarge in people holding sticks or pointers, and to contract when they are burdened with weights.Our personal space is human specific, said Dr. Daphne J. Holt, a psychiatrist and neuroscientist at Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School.She and her colleagues recently found that while the image of an approaching face will arouse the parts of the brain that monitor personal space, the image of an approaching car will not.And when we’re forced into uncomfortably close quarters with strangers aboard a crowded subway car, we reach for our smartphones and carve out some personal space-time online.Advertisement