AdvertisementSupported byReactionsTO THE EDITOR:“Overtreated Patients, Underwhelming Results” (The New Old Age, Nov. 10) emphasizes a growing problem in American health care. As a surgeon delivering cardiothoracic surgical services to patients, I submit that we in the community of physicians who manage cardiac problems may be some of the biggest offenders of delivering unnecessary and ineffective care. We often apply data collected in a younger population, demonstrating improvement in duration or quality of life, to our older patients where the information may not be relevant.Don’t get me wrong, I am all for trying to help an otherwise healthy, self-sufficient octogenarian return to an active lifestyle. However, the prospect of performing an invasive procedure, either surgical or cardiologic, on a debilitated, demented, non-ambulatory nursing home patient is offensive to my sensibilities. In The New England Journal of Medicine this month, we learned that medical therapy is as good as angioplasty or stenting of coronary arteries, or both, in patients with stable ischemic heart disease followed as long as 15 years. As one of my many mentors, Dr. Gottlieb (Bud) Friesinger, would say, “Don’t just do something, stand there.”James R. Stewart, M.D. Kansas City, Mo.TO THE EDITOR:“Placing a Cap on Americans’ Consumption of Added Sugars” (Nov. 10) illustrates why our nutrition policy, despite the best intentions, sometimes falls short. While most health care providers agree that Americans would be well-served to reduce their sugar consumption from all sources, we also know that people do not adopt wholesale dietary change. Policies that set strict consumption limits do not account for this human factor.A more effective approach encourages incremental improvements to existing food choices, which, collectively and over time, lead to a healthier overall diet. And because no food is healthy unless it is consumed, we cannot overlook the importance of taste.Some added sugar can boost consumption of nutrient-rich foods. Low-fat yogurt, granola and whole-grain breads cited in the article are good examples of practical trades: added sugars to achieve consumption of vital nutrients like protein, calcium and fiber.Rather than repeatedly urging prohibitions, the health community and the news media can better serve the public by urging that small amounts of added sugars — and saturated fats, for that matter — drive steady improvements in diet quality.Robert Murray, M.D. Columbus, OhioThe writer is a professor of human nutrition at the Ohio State University.TO THE EDITOR:The United States Department of Agriculture has long recommended “avoiding too much sugar.” However, most Americans don’t know how much they consume, because sugar is listed in grams on ingredient labels and most of us are unfamiliar with this unit of measurement. It turns out that we eat, on average, 30 teaspoons a day. Unless you know that four grams of sugar is approximately equivalent to one teaspoon of sugar, it is difficult to keep track of daily sugar intake.There is one surefire way to help consumers make better choices: Our government could insist that companies list sugar (whether added or natural) in teaspoons, along with a recommended daily allowance.Under the guise of protecting our interests, big food will sound the alarm that shoppers will not understand this change. I am willing to bet that seeing sugar in teaspoons will not result in a mass exodus from the supermarket, but it may result in less profits for companies whose most valuable products are essentially delivery mechanisms for sugar.Deb Lewison Grant ManhattanThe writer is executive director of FoodFight, a nonprofit that works in schools to promote food literacy.­Science Times welcomes letters, comments on nytimes.com and social media posts from readers. Email should be sent to scitimes@nytimes.com.Advertisement