AdvertisementSupported byBy Nicholas WadeIn a basement on the Irvine campus of the University of California, behind a series of five protective doors, two teams of biologists have created a novel breed of mosquito that they hope will help eradicate malaria from the world.The mosquito has been engineered to carry two ingenious genetic modifications. One is a set of genes that spew out antibodies to the malarial parasite harbored by the mosquito. Mosquitoes with these genes are rendered resistant to the parasite and so cannot spread malaria.The other modification is a set of genetic elements known as a gene drive that should propel the malaria-resistance genes throughout a natural mosquito population. When a malaria-resistant male mosquito mates with a wild female, the gene drive copies both itself and the resistance genes over from the male chromosome to its female counterpart.Because almost all the progeny carry the new genes, instead of just 50 percent as would be expected by Mendel’s laws of genetics, the inserted genes are expected to spread rapidly and take over a wild population in as few as 10 generations, or a single season. A large region, at least in principle, could be freed from malaria, which kills almost 600,000 people a year.The anti-malarial antibody genes were developed by a group led by Anthony A. James of the University of California, Irvine, and the gene drive by Valentino M. Gantz and Ethan Bier of the University of California, San Diego. The two teams reported the result of their collaboration in Monday’s issue of Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.“This is a very important advance in the field of mosquito biology,” said George Dimopoulos, a biologist at Johns Hopkins who has engineered mosquitoes to resist the malarial parasite with a different set of genes.Kevin Esvelt, an expert on the gene drive technique at Harvard, said he was delighted with the work of the two teams. “We have a wonderful chance of knocking down malaria and dengue fever and other diseases, so hats off to Tony James, who has been developing these techniques for 15 years,” he said.The two teams came together after Dr. Gantz and Dr. Bier developed a gene drive for the Drosophila fruit fly, a standard laboratory organism, to help identify genetically mutant insects. Finding their gene drive was far more efficient than expected, driving its cargo genes into almost all the fruit fly progeny, the researchers realized they had created not just a handy laboratory tool but a powerful technique for spreading favored genes through wild populations.After sending a report of their finding to the journal Science, which published it in April, Dr. Bier started looking around for practical uses for the technique, and came across a 2012 article in which Dr. James described making mosquitoes resistant to the malarial parasite. Dr. James concluded his paper by noting that “if coupled with a mechanism for gene spread,” his resistance genes “could become a self-sustaining disease control tool.” Having developed just such a mechanism, Dr. Bier called Dr. James to propose a collaboration.It took Dr. Gantz about two months to load all the necessary genetic elements onto a plasmid, a viruslike circle of DNA that genetic engineers use to insert genes into chromosomes. Some 680 wild mosquito larvae were injected with the cargo-carrying plasmid. About half grew to adults, which were mated with wild mosquitoes, and the progeny were then screened to see if the injected plasmids had successfully found their way to the eggs or sperm of the original larvae.To help track the progress of the experiment, Dr. Gantz engineered a color marker into the plasmid’s cargo, a gene that turned the mosquitoes’ eyes red. Thus the appearance of red-eyed mosquitoes would mean the drive and its cargo had successfully been inherited.Olga Tatarenkova, a member of Dr. James’s team, picked up the task of screening 25,000 mosquito larvae. One Saturday morning in July, she found two larvae with red eyes. After checking with other members to verify her finding, she emailed Dr. James to tell him the good news.Dr. James, Dr. Gantz and Dr. Bier plan to refine the mosquitoes’ genetics and conduct trials in cages. He hopes that eventually scientists in some country where malaria is endemic will invite them to conduct a field trial and will monitor it carefully to make sure there are no adverse affects, even though it’s hard to see any ecological downside to protecting the mosquitoes against the malarial parasite.Dr. Dimopoulos, who has engineered mosquitoes to rev up their immune systems and reject the malaria parasite, plans to add a gene drive as Dr. James has done, and to seek the Zambian government’s approval for a trial in a large, greenhouselike enclosure he operates in southern Zambia.Rendering the wild mosquito population immune to the malaria parasite may seem a fairly minimal and benign intervention. But no gene drives have yet been released into the wild, and biologists are keen to avoid surprises that might arouse public hostility to the novel technology.A more likely mishap is that the gene drive and its cargo genes will start to develop mutations that impair their inheritance or that natural selection will favor other genes that overwhelm them. The biologists could respond by developing new gene drives and cargoes, but the process could become uneconomical, in which case the new approach would fail or offer just partial advantages.Dr. James plans to proceed in careful stages with the knowledge and approval of local authorities. “This is the kind of technology where the first trial has to be a success,” he said.Advertisement