

      By MICHAEL ROSTON

NOV. 25, 2015

Thanksgiving dinner can go wrong so easily. Your uncle brings up the presidential election. Your mom’s cousin decides to go on about the entitlement of the millennial generation. Next thing you know, your communal table reaches a volume like one of the lots where they keep the turkeys prior to the harvest.It’d be sad if your enjoyment of turkey, all the sides and whatever else you might be eating was marred by a dinner table conversation like that one. So we propose six conversation starters from the fields of science and medicine that we hope will keep your family Thanksgiving gathering more fun than fraught.Is there intelligent life out there? Is there intelligent life at your Thanksgiving dinner table? Hard to say. Planetary scientists at NASA are focused on a more elemental question: Are conditions ripe for life on other bodies in our solar system? Even if your guests have not heard of Enceladus, Saturn’s icy moon, which is considered one of the best candidate’s for finding life, they can surely engage with the question, “What is life?” NASA’s working definition of life, coined by a group of biologists in 1992, is “a self-sustaining chemical system capable of Darwinian evolution.”When all else fails and you need to change the subject, talk about animals. Here are a few starting points: Doctors at the Cleveland Clinic are preparing to attempt a complicated undertaking: transplanting a uterus into a woman who does not have one, who will then attempt to get pregnant and give birth. The surgery has been done successfully in Sweden, but the American attempt will differ because the uterus will come from a deceased organ donor.This may not be polite conversation at every Thanksgiving dinner table. But if you’ve got the kind of family who lets it all hang out, they’ll probably find this story pretty interesting. And no, men are unlikely to carry babies if this works.When the present seems too difficult to discuss with the people around you, focusing on ancient history may be the best path. Fortunately for you, there has been some big news in archaeology this year: How low should your blood pressure go? A large federal study this year found that people who got their systolic blood pressure below 120 had much lower death rates and fewer heart attacks and strokes than people who aimed for 140. Someone in your family is likely to find this information very interesting and Gina Kolata explained what you need to know about this study’s results.A group of entrepreneurs wanted to make money from solar power, but that didn’t work out. So they took their technological know-how and decided to make diamonds by adding layers of carbon atoms to an initial slice of natural diamond. And now they say they can make them at a quality and cost that will be just as good and affordable as the stones on the rings worn by any of your fellow diners.Advertisement