AdvertisementSupported byBy Kenneth ChangThis time, Jeffrey P. Bezos’ rocket went up — and it came down in one piece.Mr. Bezos, the founder of Amazon, has been investing some of his wealth in space dreams, establishing a rocket company called Blue Origin. On Monday, Blue Origin launched its New Shepard rocket, named after Alan Shepard, the first American to reach space in a similar suborbital flight in 1961.The rocket lofted a capsule that is to eventually carry paying passengers on suborbital jaunts to a height of 329,839 feet, or 100.5 kilometers, above its launch site near Van Horn in West Texas. That is just above the 100-kilometer altitude that is considered the beginning of outer space.The capsule descended to the ground under parachutes 11 minutes after blasting off. The rocket itself turned around and, firing its engines again, set back down at the launchpad at 4.4 miles per hour — faster than a person strolling, but gentle enough to prevent damage. It landed less than five feet from its target.“It was a totally nominal flight,” Mr. Bezos said in an interview. “We’re walking on cloud nine. There wasn’t a dry eye in the house.”This builds on a largely successful test flight in April. In that operation, the launch and the landing of the capsule were flawless, but the rocket crashed because of a failure with a hydraulic system. Mr. Bezos said engineers had replaced the hydraulics with a new design.“Think of this as the beginning of a thorough test program,” Mr. Bezos said. The next flight, he said, “should be a matter of weeks.”The company, based in Kent, Wash., south of Seattle, is selling space on the capsules during the test flights for research experiments, and it plans to begin flying them next year. “There’s no reason not to do that,” Mr. Bezos said.Commercial flights for tourists, also to launch from West Texas, could begin in a couple of years. Blue Origin has not started selling tickets or decided the cost of a flight, which would provide about four minutes of floating.Like another upstart rocket company, Space Exploration Technologies, or SpaceX, Mr. Bezos and Blue Origin are betting that reusable rockets can greatly reduce the cost of getting to space. Most rockets today fly just once, crashing back to earth after exhausting their fuel.“The ultimate vision should be aircraftlike operations,” Mr. Bezos said.SpaceX has taken a similar approach in trying to recover the first stage of its Falcon 9 rockets, coming close to landing them on a floating platform in the Atlantic.The same technology is to be used in a larger Blue Origin rocket that is to be launched to orbit from Cape Canaveral in Florida.“Everything that we have learned here on New Shepard is completely applicable to our orbital booster,” Mr. Bezos said.Blue Origin officials have not spoken in detail about which markets they are aiming for with the bigger rocket, but Mr. Bezos has said his passion is to send people to space. The company could also compete for commercial and military satellite launches.Advertisement