
Observatory By                     
SINDYA N. BHANOO

OCT. 5, 2015
Mummification was widely practiced in what is now Britain throughout the Bronze Age, a new study reports.Archaeologists used microscopic bone analysis to study 34 human remains from Britain dating to the Bronze Age, spanning from 2200 B.C. to 750 B.C., and compared them with known mummies in northern Yemen and Ireland. The pattern of erosion in 16 of the British skeletons was consistent with that of the known mummies.“Since it was widespread in Britain, there’s no reason to think that it wasn’t a common practice in Bronze Age societies across Europe,” said Tom Booth, an archaeologist at the Natural History Museum in London and one of the study’s authors.The research was part of his doctoral work at the University of Sheffield. He and his colleagues published their findings in the journal Antiquity.AdvertisementAncient Britons may have buried their dead in peat bogs for a time to mummify them, Dr. Booth said. They may have also used evisceration, a process in which the organs are removed after death.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Bronze Age mummies may have been kept above ground on display, Dr. Booth added. In this way, the dead remained part of living societies.For instance, they “may have been used to legitimize power or ownership of land,” Dr. Booth said. “It could be a way of saying: ‘My ancestor farmed the land: Here he is now, and he farmed it years ago.’ ”AdvertisementThe researchers hope to look at more samples in Britain as well as in continental Europe.“It would be interesting to see just how far it went,” Dr. Booth said.A version of this article appears in print on October 6, 2015, on Page D4 of the New York edition with the headline: Archaeology: Mummification Practiced in Bronze Age Britain.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »