AdvertisementSupported byReactionsTO THE EDITOR:Re “Brawn May Affect Your Brain” (Phys Ed, Nov. 24): The “surprising” correlation between sturdy legs and healthy brains becomes more understandable if looked at within the framework of human development. Forays into the world from toddlerhood on through exploratory late adulthood increase both the muscle strength of the legs and the brain’s adaptive plasticity. The more ground one traverses on foot, the more novelty and opportunity to learn. The physical and mental rewards of well-being to the organism are great, and the influence goes both ways.Luba Kessler, M.D. QueensRe “Finding Relativity” (Nov. 24):We are in an age of big science, where the discovery of the Higgs boson involved thousands of scientists and billions of dollars of equipment. Einstein’s General Theory of Relativity, the product of one man’s brain, has to be the greatest mental tour de force of all time.Jimbo Seattle, posted to nytimes.comThe discovery took place in the cultural zeitgeist that Einstein found himself in. The general theory used non-Euclidean Riemannian geometry using the language of tensors-tensor fields, the Lorentzian manifold, and ...The point is that Einstein built his theory from the available mathematical toolbox.The theory was a cultural achievement.whome NYC, posted to nytimes.comOne key thing to remember is that Einstein (and Higgs) was a theorist. A single brilliant idea is possible with just a paper and pencil. Proving the theory is often the really expensive part of the process.Raymond P, posted to nytimes.comTo reinforce the incredible achievements of Einstein, the technology that conclusively proved his theories did not exist for nearly a century. He was that far ahead of everything. Recent discoveries have added modifications, but the core of his analysis still stands. The cosmological constant issue should not tarnish his legacy. That was a minor blip, caused by a lack of observational data and his one stubborn desire for consistency. We can forgive him for that.Bruce Rozenblit Kansas City, posted to nytimes.comEven with the cosmological constant, Einstein gets to have the last laugh. As it turns out, the cosmological constant may be the “dark energy” that suffuses all of space, driving galaxies apart.Hal 9000 Space, posted to nytimes.comRe “Paging Dr. Pigeon; You’re Needed in Radiology” (Nov. 25):This is why even selfish humans should care about the extinction of animal species.Michael Cunningham posted to FacebookHow wonderful! You can help? Then you have to help, no questions asked. Fee, money salary and all the complications of money? You’re not human and do not understand money, so it’ll be free. What about the freedom to fly? Well, that will be restricted — home to hospital and back, 9 to 5. We are giving you as much privilege as we get, can’t complain much. Enough talk, get back to work — next patient is waiting!Ranjit Kumar posted to Facebook­Science Times welcomes letters, comments on nytimes.com and social media posts from readers. Email should be sent to scitimes@nytimes.com.Advertisement