By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSDEC. 6, 2015
CAPE CANAVERAL, Fla. —  A shipment of much-needed groceries and other astronaut supplies rocketed toward the International Space Station for the first time in months Sunday, reigniting NASA’s commercial delivery service.If the capsule, operated by Orbital ATK, an aerospace and defense company, arrives at the space station on Wednesday as planned, it will be the first American delivery since spring.To NASA’s relief, the weather cooperated after three days of high wind and cloudy skies that kept the Atlas V rocket firmly on the ground. Everything came together on the fourth launch attempt, allowing the crewless Atlas to blast off late in the afternoon with 7,400 pounds of space station cargo, along with Christmas presents for the awaiting crew.Tony Bruno, president of United Launch Alliance, which made the rocket, urged, “Everyone cross your fingers and think happy weather thoughts.”AdvertisementIt apparently worked.The rocket soared safely through clouds as the space station sped over the Atlantic.AdvertisementLaunch controllers applauded, shook hands and hugged one another once the Cygnus cargo carrier reached the proper orbit 21 minutes after liftoff.“This is about as good as it gets,” said Vernon Thorp, a United Launch Alliance manager.The space station astronauts got to see some of the rocket contrails.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Caught something good on the horizon,” Commander Scott Kelly reported via Twitter.The six astronauts at the station — two of them deep into a one-year mission — have gone without American shipments since April. The rockets of two private companies contracted for more than $3.5 billion by NASA to replenish the orbiting lab are grounded on Earth. Orbital ATK bought another company’s rocket, the veteran Atlas V, for this supply mission.Orbital’s previous grocery run, its fourth, ended in a fiery explosion seconds after liftoff in October 2014. SpaceX, the other supplier, suffered a launch failure in June on its eighth trip.Russia also lost a supply ship this year. But it has since picked up the slack, with another resupply mission scheduled this month, and Japan has chipped in as well.Much-needed food is inside Orbital’s cargo carrier, named Cygnus after the swan constellation. NASA normally likes to have a six-month reserve of food aboard the space station, but it is down a couple of months because of three failed flights. The space station program manager, Kirk Shireman, expects it will take another year to get the pantry full again — provided there are no more accidents.Also aboard the newest Cygnus capsule are clothes, toiletries, spacewalking gear, air-supply tanks and science experiments.A version of this article appears in print on December 7, 2015, on Page A16 of the New York edition with the headline: For the First Time in Months, a Space Station Supply Rocket Makes a Successful Launch.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.