DEC. 7, 2015
TO THE EDITOR:Re “Dealers Selling Electric Cars Short” (Dec. 1): Car dealers are in the business of helping consumers find vehicles that best suit their needs, desires and budgets. And the reality is that electric vehicles — and the infrastructure that supports them — unfortunately do not yet suit the needs, desires or budgets of most car buyers.Will I be able to find a recharging station if my errands run longer than anticipated? How long will recharging take? What if a new job doubles or triples the distance of my commute? Can I really afford the additional upfront cost of an electric vehicle? These are real-world questions that, understandably, lead many consumers to conclude that an electric vehicle simply is not right for them.That is why accusing auto dealers of being the chief skeptics standing in the way of increased electric vehicles sales assumes a rather dull and, quite frankly, insulting view of the consumer. Does The New York Times really believe that consumers do not put any thought behind the second-biggest purchase many of them will ever make?Car dealers fully embrace the importance of electric vehicles to growing segments of the market — which is exactly why dealers have fought so hard to be able to include them in their franchised fleets. But dealers know better than anyone that, at the end of the day, the consumer is king. This article does not do readers any favors by simply glossing over that reality.AdvertisementPeter WelchTysons, Va.The writer is president of the National Automobile Dealers Association.TO THE EDITOR:Re “Short Answers to Hard Climate Questions” (Dec. 1) does an excellent job explaining the scale of the climate change problem, but falls short in scaling the solutions when answering “Is there anything I can do?” Turning off lights or wasting less food is just rearranging deck chairs on a sinking Titanic. The lifestyle change with the single biggest effect that most Americans can make is choosing to live in an urban environment, not a suburban one. The average New Yorker has a carbon footprint much smaller than that of the average American. Public transportation is the single biggest factor, but there are a host of others — the heat you get from your downstairs neighbor, for example, and shared utility infrastructure — that make urban living greener than suburban living. The question Americans should be asking is not “What kind of light bulb should I buy?” or “Should I have steak or eggplant for dinner?”, or even “Should I fly or drive?” The question an American concerned about climate change should ask is “Where should I live?” The answer is clear: in a city.AdvertisementJack RobbinsManhattanTO THE EDITOR:Re “The Chew and Count Diet” (Phys Ed, Dec. 1): Technology to the rescue.When speculating as to why both groups of volunteers lost the same amount of weight whether they were told to cut their daily bites of food by 20 percent or 30 percent, one clear reason was overlooked: that of increased self-awareness. The Dietary Guidelines for Americans 2010, supported by the Department of Agriculture Nutrition Evidence Library, concluded that there is strong evidence that self-monitoring of food intake improves outcomes. Instead of introducing the rather awkward bite counting technique — which, after all was associated with a dropout rate of almost 25 percent— much better holiday advice for the weight-conscious would be to use one of the many free apps now available for smartphones and tablets (My Fitness Pal, Lose It, etc.). They are extremely detailed, calculate calories reliably and provide immediate feedback.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Carol LandauProvidenceThe writer is a clinical professor of psychiatry and human behavior and medicine at Brown University.Re “The Large, Perhaps Outsize, Role of O.T.C.s” (Personal Health, Dec. 1): Over-the-counter cough and cold medications often contain a varying combination of pain relievers, antihistamines and decongestants. The amounts of these ingredients differ in different formulations and are not standardized or regulated. The American Academy of Pediatrics recommends against using these medications in children underage 6 because they have not been shown to be effective in this population and because they pose a risk of serious side effects, including heart problems, hallucinations and loss of consciousness. In 2008, the Food and Drug Administration issued a strong recommendation against use of O.T.C. cough and cold medications in children underage 2 because of the risk of these potentially life-threatening side effects.Despite these strongly worded warnings, I often encounter parents who believe it is safe to give their children O.T.C. cold medications before they turn 2. Parents must recognize the significant dangers of these medications and should realize that even medications that are labeled for use by children may not be appropriate for children of all ages. Before giving any O.T.C medication to a child, parents should speak with their primary care pediatrician or their pharmacist.Aditi Vasan, M.D.PhiladelphiaScience Times welcomes letters, comments on nytimes.com and social media posts from readers. Email should be sent to scitimes@nytimes.com.A version of this article appears in print on December 8, 2015, on Page D3 of the New York edition with the headline: Letters to the Editor.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.