AdvertisementSupported byBy Rachel NuwerEels hold tight to their biological secrets, so much so that Aristotle mused that they must be sexless creatures spontaneously emerging from the “earth’s guts.” Now, at least one eel enigma is finally a step closer to being solved.For the first time, scientists have tracked American eels migrating to their legendary spawning grounds in the Atlantic Ocean.“For a very long time, circumstantial evidence has pointed to the Sargasso Sea as the breeding grounds of eels, but like crime novel detectives, scientists have wanted conclusive proof,” said David Cairns, a research scientist at Canada’s Department of Fisheries and Oceans, who was not involved in the work.The search for that proof, he added, “has preoccupied eel scientists for more than a century.”American eels spend their adult lives, which range from three to 20 years, in rivers and estuaries from Greenland to Venezuela, but those far-flung populations share a single reproductive site in the Sargasso Sea. Their migration to the sea is perhaps one of the most impressive animal journeys in the world, but no one has ever caught an adult in the open ocean — much less observed them reproducing.Yet without fail, billions of eel larvae appear in the Sargasso Sea each spring. It is as though baby sea turtles were emerging on beaches where adults have never been spotted.Until recently, tracking devices were simply too large to attach to American eels, which weigh a maximum of nine pounds. Now, aquatic satellite tags have finally reached a point of miniaturization appropriate for these slight animals. The tags’ onboard sensors continuously collect and store information about temperature, depth and light, and transmit those data when the tags detach and float to the surface.GPS does not work under water, so scientists must reconstruct the path taken by a tagged eel by feeding the collected data into oceanographic computer models.Julian Dodson, a biologist at Laval University in Quebec, and his colleagues have been trying to map the eels’ progress for some time. In 2011, they outfitted eight eels with trackers and released them into the Gulf of St. Lawrence, but almost all were promptly eaten by porbeagle sharks.The next year, they tried using eels trapped along the Eastern Seaboard. But those eels are smaller and did not fare well with the tags. Finally, the team landed on a solution.They would transport large eels trapped in the St. Lawrence estuary into the safer waters off Nova Scotia’s eastern coast, nearer the spawning grounds. “We gave them a shortcut of about 1,000 kilometers,” Dr. Dodson said.From 2012 to 2014, the researchers released 38 satellite-tagged eels along the coast of Nova Scotia. They managed to gather data from 28, but one in particular stole the show. As described recently in Nature Communications, the eel held onto its tracker for 1,500 miles as it journeyed east from Nova Scotia toward the continental shelf off Newfoundland. There it hung a sharp right, crossed the Gulf Stream and made a beeline for the Sargasso Sea.About 150 miles from the edge of the species’ supposed breeding grounds, it lost the tracker or was nabbed by a predator. As the tracker bobbed to the surface, the researchers received its data. All told, they found, Super Eel required just 45 days to complete its marathon run.“I’ve been studying fish migration for over 40 years, and I don’t think I’ve ever seen a track like that,” Dr. Dodson said. “It was very rapid and incredibly straight — quite spectacular.”The researchers do not know how American eels manage to find their way back to the place of their birth, but they suspect that the animals guide themselves by the earth’s geomagnetic field. Other studies have suggested that eels possess magnetic compasses that allow them to orient themselves.For now, the findings are a tantalizing start toward solving such mysteries, but they also have conservation implications. American eels are listed as endangered by the International Union for Conservation of Nature, and their numbers are in decline throughout much of their range.Hydroelectric dams block the eels’ migration inland, and the larvae are often illegally fished. A pound of live larvae fetches up to $2,000 from Chinese buyers, who raise the young until adulthood and then sell them to Japan, where eel is considered an expensive delicacy, second only to bluefin tuna.“This species is in trouble,” said Karin Limburg, a fisheries scientist at the State University of New York in Syracuse, who was not involved in the study. “In order to develop conservation plans, we need to learn as much as possible about the entire life cycle of eels, and the largest information vacuum is this long, long migration back to the spawning area.”Climate change also threatens to take a toll on American eels, although its potential effects are still a matter of speculation.“If we knew more about the routes adults take to the spawning area, we would be in a better position to evaluate how migrations might change under various climate scenarios,” said James McCleave, a marine ichthyologist at the University of Maine, who was not involved in the study.Dr. Dodson and his colleagues aim to answer some of these questions in the near future. They released an additional 14 satellite-tagged eels in October; as of this month, just three tagged eels remain. “With luck, we will track them to the spawning grounds,” Dr. Dodson said.Regardless of the outcome, he and other experts are hoping to be able to continue such studies for years to come.“We shouldn’t just drop this and say ‘O.K., that’s fine,’” said John Casselman, a biologist at Queen’s University in Ontario, who was not involved in the work. “We should only be satisfied when we solve the ultimate mystery of this fish and its great migration — exactly where it spawns and how it gets there.”Advertisement