
DEC. 12, 2015

A group of 195 nations reached a landmark climate agreement on Saturday. Here is what it means for the planet, business and other areas.
Related Article
A group of 195 nations reached a landmark climate agreement on Saturday. Here is what it means for the planet, business and other areas.The planet is under threat from human emissions, and the Paris climate deal is, at best, a first step toward fixing the problem. Ice sheets are starting to melt, coastlines are flooding from rising seas, and some types of extreme weather are growing worse. Yet some of the consequences of an overheated planet might be avoided, or at least slowed, if the climate deal succeeds in reducing emissions. At the least, by requiring regular reviews, the deal lays a foundation for stronger action in the future. – JUSTIN GILLISStrange bedfellows emerged during the Paris negotiations, with industrial powerhouses such as the European Union joining with Pacific island nations, and former adversaries like China and the United States swapping brinksmanship for bonds to cut fossil fuel emissions. The pact could leave more geopolitical shifts in its wake. It could aid the economies in technologically innovative places like the United States and Japan; create economic stars out of relatively poor countries with an abundance of sun and wind for renewable energy; or leave developing countries that are slow to adjust with an energy disadvantage. Major oil producers like Russia and Saudi Arabia, already weakened by the slide in the price of oil, could shed some power. – MELISSA EDDYThe Paris accord is a triumph for President Obama and Secretary of State John Kerry, who both lobbied hard for it, but it has outraged many Republicans who are skeptical of the extent of human-caused climate change and believe the deal favors environmental ideology over economic reality. The environment has not typically played a major role in voters’ choices, and the issue will most likely be overshadowed in the current election cycle by fears of terrorism, though the drought in California and severe weather in many parts of the country have raised concerns for many Americans. The Republican-controlled Congress can do little to stop the deal, which is not considered a treaty under United States law, though Congress would need to sign off on any new money to help other countries adapt to climate change — an important aspect of the American commitment to the accord. – SEWELL CHAN The ambitious targets included in Saturday’s deal for limiting the rise in global temperatures may help companies involved in renewable energy and energy efficiency by expanding their markets. Setting a high bar may also make the energy industry attractive for innovators and venture capitalists, increasing the chances of sweeping shifts in what has been a conservative business. The agreement may make life difficult for some of the incumbent companies like electric utilities and coal producers, whose product emits high levels of carbon dioxide. – STANLEY REEDThe average American most likely will not feel an immediate effect from the Paris deal. There will be greater emphasis on more efficient electrical products, homes and vehicles. Jobs could be created through the construction of a new energy infrastructure, the maintenance of solar fields and the development of new transportation systems that move away from dependence on the gas pump, as Secretary of State John Kerry has said. Or, as Republicans warn, Americans could see a loss in jobs and American economic competitiveness, as developing economies with less stringent targets are allowed to grow at American’s expense. The deal’s intended long-term effect: avoiding the catastrophic effects of climate change and leaving behind a healthier planet. – MELISSA EDDYA group of nations in Paris reached a landmark agreement to cut back planet-warming emissions of greenhouse gas.AdvertisementA group of nations in Paris reached a landmark agreement to cut back planet-warming emissions of greenhouse gas.