AdvertisementSupported byScienceTakeBy James GormanThe behavior of very small things can surprise humans, who are used to living in a world of their own size, dominated by gravity.It takes a lot of energy for humans to leave the ground — very strong legs for short leaps, and rocket engines for big ones.So imagine not only rising, but also bouncing higher when one falls back to earth, and higher again the next time. It can be done on a trampoline, of course.But researchers in Switzerland found that microscopic droplets on a surface that is super water repellent can be made to spontaneously launch themselves upward and then bounce even higher after they fall to the surface again.The surface they were working with is rigid like the ground or a tabletop, and not bouncy like a trampoline, so videos of the droplets look like pure levitation.What drives the bouncing droplet phenomenon is a lowering of atmospheric pressure that increases evaporation, according to the researchers, who published their findings in the journal Nature.Thomas M. Schutzius, Stefan Jung, Dimos Poulikakos and other researchers at ETH Zurich, a science and technology university, did low-pressure experiments because of their interest in de-icing airplane wings.The levitating droplet experiment may seem a bit of a stretch, but their interest lies in the behavior of water under different circumstances on what are called superhydrophobic materials. These are synthetics that repel water droplets. The material they were using has a textured surface, so that a droplet rests on it “like a fakir lying on a bed of nails,” Dr. Poulikakos said.When they lowered the pressure in a closed chamber by pumping out the gases, mostly nitrogen, up the droplets went.“We did not expect to see what we did,” Dr. Poulikakos said. The team’s analysis concluded that the lower pressure enhanced evaporation from the water droplets. Most of the water vapor dissipated into the chamber.But because of the texture of the surface, there was room under each droplet for water vapor to accumulate. It was difficult for this vapor to escape, so pressure under the drop increased as the vapor built up, until it launched the droplet into the air.And then, to add to the surprise, the droplet bounced higher after it fell to the surface, and higher again after the next fall. Each time the drop fell, it compressed vapor under it, and the compressed vapor acted like a spring, or a trampoline. When the droplet fell from a greater height, it compressed the vapor more.Eventually, the droplets would drift off to the side of the chamber, as their ascents were not completely vertical. If that had not happened, they probably would have continued until evaporation caused them to shrink away.The scientists recorded another type of levitation as well. At temperatures well below zero Celsius, a water droplet would become supercooled but stay liquid until some event pushed it over the edge and it froze in a matter of milliseconds. That rapid freezing caused explosive vaporization, said Dr. Poulikakos, that made the ice droplet levitate.With current superhydrophobic materials, Dr. Poulikakos said, the low pressures needed for levitating water would be too difficult to achieve for something the size of an airplane wing. But the search is on for new materials, and there is no reason in principle that one couldn’t be created that would be so hydrophobic that levitation could occur with less of a pressure drop.For the moment, the bouncing droplets are just a treat to watch. But they may be useful one day.Advertisement