AdvertisementSupported byReactionsTO THE EDITOR:Re “Artificial Friends for the Aging” (Dec. 8): As a retired geriatric social worker, I am familiar with all the issues this article mentions. But I find it bizarre, to say the least, that drone assistance would be considered as a way to ease what one assisted living executive describes as epidemic levels of loneliness. In this country, we have managed to convince people that staying at home alone is the best way to live out our years (of course it is cheaper than institutional care). And then we are surprised that people are lonely. What we need are retirement homes, nursing homes and day care centers that have high standards and pay their staff well (so it is not the job of last resort), with government support and oversight. If one has money in this country, there are many alternatives to living alone, but that choice is for the few. Humans are social animals, and the television — or newer technology like drones or Skype — is hardly the company that people need.Phyllis DreyfussPittsburghTO THE EDITOR:“Caregivers Sometimes Give Up One Job for Another” (The New Old Age, Dec. 8) made me ever grateful to live in a community that made it possible to take care of my aging mother for the last five years of her life (she died at 95). My Second Home, an intergenerational adult day care program in my town, provided care for my mom during my workday, every day. It was a warm, caring place that kept her occupied even as her cognitive abilities slipped. They met her with a smile, made her feel wanted and loved and allowed me to continue to support myself and my son (I’m a single mom). Yes, she had to live with me for it to work, but I slept better knowing that she was just across the hall and that I didn’t need to worry about a phone call in the middle of the night telling me something was wrong.Old age is not so easy, but it shouldn’t destroy the lives of caregivers and leave us vulnerable and uncared-for as we age. We all will age — if we are lucky — so maybe we should think about putting resources into programs like My Second Home in every community.Susan Carpenter Mount Kisco, N.Y.TO THE EDITOR:The issues that this article describes will affect many more families’ lives as the number of older Americans increases from 35 million to 71 million by 2030. At the same time, the pool of potential caregivers is shrinking. The looming gap has become a concern for government agencies and health care professionals.The Family Caregiver Platform Project is a nonpartisan group that hopes to help by getting caregiving needs on the agendas of political parties in all 50 states before the 2016 elections. Suggestions for platform planks and ways to propose them are on our website, caregivercorps.org. Family caregivers cannot manage the challenges they will face alone. Neither can federal or state governments, though they can help. We need a third level of activity: community activism.People have to let state politicians know that they want caregiver support — whether it is financial, emotional, educational or technical — to be addressed. Policies must be changed and solutions created to meet the challenges that will face families, as well as our medical and social services systems, as our population ages. It is a great opportunity to meet the individual gesture of sacrifice with a cultural response of care.Victoria Walker, M.D. Sioux Falls, S.D.The writer is the national coordinator for the Family Caregiver Platform Project.Re “It’s Not Just Drivers Driven to Distraction” (Personal Health, Dec. 8): It will be fixed in a generation or two. Natural selection. Here at the University of Michigan I regularly see students crossing the street — not at crosswalks — looking down at their phones. Odds of them reproducing? Slim.Jan Ann Arbor, Mich., posted to nytimes.com­Science Times welcomes letters, comments on nytimes.com and social media posts from readers. Email should be sent to scitimes@nytimes.com.Advertisement