AdvertisementSupported byTake a NumberBy Nicholas BakalarThe E. coli infections linked to the Chipotle Mexican Grill restaurant chain are only the latest cluster of illnesses caused by contaminated food.To be sure, the Chipotle outbreak was large. As of Dec. 2, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 52 people had been infected in nine states and 20 had been hospitalized. But there was nothing unusual about such incidents.As of Nov. 23, an outbreak of E. coli traced to a sample of diced celery and onions sold at Costco had infected 19 people in seven states. Five people had been hospitalized, and two had developed kidney failure. By Dec. 2, Salmonella from nut butter spread had infected people in nine states.According to an analysis published in Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report last month, there were 120 multi-state outbreaks of food-borne infection from 2010-14 — an average of one every two weeks.Every state in the country has been affected, along with Washington, D.C., and Puerto Rico, and the outbreaks led to 7,929 illnesses, 1,460 hospitalizations and 66 deaths.Fruits, vegetable row crops like lettuce, beef and sprouts were the main sources. But seeded vegetables, dairy products, chicken, fish, eggs and turkey have all been contaminated.Imported foods accounted for only 18 of the outbreaks, so experts did not blame poor hygiene in foreign countries. Widespread food-borne outbreaks are being identified more often, partly because of better surveillance and reporting, and because of the greater centralization of food processing and distribution practices.Although they accounted for disproportionate numbers of serious illness and deaths, the 120 multi-state outbreaks were in a sense the tip of the iceberg. Over the five-year period, the C.D.C. reported 4,163 cases of food-borne disease outbreaks, or an average of more than two a day. More than 71,000 people were sickened, 4,247 were hospitalized, and 118 died.“These outbreaks are a big problem and our goal is to prevent them,” said the lead author of the report, Samuel J. Crowe, an epidemiologist at the C.D.C. “We want to detect quickly, trace the food back to its source, and learn where the food was contaminated.”Advertisement