AdvertisementSupported byFirst MentionBy Nicholas BakalarOn Jan. 2, 1966, The New York Times published a long article about American car companies’ response to the growing public concern about safety. At the time, cars had few safety devices — “shoulder harnesses will probably not be standard on 1967 models,” the article said. “The automakers are convinced that scarcely anyone wants them.”Nevertheless, the reporter wrote, automakers were beginning to study new equipment. “One of the most exotic systems under discussion is an air-bag arrangement that would rapidly expand and hold passengers in place the instant a collision occurred.” It was the first mention in The Times of the automobile airbag.Ten days later, the newspaper published an article titled “Scientist Designs ‘Safety Car’ to Cut Death Rate.” An illustration depicted a car with, among other innovations, front and side airbags, lap and shoulder belts, a collapsible steering wheel, an energy-absorbing frame and a “safety tail-light flashing system.”But the reporter made clear that all this was still science fiction. Detroit had experimented with the airbag, he wrote, but “actually, engineers there consider it — and indeed a ‘safety car,’ as well — as being rather far off in the future, if not downright improbable.”On May 18, 1969, an article quoted Robert Carter, the leader of the National Motor Vehicle Safety Advisory Council, predicting that airbags could be incorporated in all cars, in front and rear seats, by the fall of 1973 or even earlier.Mr. Carter was wildly optimistic. Figuring out how to make an airbag work was not easy. On Aug. 29, 1969, The Times reported, Ford arranged an airbag demonstration with a new candy-apple red Galaxie in front of the Commerce Department building in Washington. With reporters watching and cameras rolling, Ford’s public-relations expert pushed the button to show the airbag in action.Nothing happened. He pushed again. Still nothing. “Something must be defective,” he said. The reporter noted that his competitors chuckled, the cameramen grumbled, and tourists wondered what was going on.Nevertheless, other manufacturers were getting on board. On Jan. 15, 1970, The Times reported that the president of General Motors endorsed the idea, but said technical problems with it were still unresolved.They took a while to fix. It was 18 years later, on May 26, 1988, that The Times reported that “The Chrysler Corporation’s decision to install airbags as standard equipment on several car lines this year and all its domestically made cars by 1990 signals the end of a nearly 20-year battle over use of the devices.”Advertisement