AdvertisementSupported byBy Dennis OverbyeTakaaki Kajita of the University of Tokyo and Arthur B. McDonald of Queen’s University in Ontario were awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics on Tuesday for discovering that the enigmatic subatomic particles known as neutrinos have mass.Their experiments rewrote the balance sheet of the universe. Neutrinos were once thought to be massless, but decades of study have led astronomers to conclude that their collective weight in the cosmos is about equal to the collective weight of stars.After the light-carrying particles known as photons, neutrinos are the most abundant particles in the universe. Seas of them are left over from the Big Bang, and many more are produced in stars and in nuclear reactors. They drift through the earth and our own bodies like wind through a screen door.They also come in three different identities, or “flavors,” in the jargon — the key to their eventual unmasking.Experiments by Dr. Kajita’s team at the Super-Kamiokande Collaboration in Japan and Dr. McDonald’s team at the Sudbury Neutrino Observatory in Ontario showed that neutrinos could oscillate, changing identities like a spy on the run, as they traveled through the atmosphere or through space.That they can change identities means they have mass, according to the rules of quantum physics, and knowing that has helped cosmologists understand how the universe evolved, how the sun works and how supernova explosions occur.“For particle physics, this was a historic discovery,” the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences, which awards the prize, said in a statement. “Its Standard Model of the innermost workings of matter had been incredibly successful, having resisted all experimental challenges for more than 20 years. However, as it requires neutrinos to be massless, the new observations had clearly showed that the Standard Model cannot be the complete theory of the fundamental constituents of the universe.”In an interview posted by the Nobel organization, Dr. McDonald said, “I hugged my wife,” after the call from the academy had awakened her, too.In a news conference at the University of Tokyo, Dr. Kajita said: “I want to thank the neutrinos, of course. And since neutrinos are created by cosmic rays, I want to thank them, too.”Dr. Kajita and Dr. McDonald will share the prize of about 8 million Swedish kronor, or about $960,000.Neutrinos have led physicists and astronomers on a merry chase ever since 1930, when Wolfgang Pauli suggested their existence to explain a loss of energy when neutrons decayed.He later joked that he had done a terrible thing: “I have postulated a particle that cannot be detected.” A neutrino so rarely collides with ordinary matter that it can pass through a light-year of lead with no effect, or so the theory went.But neutrinos do hit atoms once in a great while, producing a shower of debris that can be detected. In 1956 Frederick Reines and Clyde Cowan detected neutrinos streaming from a nuclear reactor. Experimenters later found that there were actually three kinds of neutrinos: electron, muon and tau neutrinos.Years later Raymond Davis, a researcher at Brookhaven National Laboratory, set out to capture neutrinos from the sun in a tank of cleaning fluid set up in the Homestake Gold Mine in Lead, S.D. He came up short of the predicted number, leading to speculation that something was wrong with our theories of physics or of the sun, or both.But an answer to the neutrino problem already existed. The Italian theorist Bruno Pontecorvo, inspired by the behavior of another subatomic particle, the kaon, suggested in 1957 that neutrinos could oscillate between different personalities.How eight winners got the word.In this scheme of things, one form of neutrinos generated in the sun might be morphing into another, undetectable form before they got to Homestake.The quest to understand these particles drove physicists deep underground, where their experiments would be shielded from cosmic rays.Dr. Kajita, who was born in Higashimatsuyama, Japan, in 1959, and got his Ph.D. from the University of Tokyo, had cut his teeth on an experiment known as Kamiokande to see if protons, the building blocks of ordinary matter, would decay (they have not, so far).He got interested in neutrinos because they were a source of noise in his experiment. The Super-Kamiokande, a tank of super-pure water 120 feet deep, started up in 1996 in an old zinc mine, designed to identify muon neutrinos produced by cosmic rays. Its detectors recorded flashes of light caused by debris speeding away from a neutrino hit.In principle, since the Earth is transparent to neutrinos, equal numbers should have been coming from overhead and from below. But in fact more particles were coming from above, suggesting that neutrinos passing through the earth were oscillating into a form unreadable by the detector.This oscillation meant that the different flavors had different masses. “This is clearly the physics that is beyond the Standard Model of particle physics,” Dr. Kajita said.The next bit of cosmic bookkeeping was performed by Dr. McDonald and his team at the Sudbury Neutrino Observatory. Dr. McDonald was born in Sydney, Nova Scotia, in 1943, and earned a Ph.D. at the California Institute of Technology.His detector, also deep underground, could distinguish electron neutrinos from the other types, either measuring the electron neutrinos or recording the overall total.Dr. McDonald’s team recorded only a third of the number of electron neutrinos that theory predicted. But when the physicists measured the total number, the deficit had been made up. Two-thirds of the electron neutrinos had transformed into muon and tau neutrinos on the eight-minute journey from the sun, the collaboration reported in 2002.“We had an extremely clear result that showed neutrinos do change from one type to another,” Dr. McDonald said in an interview with the Nobel organization.Tuesday’s prize announcement is hardly the end of the story. The Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory in Batavia, Ill., has staked much of its future on neutrino studies — in particular the Deep Underground Neutrino Experiment, or DUNE, which will beam neutrinos from Fermilab to a detector in South Dakota to study their oscillations.Which is fitting, Joe Lykken, deputy director of Fermilab, said in an email. “DUNE,” he said, “returns us to the Homestake mine in South Dakota, where Ray Davis collected the first data on solar neutrinos back in the 1960s, inspiring the experiments being honored now with the Nobel Prize.”Jonathan Soble contributed reporting from Tokyo.Advertisement