DEC. 21, 2015
Re “A Lost Species Crawls Back” (Dec. 15):The ignorance of the old-time sailors is sad, but the genius of modern scientists might balance that out. Fingers crossed, my grandkids, yet unborn, might still get to see these magnificent creatures.Charlie ArbuisoEndwell, N.Y., posted to nytimes.comA bunch of “free range” tortoises are now held captive to allow us to attempt to right a previous wrong. And you know what they say about two wrongs.PadfootPortland, Ore., posted to nytimes.comThe second wrong, now that we have this knowledge, would be to NOT act on it. If restoring a spectacular wild species (or in this case, two) is the end result of a captive breeding program, then I am fine with trying it. At any rate, if the tortoises are really that upset with their captivity, there is no way they will make babies — so they will have the last say.JBellingham, Wash., posted to nytimes.comTO THE EDITOR:“Scaling Up” (Dec. 15) reports that hospitals are having a hard time finding nursing homes for morbidly obese patients. I am an internal medicine physician who long ago got tired of prescribing pills for societal problems that go far beyond my ability to affect them medically. Our food policies subsidize dangerous foodlike substances, yet many American can’t find or afford real, safe food. Several years ago, I sent a letter to the chief executive of one of our two local hospitals, asking him to stop selling soda pop and other dangerous garbage in his facility. I received a letter explaining that the hospital administrators felt it was important to give people “choice.” We reap what we sow.AdvertisementJudith Dasovich, M.D.Springfield, Mo.The Electronic TrapTO THE EDITOR:Re “A Health Care Cacophony” (Hard Cases, Dec. 15): As someone who was directly involved with electronic medical record development from 1999 to 2010, I was not surprised by Dr. Abigail Zuger’s lament about the lack of interoperability between multiple systems. The fundamental aegis of the problem she described was the rush to implementation that happened before interoperability standards and their mandatory adoption occurred. This headlong dive into E.M.R.s was greatly facilitated by billions of federal dollars made available for their deployment. While E.M.R.s are relatively new, the human ability to use paper is millions of years old, the time it took for our brains and vision to evolve. It is highly unlikely that any technology in use today will ever match that longevity.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.John DesMarteau, M.D.Washington, D.C.Re “Windows Onto a Better Future” (Personal Health, Dec. 15):I was one of these children. I struggled through school and lived with headaches nearly every day of my life. I thought that I was too stupid to go to college, and I had no one to encourage me to try. My mother barely finished high school herself. Then in my mid-20s, a wonderful friend suggested that I needed glasses and got me an eye exam. I remember crying all the way home with my first pair of glasses, because the world was so beautiful and I was seeing it for the first time: leaves on the trees, blades of grass, defined shapes and edges.This time next year I will have three college degrees, including a law degree and a graduate degree. I wasn’t stupid; I just couldn’t see. I often think, if my mother had access to a program like ChildSight for her children, would my personality be different? Would I have done well in school? Glasses can truly transform a child’s life, set them on a different path, change the way they see not just the world, but themselves, and change the way the world sees them.AdvertisementNico R.Texas, posted to nytimes.com­Science Times welcomes letters, comments on nytimes.com and social media posts from readers. Email should be sent to scitimes@nytimes.com.A version of this article appears in print on December 22, 2015, on Page D3 of the New York edition with the headline: Letters to the Editor.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.