
Observatory By                     
SINDYA N. BHANOO

DEC. 18, 2015
Poachers target older elephants for ivory because their tusks are larger. Elephants live in groups led by older females, and their loss may drastically affect the social structures of these communities.Yet elephant societies managed to survive the loss of their matriarchs, a new study has found.“We were expecting some sort of social collapse, especially knowing how important matriarchs are to a society,” said Shifra Goldenberg, a wildlife ecologist doctoral candidate at Colorado State University and an author of the new report, which was published in Current Biology.Instead, the researchers found that after the loss of a matriarch, female offspring often stepped in and leveraged their mother’s contacts to rebuild social networks. (The study did not track adult males.)Typically, elephants live in core, bond and clan groups. Core groups comprise close relatives, and bond and clan groups include more distant ones.AdvertisementAfter poaching incidents, the researchers watched as different core groups fused.“Families that dissolve because of poaching group up,” Ms. Goldenberg said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Sometimes, it is genetically based, but we also saw unrelated groupings.”The researchers studied the behavior of adult female elephants in northern Kenya’s Samburu and Buffalo Springs national reserves over a 16-year period starting in 1997. A major drought in 2009 also affected the population.“We thought we’d be seeing a bunch of kids running around that don’t have much guidance,” Ms. Goldenberg said.Advertisement“But the story here is that they are figuring it out. They just need a bit of time.”A version of this article appears in print on December 22, 2015, on Page D2 of the New York edition with the headline: Animal Behavior: Elephants Regroup When Their Matriarchs Die.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »