

      By THE NEW YORK TIMES

DEC. 28, 2015

As the year ends, the Science desk of The New York Times asked its reporters to choose the stories that were the most memorable. These are their selections, with a focus on space, climate change, biology and artificial intelligence.Visit this link for an additional collection from reporters who write about medicine and health.It is still not a planet, but what a glorious nonplanet it is.NASA’s New Horizons spacecraft zipped past Pluto on July 14, the climax of a nine-and-a-half-year journey. As expected, the first up-close look yielded the unexpected landscapes of ice — towering mountains, smooth plains, a patch in the shape of a giant heart. From the photographs, mission scientists were also able to measure Pluto’s diameter more precisely — 1,472 miles, give or take a dozen miles. That restores it to the largest of the Kuiper belt objects, the ring of icy debris beyond Neptune, including Eris, the object whose discovery in 2005 led to the demotion of Pluto from planet to a new category of dwarf planets . Some scientists — notably S. Alan Stern, the principal investigator for New Horizons — argued that the rich tapestry of discoveries demonstrated that Pluto should be restored to full planethood, but there is no indication that the wider astronomical community is interested in revisiting the messy debate over the definition of “planet.”Many hailed the flyby as the completion of the initial reconnaissance of the solar system. But it wasn’t really. If Pluto is not a planet, then that was completed back in 1989, when Voyager 2 flew past Neptune. If you go by the everything-round-is-a-planet view advocated by Dr. Stern, then there are quite a few, maybe hundreds or thousands, of planets not yet visited. Certainly there are many more stunning surprises yet to be seen in the solar system. – KENNETH CHANGWhat’s the Earth’s most populous vertebrate? Cats? People? Chickens?No, it turns out that the title for animals distinguished by a spine goes to a bony little fish of the deep sea that glows in the dark and can open its mouth extraordinarily wide, baring needlelike fangs.Scientists have reported compelling new evidence on the ubiquity of the bristlemouth, which compensates for its small size (smaller than a finger) with staggering powers of reproduction. They now put its numbers at hundreds of trillions — and perhaps quadrillions. In contrast, cats, humans and chickens on the planet number in the billions.Over all, bristlemouths are one to three inches in length, tan to black in color, and at times display ghostly translucence. All wield bristlelike teeth. The rapacious little fishes dine on such things as copepods, tiny crustaceans with long antennas. They live in the ocean’s twilight zone, where little sunlight reaches.Rows of glowing dots on the bristlemouth’s abdomen appear to be camouflage that helps the creature hide from predators.In the twilight zone, it’s hard for predators to see downward but, in daytime, possible for them to observe things above, which appear as silhouettes. To avoid giving away their presence, some prey species use bioluminescent spots to blend in with the surrounding light, a strategy known as counter-illumination. Bristlemouths appear to use this tactic to make their silhouettes disappear.Though the portrait of the bristlemouth is incomplete, scientists have learned enough to confidently assert that it far outstrips all other contenders for the title of most common vertebrate on the planet.“No other animal gets close,” said Peter C. Davison, a fish scientist at the Farallon Institute for Advanced Ecosystem Research, in Petaluma, Calif. – WILLIAM J. BROADThe warming Pacific Ocean is clearly a big deal. Figuring out why it’s warming and how all of the various ways that it is warming are connected is a puzzle. But the effects of higher temperatures in the Pacific, the world’s biggest ocean, are being felt around the world.Of course there’s that unusually strong El Niño pattern that promises to soak Southern California and much of the southern United States through the spring, while leaving the northern part of the country somewhat warmer and drier than usual. El Niño has been linked to a wild Pacific hurricane season,, but its effects are felt in events like a drought in Australia and enormous peat fires in Indonesia. The warm air coming off the Pacific as part of the El Niño phenomenon is part of the reason that 2015 is likely to be the hottest year on record. El Niño interacts with other warming phenomena in the Pacific, including a cycle that can span decades and an oddball phenomenon of unusually warm water massed in the Eastern Pacific coined “the Blob,” which has waned from its peak but lingers.These trends have had pronounced effects on weather around the world, and also on marine life. And while phenomena like El Niño are cyclical, this surge of heat could be providing a preview of what climate change will bring. – JOHN SCHWARTZMarine scientists in Cuba and the United States rejoiced this year when thawing relations between the countries opened up new opportunities for protecting the ocean they share. For decades, the economic embargo has made collaborative work between Cuban and American scientists cumbersome and complicated. “The blockade, what you call the embargo, has had a huge impact, especially in environmental science,” Fabian Pina Amargós, a marine biologist and director of Cuba’s Center for Coastal Ecosystem Research, said in May, when The New York Times accompanied him on a research expedition to Jardines de la Reina, the site of a thriving coral reef off Cuba’s south coast. As the barriers have lowered, more researchers have begun to work together to survey precious ocean resources. And in November, Cuban and American officials signed landmark agreements to expand environmental cooperation and protect marine ecosystems from climate change, overfishing, habitat damage and other threats. Yet the warming of diplomatic relations has also brought new challenges. Since 1992, when Fidel Castro emphasized the importance of protecting the environment, Cuba has devoted substantial effort to preserving its natural resources, enacting a series of tough environmental laws and designating coastal areas as protected zones.  But the island nation’s resolve has never been tested, or tempted, as strongly as it is likely to be if trade and travel barriers with the United States fall. And some environmental experts worry that a “tsunami” of tourism and development will threaten the country’s commitment to enforcing environmental regulations. Dan Whittle, a lawyer and senior director of the Cuba program for the Environmental Defense Fund, said the question of how aggressively the country should pursue development is likely to be an important topic at the Seventh Congress of the Cuban Communist Party in 2016. – ERICA GOODESixty years after he died, it’s still Albert Einstein’s universe.The year 2015 was the centennial of his theory of general relativity, which describes how matter and energy warp the geometry of space-time like a sleeper sagging a mattress. This year also brought hope of progress in understanding one of the weirdest and gloomiest predictions of Einstein’s theory: that space-time could curl up like a magician’s cloak around massive objects and squeeze them out of existence in black holes.Combining a network of radio antennas to create a telescope as big the Earth, Sheperd Doeleman of M.I.T. and his colleagues began observations that they hope will produce the first images of a black hole at the center of the Milky Way galaxy. Meanwhile, other astronomers were tracking two black holes circling each other in a dance of death 3.5 billion light-years from here. They appear headed for an apocalyptic collision.Even nature lit candles  for the occasion. In March, astronomers announced that they had discovered an “Einstein cross,” in which the light from a distant supernova had been bent and split into four images, allowing astronomers to see the death throes of the star over and over again.This month, the same group, led by Patrick Kelly of the University of California, Berkeley, said the supernova had now appeared in another part of the sky where they had predicted it.Astronomers were hoping nature was not finished with birthday treats. In September, the Advanced Laser Interferometer Gravitational-Wave Observatory went into operation looking for the ripples in space-time, or gravitational waves, that would be produced by cataclysms like those of colliding black holes.It might be Einstein’s universe, but it’s ours and Hollywood’s too: Eddie Redmayne won the Oscar for best actor for portraying Stephen Hawking, the cosmologist, black hole expert and best-selling author, in the movie “The Theory of Everything.” – DENNIS OVERBYETwenty years ago, finding even a tiny fragment of DNA from a human fossil was cause for celebration. Now scientists routinely retrieve entire genomes from human remains dating back thousands of years. This year brought a torrent of new studies of ancient DNA that marked a coming of age for the field.Scientists in Europe, for example, amassed hundreds of genomes from people who lived over the past 10,000 years. They used the data to sketch a genetic history of the continent, reaching back before the dawn of agriculture. Researchers were able to pinpoint the movement of people into Europe from the Near East and Russia, as well as the periods when their genes mixed with those of the native hunter-gatherers. The bacteria that killed people in the Bronze Age have been dead for thousands of years, but the germs left behind fragments of DNA in the bones of their victims.Other continents yielded DNA as well. In North America, for example, scientists retrieved genetic material from 11,500-year-old skeletons in Alaska, as well as the famous Kennewick Man, who died 8,500 years ago in Washington State. The DNA from those ancient fossils offers new clues to how humans spread from Asia into the New World.These successes come in part from more powerful DNA-sequencing technology. But new strategies for gene hunting have helped, too. Ear bones, scientists now realize, are densely packed with DNA. For the past two decades, scientists were pessimistic about finding genes in fossils from tropical regions. The hot climate there was thought to break down DNA so quickly that nothing would be left to find.But in 2015, scientists discovered the first ancient human genome from Africa, hidden in the ear bones of a 4,500-year-old fossil in Ethiopia. These days, human skeletons from the past 10,000 years from anywhere on Earth could potentially yield genetic clues to our history. – CARL ZIMMERA push the past few decades to stop biomedical research on chimpanzees in the United States came to a kind of conclusion this year when the Fish and Wildlife Service classified all chimps as endangered, and the National Institutes of Health decided to retire all of its chimpanzees to sanctuaries. The endangered classification became effective Sept. 14. Any proposed biomedical experiment on chimpanzees will now require a permit, and the applicant would have to show that the research would benefit the survival of chimp as a species. The N.I.H. had decided in 2013 to retire most of the chimpanzees it owned to sanctuaries. But until November, it was keeping about 50 available in case they were needed for future experiments.  In announcing the decision, Dr. Francis S. Collins, the director of the N.I.H., said, “We find no evidence that there is a need to continue to do research of an invasive sort on chimpanzees, not now and not going into the future.” There are many privately owned chimpanzees held by laboratories, although the permit process now places a high barrier to any research using them. At least one lab is seeking retirement homes for most of its chimps. The Yerkes National Primate Research Center at Emory University in Atlanta recently donated seven to the Chattanooga Zoo in Tennessee, and it hopes to give eight of the 56 it has left to Wingham Wildlife Park in southeast England. The application is still tied up at Fish and Wildlife. It initially notified Yerkes and some animal welfare advocates that they were going to approve the application, but then held back after the New England Anti-Vivisection Society and others filed a lawsuit. There will be a second round of public comment, but it is not yet scheduled. – JAMES GORMANA class of programs known as deep learning algorithms has transformed the field of artificial intelligence and is reshaping fields as diverse as self-driving cars, the workplace and scientific research.Neural networks are programs that can be trained by exposure to large sets of data. For example, a neural net may be taught to identify objects in millions of photographs or to be trained by listening to hundreds of hours of human speech. The programs can then identify objects, such as cyclists and pedestrians, in car safety applications, or they can understand human speech for a program like Apple’s Siri.The rapidly improving accuracy of the programs comes in part from the ease with which computer networks have made it possible to assemble large data sets, from the growing power and falling cost of computing, and also because of the growing sophistication of the programs.The rapid improvement of the technology has led to a talent gold rush in Silicon Valley with companies such as Apple, Facebook, Google, IBM and Microsoft competing with traditional industrial giants like General Electric and Toyota for a new crop of data scientists.The rapid improvement of A.I. technologies has also led to concerns that the technology could become an “existential risk” for humanity. Some technologists worry that such systems might improve so rapidly that they will make most human jobs obsolete. Others are concerned about what they call “artificial general intelligence” — systems that are “superintelligent” but may not be friendly to their human inventors. – JOHN MARKOFFCars drive better than people, and that’s a problem when they have to share the road. Those are the early indications from Google’s driverless car experiment. Since 2009, the small fleet of autonomous cars Google has been testing on roadways have been in 16 crashes and, in each case, a human driver was at fault, the company says. The collisions were mostly fender benders. One, though, led to a Google employee’s going to the hospital. In another case, a Google employee was actually driving the autonomous vehicle in 2011 and collided with another car. Another human at fault.There was at least one blemish for the car itself: A Google car was pulled over by a police officer who noticed the car driving particularly slowly.And therein lies the punch line. Driverless cars seem to be behaving particularly safely, more so than their counterparts with humans at the wheel. One reason is that autonomous cars are programmed to follow the letter of the driving law, whereas many human drivers take liberties or adapt to the culture of the road in the moment. This can lead to odd situations. For example, an early version of a driverless car couldn’t get through a four-way stop because it kept waiting for human drivers to give the Google car its turn. Humans, turns out, aren’t so polite or disciplined as that.“The real problem is that the car is too safe,” said Donald Norman, director of the Design Lab at the University of California, San Diego, who studies autonomous vehicles.“They have to learn to be aggressive in the right amount, and the right amount depends on the culture.” – MATT RICHTELI wrote in February about a carbon sequestration project in Iceland, in which carbon dioxide gas is pumped deep underground to keep it permanently out of the atmosphere, where it would contribute to climate change. As the year ends with a new climate agreement signed in Paris, the project, called CarbFix, and a few others around the world are taking on new significance.It is clear from the accord — and from a new clean-energy investment fund backed by Bill Gates that was announced in Paris — that improved technology is going to be needed if the world is to reduce carbon emissions. Removing CO2 from the exhaust of a coal- or gas-fired power plant and burying it is not a new idea, and the basic technology to do it is well known. But doing it on a scale that will have an effect on climate is no sure thing.CarbFix has been successful so far, but it is a small-scale demonstration project. Some larger, commercial-scale projects have run into snags. The Boundary Dam coal plant in Western Canada, which started capturing CO2 from one of its boilers last year, is not operating as well as expected. And in Kemper County, Miss., a gleaming new carbon-capturing coal plant has yet to sequester a molecule of CO2.  The plant is two years behind schedule and at $6.5 billion is about three times more expensive than originally estimated. The latest forecast is that it will start generating power and storing carbon dioxide in June. – HENRY FOUNTAINAdvertisement