By JASCHA HOFFMANJAN. 5, 2015
January events at the intersection of culture and science.FILMSundance Film Festival. Park City, Utah. Jan. 22-Feb. 1. Tickets at sundance.org.Two films at the annual indie-movie festival examine the seductive power of authority as revealed in a notorious pair of experiments. Stanley Milgram’s famous 1961 study on obedience suggested that most people were willing to inflict severe pain on others if urged by an authority figure. The biopic “Experimenter,” starring Peter Sarsgaard as the scientist and Winona Ryder as his wife, tracks the wider span of Dr. Milgram’s career. “The Stanford Prison Experiment,” more than a decade in the making, gives a dark glimpse into the infamous 1971 mock-prison study by the psychologist Philip Zimbardo, in which college students took so fiercely to their roles as guards and inmates that research had to be halted early. In a slightly more hopeful view of human cooperation, a documentary titled “The Visit” takes viewers inside the United Nations’ Office for Outer Space Affairs, where scientists prepare to communicate with aliens, enter their ships and, if necessary, fight back.EXHIBITSmithsonian Air and Space Museum. “Outside the Spacecraft: 50 Years of Extra-Vehicular Activity.” Washington. Opens Jan. 8. Free.Fifty years ago, the astronaut Ed White opened the hatch of his capsule and became the first American to dangle in space. Since then, astronauts on spacewalks have fixed the Hubble telescope, built the International Space Station, walked on the moon and repaired their own craft. This exhibit gathers the apparel and implements needed for the job, including the headset that Neil Armstrong wore on the first moonwalk and the last boots to tread on the moon. Those who recall George Clooney zipping around on his booster seat in the film “Gravity” might be surprised to learn that most spacewalks involve tight tethers, long checklists and deliberate movements to ensure there are no surprises. Kathryn Sullivan, the first American woman to walk in space, once said spacewalking was more like slow-motion space-swimming.AdvertisementEXHIBITAmerican Museum of Natural History. “Countdown to Zero: Defeating Disease.” New York City. Opens Jan 13. Adults $22, students and seniors $17, children $12.50.No human disease has been eradicated since smallpox in 1979. This exhibit, conceived with the Carter Center, shows how some modern pathogens spread and predicts how health campaigns might curtail them. In the absence of vaccines, low-tech solutions are sometimes effective. Take Guinea worm, a parasite that once infected millions in Africa and Asia. No cure has been found, but with the use of cheap water filters, the current number of cases is expected to be announced as less than 150. Malaria evolves so quickly that most drugs against it eventually lose effectiveness, but the distribution of bed nets has narrowed its reach. “Normally we’re concerned about keeping things from going extinct,” said the exhibit’s curator, Mark Sidall, citing the museum’s mission to promote biodiversity. “The only consequence of driving these species to extinction is that people will be better off.”BROADCAST“Sinkholes — Buried Alive.” “Nova.” Jan. 28 on PBS.Perhaps you recall the case of Jeff Bush, whose bedroom floor in Sefner, Fla., collapsed in the middle of the night, baring a giant sinkhole that swallowed him whole, bed and all, never to be found. This episode of “Nova” takes a closer look at the geological mechanisms that underlie this tabloid-ready phenomenon. Sinkholes tend to occur when rain eats through limestone or other rocks, carving out empty spaces that can fill with soil and suddenly collapse. In some regions of Spain, sinkholes threaten to demolish historic buildings and derail high-speed trains. And humans can make the problem worse. An enormous sinkhole that opened up in Guatemala City was the result of an outdated sewage system, and a lake-size one in Louisiana was the result of salt mining.A version of this list appears in print on January 6, 2015, on Page D3 of the New York edition.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.