

      By JONATHAN CORUM

UPDATED July 14, 2015

The New Horizons probe flew past Pluto and its moons early Tuesday morning.
For images from the Pluto flyby, see New Horizons Reveals
Ice Mountains on Pluto.July 13: Worth the Wait The last image sent back to Earth before New Horizons’ Pluto flyby. The photo was taken on Monday, July 13, from a distance of 476,000 miles.July 13: False Color Pluto and its moon Charon are shown in exaggerated color to highlight the range of surface features on the dwarf planet and its largest moon.A Month of Pluto A dozen images of Pluto taken by New Horizons’ long-range camera, spanning one month and more than 20 million miles.July 12: Pluto and Charon A composite image of Pluto and its largest moon, Charon, seen from a distance of 1.6 million miles.July 11: Charon and Pluto in color A colorized, composite photograph of Pluto and its darker moon, Charon.July 11: Pluto Details of Pluto’s surface are beginning to emerge in photographs from New Horizons’ long-range camera.July 11: Charon Craters, possible chasms and a dark polar region are visible in the newest image of Charon, Pluto’s largest moon.July 9: Pluto The dark equatorial band known as the whale appears at the bottom of this image, which was taken from 3.3 million miles away.July 8: Charon and Pluto A photograph taken from 3.7 million miles away was combined with color information to make this portrait of Pluto and its largest moon, Charon.July 7: A Heart on Pluto A bright, heart-shaped region dominates this view of Pluto from less than five million miles away. The dark band to the left of the heart is known as the whale. This side of Pluto will be visible during New Horizons’ closest approach next week.JupiterSaturnUranusNew HorizonsNeptunePlutoJupiterSaturnUranusNew HorizonsNeptunePlutoJupiterSaturnNew HorizonsPlutoJupiterSaturnUranusNew HorizonsNeptunePlutoNearing Pluto New Horizons launched in 2006. After nine years and three billion miles, the spacecraft will fly by Pluto on Tuesday.June 29: 11 million miles New Horizons’ long-range camera photographed Pluto and its largest moon, Charon.June 19: Charon and Pluto Pluto, at right, and Charon are about 20 million miles away in this processed image.June 18: A dark pole on Charon Images of Pluto’s largest moon Charon suggest that the Texas-sized moon has a broad dark region at its pole.June 18: Two hemispheres Pluto’s surface has continent-sized regions of light and dark. The top row of images shows the hemisphere of Pluto that will be visible during New Horizon's closest flyby next month. The bottom row shows the opposite hemisphere.June 3: Pluto and Charon in color New Horizons’ first color movie of Pluto and Charon is low resolution, but hints at the different colors of Pluto and its largest moon. Charon is so large that it makes Pluto wobble: the two bodies orbit a balance point, called the barycenter, which is marked with an ×.May 12: One month, 20 million miles New Horizons’ long-range camera is seeing more detail as the spacecraft approaches Pluto. These six images were taken from 67 million to 47 million miles away.May 1: All five moons New Horizons photographed all five of Pluto’s moons for the first time, from more than 55 million miles away.April 29: A Polar Ice Cap? NASA released a series of images showing broad areas of light and dark surface features on Pluto. A bright patch near the north pole was described as "suspiciously suggestive of a polar cap.” These images have been stabilized so Pluto remains centered, with a line showing the orientation of the planet’s north pole. In reality, the gravity of the large moon Charon makes Pluto wobble.April 9: Color New Horizons took its first color image of Pluto and Charon from a distance of about 71 million miles.Feb. 18: SMALLER MOONS New Horizons was about 115 million miles from Pluto when it caught a glimpse of Nix and Hydra, two smaller moons which were discovered in 2005. The image on the right was processed to remove most background stars.Jan. 25–31: ONE DAY ON PLUTO New Horizons was about 126 million miles away when it photographed Charon, Pluto’s largest moon, orbiting the dwarf planet. These images show one full day on Pluto, which is almost as long as one Earth week.July 2014: ORBITING PLUTO New Horizons was about 265 million miles away when it photographed Charon, Pluto’s largest moon, orbiting the dwarf planet. Pluto’s four other known moons are too small to be seen at this distance.2012: A fifth moon Astronomers using the Hubble Space Telescope found the last of Pluto’s five known moons in 2012. Pluto, or Hades, is the god of the underworld in Greek mythology, and the new moon was named Styx after the river that souls cross to enter Hades.2011: A fourth moon Hubble found a fourth moon orbiting Pluto in 2011. The new moon was later named Kerberos, after the many-headed dog that guards the entrance to the underworld in Greek mythology.2006: No longer a planet In a controversial decision, the International Astronomical Union voted to reclassify Pluto as a dwarf planet.2005: Two new moons Hubble discovered two new moons around Pluto in 2005, bringing the total to three. One was later named Hydra, after the many-headed serpent of Greek mythology. The other was named Nix, a modified spelling of Nyx, the Greek goddess of night.2003: A glimpse of the surface Photographing Pluto has been compared with observing the markings on a soccer ball 40 miles away. The best images from the Hubble Space Telescope suggest a mottled surface of bright and dark patches that are changing over time.1978: A moon for Pluto An astronomer taking measurements of Pluto noticed a bulge in some images of the distant planet, caused by a large moon orbiting close to the planet. The new moon was named Charon, after the ferryman who brings souls across the river Styx to Hades, the underworld of Greek mythology. The moon may have formed after a colllision between a large meteor and Pluto.1930: Pluto discovered Clyde W. Tombaugh, an amateur astronomer at the Lowell Observatory in Flagstaff, Ariz., noticed a small point of light moving across the background stars in these two images, which were taken six days apart. Mr. Tombaugh died in 1997, and the New Horizons spacecraft now carries a small portion of his ashes.Sources: NASA and Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory. Images by NASA/Johns Hopkins and the New Horizons team, except where noted.Advertisement