
Books By                     
DANA JENNINGS

JAN. 12, 2015
Some people are accused of living in the past. The photographer Rachel Sussman is captivated by the past living in the present.In her first book, “The Oldest Living Things in the World,” Ms. Sussman stalks and photographs organisms that are at least 2,000 years old. The artist, who lives in Brooklyn, calls the work “an existential journey into deep time” that whisked her from a “temporal comfort zone.” For nearly 10 years, Ms. Sussman worked with biologists to photograph subjects on all seven continents. “I’ve photographed 30 different species,” she writes, “ranging from lichens in Greenland that grow only one centimeter every hundred years, to unique desert shrubs in Africa and South America, a predatory fungus in Oregon, brain coral in the Caribbean and an 80,000-year-old colony of aspen in Utah.”Ms. Sussman gives the reader multiple and striking pictures of her prey, but also provides ages, locations, nicknames, common names and Latin names, all complemented by useful mini-essays. Some are contributed by the art curator Hans Ulrich Obrist and Carl Zimmer, who writes The New York Times’s Matter column. (Early versions of some chapters appeared in The Times’s Lens blog.)As a kind of time-traveling expeditionist — a chrononaut? — Ms. Sussman lets us drink from primeval wells. One of the great satisfactions of her book is that it allows us to peer at the almost eternal even as we’re mired in a culture quick to praise the new and ephemeral.The bristlecone pine here, for example, is some 5,000 years old, sits in the White Mountains of California, and is called Methuselah. Gnarled and tenacious, it seems almost eager to convey some wisdom about good living that most of us are too thick to understand.AdvertisementThe ancients include the honey mushroom, or “humongous fungus,” which covers 2,200 acres in Oregon and is 2,400 years old; Antarctic mosses (5,500 years old); and a box huckleberry in Perry County, Pa., that is more than 8,000 years old.But the absolute stars of this ode to biological stubbornness are the Siberian actinobacteria. These single-cell organisms were discovered in 2005 buried in the permafrost of the Kolyma Lowlands. They grow sluggishly, repairing their DNA at temperatures below freezing, but are thought to be 400,000 to 600,000 years old.You can almost hear the mayflies — here today, gone tomorrow — protesting the unfairness of it all. Half a million years ago, anatomically modern humans did not yet exist, but this Siberian survivor might have already been 100,000 years old.AdvertisementWhich brings me to another of this book’s pleasures: It makes the reader ponder the nature of time, and prompts the human animal to place itself in deep perspective. What is the arrogance and evanescence of man, after all, in the face of 600,000-year-old bacteria?“The Oldest Living Things in the World”: 
By Rachel Sussman. 304 pages.
University of Chicago Press. $45.A version of this review appears in print on January 13, 2015, on Page D3 of the New York edition with the headline: A Gallery of Tenacious Survivors.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »