AdvertisementSupported byReactionsCosmologyHunting for Other EarthsRe “So Many Earth-Like Planets, So Few Telescopes” (Jan. 7): Clearly, proving life doesn’t exist elsewhere is an infinite task. And searching for it in comparable heliocentric systems is logical. Characterizing these systems as nearly ideal to harbor life is quite tempting. But discovering its genesis right here on Earth where conditions for life are actually ideal would be far more persuasive than the reported prevalence of these cosmological perturbations.jsohnis, Brooklyn, NY, posted to nytimes.comEach of these “planets,” if they are, is an unimaginable distance from Earth; further, they are the smallest slice of what planets are likely out there if you simply extrapolate from the billions and billions of galaxies which we purport to generally know of. Nice work for astronomers, but our Earth will most likely be long disappeared before any real facts will be known.Jack Belicic, Santa Mira, posted to nytimes.comIn 600 years we’ve gone from a geocentric model of the heavens to telescopes and formulas that can identify and weigh planets thousands of light-years from Earth. (We know that’s where they are because we can measure the spans between us.) Let’s not be cynical.Law, New York, NY, posted to nytimes.comCancerWhen Genes MisfireTO THE EDITOR: Re “Cancer’s Random Assault” (Jan. 6):The analysis by Cristian Tomasetti and Bert Vogelstein of the division of stem cells and their correlation with cancer mutations is another step along the arduous path to understanding, and eventually controlling, cancer growth. If their conclusion is correct, that two-thirds of many cancer types are caused by random mutations, then we have a long road ahead.These “random” cell mutations may have benefited all evolving species of life in their adaptation to changing environments over the eons. This mutation mechanism may be built into all our planet’s surviving species, including humans, on a very basic level. If so, cancer may be simply a very negative consequence of this mutation mechanism which, in the bigger picture, has been necessary for our evolution. Richard G. WhiteArdsley, N.Y.Pedestrian SafetySharing the StreetsRe “Where Feet and Wheels Meet” (Personal Health, Jan. 6):It’s time to do what London, Singapore and Hong Kong have done: require high priced permits for people to drive their personal cars in large cities. We have a society of individualists who don’t value other people’s lives and limbs. These selfish oafs should not be driving in areas of high population densities.Rodrick Wallace, Manhattan, posted to nytimes.comAt some intersections at busy times of the day, it is very difficult for drivers to make a right-hand or left-hand turn because of an almost continuous stream of pedestrians filling the crosswalk throughout the entire part of the light cycle giving them the possibility of turning. Traffic lights should be modified so that there are separate and distinct periods of time when pedestrians are allowed to cross and when drivers are permitted to turn. Turning during the walk period should be forbidden, as should pedestrian crossing during the turning period. The two activities are basically incompatible from a safety perspective.Chasseur Americain, Easton, PA, posted to nytimes.comScience Times welcomes letters, 
comments on nytimes.com and social media posts from readers. Email should be sent to scitimes@nytimes.com. Advertisement