AdvertisementSupported byScienceTakeBy James GormanSome subsurface animals burrow and dig tunnels. Others, in sandy environments like the deserts of Arizona or the Sahara, wiggle along under the surface in a way that looks like swimming.And it is, according to Daniel I. Goldman, a physicist at Georgia Tech, because granular substances like sand have the properties of solids and fluids. For this kind of swimming, he and a group of colleagues have shown that long and skinny is a very good shape. And they have also shown some surprising reasons for that.Dr. Goldman and his colleagues had done a lot of research on a lizard called the sandfish. They used something called resistance force theory, developed decades ago to explain how some micro-organisms move.The theory involves treating a moving body as many independent small bits and analyzing each separately. The theory predicted that although the somewhat stubby sandfish was good at sand-swimming, something long and slender was likely to be better.The shovel-nosed snake seemed like a good animal to test.Dr. Goldman, Sarah S. Sharpe, then also at Georgia Tech, and other researchers at Harvard and Zoo Atlanta captured the snakes in their native Arizona and took them to Georgia Tech, where they used high-speed X-ray video to track their movement. The scientists published their results in The Journal of Experimental Biology.“We were interested in how they move in the sand — nobody actually knew that — and how they compared to the lizard we’ve studied extensively,” Dr. Goldman said. The first answer was that long and thin did work better. The snake body was quicker and more efficient than the lizard shape.It might seem that streamlining — having to push less sand aside — would be the reason, but it wasn’t. Instead, the length and flexibility of the snake’s body allowed it to move with all the twists and turns necessary as waves moved down its body from head to tail.In sand-swimming, Dr. Goldman said, the animals produce what could be thought of as a kind of puddle in the tube they are moving through — not of real liquid, but of sand grains that behave as a liquid. And the theory also predicted that the snake’s skin should produce a lot less friction than the skin of the lizard. That was also proved true, at least on the snake’s belly.The snake and lizard each use motions that are most economical for their body shapes, Dr. Goldman said, but over all, the long, slick snake is the more efficient sand swimmer.That may be because it seems to spend more time underground than the lizard, which also runs along the surface. So the conclusion is that evolution has more finely honed the snake’s body for swimming.videovideovideoAdvertisement