JAN. 19, 2015
BiologyOcean Life on BrinkRe “Ocean Life Faces Mass Extinction, Broad Study Says” (Jan. 16):The sea turtles, whales, sharks and corals have been trying to tell us this for decades. We are still not listening to them.L, Massachusetts, posted to nytimes.comTypically, no mention of the driving force behind the destruction of our oceans: overpopulation. As the global human population grows from about 7.2 to 10 billion during this century, acidification and pollution of the oceans will escalate, ultimately affecting all life on the planet. But so far, there is no political or religious leadership to address the root cause of our ongoing environmental disaster.RC, MN, posted to nytimes.comOverpopulation is a problem. But the true driving force is a rapacious culture. In the first world, we overconsume and overpollute. The third-world countries with the big families aren’t primarily responsible.Portia, Massachusetts, posted to nytimes.comThe good news is that life will prevail. There have been six major mass extinctions on Earth, and each time, life bounced back. Mankind may not be on the other side of it, but that is rightfully so. For we will be reaping what we have sown.AdvertisementRene Calvo, Harlem, posted to nytimes.comI think mankind and the fauna of this world are worth fighting for. We don’t have to treat environmental collapse like a fait accompli.AdvertisementMargaret Orth, Seattle, posted to nytimes.comEducationIn His or Her NameRe “Welcome to (Your Name Here) Medical School” (nytimes.com/well, Jan. 15)Instead of rich people’s names on diplomas — how about Mother Teresa Medical Center? After all, she walked among the lepers — real purpose in healing. Or how about Florence Nightingale Hospital Complex? After all, she walked among the wounded during the Crimean War — real purpose in healing. Or how about Dr. Tom Dooley Hospital? After all, he created a foundation for medical assistance for refugee children in Southeast Asia — real purpose in healing.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.MIMA, heartsny, posted to nytimes.comAlbert Einstein College of Medicine deserves consideration in this discussion. Einstein was a great (the greatest?) physicist, but also a great humanist. He gave his name to the college for free, partly because of anti-Semitism in admission policies of medical schools at that time. In 48 years on the faculty, I’ve always been proud of the name.Michael V L Bennett, New Rochelle, posted to nytimes.comMedicineTreating ConstipationTO THE EDITOR:Re “Scrutiny for a Childhood Remedy” (Jan. 6): Constipation affects about 5 percent of all children and can be associated with significant distress to the child and family. In most cases, constipation can be treated effectively with behavioral and dietary changes. Many times, however, constipation becomes a chronic problem that, when untreated, can cause severe long-term physical and psychological consequences.For children with chronic constipation, medications aimed at softening stools are often needed for months or years to achieve regular bowel movements. Your article is likely to provoke questions by any parent or caregiver whose child has had constipation and benefited from stool softeners or laxatives, including PEG 3350. Parents with questions about their child’s treatment for constipation are encouraged to consult a pediatrician or pediatric gastroenterologist.The North American Society of Pediatric Gastroenterology and the American Academy of Pediatrics are committed to advancing the understanding of disease and the safety of treatment through data and research and welcome the study of prolonged use of PEG 3350.James Heubi, M.D.Sandra G. Hassink, M.D. Dr. Heubi is president-elect of the North American Society of Pediatric Gastroenterology. Dr. Hassink is president of the American Academy of Pediatrics.Science Times welcomes letters, comments on nytimes.com and social media posts from readers. Email should be sent to scitimes@nytimes.com. A version of this letter appears in print on January 20, 2015, on Page D3 of the New York edition with the headline: Your Letters: Medical School Naming, Ocean Life and Constipation.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.