By ANDREW POLLACKJAN. 21, 2015
Could genetically modified bacteria escape from a laboratory or fermentation tank and cause disease or ecological destruction?This is not known to have occurred. But two groups of scientists reported on Wednesday that they had developed a complex technique to prevent it from happening.The scientists have given a common type of bacterium a unique genetic code that makes it dependent for survival on unnatural amino acids that must be fed to it. If such organisms escaped into the wild, where those amino acids are not available, they would die.“It really addresses a longstanding problem in biotechnology,” said Farren Isaacs, an assistant professor of molecular, cell and developmental biology at Yale, who led one of the research groups. He called it a “really compelling solution to engineering biocontainment, or biological barriers that limit the spread and survival of organisms in natural environments.”AdvertisementA paper by his team and one from a group led by George M. Church at Harvard Medical School were published online Wednesday by the journal Nature.AdvertisementThe work was done using E. coli, a species of bacteria used in the production of pharmaceuticals and chemicals. The researchers said it would be more difficult to apply the technique to genetically modified crops. In some cases, the crops end up growing where they are not wanted or transmitting their genes to other crops.Outside experts said the work was an advance from previous attempts at biological containment. “This research represents a step-change towards building reliable control switches for G.M.O.s,” Karmella A. Haynes, an assistant professor at Arizona State University, said in an email, using the initials for genetically modified organisms.A big question, however, is whether these systems are needed or whether they will ever be used.Researchers have been talking about biological containment since genetic engineering was invented in the 1970s, and many systems have been developed. Some researchers make organisms dependent on a nutrient not found outside the lab or fermenter. Others endow the organism with a genetic kill switch that can cause it to self-destruct.But such safeguards have not been used extensively. There have been no serious accidents attributed to genetically engineered microbes, said Victor de Lorenzo, a research professor at the Spanish National Biotechnology Center in Madrid, who has studied these systems.Most industrial applications use containment that is physical, not biological, meaning that production takes place in enclosed vessels, not in the open environment. Even if the microbes escape, they, like domesticated animals, are usually not fit to survive in the wild, Dr. de Lorenzo said.Still, concerns are arising anew because living things are being genetically altered in more extensive ways than before, through techniques called synthetic biology. And some of the potential uses of genetically altered organisms, like releasing them to clean up pollution, would take place outside confined areas.Biotechnology companies are trying to genetically engineer immune system cells so they attack tumors. But when these engineered cells are infused into patients, they sometimes cause a dangerous immune system overreaction. So some companies are now incorporating a suicide gene into the engineered cells, so they can be killed by administration of a drug if things go wrong.AdvertisementA company called Oxitec has developed genetically engineered mosquitoes to fight mosquito-borne dengue fever. The altered mosquitoes have a gene that kills them unless they get the antibiotic tetracycline. They can be bred in the laboratory, where the antibiotic is available. But once they are released in the wild to mate with wild mosquitoes, they soon die, as do their offspring, which inherit the lethal gene, reducing the population of the insect.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The approaches in the two Nature papers were somewhat different, but both built on work done when Dr. Isaacs was a postdoctoral researcher in Dr. Church’s lab to create an organism that uses a genetic code slightly different from other life-forms.All life on earth uses the same four chemical units of DNA, represented by the letters A, C, T and G, and generally the same 20 amino acids, the building blocks of proteins. A three-letter DNA sequence, or codon, tells the cell to incorporate a particular amino acid into a protein it is making. CTT, for instance, specifies leucine, and GTA valine. Three of the codons, however, tell the cell to stop construction of a protein.The researchers replaced one of these stop codons with another one throughout the genome of E. coli, so protein construction still stopped when it was supposed to. But now the researchers had a spare three-letter combination that could be used to make the cell incorporate a synthetic amino acid into proteins.The researchers incorporated such an amino acid into some essential proteins so the bacteria would not survive if they did not get it. A single mutation would not be enough to escape this dependence, which has been a shortcoming of previous biocontainment systems.“This approach appears to be much more resilient to mutations that could undo containment, so it’s exciting stuff,” said Tom Ellis, a senior lecturer in synthetic biology at Imperial College London.Dr. Church said that because the organism had a unique genetic code, “it’s almost a new kingdom of life” that would have “trouble exchanging genetic material with any other life-form.” He said that more extensive changes in the genetic code could conceivably make the organism resistant to all viruses. That would make the bacterial strain attractive to industry because viral infections can ruin production of drugs, yogurt or other products made using bacteria.By trying to grow the organisms in lab dishes without the unnatural amino acid, the Harvard researchers could not detect any survivors among about a trillion organisms while the team led by Dr. Isaacs of Yale could not detect any survivors out of 400 billion organisms.. That is much better than previous systems, which typically had escape rates around one in a billion, said Dr. Haynes of Arizona State. (A two-liter container, the size of a soda bottle, might contain 100 billion bacteria.)There are still questions about whether these highly manipulated cells would be cheap enough and robust enough for industrial use. And can the same approach be applied to other micro-organisms that are often preferred over E. coli?“It’s unclear whether it could work on a large scale in relevant species and combined with the genetic changes needed for industrial use,” said Helen Wallace, the executive director of GeneWatch UK, a British group that monitors applications of genetic engineering.An article on Jan. 22 about efforts by two research groups to create genetically engineered bacteria that cannot survive outside a laboratory misstated the ability of the organisms to survive when denied the nutrient they required. One group could not detect any survivors among about a trillion organisms. The other could not detect any survivors out of 400 billion organisms. It is not the case that the researchers determined that only about one in a trillion were able to survive.A version of this article appears in print on January 22, 2015, on Page A14 of the New York edition with the headline: Scientists Work to Contain Modified Organisms to Labs.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.