JAN. 26, 2015
Advance DirectivesA Difficult RequestTO THE EDITOR:Re “Complexities of Choosing an End Game for Dementia” (Jan. 20): I am 88, have all my mental faculties, keep reading the papers and my medical literature, pump iron and can still drive at night. If directives are given about care — or lack of it — when a person is still fully cognitive, those should be respected. The doctor who is quoted saying that she would want to offer a patient water or ice cream despite his directive that food and drink be withheld if his dementia has advanced to a certain point shows lack of insight that she is doing this for herself, not for him. Her own discomfort interferes with respect for his wishes.Benjamin D. Gordon, M.D.Rockville, Md.TO THE EDITOR:As a geriatrician, I have seen many families struggle when a loved one who has dementia has stopped eating. Is this a temporary state, or does it indicate worsening of the disease? Probably the latter, but let’s not be hasty in our judgment.In my practice, I have seen depression cloud the progressive nature of dementia. Practitioners must remember that depression can contribute to lack of eating and lack of hydrating. Addressing the psychiatric illness of depression may clear some of the fog.Pankaj Gupta, M.D.Edison, N.J.TO THE EDITOR:It is a profoundly sad reflection on our overachieving and hypercognitive culture that human beings are perceived to have lost their selfhood when short-term memory and reasoning fail. What, then, of feeling, love, relationship? In my 30 years of working with patients with dementia, I see people whose capacity for love and connection is not only intact but amplified. Feeling and emotion come to the forefront, leaving words and busyness behind. How we care for people with dementia is the moral challenge of our time. The real question to be asked is why our public policy leaves elderly people terrified they will become a burden to their children and society.AdvertisementElizabeth OramNew York City The writer is a nurse-practitioner in geriatrics.PsychologyYour Story, but BetterAdvertisementRe “Writing Your Way to Happiness” (Well, Jan. 20):I’ve often turned to journaling whenever I find myself in a rut. It’s always been a useful tool to organize the myriad thoughts and emotions that crisscross my brain. But writing in and of itself will not lead to happiness. You have to add a dash of optimism. You have to make the narrative read as you want it to read. Like athletes who visualize a win, writing can help you visualize the happier you.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mike, San Diego, posted to nytimes.comWriting is not for everyone. I tried writing away my problems for years, and all it did was force me to dwell on them and bring up bad feelings. Finally, I tossed the journals I’d written and use the blank ones for scrap paper. Problem solved. I don’t even think about writing anything now unless it’s a grocery list (or a comment on self-help articles).Deb, New York, posted to nytimes.comI managed to recover from a major depression by writing my memoir. Two-hundred and twenty pages, which I revised about 15 times (each version is saved on my computer). That was 10 years ago, and I haven’t had an episode since. The first version was a rant. With each editing, I saw things I’d missed about my own life. Version after version, my story became more nuanced, more understanding and empathetic, not only toward myself but toward those who I’d considered my abusers, the ones who’d “brought me down.” I began to understand their perspective too and managed to forgive. Only a few close friends have read it, but it’s not for public consumption. It’s for me.SusieQ, Europe, posted to nytimes.comI recently prepared a rough draft of my obituary. I am pleased with the result. It turns out that I was tall, handsome, witty and a devil with women. Apart from a few minor corrections, I’m gonna let it stand exactly as it is.A. Stanton, Dallas, posted to nytimes.comScience Times welcomes letters, comments on nytimes.com and social media posts from readers. Email should be sent to scitimes@nytimes.com. A version of this letter appears in print on January 27, 2015, on Page D3 of the New York edition.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.