By KENNETH CHANGJAN. 26, 2015
In 2004, the X Prize Foundation celebrated the culmination of its first prize competition, awarding $10 million for successful flights of SpaceShipOne, the first privately financed reusable spacecraft to take a pilot to space, defined as 62 miles above the Earth’s surface.Three years later, the foundation announced a more ambitious prize to spur private endeavors farther out. The Google Lunar X Prize would award $20 million to the first team that could land on the moon an unmanned spacecraft that would then move at least 1,640 feet across the lunar surface and send back photographs and videos. The second team to accomplish the tasks would receive $5 million.The prizes were to have been won more than two years ago, by the end of 2012.But the technology and financing hurdles proved higher than prize organizers had anticipated. In 2010, the deadline was pushed to the end of this year; last year, it was extended to Dec. 31, 2016.The foundation also rejiggered how the money would be paid. Instead of waiting for a successful completion of the feat, it decided to offer partial payments to teams for their efforts. On Monday, it announced what it called the Milestone Prizes, accompanied by $5.25 million, to five teams for progress in three categories: landing, moving on the lunar surface and imaging.Advertisement“It is to separate some teams from the pack,” said Robert K. Weiss, the vice chairman and president of the X Prize Foundation.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The monetary reward varied by category: $1 million for each winning team for work on the lander, $500,000 for lunar mobility, $250,000 for imaging.One team, Astrobotic of Pittsburgh, won in all three categories. Moon Express of Moffett Field, Calif., won in two categories — landing and imaging. Part-Time Scientists, based in Germany, also picked up two Milestone prizes, for mobility and imaging. The other winning teams were Team Indus, based in India, for its lander, and Hakuto, based in Japan, for mobility.AdvertisementIf any of these teams win the Lunar X Prize, the milestone money will be deducted from the payout. If a dark-horse team reaches the moon first, it will receive the full prize.A version of this article appears in print on January 27, 2015, on Page D6 of the New York edition with the headline: Moon Travel Progress Pays.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.