By KENNETH CHANGJAN. 26, 2015
To sail on winds of sunlight has long been a dream of rocket scientists.The Planetary Society, a nonprofit that promotes space exploration, announced Monday that it would send the first of two small spacecraft testing the technology of solar sails into orbit this May, tagging along with other small satellites on an Atlas 5 rocket.“We strongly believe this could be a big part of the future of interplanetary missions,” said William Sanford Nye — better known as Bill Nye the Science Guy — the chief executive of the organization. “It will ultimately eventually take a lot of missions a long, long way.”When photons — particles of light — bounce off a shiny surface, they impart a tiny bit of momentum, an effect that comes directly from the equations of electromagnetism published by the physicist James Clerk Maxwell in the 1860s. In his 1865 novel, “From the Earth to the Moon,” Jules Verne appears to have been the first to realize that this force could be harnessed for travel through the solar system. The bombardment of sunlight over a large area can gradually but continuously accelerate a spacecraft.On launching, the Planetary Society’s craft, LightSail, is about the size of a loaf of bread — 4 inches by 4 inches by 1 foot. In orbit, the spacecraft will undergo a month of testing before it extends four 13-foot-long booms and unfurls four triangular pieces of Mylar, less than 1/5,000th of an inch thick, to form a square sail that spans almost 345 square feet.AdvertisementThe May flight is to check that the sail deployment and other systems work as designed. But at the altitude that LightSail will be flying — the Planetary Society cannot say how high, because the Atlas 5’s main payload is a military satellite — the drag of air hitting the sail will be greater than the pressure of light, and the spacecraft will drop out of orbit and burn up in a few days.AdvertisementNext year, a second LightSail is to be lofted higher, to an altitude of 450 miles, by a Falcon Heavy rocket from Space Exploration Technologies Corp., or SpaceX. That flight is to be the first to demonstrate controlled solar sailing while in orbit around Earth.“The idea ultimately is to be able to tack like a sailboat on each orbit,” said Mr. Nye.Both LightSails were built for less than $4 million, financed entirely by private citizens, Mr. Nye said.NASA considered solar sails in the 1970s for a mission to meet up with Halley’s comet in 1986. That spacecraft would have been huge.The initial design called for a square sail roughly half a mile on a side — an area of almost 7 million square feet — to be deployed from NASA’s space shuttle. That was swapped for a design the engineers had more confidence in — a dozen rectangular sails, each 25 feet wide and more than four miles long, arrayed like helicopter blades that spun slowly to generate enough centrifugal force to keep the sails stretched out.Ultimately, the immense sails were regarded as too risky a technological jump. “It was very audacious for its time,” said Louis D. Friedman, who was the engineer at NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory leading the project.Because of delays and cost overruns with the space shuttle program, NASA ended up canceling the Halley’s comet mission, and sails fell out of favor at the space agency. “There was a visceral negative reaction to solar sailing,” Dr. Friedman said.A decade ago, the Planetary Society collaborated with Russian scientists on a solar sail spacecraft called Cosmos 1, raising $4 million from members. “I said, now we have a chance to realistically do something,” said Dr. Friedman, who left NASA in 1980 and helped found the Planetary Society, serving as its executive director.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Cosmos 1 launched in June 2005 from a Russian nuclear submarine. But the rocket failed, and Cosmos 1 was lost before the sail could be tested.AdvertisementInstead of attempting to build another Cosmos 1, the society turned to something smaller — LightSail — taking advantage of a new generation of cheaper, miniaturized satellites known as CubeSats.“This is a more accessible, easier-to-build gizmo,” Mr. Nye said. “You don’t need a whole space agency.”Interest in solar sails also revived at NASA, which successfully tested its own CubeSat, NanoSail-D, in 2011, demonstrating how a sail could be used to nudge decommissioned satellites out of orbit back into the atmosphere instead of adding to the accumulation of space junk circling Earth.Two other NASA CubeSats with solar sails could head into space with the first launching of NASA’s new heavylift rocket, the Space Launch System, expected in 2018.One, Lunar Flashlight, will use a solar sail not only for propulsion but also to reflect sunlight into shadowed craters near the moon’s poles. That will allow a look at ice deposits at the bottom of the craters. The other, NEA Scout, is to visit a near-Earth asteroid. The space probes will cost about $15 million each, far less than most NASA space missions.Japan has already sent a solar sail on an interplanetary voyage. Its Ikaros spacecraft, short for Interplanetary Kite-craft Accelerated by Radiation of the Sun, launched in May 2010 and passed by Venus later that year.Robert L. Staehle is among those at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory brainstorming additional concepts like sun-watching CubeSats that could give three days’ additional warning of a ferocious solar storm that could knock out power grids on Earth.Solar sails save the weight and expense of lugging fuel, helping reduce the price tag of the sun-watching mission to less than $100 million, Mr. Staehle said, less than a fifth of the cost of a larger, more conventional approach using thrusters.Another possibility is a small, solar sail-driven spacecraft looping between Earth and Mars, a possible precursor to cargo ships lugging supplies to astronauts living on Mars.AdvertisementUltimately, sails could take us to the stars. Sunlight would be too weak for that trip, but a giant laser aimed at a gigantic sail could provide the necessary acceleration. Neither lasers or sails large enough exist today, but in Dr. Friedman’s opinion, “it is the only technology that leads to interstellar,” he said.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.