By ERICA GOODEJAN. 29, 2015
Asked to picture the numbers from one to 10, most people will imagine a straight line with one at the left end and 10 at the right.This “mental number line,” as researchers have termed it, is so pervasive that some scientists have argued that the spatial representation of numbers is hard-wired into the brain, part of a primitive number system that underlies humans’ capacity for higher mathematics.Now a team of Italian researchers has found that newborn chicks, like humans, appear to map numbers spatially, associating smaller amounts with the left side and larger amounts with the right side.The chicks, trained to seek out mealworms behind white plastic panels printed with varying numbers of identical red squares, repeatedly demonstrated a preference for the left when the number of squares was small and for the right when the number was larger. The research, led by Rosa Rugani, a psychologist who at the time was at the University of Padova, will appear in Friday’s issue of the journal Science.Researchers demonstrated that chickens naturally order numbers left to right. When the number five is in the middle, chickens naturally go left for lower numbers and to the right for higher numbers.In their report, the researchers said the findings supported the idea that the left-right orientation for numbers is innate rather than determined by culture or education — a possibility that was raised by some studies that found that in Arabic-speaking countries where letters and numbers are read right to left, the mental number scale was reversed. But the new research, Dr. Rugani and her colleagues wrote, indicates that orienting numbers in space may represent “a universal cognitive strategy available soon after birth.”AdvertisementTyler Marghetis, a doctoral candidate in psychology at the University of California, San Diego, who has published research on the spatial association of numbers, called the researcher’s studies “very cool.”Advertisement“We have brains that evolved for fighting and finding food, not for doing calculus,” Mr. Marghetis said. “So one of the hopes of this kind of research is that it will tell us something about the basic building blocks we have access to in building up these more human concepts.”But Mr. Marghetis said that the studies demonstrated only that the chicks associated rough quantities that were smaller or larger with left or right, not that they represented precise numbers in a mental line. And he cautioned against leaping from the study’s findings to the idea that chicks are capable of the same complex numerical abilities as humans.Judging amounts, either of how much food is available or how many predators are nearby, is an important tool for survival. And many nonhuman species — including chickens, pigeons, monkeys and even some species of fish — have some ability to count, though this may be a capacity to distinguish rough numerical magnitude rather than precise numbers.Human studies indicate that when presented with a task involving numbers — categorizing them as even or odd, for example — people automatically create a mental scale, using one number as an anchor and locating smaller numbers to the left and larger ones to the right. The findings of the new research suggest that some version of this may be true for chickens.The scientists trained 64 chicks to find a mealworm behind a plastic panel with five red squares on it (16 chicks were disqualified after showing “poor mealworm-following behavior,” the researchers wrote).The chicks were then presented with panels, one to the left, one to the right, each marked with an equal number of squares, different from the training number. When that new number was less than five, the chicks more often chose to look for food behind the left-hand panel, presumably because they automatically associated the left-hand side with a smaller number. When the number of squares on the new panels was larger than five, the chicks more often headed toward the panel on the right.The chicks preference for the left-hand panel with smaller numbers held true even when the anchor number was changed to 20. Like humans, they seemed to adjust their choices to the relative magnitude of the numbers they encountered.“We cannot think of any other, and simpler, explanation for the behavior of the chicks than assuming the training number is 1) remembered and 2) compared with the number seen at test,” Dr. Rugani said in an email.A version of this article appears in print on January 30, 2015, on Page A3 of the New York edition with the headline: Chickens Agree: Left Means Less; Right Means More.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.