FEB. 2, 2015
CosmologyStardust and ScienceRe “Speck of Interstellar Dust Obscures Glimpse of Big Bang” (Jan. 31):This is the way science is supposed to work! Critical review of a hypothesis leads to renewed interpretation of the data followed by either refutation or verification and mostly always leading to more work. I salute the Bicep group for “getting it right” with respect to how science works and should be practiced, regardless of the danger of receiving an uppercut to the ego.Kenneth, Denmark, posted to nytimes.comThe scientific method works, and the truth wins eventually, but the wishful thinking of scientists who can almost taste their Nobel Prize does lead to mistakes. It is an old story. And the strong orthodoxy that has emerged around the theory of inflation, supported by literally no data so far, is a perfect set-up for such mistakes. A tip-off, by the way, is when the scientific collaboration gives a press conference to announce their results. Rutherford did not do that. Marie Curie did not do that. It is a modern phenomenon and not a good one.JR, Texas, posted to nytimes.comI was immensely excited at the initial announcement, and I remain so now — maybe even more. What an incredible search! We are indeed an audacious and creative species. As much as the news so often causes me to despair, there are other aspects of our existence — poetry, music, scientific endeavors like this — which inspire and give me hope. I do not see error here, but a quest for knowledge honorably undertaken. Let us continue, each in our own way.Alan, Hawaii, posted to nytimes.comANIMAL BEHAVIORThe Species BarrierTO THE EDITOR:Re “So Happy Together” (Jan. 27): As an artist whose work responds to the complexities of human and animal relationships, I was glad to see this article published, but it seemed to miss the point of what we can learn from these relationships across the species barrier. As humans, our mutual and symbiotic interactions with other species are very limited, seeing as most animals we interact with are in food products or in products that were tested on them. The way predators and prey have the ability to forge a friendship, or how species from completely different habitats can find commonality, shows the amazing and overlooked emotional capacity of animals. These examples should be taken not as a scientific learning experience, but as a reminder to the human-animal to not set low expectations for other animals based on our own criteria. We need learn how to value other species, and recognize that differences between animals are secondary to our shared capacity to love and suffer.Linnea RyshkeBrooklynTO THE EDITOR:I wonder, in reading this article, that no one thinks it odd that animals make friends with the most unusual other species: humans. We take it for granted that a dog or a cat or a horse would live with us and respond to us: our demands, moods, love. To our otherness! A photo of a dog curled up with a sad child, responsive to her mood, would not seem as remarkable to us as a photo of a turtle playing ball with a dog. But isn’t it equally unusual, if not more so? Is this not an anthrocentric view, to find unusual companions unusual only if we are not one of the partners? My dog, who undoubtedly should be running wild and living a canine life, has accommodated to my human life with as much grace as the hamster climbing on the snake; odd companions indeed.Lucy KuemmerleManhattanScience Times welcomes letters, 
comments on nytimes.com and social media posts from readers. Email should be sent to scitimes@nytimes.com. A version of this letter appears in print on February 3, 2015, on Page D3 of the New York edition.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.