

 James Gorman
 

SCIENCETAKE
FEB. 9, 2015
With a new device scientists measure the force of a wingbeat while birds fly freely.Humans have probably been pondering the flight of birds as long as there have been humans. And in the age of science, it would seem that every aspect of flight had been studied in order to build flying machines, from passenger airplanes to tiny robots.But, said David Lentink, a Stanford University engineer, researchers had “never measured the aerodynamic force directly of any flying animal.” Dr. Lentink and two colleagues reported last month in the journal Interface that they had solved the problem.Scientists had found other ways to measure that force indirectly — by observing air flow, for example, and going through some complex calculations.Dr. Lentink built a box big enough for a bird called a parrotlet to fly from one perch to another. It was equipped with high-speed video recorders and sensors to weigh the box every millisecond.AdvertisementThe sensors would register the added force of a wing beat, and by correlating video and sensor data, the researchers were able to come up with an exact measurement of the wing’s force — two times the bird’s weight on the downstroke, as it turned out.AdvertisementThe researchers tested their method against other methods to make sure it was correct.Engineering was only one part of the experiment, Dr. Lentink said. He wanted to measure natural, untethered flight, and trained the birds with treats so they would enter the box and fly to the place he pointed at.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The birds are never touched through the whole process. “The bird actually does what it wants to do,” he said.He did the training partly because he wanted to measure free, natural flight. But, he said, “It’s not only because the science gets better; I personally care about the birds.”He said in the lab, researchers played recordings of birds tweeting contentedly during the training, which has increased his appreciation for the intelligence of birds.Successful training, he said, was very demanding — on the trainer. “It’s really hard,” he said, “learning the skill.” What he discovered, he says, was that “you’re allowing the animals to manipulate you.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »