By KENNETH CHANGFEB. 8, 2015
Al Gore will have to wait at least one more day for his spacecraft to go to space.The planned launching of a spacecraft that is to act as a “tsunami buoy” to warn of potentially catastrophic solar storms was aborted with less than three minutes left in the countdown on Sunday evening.The Deep Space Climate Observatory, abbreviated as Dscovr and pronounced “discover,” was to blast off at 6:10 p.m. in Cape Canaveral, Fla., but the launch was called off because of a problem with the Air Force radar for tracking the rocket to space.Because of poor weather on Monday, the next launch opportunity is Tuesday at 6:05 p.m. Eastern time.The spacecraft, originally named Triana, started as a brainstorm of Mr. Gore when he was vice president. In 1998, he envisioned that a distant spacecraft sending back images of Earth would be educational and inspirational. NASA built the spacecraft, adding scientific instruments to observe the sun and the Earth, but the mission was canceled and the spacecraft was put into storage.By then, NASA had recast Triana as Dscovr, although not everyone was looking to claim credit for the name change. “It surely wasn’t me,” said Adam Szabo, the project scientist for NASA’s portion of the mission. “I have an accent,” said Dr. Szabo, a native of Hungary, “but I can spell better.”AdvertisementThe instruments and spacecraft remain almost the same, but the focus has swapped from the Earth to the sun.AdvertisementIn recent years, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration financed its refurbishment after determining that Dscovr would suit its need for a spacecraft that could provide warning 15 minutes to an hour in advance of a wave of energetic solar particles, known as a coronal mass ejection, about to slam into Earth. A gigantic solar storm could disrupt communications satellites and knock out power grids on Earth.Thomas Berger, director of NOAA’s Space Weather Prediction Center, has described Dscovr as “our tsunami buoy in space.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The $340 million mission is a joint effort of NOAA, NASA and the Air Force.The Earth-observing instruments will still be collecting data as originally designed, including the photographs Mr. Gore proposed. The former vice president said he was inspired by the 1972 “Blue Marble” photograph taken by Apollo 17 astronauts — one of the few images ever taken of a fully illuminated Earth.Scientists are also looking forward to a measurement from Dscovr that will tell how much energy is radiating from the surface of Earth, which will help improve knowledge of the planet’s “energy budget,” whether emissions of carbon dioxide are indeed trapping energy and causing rising temperatures.Dscovr will not provide complete knowledge — with the curved surface of the Earth, much of the radiated energy heads in other directions. Ideally a second spacecraft over the other side of the Earth would measure emissions from the night side of the planet.Dscovr will take photographs like the Apollo 17 picture multiple times a day, although they will not be downloaded to Earth in real time as originally planned, but with about a day’s delay.The Space Exploration Technologies Corporation, or SpaceX, also plans to use the launching as a second opportunity to try to land the first stage of its Falcon 9 rocket on a platform in the Atlantic, part of its effort to develop a reusable rocket that could greatly reduce the cost of sending payloads to space.A version of this article appears in print on February 9, 2015, on Page A10 of the New York edition with the headline: Warning System for Solar Storms Is Kept on Earth for Now as Launch Is Halted.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.