FEB. 9, 2015
NutritionSupplement RisksTO THE EDITOR:Re “4 Retailers Told to Stop Selling Supplements” (Feb. 3): I read with great interest the article on dietary supplements and the lack of standards and identification of the plant species present in over-the-counter products. This research corroborates earlier studies conducted by Damon Little in the Cullman Program for Molecular Systematics at the New York Botanical Garden. Further research by the New York State attorney general with Dr. Little’s input has once again revealed the urgency of this problem.The issue goes even further than the few species mentioned in the article. For example, many herbal teas contain chamomile but do not list chamomile on the label. So what is a physician to do when a patient exhibits an allergic reaction to chamomile, but the patient has no idea that he or she has consumed that species? These situations can easily be avoided by using plant identification employing DNA bar codes and by improved regulations.At the New York Botanical Garden, we reliably identify plants using the latest DNA technology. The attorney general’s investigation demonstrates the success of partnerships in which scientific research, law enforcement and ethical manufacturing can bring about safer products. I would hope that with newly available scientific data, the public would support legislation regulating botanical products.Dennis Wm. StevensonNew York The writer is vice president for botanical research at the New York Botanical Garden.AdvertisementOral HealthA Dentistry DebateTO THE EDITOR:The services described in “Straighter Teeth, by Mail” (Feb. 3) serve the best interests of only one group: the “entrepreneurs” behind the scenes. For many reasons, the practice of dentistry and medicine on the streets has been halted. Science, research and legislation have moved the practices indoors and into regulated environments where best practices and minimum standards of care are met by state-licensed practitioners. It has taken 150 years of steady progress to bring dentistry to the high levels at which it is practiced today. These mail-order “orthodontists” are basically invisible to the “patients” they claim they are serving. If an adverse event occurs, how easy do you think it would be to get professional help? Because it is a state’s right to regulate dentistry, every state in this country will have to take action to stop this. Make no mistake, this is not the future of orthodontics.AdvertisementThomas R. Getreuer, D.D.S.Stamford, Conn.Orthodontics has been a monopolistic industry for years. There’s no reason teledentistry can’t help reduce costs and inefficiencies, just like other health care industries have experienced in recent years.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.J. Ellison, Los Angeles, posted to nytimes.comGeriatricsRestricted LivingTO THE EDITOR:“An Unexpected Bingo Call: You Can’t Play” (The New Old Age, Feb. 3) accurately describes the reality and policies of many continuing care retirement communities. Restricting where a resident can play bingo and dine based on where the person resides in the facility — in an independent living apartment, or in assisted living, or in a nursing care unit — segregates people in violation of the Americans with Disabilities Act.The law requires that people with disabilities receive services and have the opportunity to participate in activities in “the most integrated setting.”These facilities know that having a disability is not contagious, whether from touching bingo cards or eating meals with a person with a disability.What’s really going on is the presumed stigma associated with having a disability. Obviously, and unfortunately, aging does not end the perpetuation of degrading people with disabilities.Stephen F. GoldPhiladelphia The writer is a civil rights attorney.Science Times welcomes letters, 
comments on nytimes.com and social media posts from readers. Email should be sent to scitimes@nytimes.com A version of this letter appears in print on February 10, 2015, on Page D3 of the New York edition.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.