AdvertisementSupported byScienceTakeBy James GormanPopcorn is ancient. At archaeological sites in Peru and Mexico, scientific diggers have found popcorn more than 6,000 years old.By the 16th century, the Aztecs were not only consuming popcorn, but wearing it at festivities.And the basic science of popcorn is pretty familiar: Heat up a kernel until the pressure from water vapor makes it pop.But two French scientists have gone deeper into the mysteries of one of the most popular butter and salt substrates, and they report new insights into not only the pop, but the jump.Popcorn kernels do not only burst from a hard hull. They also vault into the air and somersault like an oddly shaped gymnast, with one puffy white leg.Emmanuel Virot of the Ecole Polytechnique in Palaisaeu, France, and Alexandre Ponomarenko, now at Grenoble University, used high-speed video cameras and a hot plate to illuminate the physics of the kernel’s leap. In their report last week in the journal Interface, they described that puffy leglike bit of the kernel as acting like a muscle.The first action, of course, is the split of the hull, which, the researchers point out, is not what makes the noise. That comes from a release of water vapor.As the kernel expands in milliseconds, the puffy extension shoots out and powers the kernel, still growing, into the air.When Dr. Virot and Dr. Ponomarenko started their research, they were interested in the mechanics of the hull splitting, an explosive fracture of the kind seen in other plants, like touch-me-nots, when pods pop to release seeds.They had been looking at large-scale events like trees breaking in the wind, Dr. Virot said. But other researchers in the laboratory were using high-speed video, so they decided to try it out on popcorn.The results may not change the face of science, but Dr. Virot anticipates that they will certainly aid in teaching physics.He said the popping of popcorn includes the kind of explosive activity seen in plants and the kind of muscular force seen in animals. And, he said, the calculations to explain how it all happens involve “a wide bunch of concepts — mechanics, temperature, pressure.”“Many objects explode under pressure,” he added.But very few can be eaten after the explosion.Advertisement