By C. CLAIBORNE RAYFEB. 16, 2015
Q. Does sitting with one leg crossed over the other lead to circulatory problems? A. “Contrary to popular belief,” it does not cause vascular problems, especially varicose or spider veins, said Dr. Darren B. Schneider, chief of vascular and endovascular surgery at NewYork-Presbyterian/Weill Cornell Medical Center.In fact, Dr. Schneider said, most varicose veins are caused by a problem intrinsic to the veins, characterized by weakening of the vein walls and failure of the valves that control blood flow.Genetics probably has much more do with the development of varicose veins than the sitting position, Dr. Schneider said, adding, “You’re at greater risk of developing them if other family members also have them.”Anything that increases pressure within the veins combines with the existing vein problem to cause pooling of blood and bulging of the vein walls to form what are called varicosities, he said.AdvertisementThings that lead to chronic elevation of the pressure within the veins in the abdomen and lower extremities can aggravate the condition.“That’s why pregnancy, obesity and standing for long periods of time are associated with the development of varicose veins,” Dr. Schneider said. Wearing tightfitting clothing or high heels may also make them worse.AdvertisementExercise can improve the condition, since muscle contractions in the legs help circulation, he said.Finally, it is true that an aneurysm or the placement of arterial stents in the lower legs can mean that sitting with legs bent or crossed for long periods could cause problems, Dr. Schneider warned, so anyone with these conditions should check with a doctor about the risks of crossed legs.question@nytimes.comQuestions of general interest will be answered, but requests for medical advice cannot be honored and unpublished letters cannot be answered individually.A version of this article appears in print on February 17, 2015, on Page D2 of the New York edition with the headline: Crossed Legs, Heightened Worries?.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.