MARCH 9, 2015
1 Being Mortal by Atul Gawande. Metropolitan/Holt. The surgeon and New Yorker writer considers how doctors fail patients at the end of life, and how they can do better. (1)2 Alan Turing: The Enigma by Andrew Hodges. Princeton University. The mathematician who cracked the German Enigma code during World War II. (4)3 What If? by Randall Munroe. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt. Scientific, often humorous answers to hypothetical questions, drawn in part on the author’s website, xkcd.com. (3)4 A Brief History of Time by Stephen W. Hawking. Bantam. The classic primer for nonscientists on the origins of the universe. (7)Advertisement5 The Immortal Life of Henrietta Lacks by Rebecca Skloot. Crown. A woman’s cancer cells were cultured without her permission in 1951. (2)Advertisement6 The Power of Habit by Charles Duhigg. Random House. An examination of the science behind habits, how we form them and break them. (5)7 Sapiens by Yuval Noah Harari. Harper. How Homo sapiens became Earth’s dominant species.8 Future Crimes by Marc Goodman. Doubleday. The world of cybercrime and corporate spying, and advice on protecting yourself.9 Quiet by Susan Cain. Crown. Introverts — one-third of the population — are undervalued in American society. (6)10 Thinking, Fast and Slow by Daniel Kahneman. Farrar, Straus and Giroux. The winner of a Nobel in economic science discusses how we make choices and when we cannot trust our intuitions. (8)11 The Elements by Theodore Gray, with photography by Nick Mann. Black Dog & Leventhal. A visual exploration of every known atom in the universe.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.12 Spring Chicken by Bill Gifford. Grand Central. A review of the science on — and myths about — aging, and advice on how to live longer.13 The Sixth Extinction by Elizabeth Kolbert. Picador. The New Yorker writer examines the role of human influences in the planet’s current spasm of plant and animal loss. (9)14 The Teenage Brain by Frances E. Jensen, with Amy Ellis Nutt. Harper/HarperCollins. What neuroscience has learned about brain development in the teenage years, and practical suggestions for parents based on those findings.Advertisement15 The Signal and the Noise by Nate Silver. Penguin. A guide to the art and science of prediction models that explains how big data is used to make predictions about flu outbreaks, earthquakes, winning poker hands and more.16 The Innovators by Walter Isaacson. Simon & Schuster. Portraits of the people who created computers and the Internet, beginning in the 1840s. (10)17 The Future of the Mind by Michio Kaku. Doubleday. A theoretical physicist examines research suggesting that scientists will have soon a complete map of the brain.18 Travelling to Infinity by Jane Hawking. Alma Books. The first wife of Stephen Hawking provides an account of their life together.19 My Age of Anxiety by Scott Stossel. Knopf. A study of anxiety disorder by the editor of The Atlantic, drawing on research as well as personal experience.20 Undeniable by Bill Nye. St. Martin’s. The “Science Guy” explains how evolution shapes our lives.About the Best SellersThe titles ranked here are selected by the Science Times editors from all adult nonfiction books reported to The New York Times for the month. These titles are fundamentally based on the sciences; those for which science is more tangential or peripheral are generally excluded. Rankings reflect sales for February 2015.An asterisk (*) indicates that a book’s sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above. A dagger (†) indicates that some bookstores report receiving bulk orders.A version of this list appears in print on March 10, 2015, on Page D5 of the New York edition with the headline: Science Best Sellers.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.