MARCH 9, 2015
Re “Guardians of the Soil” (Basics, March 3):The amazing efficiency and creativity of natural selection should serve as a source of inspiration for any engineer and scientist. Even with our great technological capabilities, we do not come close to the simplicity and elegance which with nature carries out its tasks. The biological robots we call termites are way beyond anything we will able to create in the foreseeable future, and nature did it blindfolded.Bako Ahmed, Edinburgh posted to nytimes.comTo the Editor:Re “New Stage of Progress in Science” (March 3): Alan Alda is doing a tremendous service to the scientific and engineering community in stressing the need to be able to communicate with nonscientists. In almost 40 years of working as a scientist and more recently as an instructor on environmental issues, I have stressed the need to write clearly and communicate well. Most scientists and engineers spend little time in school practicing these skills, and few are encouraged to do so. Yet in many instances in academia, the public, through the National Science Foundation or the National Institutes of Health, is paying for the research and needs to know what it is getting for that support. Given that poll after poll shows that many in the public don’t trust scientists, this is a must if we as a country are to make sound policy decisions.Steve Ziman San Rafael, Calif.To the Editor:Re “Arming the Immune System Against Cancer” (March 3): Very interesting article about the work of Dr. James Allison. I must take issue, however, with his statement about the patient who had “failed at everything.” As a retired hospital social work director who worked for many years with oncologists, may I point out that the patient didn’t fail; it was the treatments that failed.Avra Mark Tuckahoe, N.Y.To the Editor:The article “U.S. Push for Abstinence in Africa Is Seen as Failure Against H.I.V.” (Feb. 27) suggests that the President’s Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief (Pepfar) dismissed invitations to perform evaluations of its investments in abstinence and faithfulness programs. This was speculation on my part and misrepresents Pepfar’s commitment to using evidence in designing its strategy. Among the organizations involved in the global H.I.V. fight, Pepfar has been a leader in incorporating scientific data in allocating its funds, greatly expanding and fine-tuning its approach to H.I.V. treatment, and most likely directly contributing to extensions in life expectancy in many hard-hit countries. Its scientific advisory board is largely academic, and that board’s input has been woven into Pepfar’s strategy.At the same time, Pepfar has been slow to publicly evaluate the outcomes of its investments. My interactions with its officers led me to recognize that its intense focus on programmatic expansion left little time or support for evaluations and in-house research. American investments in H.I.V. treatments have been a positive outlier in the global health world in terms of scale and dedication. I hope that greater emphasis could be placed on learning from this experience so this scale and dedication would be accompanied by success in reaching the people who would benefit the most.Eran Bendavid, M.D. Stanford, Calif.The writer is an assistant professor of medicine at Stanford University.­Science Times welcomes letters, comments on nytimes.com and social media posts from readers. Email should be sent to scitimes@nytimes.com.A version of this article appears in print on March 10, 2015, on Page D3 of the New York edition with the headline: Letters to the Editor.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.