
Books By                     
 GREGORY COWLES
 
MARCH 9, 2015
There is a hallowed tradition in science writing, going back at least to John McPhee’s early career, of choosing a seemingly drab subject and making it pop through simple, stubborn attention to personality and detail.It’s a generous impulse, born of curiosity and a belief that anything is fascinating if only you study it from the right angles. It doesn’t hurt, either, that so many of the books in this category sound like ingredients at a farm-to-table cafe: “Oranges,” “Cod,” “Salt.”Jonathan Waldman’s first book, “Rust,” (Read an excerpt.) sounds like a building code violation. But don’t let that fool you. This look at corrosion — its causes, its consequences and especially the people devoted to combating it — is wide-ranging and consistently engrossing. Mr. Waldman makes rust shine.To a large extent, that’s because he concentrates less on corrosion itself than on the eccentric brotherhood of engineers and bureaucrats who fight it. In this, he may have had little choice. The basic science of rust — technically, the chemical interaction between oxygen and iron, although Mr. Waldman tends to apply the word more colloquially to the oxidation of any metal — is so simple it takes up just six pages in “Rust.” But the risks it poses to an industrialized society are legion.Advertisement“Rust has knocked down bridges, killing dozens,” Mr. Waldman announces at the outset. “It’s killed at least a handful of people at nuclear power plants … It has shut down the nation’s largest oil pipeline.”Rust, he writes, “poses the No. 1 threat to the most powerful navy on earth,” and dictates the design of everything from skyscrapers to tap water. (To protect water mains, municipalities spike their water with corrosion inhibitors like lime, phosphates or sodium hydroxide.) Rust costs the United States $437 billion a year, more “than all other natural disasters combined.”No wonder the stuff keeps corrosion experts awake at night.Mr. Waldman, a journalist who has written for The Washington Post and Outside magazine, presents a series of case studies, each exploring a different aspect of rust and its wranglers. In one, he details the renovation of the Statue of Liberty in the 1980s. In another, he discusses the life of Harry Brearley, the British metallurgist often credited as the inventor of stainless steel.AdvertisementHe talks to an entrepreneur who specializes in antirust products, and tags along with a photographer who finds art in the inexorable decay of the shuttered Bethlehem Steel Works in Pennsylvania.Most grippingly (unlikely though the word may be), he takes us deep inside the canning industry to explore the challenges of preserving corrosive food in metal containers. “Consider a can of Coke,” Mr. Waldman writes. “It sits there for weeks, months, years, often in a humid fridge, or dank pantry, or hot trunk, or a stagnant warehouse. That the can doesn’t corrode is a technological marvel.”This feat of precision engineering, he says, relies on an “invisible plastic shield” separating the soda from the aluminum: “Without this epoxy lining, only microns thick, a can of Coke would corrode in three days.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.It sounds impressive, and it is. But the lining, Mr. Waldman also makes clear, presents risks and challenges of its own. According to specialists in the field, about 80 percent of the epoxy in cans is made up of bisphenol-A, or BPA, which in rats has been linked to early puberty, obesity and miscarriages, along with increased rates of cancer and other maladies. Scientists disagree over its effects in humans.Mr. Waldman explicitly admits BPA makes him nervous, and he evokes Rachel Carson’s “Silent Spring” in pushing for stricter regulations. But he also cites industry statistics suggesting cans help reduce illnesses from food-borne bacteria, and he acknowledges they are so convenient that they are here to stay. Near the end of the chapter, he quotes a 1918 ode from an Army quartermaster: “We can sing without bands / Parade without banners / But no modern army / Can eat without canners.”It’s not the only poem in the book. Mr. Waldman has a lively sense of play, and remains constantly alert to his subjects’ idiosyncrasies. One, a corrosion expert at the Pentagon, is a “Star Trek” fan who hires the series star LeVar Burton to narrate educational videos. Another, responsible for maintenance on the Trans-Alaska Pipeline, is an aquarium buff and champion badminton player.In a running gag, Mr. Waldman notes every instance of facial hair he comes across — the rust industry is a hirsute one — and he titles his chapter about corrosion engineers “Ten Thousand Mustachioed Men.”The other poem he cites starts like this: “Mighty ships upon the ocean / Suffer from severe corrosion / Even those that stay at dockside / Are rapidly becoming oxide.”“As far as I can tell,” Mr. Waldman writes, that poet “was the funniest corrosion engineer in history.”AdvertisementYou get the sense Mr. Waldman could have written a much longer book. His chapters sometimes feel more random than inevitable, as if he had drawn them from a full deck of possibilities. Bridge repair, battleships, the impressive progress of automakers in preventing rust: All are mentioned in passing but spared the kind of deep-dive investigation Mr. Waldman does so well.He could shuffle the deck, you feel, and deal himself another book entirely. If he did, I would read it.At one point, a canning executive hostile to Mr. Waldman’s questions tells him rust is “a silly subject to write about.” It is a testament to Mr. Waldman’s skill and perseverance that this book proves that man so thoroughly wrong.A version of this review appears in print on March 10, 2015, on Page D5 of the New York edition with the headline: The Character of Corrosion.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »