

 James Gorman
 

SCIENCETAKE
MARCH 9, 2015
A praying mantis takes a leap that would do Michael Jordan proud.Praying mantises, before they mature, don’t have wings to fly, or to help them stabilize their bodies in a jump.What they do have is an uncanny ability to control the spin of their body with complex and coordinated movements of forelegs, hind legs and abdomen in a leap that takes less than a tenth of a second.That’s the report in Current Biology from Malcolm Burrows, a neurobiologist and emeritus professor at Cambridge University, Gregory Sutton, a biologist at the University of Bristol and their colleagues.“I’ve been interested in all the weird mechanisms that insects have for moving so fast and so powerfully,” Dr. Burrows said. He and Dr. Sutton reported in 2013 on insects that used working gears connecting their hind legs to synchronize movement in jumping.AdvertisementBut the recent experiments began more or less by accident.“We went to an insect fair recently,” Dr. Burrows said. And they bought praying mantises, which were fruitful and multiplied in his lab. They had lots of them, so he and Dr. Sutton decided to see how they jump.That was the first problem. They had to get the mantises to take the leap. They tried standard methods — scaring them, prodding them — without success.Finally, they figured out that if you just gave the mantises a target, they would jump at it over and over again, and land on it. They were consistently accurate.And the way they managed their jumps, which look like an NBA player soaring to the basket, was very sophisticated.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.After swinging their head side to side, apparently to gauge the distance, they curled their abdomen as they leapt to change their center of mass, and also to generate a bit of spin.They corrected the spin in flight by moving front and hind legs and the abdomen to keep themselves on target.AdvertisementControlling spin is a problem for insects and for jumping robots, which often spin out of control, Dr. Burrows said.And having control of how much spin they generated from the start helped the mantises control the spin in flight.A mathematical analysis suggested that this was what was occurring. And when the researchers used glue to stiffen the abdomens so mantises could not curl them properly, the insects missed. Sometimes, he said, they would “crash and head butt the target and drop off.”The next step is to figure out the neuroscience — how a mantis controls its abdomen and two sets of legs to fine-tune their body position in such a quick jump.A version of this article appears in print on March 10, 2015, on Page D5 of the New York edition with the headline: A Praying Mantis’s Spin on Target Practice.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »