By DENNIS OVERBYEMARCH 10, 2015
A small, newly discovered galaxy orbiting the Milky Way is emitting a surprising amount of electromagnetic radiation in the form of gamma rays, astronomers reported Tuesday. The finding may be the latest in a long string of cosmic false alarms, they said, or it might be that the mysterious dark matter that permeates the universe is finally showing its face.If confirmed, the results could mean that most of the matter of the universe is in the form of as-yet-unidentified elementary particles, 20 to 100 times as heavy as a proton, that have been drifting and clumping like fog in space ever since the Big Bang.But while the gamma-ray signal is “tantalizing,” in the words of Alex Geringer-Sameth of Carnegie Mellon University and colleagues from Brown and Cambridge Universities, “it would be premature to conclude it has a dark matter origin.” Their analysis appears in a paper submitted to the journal Physical Review Letters.The group used data from NASA’s Fermi Large Area Telescope, which orbits the Earth, to search for gamma rays from a loose-looking accumulation of stars known as Reticulum-2, in the southern constellation of the same name. It is one of a rare breed known as dwarf galaxies, which can have fewer than a hundred stars and are only a billionth as luminous and a millionth as massive as the Milky Way.AdvertisementBecause dwarf galaxies have so little atomic matter, astronomers see them as happy hunting grounds for dark matter. That mysterious stuff has led scientists on a merry chase ever since Fritz Zwicky in the 1930s and Vera Rubin and her colleagues in the 1970s discerned that galaxies move under the gravitational influence of massive clouds of invisible matter.AdvertisementCosmologists now agree that dark matter is 80 percent of the matter in the universe and that it is not the ordinary atomic matter that planets and people are made of, nor anything else predicted by the Standard Model that rules particle physics today.What is it?Lately physicists have speculated that it consists of exotic particles left over from the Big Bang known colloquially as Wimps — for weakly interacting massive particles. So far particle accelerators like CERN’s Large Hadron Collider have been unable to make them, although looking for them will be a major priority when that machine starts running again this spring. Meanwhile, there is the sky.In the centers of galaxies, where dark matter is densest, the Wimp particles would collide and annihilate one another in a telltale flash of gamma rays, the thinking goes. Some support for this notion has come from the Fermi telescope’s observations of excess gamma rays, the most energetic form of electromagnetic radiation, coming from the center of the Milky Way. But astronomers cannot rule out the possibility that pulsars, black holes and other astrophysical phenomena are creating the gamma rays in our own galaxy.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Still, dwarf galaxies typically appear to have nothing going on in them at all.“They are very quiet systems, just containing some old stars and a lot of dark matter,” Dr. Geringer-Sameth said in an email. “If you see any excess gamma rays coming from them, something intriguing is going on.”Neal Weiner, a dark matter theorist at New York University, agreed, saying, “If you see gamma rays in a dwarf galaxy, it would be a good way to make a case that you are seeing dark matter.”Lately astronomers have been discovering these dwarfs in droves, thanks to new tools like the Sloan Digital Sky Survey. Reticulum-2 is one of several such clumpings of stars recently discovered in data compiled by another effort, the Dark Energy Survey.The Reticulum galaxy is one of the closest dwarfs to our own galaxy, about 100,000 light-years away. So far it is the only one in which gamma rays have been observed.And that observation is not unanimous. A group from Cambridge University found the galaxy in the Dark Energy Survey data and shared the information with Dr. Geringer-Sameth’s group, which searched the Fermi Large Area Telescope data and saw evidence for gamma rays from the galaxy. Another team, led by Alex Drlica-Wagner of the Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory in Illinois and the Dark Energy Survey as well as the Fermi telescope collaboration, independently found the galaxy and looked for gamma rays, but did not see them.So goes life in what they call the dark sector. “This is the question to get to the bottom of, from our perspective,” Dr. Geringer-Sameth said. “What is causing the two analyses to reach different conclusions?”AdvertisementDr. Weiner said it was far too soon to make any assumptions. “We don’t know what dark matter looks like,” he said. “We will need patience. But the payoff is going to be huge.”An article on Wednesday about gamma rays observed in a distant dwarf galaxy that could be evidence of dark matter misidentified one of two groups that found the galaxy, known as Reticulum-2, in data from the Dark Energy Survey. It was a group from Cambridge University, not a group led by Alex Geringer-Sameth of Carnegie Mellon University. (Dr. Geringer-Sameth’s group used the information to scour telescope data and produce the gamma ray observation.)A version of this article appears in print on March 11, 2015, on Page A17 of the New York edition with the headline: Gamma Rays May Be Clue on Dark Matter.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.