AdvertisementSupported byReactionsTO THE EDITOR:Re “Ebola-Stricken Countries Lagged in Health Systems” (Global Health, March 10): The recent Ebola epidemic is likely the canary in the coal mine. Rapid globalization, urbanization and climate change create fertile ground for infectious diseases that will continue to hit the poorest the hardest.In the last two decades, 30 new diseases have jumped from animals to humans. Health experts estimate that an influenza epidemic could prove 8,000 times more deadly than this Ebola outbreak. The recent resurgence of measles in the United States shows that even one weak link in a strong health system can put a nation at risk.Prioritizing health systems from the get-go could have saved billions of dollars and countless lives — not just in West Africa during the Ebola crisis, but anywhere with a weak health system. What’s more, in times of relative calm, investments in health systems boost economies and strengthen social cohesion, yielding a resilience dividend.With crisis becoming the new normal, governments must recognize resilient health systems as an investment, not a cost.Judith Rodin New YorkThe writer is president of the Rockefeller Foundation.TO THE EDITOR:Re “Keeping Your Hair in Chemo” (Well, March 10): I am a fortunate patient of Dr. Hope Rugo at the University of California, San Francisco. Cold capping afforded me the chance to resume normality after chemo treatments the very day they concluded. My young girls could be assured that their mom was cured almost instantly, not nine months later when my hair grew back. The reader comments left me surprised and saddened because of the wide-ranging judgmental opinions. I was reminded of the furor over breast-feeding babies; to do so or not, and for how long. Where is the sisterhood? Why can’t we accept each person’s daunting experience with cancer as unique and collaborate to get cold caps approved by the F.D.A. so that they are financially accessible to anyone who wants the choice?Kristin Fischer Albany, Calif.TO THE EDITOR:I read with interest the recent article about women keeping their hair through chemotherapy — good for them, I think. But I want to say this: I wore my bald proudly when I went through chemotherapy. I did not feel like my bald head said I was sick; I felt like it said I was awesome and I was taking control and not letting cancer control me. One day shortly after I finished treatment, a stranger came up to me. She asked if I had had chemotherapy. When I said yes, she said that seeing me like that gave her the courage to go through the chemotherapy she was about to begin. If my bald head helped this one person, that is enough and makes it worth it.So many people can’t afford desperately needed cancer treatments. I hope that hair does not become another have/have not issue. Hair, no hair, be proud, fight back and, most importantly, let’s find a cure for cancer so we don’t have to have this conversation anymore.Wendy Kuhn Chapel Hill, N.C.TO THE EDITOR:Re “Tracking a Killer Over Decades” (Matter, March 10): This interesting article on the origin and spread of H.I.V. omits one important fact. Chimpanzees are promiscuous animals with large testes. They can have sex several times a day. Gorilla males control a small harem of females, most of whom will be pregnant or breast-feeding most of the time. They may have sex as rarely as once a year, and they have correspondingly small testes. It is highly likely that a sexually transmitted virus would evolve different strategies to accommodate to very different probabilities of transmission to the next host.Malcolm Potts Berkeley, Calif.The writer is a professor at the School of Public Health, University of California, Berkeley.Science Times welcomes letters, comments on nytimes.com and social media posts from readers. Email should be sent to scitimes@nytimes.com.Advertisement