

      By JONATHAN CORUM

UPDATED August 13, 2015

The European Space Agency’s Rosetta spacecraft caught up with Comet 67P/Churyumov-Gerasimenko a year ago and dropped the Philae lander onto its surface in November. Today the comet reached perihelion, its closest approach to the sun.
Aug. 13: Perihelion Comet 67P/C-G reached perihelion, the closest point to the sun in the comet’s six-and-a-half-year orbit. Rosetta took this image an hour before perihelion, when the comet was around 186 million km from the sun.Comet’s location whenRosetta was launchedRosetta launchedin March 2004MarsPerihelionSunEarthRendezvouswith CometAug. 6, 2014Orbit ofJupiterComet’s location whenRosetta was launchedRosetta launchedin March 2004MarsPerihelionSunEarthRendezvouswith Comet67P/C-GOrbit ofJupiterPerihelionMarsSunEarthRendezvouswith Comet67P/C-GRosetta launchedin March 2004Orbit ofJupiterComet’s locationwhen Rosettawas launchedRosetta launchedin March 2004MarsPerihelionSunEarthRendezvouswith Comet67P/C-GOrbit ofJupiterWhere is Rosetta? The Rosetta spacecraft took 10 years to match speed and direction with Comet 67P/C-G. The chase ended last August, and Rosetta has been following the comet as it moves closer to the sun in its elliptical orbit.Aug. 6: One year A year ago today Rosetta rendezvoused with Comet 67P/C-G. The spacecraft has puilled back from the comet in recent days as it approaches perihelion. This image was taken from a distance of 261 km.July 30 The Philae lander is still lost somewhere on the comet’s head, which is at lower left in this image. Philae has not made contact with Rosetta in over a month, but seven research papers highlight the scientific discoveries made during the lander’s first few days on the comet’s surface. July 29: Bright jet Rosetta observed a bright but short-lived jet of gas and dust emerge from the comet’s neck in this series of images taken from 186 km away.July 20 Jets of gas and dust extend from Comet 67P/C-G’s head and neck in this image taken 171 km from the comet’s center.June 25 The comet’s head is facing the camera in this image taken from 168 km away.June 14: Contact with Philae The Philae lander, which bounced across comet’s surface and settled in an unknown location last November, finally received enough sunlight to emerge from hibernation and contact the Rosetta spacecraft on June 13.The lander’s exact location is still unknown, but researchers have narrowed their search to the area near the red ellipse, above, on the head of the duck-shaped comet.June 7 The comet’s head is pointed down, deep in shadow and surrounded by brighter traces of gas and dust. June 5 The comet’s two lobes are silhouetted with fans of gas and dust in this image taken from 208 km away.May 12 The comet’s head is pointed down and barely visible in this image taken from 166 km away.April 15 The comet appears as a bright crescent under a fan of gas and dust in this image taken from 162 km away. The top of the comet’s head is pointing toward the camera.April 15 Rosetta was 170 km away when it took this image. The comet’s head is to the left, crowned by a broad circular depression named Hatmehit.April 12 Rosetta spotted a new jet of gas and dust spouting from the comet’s shadowed underbelly. The images in this animation were taken two minutes apart, from a distance of 75 km.April 8 Rosetta finished correcting its distance and trajectory around the comet after having problems during a close flyby two weeks earlier. In this image taken from 137 km away, the comet’s sunlit belly is pointed up and surrounded by faint jets of dust and gas. This debris has been confusing the spacecraft’s star tracker.April 2 After a problem with its star tracker during a close flyby, Rosetta switched into safe mode and flew about 400 km away from the comet. This image was taken from 385 km away, after the spacecraft had resumed normal operations and turned to move closer to the comet.False stars on March 28 Rosetta passed within 14 km of the comet’s surface during a flyby, but had unexpected technical problems.Rosetta has an onboard star tracker that locks onto specific stars to maintain the spacecraft’s orientation and keep its antenna pointed toward Earth. During the flyby, the star tracker became confused by dust particles around the comet, which looked like stars.This image of the comet’s belly and the Imhotep plain was taken from 19.9 km above the surface.March 22 Comet 67P/C-G’s two-lobed structure is criss-crossed with jets of gas and dust in this image taken from 77.8 km away.March 21 Wisps of gas and dust curve away from comet’s sunlit body and neck, seen from a distance of 82.6 km. The top of the comet’s head is angled down, in shadow.March 18 Rosetta was 85.7 km away when it photographed the comet’s head casting a crisp shadow across the larger body of the comet. The Philae lander is thought to be in hibernation mode somewhere on the comet’s head, but its exact location is unknown.March 14 The comet’s sunlit neck is wrapped with a collar of dust and gas in this image taken from a distance of 81.4 km. Rosetta has detected molecules of nitrogen trapped in the comet’s ice, evidence that Comet 67P/C-G probably formed at very low temperatures in the outer regions of the solar system.March 9 Rosetta was 71.9 km from the comet when it photographed the comet’s head ringed with a halo of gas and dust. These jets extend from active areas of the comet’s surface and will become much more prominent over the next few months as the comet approaches the sun.March 6 The comet’s head is angled down in this image of crisscrossing sunlit jets taken from 85.5 km away.March 6 Rosetta was 82.9 km away when it looked up at the comet’s flat underbelly. The smooth plain at center covered with large boulders is named Imhotep.Feb. 28 Rosetta captured a profile of the comet surrounded by curving jets of gas and dust from active regions. The spacecraft was 102.6 km away.Feb. 25–27 One day on Comet 67P/C-G is about 12 hours, the time it takes the comet to spin on its axis. The jets of gas and dust surrounding the comet are thought to curve from a combination of the comet’s rotation and the uneven gravity of its two-lobed structure.Feb. 20 The comet’s sunlit underbelly casts a shadow obscuring the neck that joins the two lobes. Rosetta took this image from 118.5 km away.Feb. 18 Pale jets of gas and dust surround Comet 67P/C-G, seen from 198 km away. Bright marks in the background are a mix of stars, camera noise and streaks from small particles ejected from the comet.Feb. 14 On Valentine’s Day, Rosetta made its first close flyby of the comet, passing within 6 km of the surface. Here the spacecraft looks down on Hatmehit, the large circular depression at the top of the comet’s head.Feb. 14 An image of the comet’s underbelly taken 8.9 km above the surface during the Valentine’s Day flyby. The smooth plain in the foreground is called Imhotep.Feb. 9 The comet is upside down in this image from 105 km away, and a fan-shaped jet of dust streams from the comet’s neck region.Feb. 6 Jets of gas and dust extend from the comet’s neck and other sunlit areas in this image taken from 124 km away.Feb. 3 This close-up image of the comet’s neck was taken from 28.7 km away, and was the last image taken from orbit around Comet 67P/C-G. Rosetta will continue to follow the comet, but will leave its gravity-bound orbit because of increasing dust and instead begin a series of flybys.Jan. 31 The comet’s head, neck and back are sunlit in this image taken from 28 km away. A prominent jet of gas and dust extends from an active region of the surface near the comet’s neck.Jan. 16 The tail of the comet’s larger lobe points up, revealing a smooth plain named Imhotep at left. Rosetta was 28.4 km away when it took this image.Jan. 3 The smooth plain named Imhotep, at center right, lies on the comet’s flat underbelly, seen here from a distance of about 28.4 km.Dec. 14, 2014 The large triangular boulder on the flat Imhotep plain is named Cheops, after the Egyptian pyramid. The spacecraft was about 19.4 km from the comet when it took this image.Dec. 10 Sunlight falls between the body and head of the comet, lighting up a large group of boulders in the smooth Hapi region of the comet’s neck. To the right of the boulders, the cliffs of Hathor form the underside of the comet’s head. Rosetta took this image from a distance of 20.1 km.Dec. 2 The circular depression called Hatmehit, in the center of the comet’s head, is filled with shadow in this image taken 20.1 km above the comet.Nov. 22 An overexposed image of Comet 67P/C-G from 30 km away shows faint jets of gas and dust extending from the sunlit side of the comet.Nov. 12 Rosetta’s washing-machine sized lander Philae successfully touched down on the comet’s head. But anchoring harpoons failed and Philae bounced twice before going missing in the shadow of a cliff or crater (above). Without sunlight Philae quickly lost power, but might revive as the comet gets closer to the sun. On March 12, Rosetta resumed listening for radio signals from the missing lander.How big is the comet? The body of Comet 67P/C-G is about as long as Central Park. For images of Rosetta’s rendezvous and the Philae landing, see Landing on a Comet, 317 Million Miles From Home.Sources: European Space Agency and the Rosetta mission. Images by ESA/Rosetta, except where noted. Some images are composite panoramas created by ESA, and most images were processed by ESA to bring out details of the comet’s activity.Advertisement