By CHRISTOPHER CLAREYDEC. 22, 2016
It was a year of time travel in global sports. While revisiting the past was often a downer, with the McLaren reports and Olympic retesting confirming the grand scale of recent cheating, living in the moment was routinely a joy ride.There were times — as the buzzer-beaters and long-delayed gratification piled up — when it felt as if sport, amid the justifiable negativity, was trying desperately to prove to wavering millennials and everyone else that it was still worth saving by pulling out all the stops, all the most irresistible stories and completed quests it could muster.In Europe, Leicester City somehow held off the best talent that richer clubs with worldwide followings could deploy, becoming the unlikeliest and most endearing Premier League champion in memory. This was a club that had avoided relegation the previous season only with a very late surge. But after signing the Italian manager Claudio Ranieri and the deft and indefatigable French midfielder N’Golo Kante, Leicester City overcame preseason odds that were 5,000 to 1 and won the title.In North America, the Chicago Cubs were no Cinderellas — they were widely viewed as favorites from April to October. But they still had a cargo hold of historical baggage to unload before ending their 108-year wait for another World Series win. That deliverance came in the same year that LeBron James completed his mission in Cleveland, leading the Cavaliers to their first N.B.A. title.Both the Cavs and the Cubs rallied from 1-3 deficits, clinching their titles on the road, which did little to dampen their celebrations.AdvertisementDown to the wire was the rule with many championships at stake. Villanova won the N.C.A.A. men’s basketball title when Kris Jenkins hit a three-pointer as time expired against North Carolina. Nneka Ogwumike scored on a short jumper with 3.1 seconds left to win the W.N.B.A. title for the Los Angeles Sparks over the defending champion Minnesota Lynx.AdvertisementThe Euro final went to extra time in Paris, and with Portugal’s essential man, Cristiano Ronaldo, injured and patrolling the sideline instead of the wing, it looked as if France would surely win. But in another 2016 surprise, Portugal pulled it off, with the substitute Éder scoring the only goal of the match on a low, well-struck shot from 25 meters to beat the diving French goalkeeper Hugo Lloris.It was the biggest year yet for Ronaldo, still more famous than loved but so undeniably great at the global game. And when the Champions League Final went to penalty kicks, he and Real Madrid maintained the traditional pecking order in the Spanish capital by defeating Atlético Madrid, just as they had in the Champions League final in 2014.Penalties remain a profoundly unsatisfying way to resolve anything of import, but with the margins so narrow at the top in 2016, they kept proving necessary. The Copa América Centenario required them, with Chile defeating Argentina and Lionel Messi. The men’s gold medal game at the Summer Olympics in Rio de Janeiro required them, too, and they provided a measure of redemption — if only a measure — for Brazil, as it defeated Germany to win its first Olympic football title.Neymar, who provided the winning penalty kick, was the same shifty and slender striker who was supposed to lead Brazil to the World Cup at home in 2014, but was injured and missed one of the darkest moments in Brazil’s often-sunlit football history: a 7-1 defeat to Germany in the semifinals.The young German team at the Olympics was not nearly the same juggernaut: no Mesut Ozil, Thomas Müller or Mats Hummels; no free-roaming Manuel Neuer in goal. But it still provided enough symbolism to provide the Brazilians with a much-needed exclamation point to an Olympics that had generated so many question marks.The roars after the victory could be heard in Rio even over the sounds of the pounding surf on Copacabana Beach. And as some of us walked back to our nearby hotel, an elderly man emerged — a little shaky — from his apartment block and onto the tiled, uneven sidewalk and shouted “Brazil!” as if his identity had just been reaffirmed.That was part of the idea behind Brazil’s daunting double: hosting the 2014 World Cup and the 2016 Summer Games. But between economic and political crises and concerns about pollution and corruption and getting to the finish line on time, Brazil was hardly able to leverage its extended moment in the global spotlight as its leadership had hoped.AdvertisementIn 2009, when Rio beat out Chicago, Madrid and Tokyo to secure the Olympics, Brazil was on a roll, and China, another resurgent, fast-developing power, had just staged a grandiose Summer Games in Beijing. Going back to the emerging world and to South America for the first time looked like a bold, smart move by the International Olympic Committee.Seven years later, after all the seismic shifts, the landscape looked starkly different, and it was difficult not to wonder — as you visited the temporary and permanent playgrounds of Rio, some far from full — how much Brazilians would have benefited by spending all this capital and energy on more essential matters.The Olympic model looked as shaky as the American swimmer Ryan Lochte’s credibility in Rio. There is no glory in building sports temples in a city that cannot afford the price tag. But some of the visitors still put on quite a show.Simone Biles, the explosive American gymnast, was spectacular in winning four gold medals. Usain Bolt, the Jamaican sprinter, swept the men’s 100- and 200-meter sprints for an unprecedented third straight Olympics. Two other runners — Nikki Hamblin and Abbey D’Agostino — did not come close to medals but did capture the endangered Olympic spirit by picking each other up after a collision in the first round of the women’s 5,000 meters and urging each other to the finish line.Then there was Michael Phelps, who after assuring his public that he was done with swimming, returned to the Olympic pool at age 31 and won six more medals, five of them gold, before retiring again.That was another theme in 2016. Peyton Manning, the veteran American quarterback, predictably called it a career after winning Super Bowl 50 with the Denver Broncos. Nico Rosberg, the veteran German Formula One driver, much more unexpectedly announced his retirement after winning his first world championship in November.It was a year of acute nostalgia with the deaths of Muhammad Ali, Arnold Palmer, Johan Cruyff and Gordie Howe. Ali, in particular, transcended sports with his charisma and taste for bigger battles than a boxing ring could provide.Palmer, a magnetic and genial golfer, brought sports into the modern mercantile era and helped globalize the game. Cruyff at his peak was a wonder with a ball at his feet, but he was also an attacking innovator as a player and a coach. Howe, a Canadian icon known quite rightly as Mr. Hockey, played for 33 seasons.AdvertisementIt was bittersweet to look back at lives and careers. But other trips down memory lane were nothing but bitter — none more so than the confirmation that many of the results at the 2014 Winter Olympics in Sochi, Russia, were a farce.As reports by The New York Times and CBS News made clear, the Russians gamed the system. In a plotline perfectly suited to a Cold-War espionage novel, Russian secret-service agents worked through a hole in a wall to swap out tainted urine samples from Russian athletes, devising a method to break into the supposedly tamper-proof glass bottles used to store those samples.Thus, an antidoping laboratory became a pro-doping laboratory, a switcheroo later substantiated by two independent reports in 2016. The reports, headed by the Canadian law professor Richard McLaren and commissioned by the World Anti-Doping Agency, concluded that Russia had indeed conducted a state-sponsored program and that more than 1,000 Russian athletes, including numerous Olympic medalists, had benefited.The Russians were hardly the only naughty ones in the Olympic family, just the naughtiest, as the results of retesting from the 2008 and 2012 Summer Games made clear.One can only imagine how different the record books might begin to look in the major North American professional sports or in rugby and football if they were retesting samples from their own long-ago championship games (or if there were even any long-ago samples to test).The International Olympic Committee, for all its flaws, deserves credit for putting such a system in place, fully aware of the public relations risks. Others need to follow, and as the year was coming to a close, sports governing bodies were often stumbling over one another to project transparency and reformist zeal. The glass bottles even had a new design. But as we have learned the hard way, only time will tell how tamper-proof the results really were in 2016.A version of this article appears in print on December 22, 2016, on Page A9 of the New York edition with the headline: Upsets and the Upsetting.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.