

 Michael Powell
 

SPORTS OF THE TIMES
FEB. 3, 2017
Paul Tagliabue is the former commissioner of the N.F.L., the most prodigiously profitable sports league in America. As he ages and his thoughts turn to his legacy, he yearns to be voted into the Pro Football Hall of Fame.Tagliabue is a finalist in the contributors category, and the vote is Saturday. To promote his candidacy, he appeared on a radio show this week, and there was much talk of the spectacular sums of money he generated for the owners. Then the hosts turned, a touch apologetically, to the question of damaged brains. In 1994, Tagliabue had waved off talk of a concussion epidemic as a “pack journalism issue.”Tagliabue conceded he would like to retrieve those words. “Obviously, I do regret those remarks,” he said. “My language was intemperate, and it led to serious misunderstanding.”We reporters can be disagreeable, and who has not uttered words he comes to regret? Let’s step past words and take a close look at Tagliabue’s role in overseeing a decade-long cover-up of the N.F.L.’s destruction of the brains of its players.AdvertisementI pulled up a case filed in 2012 in federal court, Jeff Hostetler et al. v. the N.F.L. The lawsuit is accompanied by a list of dozens, stars and journeymen, who sustained brain damage in service to our most popular pro sport. Some can no longer read; others cannot remember where their home is; others require help eating.This is not terribly shocking. In 1928, doctors noted abnormalities in the brains of boxers, who, like football players, take blow after blow to the head. By the 1980s, studies revealed short- and long-term damage to the brains of football players.Tagliabue became commissioner in 1989 and served 17 years. In 1994, two star players retired with serious head injuries from repeated concussions. Tagliabue responded by establishing the oxymoronically named Mild Traumatic Brain Injury Committee. At the urging of Leon Hess, then the Jets’ owner, Tagliabue tapped a rheumatologist, Elliot Pellman, to direct that panel. This doctor had no expertise in head injuries and remained on the Jets’ payroll.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Concussions are part of the profession, an occupational risk,” Pellman told reporters in 1994. It’s “like a steelworker who goes up 100 stories.”Pellman’s panel worked at a languorous pace.Thirteen years later, Congress asked Roger Goodell, who ascended to commissioner after serving as Tagliabue’s Man Friday, about the committee’s promised report. We have more data to crunch, Goodell replied. He did not know “when this study will be completed.”AdvertisementIn fact, Pellman labored to discredit the studies documenting a link between crushing hits and brain injuries. Scientists said he pressured them to remain silent. In fact, it was Pellman’s research that ended up being discredited.Pellman also published reports in an accommodating medical journal. In 2005, Pellman and his colleagues argued that concussed players often could return to play in the same game or the next week: “Players who sustained multiple concussions did not perform more poorly than those with a single injury.”This is the sound of doctors talking in tongues.Tagliabue was asked about Pellman, who remained in the league’s employ until last year. Faced with so much evidence to the contrary, he insisted that his doctor did fine work. “We were,” he said, “in the forefront” of concussion research.Tempted to toss up my hands, I placed a phone call to Gay Culverhouse, the former president of the Tampa Bay Buccaneers. She is an often severe critic of the N.F.L. and a guardian angel for some of its injured and handicapped players. (She first became involved with this issue when Tom McHale, a onetime offensive lineman for the Bucs, died at 45 of an accidental drug overdose. A posthumous examination revealed that McHale had chronic traumatic encephalopathy, a degenerative brain disease that leads to dementia, memory loss and depression.)Culverhouse agreed that Tagliabue did not handle concussions well. But his virtues outnumbered his sins, she said.She credited him with taking the lead on an issue of real principle and removing the 1993 Super Bowl from Arizona when that state’s voters refused to recognize Martin Luther King’s Birthday as a state holiday.The Pro Football Hall of Fame, she noted, has more than its fair share of genuine miscreants. “He messed up on concussions, yes he did,” Culverhouse said of Tagliabue. “Business-wise, he created an amicable ownership and a better relationship with the union. I would never deny him entry.”That gave me pause. Our lives should not be reduced to our worst moments. Then I sat on the subway Friday morning and leafed again through that lawsuit by the injured players. Would we any longer excuse the owner of a coal mine if he presided over injuries that led to hundreds of his employees sustaining life-altering brain damage?AdvertisementIf his factotums covered up the damage, and urged some to silence, wouldn’t we question the quality of his leadership?A panel composed almost entirely of journalists will vote Saturday on Tagliabue’s candidacy. The museum’s website has plumped for his admission, citing his good works: “Tagliabue was the first commissioner to take the initiative to address concussions in sports by appointing a panel of experts to a Mild Traumatic Brain Injury Committee.”If he is inducted, Tagliabue will find the Hall an agreeable place. Walking its hallways, he will find helmets and shoulder pads and old footballs and photos and exhibits glorifying in the toughness of these men. He will not find an exhibit on concussions. In comparison to the Baseball Hall of Fame in Cooperstown, N.Y., which deals openly with the darkest chambers of the sport’s history, from racial exclusion to steroids, the Pro Football Hall of Fame is a company store.There are a few mentions of concussions on the website, most intended to highlight heroic achievement. So I read that Lynn Swann, the beautiful Steelers receiver, sustained a bruising hit and concussion in the 1975 A.F.C. championship game. Not to worry. “With two weeks off before the big game, a well-rested Swann recovered sufficiently to play.”This is dangerous mythology.Junior Seau is another member. This fierce linebacker played for most of Tagliabue’s tenure as commissioner. He piled up statistical accomplishments like cordwood: eight All-Pro sections, 12 Pro Bowls, 20 years in the league. And in that time, he was subjected to numerous concussions and thousands of hard hits. As Chris Nowinski of the Concussion Legacy Foundation noted: “Hall of Fame players suffer the most damage because they have the longest careers.”Seau retired in 2009. In 2012, he shot himself in the heart. A subsequent study of his brain found he suffered from C.T.E. The Hall of Fame website does not mention details of his death or those medical findings.On that radio show, Tagliabue assayed a defense of his legacy on concussions. The league was engaged in cutting-edge work, he said. He offered only grudging concessions, like loose change falling out of his pocket. “Certainly,” he said, “some things happened that were not positive.”That is so, certainly.A version of this article appears in print on February 4, 2017, on Page D1 of the New York edition with the headline: Tagliabue’s Flawed Legacy.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »