By BEN SHPIGELAPRIL 18, 2017
The pivotal moment in a hockey game, that cumulative impact of all those goals and saves and subtleties, can sometimes be ascertained only after the teams have left the ice. In other cases, though, that moment unfolds in real time but projects its intent in slow motion, obvious even as it develops.The Rangers’ 2-1 victory Tuesday night against the Montreal Canadiens, which evened their best-of-seven series at two games apiece before the series returns to Montreal for Game 5 on Thursday, turned on a sequence in the second period that began with understated brilliance and ended, four seconds later, in unadulterated joy.Long before Henrik Lundqvist earned a rousing ovation for preserving a one-goal lead over the final 35 minutes 32 seconds, and long before the Rangers turned back a frantic Montreal push that included a rocket from Shea Weber that struck the goal post, Ryan McDonagh caught a puck with his hand.Hours earlier, standing in front of his locker, McDonagh said that there would be no continuation from the Rangers’ listless Game 3 on Sunday. He distilled their charge Tuesday into simple terms. Just one play, he said, could prove critical.AdvertisementAn uneven first period ended with the score tied at 1-1, but a few minutes into the second, the Rangers lingered in the Canadiens’ zone, penetrating with a long shift. Relief almost came when Montreal defenseman Jeff Petry corralled the puck by the boards behind the goal line. All he had to do was flip the puck over McDonagh and past the blue line.AdvertisementBut McDonagh hopped and snared the puck with his gloved left hand. As he set it on the ice, he tried to pass — but he missed, and the whiff helped him evade a check from Max Pacioretty.“I got pretty lucky,” McDonagh said.In an instant he regained possession and whipped a pass toward the crease, just looking for a stick blade. Stationed to the right of Montreal goalie Carey Price, Rick Nash received the puck on his forehand and in one fluid move transferred it to his backhand. With a gaping net, Nash put the Rangers ahead by 2-1 at 4:28.
            In close, Rick's tossing that in 10/10 times. #MTLvsNYR #StanleyCup pic.twitter.com/v6xsdvWi1K The collaboration invigorated the crowd at Madison Square Garden and fulfilled the wishes of Coach Alain Vigneault, who had publicly — and, no doubt, privately — challenged his stars. “In the playoffs,” Nash said, “you need your best players to be your best players.”Both Nash and McDonagh are stalwarts of Rangers teams that have reached the playoffs year after year, and both had watched as they sputtered at home in the playoffs — six straight losses, outscored by 21-4, since a Game 1 victory against Tampa Bay in the 2015 Eastern Conference finals.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The most recent of those losses came Sunday night, and Vigneault, in discussing that defeat, used terms like “very bad” and “ordinary” to describe his team’s performance.“It was a tough couple days around here,” Nash said.Speaking on Tuesday morning, Vigneault eschewed verbs like “expect” and “hope” for more definite language. The Rangers will play better, he said. Their power play, now 0 for 12 this series, will produce — of that he was “very confident.”The first period demonstrated the challenge in transferring word to deed. For a spell the Rangers upheld Vigneault’s initial pledge, if not in the quality of scoring opportunities then at least in their regular and dedicated presence in Montreal’s zone. Buzzing around on the forecheck, Jesper Fast capitalized on a miscue by Andrei Markov — the puck, dumped in from center ice by Brady Skjei, caromed off his skates — to slip a backhander by Price at 11:39.AdvertisementBut even as they led by 1-0, the Rangers still committed the sort of mistakes — unforced turnovers, defensive lapses — that doomed them in Game 3. Lundqvist, who finished with 23 saves, twice rescued them on breakaways, stopping Andrew Shaw and then Torrey Mitchell, before a poor line change late in the period rendered him helpless.Perfectly executing a two-on-one with Shea Weber, Mitchell shot into an open net to even the score at 1-1 at 18:37.Through the first three games, Lundqvist (.941) and Price (.944) had posted nearly identical save percentages. But Lundqvist had faced 29 more shots — the rough equivalent of a full game’s worth — in an indictment of the Rangers’ play in front of him. He has faced more consistent pressure than Price, who rarely makes mistakes. However, Price’s tack on Nash’s goal backfired when he failed to poke the puck away.“I didn’t know he was there, to be honest,” Price, who saved 30 of 32 shots, said of Nash. “It was a quick point shot. I didn’t quite get set on the post the way I wanted to. I thought he was going to walk out front.”Beyond their exceptional goaltending, what the Canadiens have in surplus — and what the Rangers have lacked — are players who agitate and infuriate. The Canadiens have nuisances like Brendan Gallagher, Shaw and Steve Ott, who in Game 3 felt like tousling Mats Zuccarello’s hair during a stoppage, and so he did. “The game within the game,” Ott said.To counter, Vigneault broke up the fourth line, the Rangers’ most productive, by swapping brute force for skill. He replaced the team’s chief pest, Tanner Glass, with the rookie wing Pavel Buchnevich. Vigneault wanted the Rangers to play with “a quick pace.”In the first period, they labored. In the third, aside from Lundqvist’s sparkling play, they toiled. But in the second, they controlled play. The Rangers outshot the Canadiens by 12-6 and, courtesy of McDonagh and Nash, outscored them by 1-0, breaking one tie to achieve another.A version of this article appears in print on April 19, 2017, on Page B8 of the New York edition with the headline: In One Brief Moment, Rangers Finally Win Playoff Game at Home.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.