AdvertisementSupported byBy Tyler KepnerMark Attanasio watched the end of the 2001 World Series from a field box in Arizona, cheering for his hometown team, the Yankees, to win. He expected the ballpark to go silent as soon as Mariano Rivera finished off the Diamondbacks.“It didn’t go that way,” Attanasio said on Friday, with a smile. “They say, about baseball, the only thing certain is uncertainty.”Take this season. Attanasio, who bought the Milwaukee Brewers in 2005 and lives primarily in Southern California, arrived in the Bronx on Friday with his team well over .500, assured of entering the All-Star break in first place in the National League Central. He watched the game with a new friend, the musician Paul Simon, whom he met in Milwaukee last month.There is something so right about these Brewers, but few could have seen it coming. Their neighboring division rivals, the Chicago Cubs, are the reigning champions. The Brewers had lost 183 games the previous two seasons, tearing down much of their roster after a division lead went slip slidin’ away down the stretch in 2014.They traded veterans, hired a new manager and general manager, and decided to wait. On a drizzly day in Phoenix in February, when the full squad reported to spring training, Attanasio stood under a canopy near the bullpens and said the players would soon provide direction.“This year will be the year that informs us the most about where we really are on the timeline for competing,” he said. “This team will tell us.”At 49-40 before Friday’s game, the team has boldly announced itself as a contender. The Brewers ranked first in the National League in home runs and stolen bases, seizing control of the division as the Cubs struggle to find their dynamic offense and reliable starting pitching. The Brewers thumped the Cubs at Wrigley Field on Thursday in a makeup game from a dubious rainout in May.“That was a big statement, especially with the rainout when it didn’t rain at all,” said closer Corey Knebel, the Brewers’ only All-Star. “That was a little upsetting to us — we had to go back to the hotel that day and walk around the city on a beautiful day when we could have been playing baseball. And then to have to come back on an off day — hey, we wanted to put it on ’em, and we did. That showed.”The longer the Cubs go without asserting themselves, the better the Brewers’ chances become. A year after making trades to build up their prospect inventory, the Brewers now may add talent in an effort to reach the playoffs for the first time since 2011.“This is certainly ahead of their timetable, the rebuild timetable that everybody wants to call it,” third baseman Travis Shaw said. “I’m glad we sped up the process. It’ll be interesting to see what they do. We’re confident in the 25 guys in here if they don’t make a move, but it’ll be nice to see if they have some faith and see what they do.”General Manager David Stearns’s predecessor, Doug Melvin — who remains in the organization as a senior adviser — began the process in 2015, acquiring Knebel and outfielder Domingo Santana in trades. Stearns added other pivotal players, like second baseman Jonathan Villar, outfielder Keon Broxton and the injured starter Chase Anderson, and then made two masterstrokes last winter.He cut Chris Carter, the one-dimensional slugger who has since been designated for assignment by the Yankees, and replaced him with Eric Thames, who had been a sensation in South Korea. Thames has cooled after a blistering April, but he leads the team with a .941 on-base plus slugging percentage.Just behind him is Shaw, acquired from Boston for reliever Tyler Thornburg, who has been injured all season. With two low-cost moves, Stearns imported high-impact corner infielders. Others — like Anderson, Broxton, Knebel, Santana, shortstop Orlando Arica and starter Jimmy Nelson — have also flourished.“Where we’ve been fortunate is that a number of players have accelerated their development,” Stearns said. “They’ve gotten there a little bit quicker than we thought they might — and when you have multiple players doing that together, it creates a team that can surprise people and be a little bit more competitive than expected.”Catcher Stephen Vogt, who was claimed off waivers from Oakland last month, compared this group to the 2012 Athletics, a lightly regarded team that came together and started a three-year run of playoff appearances.“It’s very similar — it’s a lot of young guys that are coming into their own quickly,” Vogt said. “It’s a team that nobody was talking about, and now people are gonna have to start talking about it.”With Anderson out until mid-August because of an oblique injury, the Brewers could use more depth in their rotation. They have also made an N.L.-high 67 errors — including five on Friday — and could upgrade at second on Villar, who has 16 stolen bases but has struggled to reach base.On a conference call in mid-June, Attanasio said he told Stearns that he would not pressure him to make a deal before the July 31 nonwaiver trade deadline. But there would seem to be room to add payroll, and he trusts Stearns’s judgment.“He has the wherewithal to do something if he wants to,” Attanasio said. “He has a very high batting average. So if David wants to make a call, it’s a good moment for him to make a call, in any direction.”Stearns said he would be open to a move that could help the team now and in the future. With most of his young core already in the majors, he should have a sufficient prospect inventory to make deals.“We believe in this group, and frankly, more importantly, this group believes in itself,” Stearns said. “You don’t get through 88 games in a season like this by accident. It’s because you have a group of talented players that is playing together and continues to grow and develop.“We don’t take that for granted at all. We know that being in first place in mid-July is an advantageous position. It’s not something you can count on on an annual basis, and that has to play a part in our analysis.”Attanasio, for his part, seems to be a believer. For two months, he was not quite sure what kind of team he had. But when the Brewers opened June in first place, he decided to grow a modest beard.“I’ve had Milwaukee fans come up to me: ‘Don’t shave!’” Attanasio said, laughing. “Who knows how many games we’d be up if I really just let it grow and didn’t trim it?”Advertisement