AdvertisementSupported byOn Pro BasketballBy Scott CacciolaThe Knicks are not well known in the basketball world, or in any world, for making sound decisions.Without detailing every blunder, it is worth remembering, at this delicate juncture of team-building, that this is the same organization that handed a broken-down Joakim Noah a contract worth $72 million in free agency last season. The same organization that had Charles Oakley, one of the most beloved players in franchise history, arrested and led out of Madison Square Garden in handcuffs five months ago.And the same organization that employed a team president who alienated the team’s top two players last season and who, just two weeks ago, publicly weighed whether to trade one of them — the 21-year-old Kristaps Porzingis — in a move that might have pushed many of the team’s fans over the edge.Finally, James L. Dolan, the team’s owner, decided last week to pay Phil Jackson to go away. Which suggested that the Knicks might begin moving in a different direction, maybe even a better one.The danger, of course, was that the Knicks, even without Jackson, would still do something that didn’t make any sense. Actually, for nearly a week after N.B.A. free agency kicked in, the Knicks barely did anything at all. But on Thursday night they suddenly emerged from their hibernation to sign Tim Hardaway Jr. to a four-year, $71 million offer sheet.Knicks fans did not treat this news with indifference. The general reaction was that there must have been a bookkeeping error: Is that really supposed to be a 7 in front of the 1?Hardaway, a 25-year-old guard, is a restricted free agent, which means that the Atlanta Hawks have until 11:59 p.m. Saturday to match the Knicks’ offer. But the Knicks — and General Manager Steve Mills, who is running the front office by himself until a replacement for Jackson is found — must think an awful lot of Hardaway, because that is a fortune for a player who has started just 62 games.Of course, the move can also be seen as another rebuke of Jackson, who was responsible for getting rid of Hardaway in the first place.The Knicks, remember, used a first-round pick to draft Hardaway out of Michigan in 2013, a decision that was made before Jackson arrived in New York to take control of the club. Hardaway then spent two seasons with the Knicks, but Jackson did not become a fan of his and proceeded to trade him for the rights to the No. 19 overall pick in the 2015 draft.The Knicks then turned that pick into Jerian Grant, a point guard who was overmatched in his lone season in New York.Last summer, the Knicks packaged Grant as a part of a trade that landed them Derrick Rose. Now, to make room for Hardaway under the salary cap, the Knicks would need to officially renounce their rights to Rose — which they will do without hesitation if Hardaway becomes theirs.And if all that happens, Hardaway’s path back to the Knicks will be something to behold: a sort of Rube Goldberg machine of wayward deals and mismatched parts.The main concern in all this is that the Knicks are severely overpaying Hardaway, in large part to dissuade the Hawks from re-signing him.The other problem is that Hardaway is not a point guard, which is the Knicks’ most significant need at the moment. Last month, the Knicks selected Frank Ntilikina, an 18-year-old from France, with the eighth overall pick in the draft. He has plenty of potential, but he won’t be ready to be a starting point guard in the N.B.A. any time soon.And if Hardaway does end up a Knick, he would devour the team’s remaining space under the salary cap, making it harder to bring a veteran point guard aboard.The Knicks would still have the midlevel exception, which is a little above $4 million. And they would still have a list of remaining point-guard candidates, which for now includes Greivis Vasquez, Rajon Rondo and Beno Udrih, who once was Hardaway’s teammate in New York.On the bright side, the Knicks essentially outsourced Hardaway’s development to the Hawks — which, given the dysfunction of the Jackson era, was one of the smartest moves that they could have made. The Hawks are highly regarded for their player development, and the Knicks could wind up reaping the benefits, albeit at a steep price.Not long after Hardaway arrived in Atlanta, the Hawks dispatched him to the N.B.A. Development League to delouse him of the bad habits he had picked up with the Knicks. He improved greatly. Last season, he averaged 14.5 points in 27.3 minutes a game while shooting 45.5 percent from the field. In his two seasons with the Knicks, he shot 40.8 percent.Hardaway would make the Knicks younger and more athletic, a point of emphasis for Coach Jeff Hornacek now that he has escaped from Jackson’s triangle-shaped clutches. Hardaway would also give the team another wing, a position of increasing importance. More teams than ever want versatile players who can run the floor. As Celtics Coach Brad Stevens told The Associated Press this week: “I don’t have the five positions anymore. It may be as simple as three positions now, where you’re either a ballhandler, a wing or a big.”With Hardaway in the mix, the Knicks would have wings — a glut of them. But there is nothing that would prevent Hornacek from playing Hardaway, Courtney Lee and Carmelo Anthony together. In fact, when Hornacek was coaching the Phoenix Suns, he was not averse to going small by sending three point guards onto the court at once.However, the Knicks are also looking to ship Anthony out of New York. And if Hardaway and Lee are both on the team, it does, arguably, make Anthony more expendable.So on Thursday, as the Knicks looked to move on from Jackson, they made their first big bet. They can only hope it pays off.Mike Vorkunov contributed reporting.Advertisement