AdvertisementSupported byBy Wallace MatthewsYankees catcher Gary Sanchez had a simple message for Tampa Bay Rays first baseman Logan Morrison, who had questioned Sanchez’s qualifications for inclusion in the Home Run Derby next week: “Don’t blame me.”“What can I say? That’s something I have no control of,” Sanchez said before the Yankees played the Toronto Blue Jays on Wednesday afternoon. “They gave me a call, invited me to participate, and I told them, ‘Well, I don’t even know if I’m making the All-Star Game. So, I don’t know if I will have the opportunity to attend the Derby.’”In the end, Sanchez was picked as an All-Star reserve and will be in the Derby on Monday, the day before the game. “It’s an honor to participate in the event,” he said. “It’s not my fault that he didn’t get selected.”Morrison was passed over despite having hit 24 home runs, the third highest in baseball going into Wednesday’s games.“Gary shouldn’t be there,” Morrison told The Tampa Bay Times on Tuesday. “Gary’s a great player, but he shouldn’t be in the Home Run Derby.”He added: “I remember when I had 14 home runs. That was a month and a half ago.”Sanchez, who actually has 13 home runs, missed 21 games with a biceps strain earlier this season. He said he had met Morrison, but that the two had only a passing relationship.Morrison said he was not specifically pushing for his own inclusion in the Derby, which will also include Sanchez’s teammate Aaron Judge, the major league home run leader this season.“It’s not even about that,” Morrison said. “I think Mike Moustakas should be there.” He was referring to the Kansas City Royals third baseman who also had 24 home runs going into Wednesday’s games.“I’m not disappointed,” Morrison said. “It’s par for the course. I play for the Rays. I get it.”Morrison said he was accustomed to the slights that come with playing for one of the game’s less prestigious teams, such as having seen a teammate’s picture appear next to his name on MLB Network.“Probably if they would have asked me, I would have done it,” he said of the Home Run Derby organizers.Instead, he will watch how Sanchez does.Advertisement