AdvertisementSupported byOn TennisBy Christopher ClareyWIMBLEDON, England — It once would have been quite reasonable to believe that Ernests Gulbis would become the first Latvian to win a Grand Slam singles title.Instead, the trailblazer turned out to be Jelena Ostapenko, and when the 20-year-old from Riga finished off her stunning run at the French Open on June 10, Gulbis was lying on a trainer’s table in Santa Cruz de Tenerife in the Canary Islands, receiving physical therapy.“I wasn’t watching on TV,” Gulbis said in an interview on Thursday. “I was following it on live scoring. Unbelievable.”It was indeed a big moment for a small place. Latvia, on the shores of the Baltic Sea, has about two million inhabitants. But it is definitely punching above its weight on the tennis court, whatever the surface, and on Thursday, Gulbis delivered another unexpected roundhouse by sweeping past 29th-seeded Juan Martín del Potro in straight sets at Wimbledon, 6-4, 6-4, 7-6 (3).In the third round, Gulbis will face Novak Djokovic, who is still seeded No. 2 but not yet back to being the same flexible, indefatigable force who dominated the sport and its Grand Slam tournaments for much of this decade.But then Gulbis is quite a bit further from his own peak.“I had nothing to lose also this match, and I played well,” Gulbis said of the del Potro upset. “I’m going to have even less to lose next match. Maybe I’ll play even better.”Or maybe — thrown off by Djokovic’s defense, depth and latest all-star entourage — Gulbis will exit the zone and spray groundstrokes and returns far and wide.It is impossible to know, as is often the case with Gulbis, a flickering flame now ranked 589th.“That number is a good joke; we’re going to laugh about it, I hope, very soon,” Gulbis’s coach, Pjotrs Necajevs, said as he walked to the locker room at the All England Lawn Tennis and Croquet Club (people tend to forget the croquet part).Still, Necajevs knows that Gulbis’s plummet from tennis prominence has been no laughing matter.“Dropping in the ranking; asking for a wild card here and there, and nobody gives the wild cards,” Necajevs said. “Look, when you lose, nobody cares about you. When you win, suddenly, you know, all the doors are open.”Gulbis broke into the top 10 after reaching the semifinals of the French Open in 2014. But his tour singles record since then — 29-49 — resembles that of a journeyman, not a contender.The issues have been attitudinal and, more recently, physical. There have been shoulder problems and a wrist injury that forced him to miss the second half of the 2016 season. Lately, the injuries have been more nagging: a micro-tear in a calf muscle in late April and then an abdominal muscle tear during a challenger event in the Czech Republic last month.“This has been the story this season,” Gulbis said of the setbacks.But he still made it to Wimbledon, where he entered the main draw with a protected ranking and a beard worthy of a desert island. He has yet to lose a set in two matches — his first victories on tour in more than a year.So where has the tennis he displayed on Thursday been hiding?“Practice court,” Gulbis said, deadpan.It has become conventional practice to describe Gulbis, 28, as a great, unrealized talent. But talent is a slippery word, as his former coach Günter Bresnik pointed out when we spoke in Paris last month.Bresnik coached Gulbis and Dominic Thiem for several years before splitting with Gulbis last year.“In my 30 years of coaching, whoever was really successful worked harder than the others,” Bresnik said. “Thomas Muster, they even called him not talented, and he become No. 1, won the French Open, and all these titles. You can define talent as someone who picks things up easier, faster, but what if it doesn’t stick? For example, if I tell Dominic to hit a backhand drop shot, he misses the first 50, but afterwards, after he starts making the first two or three, it stays in his system forever.“And Gulbis, you tell him, and he does it the first time right, but if you tell him the same thing in two or three days, it’s not there anymore. This, for me, is talent, too.”The killer combination, of course, is both talent and hard work, and in an age when the leading men and women are winning plenty of titles in their 30s, it seems rash to write off Gulbis in his late 20s.Even he said he was on the “last-chance train” when he made his big push in 2014.“I was wrong,” he said, with a grin. “Maybe now is the last-chance train. Maybe is going to be another last chance in five years. Who knows?”It seems even rasher to write off Gulbis’s next opponent, at age 30. Djokovic cruised again on Thursday, defeating No. 136-ranked Adam Pavlasek, 6-2, 6-2, 6-1. After winning Eastbourne last week, Djokovic has now won six matches in a row for the first time since January.But the memory lingers of his desultory final set against Thiem in the French Open quarterfinals.John McEnroe, speaking on the BBC this week, compared Djokovic’s struggles to those experience by the golfer Tiger Woods in 2009, speculating that marital trouble might have put Djokovic into a similar downward spiral on the court.No matter what he thought in private of such comments, Djokovic has stuck to the high road in public. “He has his right to say the things he wants to say,” Djokovic said of McEnroe on Thursday. “I don’t necessarily need to agree with that, but it’s his right.”Djokovic certainly has embraced change: adding Andre Agassi to his coaching team in Paris and adding the former Croatian star Mario Ancic here. That is a lot of brain power in one man’s corner, but there is also the risk of overthinking the problem in a game that relies so much on instinct and the confidence to swing freely when a very small opening presents itself.“When you are winning, of course, your ego, your confidence is high,” Djokovic said. “Why would you change anything? I know many times in the course of the last couple of years where I was just going against the signals of my body, where I was probably needing to maybe take a little break or rest or maybe skip a certain tournament. I wasn’t doing that. It gave me results, fine, but the interest rate came, and the payment came a bit later, and it came two or three times as hard as maybe it would before that.”Gulbis, once Djokovic’s practice partner at Niki Pilic’s tennis academy in Munich, knows plenty about nasty aftereffects. For now, Djokovic’s decline is a slip compared to Gulbis’s free fall.Who knows what happens next, other than that on Saturday their career paths will intersect again?Advertisement