By WALLACE MATTHEWSJULY 5, 2017
When Michael Pineda left the mound in the fourth inning of Wednesday’s game against the Toronto Blue Jays to a mixed chorus — jeers for him and cheers for Manager Joe Girardi coming out to collect him — few at Yankee Stadium could have suspected that they had witnessed only the day’s second-worst performance by a Yankees pitcher.The worst came four innings later, when Dellin Betances, at one time as reliable as gravity, once again could hardly manage to get the ball over the plate.As the Yankees’ setup man, Betances earned a spot in his fourth consecutive All-Star Game, and he has been among the best relief pitchers in the game during his career. But on Wednesday, he walked four of the five batters he faced, capping it by walking Russell Martin with the bases loaded to force in the winning run in a 7-6 Yankees loss.Betances’s implosion came after the Yankees had fought back from a 5-0 hole that Pineda had dug. Two home runs fueled the comeback, one that was unsurprising — a two-run shot by Aaron Judge, who leads the major leagues in homers with 29 — and one that few would have predicted: a two-run blast by Ji-Man Choi, a player known to few Yankees fans just 24 hours earlier.AdvertisementWhen the Yankees took the lead on a two-run double by Didi Gregorius in the fifth inning, the stage seemed set for a blueprint Yankees victory over a team at the bottom of their division, with their once high-octane bullpen of Betances and closer Aroldis Chapman poised to slam the door.AdvertisementBut that formerly watertight unit has sprung leaks lately. Chapman struggled to finish off a 6-3 victory over the Blue Jays on Monday, and the seventh-inning man Tyler Clippard struggled mightily in June, compiling a 11.17 E.R.A. No pitcher, however, is floundering worse than Betances.“In the short term, I’m concerned about him, but in the long term, I’m not,” Girardi said. “Obviously, he’s too good and his track record is too good for this to continue. Right now, physically, he’s off and we have to get him back.”Girardi emphasized the word “have,” making the message clear: Without an effective Betances, Chapman and, to a lesser extent, Clippard, the Yankees’ current slide would continue. Wednesday’s loss was their second in a row, fourth in their last five and 16th in their last 22 games, a skid that began June 13.On that day, they held a four-game lead in the American League East over the Boston Red Sox. They were four and a half games back before the Red Sox played a Wednesday night game against the Texas Rangers.“Just as easy as you can lose ’em, you can turn it around and get hot and win a lot of games like we were before,” Girardi said. “We are scuffling right now. But we are having opportunities to win games and we have to find a way to do it.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.That may be easier than finding a solution to what is ailing Betances. He and Girardi insist he is healthy, and his fastball, which sometimes tops 100 miles per hour, has not wavered.But in a game in which pitchers missing their target by inches can be cause for concern, Betances at times was missing the strike zone by as much as a foot. In the eighth inning, he threw 10 consecutive pitches out of the strike zone, and the crowd, often critical of home plate umpires, had no cause to grumble. Most of Betances’s misses were wild outside, and it did not seem to matter whether the hitter was left-handed or right-handed, or whether Betances was working from the windup or the stretch.“It’s frustrating,” Betances said. “I feel like I’m not consistent with my mechanics right now. I find that my stuff is there, but the timing in my delivery is not there and it’s causing me to fall behind guys and walk guys. I have to look at some video and try to see what I can find to help myself when I’m out there.”AdvertisementBetances has been plagued with control problems before; the Yankees shifted him to reliever from starter in 2012 when he could not consistently throw strikes in Class AA and AAA games. But even at his wildest in the minor leagues — he walked 99 batters in 131 ⅓ innings in the minors that year — he was never as wild as he has been this season.In 27 ⅓ innings this season, Betances has walked 26 batters. And with his difficulty in holding on runners, a walk is often the equivalent of a double. There were no stolen bases off Betances on Wednesday, but none were necessary.“He’s our teammate and we’ve got his back,” said Judge, whose home run into the Yankees’ bullpen in the fourth inning tied the Yankees’ record for home runs by a rookie, set in 1936 by Joe DiMaggio. “We’re behind him 100 percent.”In reality, the Yankees have no choice. Pineda allowed back-to-back home runs by Justin Smoak and Kendrys Morales in the third inning and the solo shot by Kevin Pillar that helped chase him in the fourth. C. C. Sabathia had a rocky start on Tuesday, and after his early-season brilliance, Luis Severino has allowed 16 earned runs in his last 24 ⅓ innings, a 5.91 E.R.A.With Yankees starters averaging five and two-thirds innings per outing, a reliable bullpen is more necessary than ever. But Betances has been so shaky that Girardi entertained the possibility of using him in lower-leverage situations reserved for middle relievers.“Obviously, I’ve been in this spot before,” Betances said. “I put myself in a tough spot and I put my team in a bad spot. I want to pitch in the good situations and I know I can get anybody out. I just have to trust myself and go do it.”A version of this article appears in print on July 6, 2017, on Page B15 of the New York edition with the headline: Bad Start For Yanks, And Relief Is No Better.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.