By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSJAN. 7, 2017
INDIANAPOLIS — Jeff Teague is providing the boost behind Indiana’s surging offense.“Jeff, to me, is the M.V.P. of this five-game win streak,” the veteran center Al Jefferson said after Teague and Paul George each scored 19 points to lead the Pacers to a 123-109 victory over the Knicks on Saturday. “He’s getting everyone involved and setting the tone.”Teague, who was 9 of 9 from the free-throw line, also had eight assists. The Pacers have scored more than 120 points in each of their last three games and at least 111 throughout their current streak, their longest of the season.Thaddeus Young had 16 points and 9 rebounds, C. J. Miles added 15 points off the bench, and the Pacers extended their streak of regular-season home wins over the Knicks to nine.“We have guys who can put the ball in the basket,” Pacers Coach Nate McMillan said. “In this winning streak, we have established that we can run the offense and focus on making the right plays.”Carmelo Anthony and Brandon Jennings each scored 17 points for the Knicks, who lost for the seventh time in eight games. Kristaps Porzingis made four 3-pointers and finished with 16 points.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Pacers used a 14-2 run at the start of the second quarter to pull away. A Teague 3-pointer with 49 seconds to go in the first half put the Pacers ahead by 60-40 before Porzingis answered with a 3-pointer of his own. Miles then scored to give Indiana a 62-43 halftime lead.The Knicks’ trip to Indiana fell on the second night of a back-to-back. The Knicks overcame an 18-point deficit on Friday at Milwaukee, ending a six-game skid, but a 29-point hole against the Pacers was too deep for them to escape.“We didn’t come out with enough energy, and they were playing real good basketball,” Porzingis said. “Once you get down big like we did, it’s tough to get back into the game.”Miles made a 3-pointer at the start of the fourth quarter, giving Indiana a 99-70 lead, and Jefferson drained two free throws to make the score 103-80. The Knicks then went on a 14-2 run, closing the gap to 11 when Mindaugas Kuzminskas dunked with 4 minutes 57 seconds left.A version of this article appears in print on January 8, 2017, on Page SP6 of the New York edition with the headline: Teague Keeps Pacers Rolling, Past Knicks.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.