AdvertisementSupported byBy Benjamin HoffmanThe N.F.L. wild-card round did its job, eliminating those teams that limped into the playoffs while setting up more exciting matchups for the second weekend. Aaron Rodgers, fresh off another dominant performance, travels to Dallas to try and knock off the N.F.L.’s rookie sensations. Elsewhere, the Seahawks’ Legion of Boom faces a high-powered Falcons offense, the Patriots will take the Texans for a test drive on their way to the Super Bowl, and a banged-up Ben Roethlisberger leads the Steelers into Kansas City.Here’s a quick look at how the final 8 teams match up:No. 3 Seattle Seahawks (10-5-1) at No. 2 Atlanta Falcons (11-5)When: Saturday, 4:35 p.m. Eastern, FoxSpread: Falcons -4.5 pointsIt looked like a vintage Seahawks performance in the wild-card round, with the defense holding Detroit to 6 points as Thomas Rawls rumbled for 161 rushing yards, setting a franchise playoff record. But against the dynamic Atlanta offense, the absence of All-Pro safety Earl Thomas will be felt a lot more.No. 4 Green Bay Packers (10-6) at No. 1 Dallas Cowboys (13-3)When: Sunday, 4:40 p.m. Eastern, FoxSpread: Cowboys -4 pointsFor much of the season the Cowboys were the best and most consistent team in the N.F.L., but since the Packers and Aaron Rodgers closed the season with six consecutive wins, and then kept it going with a convincing wild-card win over the Giants, it is hard to argue there is a team playing better. The Cowboys are quite a challenge, though. If Green Bay works too hard to stop Ezekiel Elliott they may get burned by quarterback Dak Prescott, or vice versa.No. 3 Pittsburgh Steelers (11-5) at No. 2 Kansas City Chiefs (12-4)When: Sunday, 1:05 p.m. Eastern, NBCSpread: Chiefs -1 pointDespite a solid record, the Steelers of this season were not quite up to their celebrated predecessors, especially on defense. But in an easy wild-card win over Miami, Pittsburgh looked reborn into a hard-hitting unit capable of immense disruption. That being said, the Chiefs have come a long way since the Steelers crushed them 43-14 in Week 4, and have one of the few defenses that may slow down Le’Veon Bell and Antonio Brown, while also being a threat to score any time Tyreek Hill touches the ball.No. 4 Houston Texans (9-7) at No. 1 New England Patriots (14-2)When: Saturday, 8:15 p.m. Eastern, CBSSpread: Patriots -16 pointsThe Texans looked great in shutting down Oakland’s Connor Cook, but will face a quarterback this week with a bit beefier of resume. Tom Brady is a legitimate candidate for Most Valuable Player despite missing the first four weeks of the season because of a suspension, and even though the Patriots’ game plan is weakened significantly with the season-ending injury to Rob Gronkowski, they still have enough offensive options that the game seemingly borders on unfair.In a wild-card matchup billed as a top offense against a top defense, offense asserted itself, and the Green Bay Packers rolled to a 38-13 victory over the Giants.It was a slow start for Aaron Rodgers, but after the Packers finished the first quarter having been outgained by the Giants to the tune of 105 yards versus 7, the Packers’ quarterback found his way, throwing for four touchdowns and 362 passing yards.The matchup bordered on boring for much of the first half, with the Giants taking a 6-0 lead, but then took a number of dramatic turns, with Rodgers shredding the Giants’ secondary, including completing yet another Hail Mary to add to his collection. His latest came on a 42-yard heave to Randall Cobb as time expired in the first half, with the ball somehow finding its way past the entire Giants defense before landing in Cobb’s arms at the back of the end zone.While the Hail Mary led to the Packers leading 14-6 at halftime, the Giants looked like they could be on the comeback trail when they smothered the Packers on a few short running attempts in the third quarter leading to a turnover on downs. The Giants then capitalized on the Packers’ failure to convert with Eli Manning’s 41-yard touchdown to Tavarres King that made it a 14-13 game.Despite the Giants’ brief resurgence, the Packers’ offense was almost unstoppable even after losing Jordy Nelson for the game thanks to a hit to the ribs that he took in the first half. Nelson, the team’s top wide receiver, had just 1 catch for 13 yards, but Cobb more than made up for his absence by catching 5 passes for 116 yards. He tied the playoff record with 3 receiving touchdowns, and Davante Adams was nearly as good, contributing 7 catches for 107 yards and a touchdown.In a televised interview, Rodgers did not mince words when describing his struggles up until the final three minutes of the first half.“I was bad in the first half,” Rodgers said. “I was struggling to find a rhythm, they were covering really well, I took some sacks.”Rodgers cited his own problems with holding onto the ball in the pocket too long with creating some of the problems, but was in a jovial mood despite enduring five sacks from the Giants’ hard-hitting defense.The Packers’ defense, meanwhile, held tough holding the Giants to a pair of field goals despite a huge early yardage deficit, and then closed the game out strong. Manning finished the game having completed 23 of 44 passes for 299 yards, 1 touchdown and 1 interception, never looking comfortable on Green Bay’s side of the field. Giants receiver Odell Beckham Jr. struggled against a banged-up Packers secondary, dropping two passes in the first quarter and failing to have an impact in the second half.After a wild-card weekend of games that were seemingly never in doubt, much was made about the potential competitiveness of this game, and it delivered for the most part despite the lopsided result.The Giants had finished the season tied for the second best record in the N.F.C., but were forced to go on the road because the Packers were division champions. The cold weather at Lambeau Field was no problem for a Packers’ offense that was the hottest in the N.F.L. over the course of a six-game winning streak that culminated with the team winning the N.F.C. North on the last day of the season. During the streak, Rodgers threw 15 touchdowns and 0 interceptions, and including today’s game he has now thrown 22 touchdowns since his last interception.On a cold day in Pittsburgh, going up against a team loaded with big names, the Miami Dolphins’ improbable and tenacious season came to a close with the star-laden Steelers rolling to a 30-12 wild-card round victory that was never in doubt.There were few surprises in the game plan, as the Steelers employed their tried-and-true approach to offense, with Antonio Brown and Le’Veon Bell collecting two touchdowns each.Initially, Ben Roethlisberger deftly used Bell and his various other receiver options to soften up the Miami defense just enough to create openings for Brown, who used his catch-and-run ability to race for touchdowns of 50 and 62 yards.With a lead opened up, and all eyes on Brown, the Steelers turned to Bell, who in his first career playoff game rushed for a franchise-record 167 yards. He topped the previous mark of 158, set by Franco Harris in Super Bowl IX.The Steelers amassed 367 yards on 54 plays, with Roethlisberger completing 13 of 18 passes for 197 yards, letting Brown and Bell essentially steal the show.The offensive output, combined with a turn-back-the clock game by the team’s defense, overwhelmed the Dolphins, who had survived losing the team’s starters and quarterback and running back during the season to finish with a surprisingly good 10-6 record and the No. 6 seed in the A.F.C. playoffs.The Dolphins endured a scare at the end of the first half when Matt Moore, who took over the starting quarterback position when Ryan Tannehill was injured in Week 14, took a brutal helmet-to-helmet hit from Steelers linebacker Bud Dupree, and was forced to leave the game. Moore cleared the N.F.L.’s concussion protocol and returned one play later, but it was just one of several big hits he took during the game, including sacks by James Harrison and Mike Mitchell, both of which resulted in fumbles recovered by Pittsburgh.Moore ended up completing 29 of 36 passes for 289 yards. He was sacked five times, fumbled twice and threw one interception.The game was a far cry from Miami’s 30-15 upset of Pittsburgh in Week 6 that started a four-game losing streak for the Steelers. In that game, Jay Ajayi made a name for himself with 204 rushing yards and 2 touchdowns, but in the rematch Bell outgained his Dolphins’ counterpart in rushing yards 167 to 33, with Ajayi exiting late in the game with a shoulder injury.With the win, Pittsburgh will now travel to Kansas City to face the Chiefs in the divisional round, and the Houston Texans will travel to New England to face the Patriots.Giants wide receiver Odell Beckham Jr. has compiled a highlight reel of spectacular grabs. But what sets Beckham apart is not that he holds onto the football. It’s what happens after the ball is in his hands.■ The Houston Texans rolled past the Oakland Raiders, in a 27-14 game that was never in doubt. Brock Osweiler deserved some praise after his re-emergence, but the lopsided score had just as much to do with Connor Cook’s inability to overcome his lack of experience. The rookie, making his first career start, attempted a remarkable 45 passes and only completed 18, though the number climbs to 21 if you count his three interceptions. Cook got no help from Michael Crabtree and Amari Cooper. He targeted the standout wide receivers 17 times and they came away with just 4 receptions. The Texans are still waiting for the Steelers-Dolphins result to find out their opponent in the divisional round.■ The Seattle Seahawks located the team’s missing running game just in time for the playoffs, and Thomas Rawls steamrolled the Detroit Lions with 161 yards on 27 carries. Rawls’s performance may not have had the highlight reel aspect of Marshawn Lynch’s Beast Mode days, but it set a franchise record for rushing yards in a playoff game. Rawls, despite limited playing time over two seasons, now has three of the top-20 rushing performances in Seahawks history. Lynch’s best game is ranked 21st. Seattle’s defense also looked playoff-ready, smothering the high-powered Lions in a 26-6 laugher. The Seahawks will face Atlanta in the divisional round.Advertisement