AdvertisementSupported byKeeping ScoreBy Benjamin HoffmanAn N.B.A. playoff team with a great defense and a building-block star fired its polarizing coach and replaced him with a rookie coach who had been a sharpshooter in the 1990s. It was a recipe that worked so well for the Golden State Warriors that the Chicago Bulls went out and did virtually the same thing a year later.Unfortunately, under Coach Fred Hoiberg, the Bulls have found that going from good to great can be a lot harder than the Warriors made it look.After losing at home on Wednesday by 115-107 against the Knicks, whom they also face Thursday in New York, the Bulls are ninth in the Eastern Conference playoff race. The offensive leap the franchise was searching for when it fired Coach Tom Thibodeau last year has yet to materialize.The knock on Thibodeau was that he built great defenses and got maximum effort from players but could not summon enough offense for his team to be a true contender. Under Hoiberg, the Bulls were supposed to learn to score. Instead, they have regressed, averaging 104.3 points per 100 possessions, more than 3 points lower than their mark last season. And the defense, hampered by a season-ending injury to Joakim Noah, is allowing 105.5 points per 100 possessions, a worse mark than in any season under Thibodeau.Blaming Hoiberg for all of the problems would be unfair. The team has dealt with significant injuries — Jimmy Butler, Derrick Rose and Noah have missed a combined 67 games — but even when everyone was healthy, there seemed to be disagreement over the team’s direction, with Noah, a former defensive player of the year and an excellent passing center, struggling to adapt.Players and fans seemed confused, too, as to why the team was so adamant about changing. In Thibodeau’s time in Chicago, the Bulls were viewed as a team that outperformed expectations, rallying to compete no matter how thin the roster became because of injuries and illnesses.Some have cited the Warriors’ bold move of firing Coach Mark Jackson after he led the team to a 51-win season as a justification for the Bulls to part with Thibodeau, but Thibodeau averaged 51 wins over five years despite being shortchanged 16 games by the lockout in 2011-12. The one time he had his full team intact for a season, he won 62 games, reaching the Eastern Conference finals, and the Bulls might have won it all if not for a knee injury to Rose.But after dumping a coach so highly regarded that he is now touring the league as a defensive consultant while waiting for his next squad to mold in his image — the Knicks, anyone? — the Bulls are left looking for positives in a season in which they have become far less scary to opponents.The best thing to happen to the Bulls has been the steady re-emergence of Rose as a force on offense. He may not be back to the most-valuable-player level that he was at in 2010-11, but over the last two months, he has averaged 19.8 points and 5.6 assists while starting in 18 of the Bulls’ 24 games. Paired with Butler, a healthy Rose gives the Bulls one of the best backcourts in basketball.“He’s playing his best stretch of basketball; there’s no doubt about it,” Hoiberg told reporters recently. “He’s raising up and taking and making clutch shots with no fear. He’s attacking the basket.”But perhaps the starkest reminder that Hoiberg, not Thibodeau, is running the show in Chicago is the recent development of Doug McDermott, a second-year forward from Creighton. Among players with 1,500 or more minutes, McDermott has been the 19th-least efficient defender in the N.B.A., according to Basketball-Reference.com, which would probably have earned him a permanent spot on Thibodeau’s bench. But Hoiberg, who seems less committed to the idea of keeping defensively inclined veterans on the court, has continued to give McDermott opportunities, and he has averaged 13.5 points a game over the last two months while shooting 42.9 percent from 3-point range.Even with Rose and McDermott stepping up, Pau Gasol continuing to be an offensive force and Butler holding a claim as one of the best two-way players in the game, Chicago is in line for its worst record since 2009-10, the season before Thibodeau arrived.Expecting an immediate improvement like the one the Warriors had under Steve Kerr was unrealistic, and the Bulls can be forgiven for not immediately being able to adjust to a new coach and strategy. But the hope will have to be that with another year of Hoiberg and some better health, the Bulls can figure out how to get into the top half of teams in the Eastern Conference again. Advertisement