By JULIE ROBENHYMERMARCH 24, 2016
ANN ARBOR, Mich. —  The University of Michigan men’s hockey team has 35 N.C.A.A. tournament appearances, 24 Frozen Four berths and nine national championships — all records.That is why the past three seasons were particularly difficult for the Wolverines, who barely missed the postseason each year. And that is also why, with the Wolverines (24-7-5) back in the N.C.A.A. tournament this month, they are setting their sights high.“Expectations are always high at Michigan,” said the junior forward Tyler Motte, a fourth-round draft pick of the Chicago Blackhawks in 2013. “That’s why you come here. You want to find success both on the ice and in the classroom and be part of that winning tradition. It’s been a big goal of ours to make it back to the tournament, but that’s not our only goal. We know we are capable of more.”Michigan certainly has the lineup for it. The Wolverines average 4.8 goals per game, led by the freshman Kyle Connor, who has 35 goals and 34 assists. Drafted 17th over all by the Winnipeg Jets last June, Connor is No. 1 in Division I in goals and points and, with Motte and the junior captain J. T. Compher, forms the most potent line in college hockey. Motte is second in goals, with 31, and Compher is second in points with 60, including his Division I-leading 46 assists.Advertisement“They clicked right away,” said Coach Red Berenson, who is in his 32nd season behind the bench here. “J. T. and Tyler played together a lot with the U.S. National Team Development Program before they got here, and I always felt that if nothing else worked, if I put J. T. and Tyler together, they’d get the job done.Advertisement“They’re the engine that drives the bus. It’s second-effort hockey at its best. Tyler blocks more shots than just about our whole team put together. He pays the price every night, as does J. T., who does a lot of the heavy lifting. They’re both really good players, and with Kyle, they’ve just become much more offensive.”All three are finalists for the Hobey Baker Memorial Award, given to the best player in college hockey, but Connor, who was named the Big Ten player of the year, has taken the lead.“You knew before he even got on campus that he was going to be an impact player,” Berenson said. “He was the player of the year in the U.S.H.L., led the league in scoring, and he did everything at a very high level. He came here with high expectations and he lived up to them.“He’s paying attention, and he’s working hard and growing into a more complete player, and he’s being rewarded. He knows how to get open, and he gets his shot off as quick as anybody can, and he’s accurate. He’s a pure goal scorer. There’s no other way to say it.”Compher, a second-round draft pick of the Buffalo Sabres in 2013, added, “Kyle is so dynamic and so fast that Tyler and I had to elevate our game to be able to play with him, and we all do a great job of creating opportunities for each other.”Berenson is confident in the Wolverines’ ability to put the puck in the net, but with the team giving up an average of three goals per game, it is his players’ ability to keep the puck out of their own net that has his attention.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I always say that you can’t outscore your mistakes,” he said, “and this year they’re trying really hard to prove me wrong.”AdvertisementFor the players, it comes down to puck possession.“Our defensive game is going to be crucial if we want to win,” Connor said. “The more aggressive we are on the backcheck, the more turnovers we’ll force, the more we control the puck and are able to make our own opportunities. They can’t score if they don’t have the puck.”After earning the Big Ten championship with a 5-3 victory over Minnesota last Saturday, the Wolverines turned their focus to an N.C.A.A. tournament game against Notre Dame on Friday. It is an opportunity three years in the making.“I think they just need to continue to play hard and play on the right side of the puck,” Berenson said. “Of course, there’s the defensive side of things, and we’ve gone over our goals-against and our penalty killing and face-offs and all the little things that have to fall into place. But I think this team has what it takes to move forward, and it’s our job to make sure they know that the bar moves higher every week from here on.”He added: “They came to Michigan to play in big games. It’s time to play.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.