By EMMA STONEYJUNE 9, 2016
WELLINGTON, New Zealand — Some of Australia’s most celebrated players and coaches can trace their rugby roots to the Randwick Rugby Club in Sydney.England Coach Eddie Jones and Australia Coach Michael Cheika played as teammates with Randwick in the 1980s, when the Ella brothers — Mark, Glen and Gary — were weaving their magic and Bob Dwyer was coach. The attacking mind-set and physical approach prevalent at Randwick has remained with Jones and Cheika ever since.While Jones and Cheika remain friends, their camaraderie will be put on hold over the next three weekends as Australia hosts England for three tests, with the first in Brisbane on Saturday.“It’s obviously fun having someone that you know pretty well opposing you,” Cheika said. “His daughter works with us at the Australian Rugby Union, so it’s a bit weird in that way. But it’s nothing different. He’s going to be doing his best and we’re going to be doing ours, like you would in any game.”AdvertisementNeither coach is averse to playing mind games to give his team an advantage and while Cheika has been strangely quiet in the buildup to the first test, Jones has been fiery. He was stopped and had his belongings searched by customs officials on arrival in Australia and suggested it was all part of a coordinated campaign, assisted by Australia’s media, to help the Wallabies win.AdvertisementEngland, the Six Nations champion, has never won a series in Australia and has beaten the Wallabies only three times in 17 tests on their turf — twice in 2003, including the Rugby World Cup final, and once in 2010.England has markedly improved under Jones, who took over after the team’s disastrous 2015 World Cup. But Australia, a World Cup finalist last year, will provide a far tougher test than Wales, Ireland, Scotland, France and Italy did during the Six Nations.The Australian players generally play a quicker, higher-intensity style with their Super Rugby teams than their English counterparts do with their clubs.While Jones concedes rugby in the Northern Hemisphere is slower, he is adamant that his players are not any less skillful or fit, though they are not used to facing all-out attacking rugby on a regular basis.“The only way we can change that is by training at a much higher intensity and a much higher quality,” said Jones, who has brought Glen Ella in to work with the England back line. “That’s what we started doing during the Six Nations, and we’ll continue through the Australia tour.“We need to be good at the things England rugby has always been good at. That’s being absolutely efficient at set-piece and punishing in defense. Then, the plus bit of our rugby needs to be our ability to attack off our own ball and off opposition ball, and the Australian tour is a great opportunity for us to keep moving in that direction.”To get the physical dominance that Jones believes England will need to beat the Wallabies, the coach has suggested his team employ its own version of cricket’s notorious “bodyline” tactic — a reference to the 1932-33 Ashes series when England’s fast bowlers were told to aim at the bodies of Australian batsmen to nullify them.AdvertisementCheika however, is not concerned. “They’ve talked about coming here and being very physical, and I think that’s good play. I enjoy that idea,” he said.“I think our players, even though we might be a bit smaller, will be up for the physical battle when it comes.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Australia has seven players on its roster who could make their debut, with Karmichael Hunt the most high-profile.Hunt, a former rugby league and Australian rules football player, has been on Cheika’s radar since switching to rugby union last year and received support from the Wallabies coach even after he pleaded guilty to cocaine possession, a scandal that threatened to derail his fledgling rugby union career. Hunt is not scheduled to play Saturday, and will have to wait at least a week to earn his first Wallabies cap.Ben Te’o, who was born in New Zealand and played rugby league in Australia for a decade, has been the most talked-about new player for England. The big, imposing midfield back was a teammate with Sam Burgess when both played rugby league for the South Sydney Rabbitohs. Burgess switched to rugby union to play for England in the 2015 World Cup, and he drew plenty of scorn after the team’s poor showing at the tournament. In November, shortly after the World Cup ended, he announced he was returning to rugby league.Jones is confident that Te’o, who qualified to play for England via his mother and has played two seasons of rugby union with Leinster in Ireland, will have a far more successful transition to international rugby union than Burgess did.“Te’o can carry the ball well, he’s got a short passing game and he’s good defensively,” Jones said. “He’s a high-quality rugby league player and history shows that most, most, high-quality league players have made their mark in rugby.”Australia and England are not the only major nations in action during June.Wales Coach Warren Gatland has taken an experienced roster to New Zealand for its three-test series against the world champions.History is against the Welsh, who have not beaten the All Blacks since 1953, and never on New Zealand soil.After a mixed Six Nations, it is difficult to see Wales ending that losing streak, even though the All Blacks will have a new look to them. The core of the World Cup-winning group remains under the new captain Kieran Read. Coach Steve Hansen has stressed the All Blacks are not rebuilding, but “re-establishing” — an ominous warning for their rivals.AdvertisementSouth Africa however, is going through a huge rebuilding as it prepares to face Ireland. South Africa has a new coach, Allister Coetzee; a new captain, Adriaan Strauss; and a 31-man roster that includes 12 nonwhite players as the Springboks look to meet the government’s “transformation” policy. By the 2019 World Cup in Japan, South Africa’s roster must be 50 percent nonwhite.A version of this article appears in print on June 10, 2016, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.