JAN. 29, 2016
The best-selling sports books in December 2015, according to the New York Times best-seller list:1. THE BOYS IN THE BOAT, by Daniel James Brown (Penguin). A group of American rowers pursued gold at the 1936 Berlin Olympic Games.2. CONCUSSION, by Jeanne Marie Laskas (Random House). The story of Bennet Omalu (who inspired the movie), the forensic pathologist who found proof that blows to the head caused the extreme mental deterioration of a former professional football star — unwelcome news to the N.F.L.3. UNBROKEN, by Laura Hillenbrand (Random House). An Olympic runner’s story of survival as a prisoner of the Japanese in World War II; a 2014 movie.4. ABOVE THE LINE, by Urban Meyer with Wayne Coffey (Penguin Press). A championship-winning college football coach shares his insights on team building and leadership.Advertisement5. SUPER BOWL GOLD, by the editors of Sports Illustrated (Time Inc. Books). A 50-year retrospective volume celebrates football’s Super Bowl with photographs and anecdotes.Advertisement6. THE THREE-YEAR SWIM CLUB, by Julie Checkoway (Grand Central). Maui’s Sugar Ditch Kids and their quest for Olympic glory in 1937.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.7. 50 YEARS, 50 MOMENTS, by Jerry Rice and Randy O. Williams (Dey Street). A scrapbook of photographs and statistics commemorates the 50th anniversary of football’s Super Bowl.8. BARBARIAN DAYS, by William Finnegan (Penguin). A surfing chronicle and memoir by a New Yorker writer.9. IT’S GOOD TO BE GRONK, by Rob Gronkowski with Jason Rosenhaus. (Gallery/Jeter). The football life of the New England Patriots tight end.10. RAW, by Colin Cowherd (Gallery Books). The ESPN radio show host shares an “unfiltered” insider’s view of professional sports.And One17. SABAN, by Monte Burke (Simon & Schuster). A biography of Nick Saban, the University of Alabama football coach.Rankings reflect sales for December 2015. The sports titles ranked here are selected by the editors from among all adult nonfiction books in all print and electronic formats, as reported to the New York Times best-seller list for the previous month. The definition of sports is deliberately broad and inclusive, so as to reflect all aspects of the sports world, varying from the professional leagues to personal athleticism. A version of this list appears in print on January 30, 2016, on Page D6 of the New York edition with the headline: The Best Sellers: Filed Under Sports.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.