By STEVE BRENNERJUNE 8, 2016
ORLANDO, Fla. — It will undoubtedly take more than a convincing win over Haiti to reinvigorate Brazil’s love affair with its national soccer team.With only 35 minutes on the stadium clock, Brazil, five-time world champions, already had three goals against an earnest collection of Haitian players who were content enough to be joining the party at this summer’s Copa América Centenario without registering a seismic result against a team that has traditionally been one of the game’s powers.The Brazilian team, known as the Seleção, would go on to score seven times, satisfying the healthy-sized crowd, announced at 28,241, with the tournament’s highest-scoring game so far. Philippe Coutinho, the Liverpool forward, was impressive, scoring three of Brazil’s goals.“We are humble, but a result like this gives us confidence,” said Brazil defender Filipe Luís. “Coutinho is a great player, who showed it on the pitch.”AdvertisementBut for Dunga, Brazil’s coach, problems remain.No matter what story the scoreboard told, there is an acute lack of interest among Brazil’s fans in the Seleçäo’s progress this summer. With the Rio Olympics looming, fans seemed to shrug at Brazil’s draw in the opening match of the tournament, in which an unlucky Ecuadorean team was denied a victory by some questionable officiating.AdvertisementConfidence among Dunga’s players has been understandably low. And a meeting with Haiti, ranked 71st, would probably only marginally reinvigorate a team under the pressure it faces.Brazil’s mystique remains in the hearts of those who recall their glory days. Such was the magic from legendary players such as Pelé, Jairzinho, Zico, Ronaldo and Romário, that it was impossible not to be enthralled.The current Brazilian squad, however — which effectively played its B team, having rested Neymar for the Olympics — will need to dispatch better teams than Haiti before it can entertain dreams of returning to soccer’s summit.Brazil was last crowned World Cup champion in 2002, and triumphed in the Copa América five years later. Since then, there has been little to excite a nation whose lifeblood is the most popular sport on the planet.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Indeed, the embarrassment of losing by 7-1 to Germany on home soil in the 2014 World Cup semifinals was the nadir for those who had grown sick and tired of the C.B.F., Brazilian soccer’s governing body, which had become embroiled in corruption and a crackdown on irregular activity within FIFA.“Football was our drug, but now we are sober and having to face a dark reality,” said Leonardo Licinio, a soccer fan in Brazil. “Corruption, economic crisis, unemployment. The phantom of that 7-1 haunts us.”As Dunga lamented his team’s ability to prepare since arriving in the United States — the team was unable to practice at Camping World Stadium on Tuesday because of heavy rainfall — he spoke that day like a man who was feeling intense heat. The tide, it was clear, could not be turned on this result.AdvertisementWhat mattered most, it seemed, was that the manner of play had to pay homage to Brazilian legend.The team would have to move the ball with panache and vigor. It would have to attack or excite.The Haitians, whose soccer-crazed population has always fawned over Brazil and its South American rival Argentina, injected a sense of excitement into this match, even if they saw little of the ball in the opening stages. Casemiro, the Real Madrid midfielder, almost opened the scoring for Brazil seven minutes into the game when a long-range effort was deflected wide of goalkeeper Johnny Placide’s net.Yet Coutinho’s excellent run and finish at 14 minutes left Placide with no chance of averting danger. It was an excellent goal and one that invigorated Dunga’s team. Coutinho’s second goal, at 29 minutes, was far more straightforward — he rolled the ball in from close range after Jonas had teed him up — though equally important.Renato Augusto’s header 10 minutes before the end of the first half ensured that the rest of the match resembled target practice for Brazil. Gabriel Barbosa, who was introduced as a second-half substitute, pushed the score to 4-0 at 59 minutes before Lucas Lima headed in a fifth goal soon after. Augusto made it six late in the game before Coutinho’s curling effort brought the crowd to its feet at the end.“Take nothing away from Brazil,” said Haiti’s Jean Marc Alexandre. “Their fifth team would beat most teams in the world. We made too many mistakes.”Haiti was ultimately outclassed but worked hard, though the result was never in doubt. Haiti’s consolation goal by James Marcelin at 69 minutes received the loudest cheer of the evening, speaking volumes about his team’s effort.Only when better opposition comes into view for Brazil, however, can the current state of Brazilian soccer be properly assessed. The test starts with Peru on Sunday in Brazil’s final group game.A version of this article appears in print on June 9, 2016, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: Brazil Overwhelms Haiti at Copa América.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.