By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSAUG. 6, 2016
ANN ARBOR, Mich. — Jim Harbaugh’s ways seem to be working with his target audience.Harbaugh, Michigan’s football coach, has starred in a rap video, traveled the country for youth camps, taken his team to Florida for spring break, traded barbs on Twitter and even had sleepovers with recruits.He has done all of that — and more — entering his second season with the Wolverines.If generating buzz to attract recruits to help revive a storied program is Harbaugh’s aim, he is hitting the mark.Harbaugh is much more popular than Alabama Coach Nick Saban among millennial males, according to the Q Scores Company, a New York venture that measures the awareness and appeal of personalities. And at least some data shows Harbaugh is on the verge of having his celebrity transcend the sports world with those same young men between the ages of 18 and 34.“Harbaugh is making a significantly stronger impact than Saban among younger males, and that seems to be his objective,” Henry Schafer, executive vice president of the Q Scores Company, said in a telephone interview Friday. “And Harbaugh is on the cusp of being an iconic figure among the general population in the same demographic.”Nearly three-quarters of male sports fans between 18 and 34 are aware of Harbaugh. whose Q score is 25 among that group, meaning one of four millennial males said he was a favorite of his in a survey done earlier this year. Sixty-eight percent of millennial males surveyed are familiar with Saban, whose Q score is 21 for that group.AdvertisementThe Q Scores Company conducted its latest survey in February, just after Harbaugh slept at the houses of recruits and before he became the first college football coach — and perhaps the last — to take his team far off campus for spring drills in Florida. In June, he barnstormed the country for satellite camps that the N.C.A.A. had banned at the behest of the Southeastern Conference and the Atlantic Coast Conference. The ban was rescinded.Advertisement“I don’t know about Q ratings, but I do know that it was priceless to coach and teach 15-to-20-thousand youngsters at those camps,” Harbaugh said before throwing the ceremonial first pitch at a recent Chicago Cubs game. “Obviously, we didn’t do all those camps just for recruiting, because all of those youngsters aren’t coming to Michigan. But they were all introduced to and learned more about the great game of football.”Michigan was good, not great, in Harbaugh’s first season leading his alma mater.The Wolverines were 10-3, opening with a setback to Utah and losing later to Ohio State and Michigan State.Sam Manchester will guide you through the 2016 summer Olympics in Rio de Janeiro.Hey. It’s Sam from the NYT Sports desk. I’m at the Olympics in Rio (so you don’t have to be :)). Grab a limited spot and I’ll text you updates, answer your questions and share the behind-the-scenes stuff nobody else gets.Thanks! Talk to you soon.They are positioned for a successful start to this season, playing their first five games at home, all of which they will very likely be favored to win. They appear to have tougher tests in the back half of the schedule, including road games against the Buckeyes and the Spartans, rivals who have had their way with the maize and blue in recent years.If Harbaugh and the Wolverines do not win more games this season and lose to both rivals again, his efforts to create buzz will fall flat. And he will still have five fewer national championships than Saban.“Hype is just hype; it doesn’t mean anything,” Michigan receiver Jehu Chesson said. “You’ve got to beat your rivals, and we don’t shy away from that.”Between spring drills and training camp, Harbaugh appeared in a video with the rapper Bailey, whose song “Who’s Got It Better Than Us?” plays off a catch phrase of Harbaugh’s father, Jack. The senior Harbaugh asked his children, who include Baltimore Ravens Coach John Harbaugh, that question when they were growing up and “Nobody!” was the expected response.Jack Harbaugh, who recently moved into a house “500 feet” from his son’s house in Ann Arbor, said there was no disconnect between the perception and reality of Jim Harbaugh.Advertisement“Jim is who is he and he doesn’t ever worry about the backlash,” Jack Harbaugh said. “He took his shirt off at a camp, and people are still talking about it a year later. They asked him to be in a rap video and he had some fun with it. Some liked it. Others didn’t, and that doesn’t bother him.”His current players and the ones he is recruiting, those in the millennial group, seem to be fans of Harbaugh’s unique style.Harbaugh’s boss, Warde Manuel, does not fit in the same demographic. However, Manuel also admires Harbaugh’s approach and is thankful his first season in charge of the athletic department will be Harbaugh’s second on the sideline at the Big House.“Having him back has meant a lot to the university, athletic department and Michigan football in ways that can be measured: wins, ticket sales and donations,” Manuel said. “And in many intangible ways, he has made people feel good around here and from afar about him and Michigan.”A version of this article appears in print on August 7, 2016, on Page SP2 of the New York edition with the headline: Harbaugh’s Celebrity Builds Toward a Payoff at Michigan.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.