AdvertisementSupported byToronto F.C. 5, N.Y.C.F.C. 0 | Second leg | Toronto advances on aggregate, 7-0By Billy WitzWhen Major League Soccer announced the three finalists for most valuable player last week, Sebastian Giovinco, who won the award last year, was absent despite his 17 goals and 15 assists — the league’s highest combined total.Recount, anyone?Giovinco, the 5-foot-4 dynamo for Toronto F.C., provided a fresh reminder of how many ways he can influence a game on Sunday night, scoring early and often as his hat trick thrust Toronto F.C. into the Eastern Conference finals with a 5-0 pasting of New York City F.C. at Yankee Stadium.Toronto earned a 7-0 win on aggregate in the home-and-home series and will face Montreal for a spot in the M.L.S. Cup final.As for the M.V.P. finalists — who were selected by players, team staff members and news media members — N.Y.C.F.C. forward David Villa and Red Bulls midfielder Sacha Klejstan and forward Bradley Wright-Phillips had their teams eliminated from the playoffs on Sunday.While Giovinco had shrugged off the snub, his coach, Greg Vanney, called it ridiculous.“I’m not quite sure how he gets overlooked, but I only get one vote,” he said. “I think tonight, it was also an opportunity for him and the group to make a statement. Sometimes this group feels like they get overlooked for various reasons, and there’s no better place to make a statement than in the playoffs by making a run.”If space is hard to come by at Yankee Stadium — the 70-yard-by-110-yard playing surface is the smallest in the league — the smallest player on the field had no trouble finding it.In the sixth minute, Giovinco took a pass from Jozy Altidore with his back to the goal at the edge of the penalty area. Giovinco held off defender Maxime Chanot, turned neatly to his left to create an opening and unleashed a shot that beat goalkeeper Eirik Johansen to the near post.That goal meant that to advance, N.Y.C.F.C. would have to score four goals, something it had done four times this season. But even though Andrea Pirlo and Frank Lampard were back in the lineup after missing the first game with leg injuries, Toronto F.C. could clog the field.“Now they have to completely open up, which allowed us to have more chances, and we took those chances well,” Toronto F.C. center back Drew Moor said. “An away goal that early is always huge.”In the 20th minute, Giovinco drew a tripping foul from Frederic Brillant and tucked the resulting penalty kick inside the left post. A small but boisterous group of Toronto F.C. fans showered him with chants of “M-V-P.”By the time Altidore scored in the 30th minute, the rout was on. Jonathan Osorio added a goal in the 50th minute when Giovinco fed Will Johnson, who laid the ball off for Osorio. Giovinco finished the scoring by dipping a shot neatly past Johansen, just inside the far post, in stoppage time.It was a final dose of humiliation for N.Y.C.F.C., which was booed off the field at halftime. The team was spared a similar indignity at the end: Many in the crowd, announced at 28,355, had left.“I don’t want to blame our back four or our goalkeeper,” Coach Patrick Vieira said. “As a team, we didn’t defend well at all, and when you don’t defend well, you expose yourself.”Although N.Y.C.F.C. led the league in scoring during the regular season, it did not score in either game against Toronto F.C. While Pirlo created a handful of chances — for himself and for Lampard — their contributions to the defense were all but absent. The most vigorous defending by the home team came when stadium security officials tackled a fan who ran onto the field just after the final whistle.Advertisement