By BILL PENNINGTONNOV. 5, 2016
About a month ago, when the Chicago Cubs had baseball’s best regular-season record but were still far better known for what they had not won, I spent a week embedded with five central characters in the team’s taut drama. It was a way of assessing the temperament and zeitgeist of the club, and by extension its national following.These people — from various sectors of the Cubs’ constituency — were at once confident, distraught, defiant, unruffled, excited and deathly afraid to be excited. In other words, it was the Cubs’ experience as we have known it for decades.But now the Cubs are World Series champions and enveloped by a community liberated from a 108-year burden. After the biggest week in the franchise’s history, I revisited the five characters to learn how they had experienced the nearly monthlong theater.Carol Haddon, a Cubs season-ticket holder for 45 years, drove with three friends from Chicago to Cleveland for Wednesday’s tense, climactic Game 7. It seemed like the right thing to do until the Indians wiped out a three-run Cubs lead to tie the game in the eighth inning.Advertisement“That broke my heart; I was devastated,” Haddon said Thursday morning as she drove through western Ohio on her way back to Chicago. “I was as pale as a ghost.”AdvertisementJust after the eighth inning Wednesday night, it began to rain in Cleveland.“That felt like tears from heaven,” Haddon said.After the ninth inning, with the score still tied, the umpires halted the game.Haddon, who says she is in her early 70s, has never believed in any of the curses that seemed to shroud her team.“I believed in the sport,” she said. “We just were not good enough before. So I don’t believe in jinxes, but I will always believe the rain delay in Game 7 was a godsend.”After a roughly 20-minute reprieve, the Cubs weathered the shock of the Indians’ comeback and regrouped to regain the lead in the 10th inning. With two outs in the bottom of the 10th, from her seat in the upper deck, Haddon watched a slow ground ball dance and hop toward Cubs third baseman Kris Bryant.“I did not start jumping up and down when Bryant went to field it,” Haddon said. “I waited.”Cubs fans are good at waiting.“It was worth it,” Haddon said. “When the ball was in Anthony Rizzo’s glove at first base, then I jumped up and down.”After the game, and before visiting some Cleveland pubs, Haddon and her friends remained in the stands, which were nearly half-full with Cubs fans.Advertisement“I’ve never had anything to cheer for this late in the year before,” she said. “It’s a new Cubs world. We can look forward now. We don’t have to look back. It’s wonderful. What we have now is a future.”It was not long after the final out of the 2016 World Series that Rocco Caputo, back in Chicago, started receiving text messages from his regular customers at Wrigley Field.“They were telling me how much they were crying,” said Caputo, who has sold beer, hot dogs and peanuts at Cubs games for 34 seasons. “These were grown men. But it was that kind of night.”When Caputo, 49, was not reading texts, he looked out the window of his Aunt Barbara’s house, where he had gone to watch Game 7 with other family members.“Fireworks were going off left and right for about two hours,” Caputo said. “All the cars in the street were beeping — and this was three miles from Wrigley.”The mood was not nearly as festive when the Indians had tied the game in the eighth inning.“The whole neighborhood went so quiet,” Caputo said. “Where I was, nobody said a word. We just looked at each other and put our heads down.”Caputo was at Wrigley Field the night in 2003 when Steve Bartman, a spectator, deflected a fly ball and ruined a potential pivotal out in the National League Championship Series. The Cubs collapsed soon after. Caputo worked through the 1984 season, which held such postseason promise but instead ended in stunning, deflating disappointment. Caputo was there last year when the Mets swept the Cubs in the playoffs. He has committed each demoralizing defeat to memory.“Honestly, I didn’t think it was ever going to happen for us,” he said Friday morning. “But these Cubs players are just young kids, and that was a blessing, because they didn’t believe in curses.”AdvertisementLater on Friday, Caputo attended the city’s parade honoring the new champions. And though it was five months away, Caputo was already flashing forward to his next work day at Wrigley Field.“Opening day will be nuts: everyone back in the park with the monkey now off our backs,” Caputo chortled. “That is going to be a great day.”But in a quieter voice, Caputo also conceded there will be bittersweet moments as well.“I can still see the faces of all the die-hard fans who passed away and never got to see a Cubs championship,” he said. “They were my regular customers and friends, too. Part of me will feel bad for them. They won’t get to celebrate with us.”When the Cubs first approached Jon Lester, a coveted pitcher, about signing a free-agent contract in the fall of 2014, Lester, who had played his entire nine-year career in the American League, was not entirely sure where the Cubs had finished in their division that season.Dead last, he was told, 17 games out of first place.And the year before that?Last place again, 31 games out of first place. The year before that was even worse: 101 losses and 36 games out of first place.But Theo Epstein, the Cubs’ president for baseball operations, had a trick up his sleeve in the pursuit of Lester. Epstein had become the general manager of the Boston Red Sox just a few months after the team drafted Lester in 2002, and Epstein knew that Lester had been pitching in the club’s low minor leagues during Boston’s curse-busting season of 2004.Yes, Lester later became part of two other World Series-winning teams in Boston, but he had missed the momentous, unforgettable victory that freed Red Sox fans from 86 years of torment.“Come to Chicago,” Epstein beseeched Lester. “Imagine being on the Cubs team that finally wins.”AdvertisementLester took the leap. On Friday, he was seated in the last row of the last bus on the Cubs’ parade route, gliding along Chicago’s Michigan Avenue. With his baseball cap turned backward, he leaned forward and shouted at the crowds lining the streets: “How about this? Do you believe this?”After pitching three pivotal innings in Wednesday’s climactic victory, Lester lugged a bottle of Champagne in the Cubs’ clubhouse.“I was convinced by Theo to believe in a 100-loss team,” Lester said. “This right here is why I came here. I wanted to be a part of this. I missed out on Boston. I was too young.”Though now only 32, Lester has been a voluble veteran presence on a Cubs team filled with precocious talent. He has been able to make important personal connections from locker to locker, a friend to the starters and the lesser players alike.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The All-Star first baseman Anthony Rizzo got to know Lester in 2008, when Rizzo was an 18-year-old Red Sox minor leaguer who had been found to have Hodgkin’s lymphoma, a blood cancer. Lester, who had overcome non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma just two years earlier, counseled Rizzo about what to expect in the coming treatments. The two have remained close, like brothers.And Lester is a longtime friend to the reserve catcher David Ross, a team elder and the spiritual leader of the 2016 Cubs.“Even if he’s not an everyday player, Lester is like the beating pulse of this team,” Ross said last month. “He came here to beat a so-called curse, and he never stops reminding the guys of that.”Standing in a chaotic Cubs locker room after Game 7, Lester smiled at the scene. His third World Series championship will stand alone in his mind’s eye, and he said he knew it.Looking around the room, Lester said: “They’re so young. I don’t think they really understand what they just accomplished. I don’t think they’ll understand it until they get a little bit older.”Epstein has said that hiring Joe Maddon was the final major piece in the construction of a Cubs’ World Series championship team.AdvertisementBut after Game 7, Maddon, the scruffy-faced manager with an eternal twinkle in his eye, had a different view.“Listen, I am late to the party,” he said with a laugh. “I came here after all the heavy lifting had been done.”But Maddon, who joined the Cubs in 2015 after managing the Tampa Bay Rays for nine seasons, made some indispensable contributions, none bigger than embracing the Cubs’ dispiriting postseason history with an unflinching candor.He talked about black cats, billy goats and Gatorade-soaked mitts. He mocked 1908, the year when the Cubs had last won the World Series.“My mom wasn’t even born,” he said.After the Cubs had sprayed celebratory Champagne throughout the visitors’ clubhouse in Cleveland, he doubled down.“I totally respect what’s happened in the past, and I totally respect our fan base,” Maddon said. “But if you just want to carry the burden with you all the time, then tonight would never happen.”From the day he arrived in Chicago, Maddon’s message has been as blunt.“Running toward expectations and running toward pressure was really important,” he said, “as opposed to running away from it.”AdvertisementIt was Thursday morning by the time Maddon made his way into a postgame news conference. He had ski goggles on his brow, gym shorts around his waist and what appeared to be a cutoff black wet suit on his torso that was embossed with a classic Cubs emblem.Maddon answered questions with his eyes wandering around the room, and he smiled and waved at Cubs employees standing in the back. He winked at his wife, Jaye, seated nearby. The journey will always be the destination to someone like Maddon, but he nonetheless liked where he had ended up.“This is really great for our entire Cub-dom to get beyond that one championship moment,” said Maddon, who has spent 42 years working in baseball, half of them in the minor leagues. “Because now, based on the young players we have in this organization, we have an opportunity to be good for a long time.”He added, “And now, we can do it without any constraints, without any of the negative dialogue.”Sitting in his downtown Chicago office early last month, Tom Ricketts, whose family owns the Cubs, said the impending quest for the Cubs’ first World Series title in 108 years was not costing him any sleep.“I’m pretty chill,” Ricketts said with a winsome smile.Late in Wednesday’s game, Ricketts, who has dark hair, sent a text to Epstein. It read: “If you see someone after the game who sort of looks like me except he has completely gray hair, say ‘hello.’”In a telephone interview from his home north of Chicago on Saturday morning, Ricketts laughed when he recalled his missive.“I had lost my Zen-master calm,” he said.Ricketts, whose title is team chairman, has been a Cubs fan all his adult life. He lived across the street from Wrigley Field as a student at the University of Chicago. He met his wife, Cecilia, in the Wrigley bleachers.Years later, when he had become the team’s most visible owner, walking through the cozy ballpark’s aisles became a more demanding experience. But even in seasons when the Cubs were consistently losing almost two-thirds of their games, the genteel sensibilities of Midwestern baseball fans protected Ricketts from being heckled.Advertisement“People were patient,” Ricketts said. “But they would also usually say, ‘But this year is the year we win, right?’”It was the memory of those conversations that left Ricketts most at ease — now he really was chill — once the Cubs had claimed the 2016 World Series.“I’ve literally had thousands of people say to me, ‘Please win the World Series before I die,’” he said. “For many years now, I’ve carried with me the understanding that for generation after generation after generation, the Cubs have been like a member of the family.“It’s great to have a World Series trophy to pay them back for that faithful support.”The Ricketts family, whose fortune derives from TD Ameritrade, the brokerage founded by the patriarch Joseph Ricketts, bought the club in 2009. In his first news conference after the purchase, Tom Ricketts addressed Cubs fans everywhere.“There is no curse,” he said.That proclamation was often quoted. Some wondered if Ricketts had been too bold too soon. But even with the wait at 108 years and counting, Ricketts would not back down a month ago.“There is no curse; that’s crazy talk,” he insisted.On Friday, Ricketts stood at the front of the second bus as the Cubs’ parade began outside Wrigley Field.“I looked down the route and saw the hundreds of thousands of people — and we were just getting started with several miles to go,” Ricketts said Saturday. “That’s when it hit me: This championship is much bigger than I imagined.”The procession journeyed from the city’s North Side and through downtown before ending with a rally in a lakeside park. The buses moved slowly so fans could wave and cheer at the players, coaches and executives — and vice versa.During the previous two days, legions had visited cemeteries around the Chicago metropolitan area. Perched on tombstones and laid across grave markers were an assortment of Cubs caps and pennants, both new and vintage.James Wagner contributed reporting. Susan Beachy contributed research.A version of this article appears in print on November 6, 2016, on Page SP1 of the New York edition with the headline: Invested in Cubs, and Aglow With Riches.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »