AdvertisementSupported byOn RunningBy Jeré LongmanA familiar face returned to the New York City Marathon after a year of success and anguish.Dr. Gabriele Rosa of Italy, a prominent coach and cardiologist with wispy white hair and beard, has produced 12 champions in New York. Another of his runners, Jemima Sumgong of Kenya, won gold in the women’s marathon at the Rio Olympics. His top male athlete, Stanley Biwott of Kenya, entered Sunday’s race as the defending champion.But these victories have been tempered by the plight of Dr. Rosa’s son, Federico, a leading manager and agent who has been accused of abetting doping in Kenya and who was briefly incarcerated there in July before being released on bail.Federico Rosa was the manager of the most prominent marathoner to be barred for using performance-enhancing drugs, Rita Jeptoo of Kenya, a three-time winner of the Boston Marathon and a two-time winner in Chicago.The younger Rosa has denied any involvement with banned substances and has gained renewed hope that his case will turn in his favor when his trial begins on Nov. 21.News on the race front was not so encouraging for the Rosas on Sunday.Biwott dropped out during the Rio Games after a mix-up at the fluids stations had left him ingesting an acidic drink that upset his stomach. A calf injury then disrupted his training for New York. On Sunday, Biwott withdrew again, by Mile 10.Before the race, Dr. Rosa pointed to his head and said, “I think he is broken here.”But in recent days, there has been more heartening news for the Rosas on the legal front.On Oct. 26, the Court of Arbitration for Sport, based in Lausanne, Switzerland, extended Jeptoo’s ban from competition from two years to four years for use of the blood-boosting drug EPO. The court ruled that Jeptoo had engaged in “deceptive and obstructive conduct” during the proceedings.The court also said that Jeptoo had received at least one injection of the drug from an unnamed doctor in Kenya and that she “hid the visits to the doctor in question from her manager and coach.”About 40 Kenyan athletes have tested positive for doping in recent years. Supporters of the Rosas have accused Kenyan officials, long indifferent to doping, of conveniently blaming outsiders for the crisis in a desperate attempt to avoid being barred from the Rio Games.“Kenya is very dangerous,” Dr. Rosa said. On the basis of hearsay, he added, people can make accusations to the police and “they come and take you to prison.”“It’s an incredible situation,” Dr. Rosa said.Later this month, though, Dr. Rosa said he expected that “Federico should be released completely.”“We are clean.”With the case unresolved, New York marathon officials kept their distance in the past week. They said they did not pay for the younger Rosa’s trip for the race, as they usually do. And he kept a low profile. He is amiable and usually accommodating to reporters. On Friday, though, he did not attend Biwott’s pre-race news conference. Later, he declined an interview request.The arbitration court’s statement “was really good and clear a lot of situation worldwide,” the younger Rosa, 46, said in an email. But with his trial to start in two weeks, he added, “for my safety I will not talk to media.”Biwott, and other prominent Kenyan runners, have spoken in Rosa’s favor. “Those are false allegations,” Biwott said on Friday.Dr. Rosa, 74, might have been content to retire as a marathon coach, having helped facilitate the Kenyan running boom over the past quarter-century and having tutored greats like Paul Tergat, a former world-record holder, and Margaret Okayo, who holds the women’s course record in New York.But Jeptoo’s doping case brought anger, embarrassment and widespread suspicion of the Rosas. It also led to the departure last year of the training group’s head coach, Claudio Berardelli, and the resumption of a more active role by Dr. Rosa.Berardelli has denied any involvement in doping. And last month’s ruling in Switzerland seemed a step toward vindicating him. Dr. Rosa said Berardelli’s resignation had more to do with coaching than with the cloud of performance-enhancing drugs.“I guarantee Claudio is not involved in doping,” Dr. Rosa said. “I trust him completely.”Still, Dr. Rosa said, perhaps Berardelli “is too young to know what is going on in Kenya.”“The problem of Kenya is many medical doctors are using doping with the athletes,” he added, “but nobody do nothing.”Dr. Rosa added: “I respect Claudio. He is a good coach, but maybe he’s too friendly. You must not trust too much. You must be distant.”In his own 50 years as a coach, Dr. Rosa said, “I never had one doping case, ever.”Recent years for the younger Rosa have been both celebrative and complicated. One of the top runners he managed, Sammy Wanjiru of Kenya, won the marathon at the 2008 Beijing Games, then died in 2011 in a fall from a balcony at his home that has never been fully explained.Biwott won New York last year, then finished second at the London Marathon in April in his searing personal best of 2 hours 3 minutes 51 seconds. But he has failed to finish his two marathons since.At the Rio Olympics, another of the younger Rosa’s runners, Feyisa Lilesa of Ethiopia, won the silver medal and crossed his arms above his head at the finish line. It was a sign of protest of the treatment of the Oromo people, his ethnic group, by Ethiopia’s ruling party.Lilesa came to the United States, fearing a return home, and is now training in Flagstaff, Ariz., where everything is O.K. for him, Rosa said in an email.The younger Rosa added that Lilesa’s family remains in Ethiopia, but it appears “all is good for them.”And, Rosa hopes, all will soon be good for himself.Advertisement