
TV Sports By                     
 RICHARD SANDOMIR
 
MARCH 28, 2016
The 1966 N.C.A.A. men’s basketball tournament was a pre-March Madness event. Only 22 teams were in it. The tournament was not carried by a major network, let alone the four that televise it now. But it remains a landmark event because Texas Western started five black players against Adolph Rupp’s all-white Kentucky in the championship game and won, 72-65.Ten years ago, the game got the Disney Hollywood treatment in the film “Glory Road.”Last month, President Obama offered a 50th anniversary tribute to Texas Western: “Our progress demands not only Dr. Kings, but Jackie Robinsons. Not only Rosa Parks, but Aretha Franklins. Not only household names but ordinary Americans doing their part in their own lives with their own example. That’s what we honor today — a group of Americans who laced up their shoes and moved our country forward.”That game has rarely if ever been seen on television since its original broadcast on March 19, 1966, and eventually the rights to the tournament were acquired by NBC, CBS and now the partnership of CBS and Turner Sports. Rebroadcasts of classic games are standard procedure these days; ESPN Classic was specifically created (originally as the Classic Sports Network) for that purpose. On the YES Network, classic games are defined as only those the Yankees won, and continue to win, over and over.But not every classic has a level of historical significance like Texas Western’s. (The college is now known as the University of Texas at El Paso.)AdvertisementNow, fortunately, it will be seen again on Wednesday at 7:30 p.m. Eastern on ESPN. How it looks will not be a surprise to those who have seen some clips online: The original black-and-white broadcast is a little bleached out. But it is intact.“This is clearly a seminal event in the history of college basketball, and American sport, in terms of integration,” said John Wildhack, an executive vice president of ESPN, speaking about the original game. “But it was under the radar. I brought it up to everybody and asked if there was a copy of the game anywhere.”AdvertisementThe search for the game did not require uncovering a decaying videotape in an attic, as was the case with the only known copy of the first Super Bowl. A kinescope of Game 7 of the 1960 World Series between the Pittsburgh Pirates and the New York Yankees was discovered in Bing Crosby’s wine cellar.It was quite easy for ESPN to acquire the rights to the game because the N.C.A.A. is pretty good about historic preservation. A company called Wazee Digital maintains and licenses an archive whose oldest men’s tournament film contains highlights from the 1939 Oregon-Ohio State championship game.“When the question came up, I contacted our account rep and asked him if they had the entire game,” said Mike Cocchi, ESPN’s director for content rights management. “He did a little research and said they had something that might work.”Burke Magnus, another ESPN executive vice president, said: “We would have taken as much of it that existed. But Mike quickly learned it was all available.”ESPN’s broadcast will be augmented with commentary by John Saunders, Jay Bilas and Michael Wilbon, but they will not speak during the rebroadcast, an approach that was criticized when NFL Network recently let its announcers speak over NFL Films’s restitching of its footage of Super Bowl I. Dave Lattin, the starting center for Texas Western, will be interviewed.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The game was originally broadcast by Sports Network Inc., which assembled ad hoc networks of stations for the events it televised in the 1950s and ’60s. Ian Retzlaff, the senior sports account manager at Wazee, said he was not certain that the N.C.A.A. received its copy of the game directly from S.N.I. because it has no identifying onscreen graphics.AdvertisementWhatever the provenance, Wazee uses its digitized version of the original 16-millimeter film of the game to fulfill a handful of requests for clips each year. But Retzlaff said he had been surprised to get a request for the whole game because of ESPN’s reliance on live games and events, news programming and documentaries.Viewers should not expect a great production. Cocchi said it was typical of its day: a lot of high-angle, center-court shots that wouldn’t be mistaken for a modern broadcast.One person who has seen the game is the writer Frank Fitzpatrick, who viewed a silent version of it provided to him by UTEP while researching his book “And the Walls Came Tumbling Down: The Basketball Game that Changed American Sports.” In an article for ESPNcom, he writes that if you watch it, “you’ll probably wonder what all the fuss is about” with 10 players in “laughably short pants” who “move slowly through 40 minutes of ordinary basketball.“There’s not much drama, very little passion, and, in 2001, you’ll see more athletic talent at many high school games,” Fitzpatrick continues.But, he adds, the grainy film reveals much more: the crowd, the officials, the referees, the coaches and the cheerleaders, all of them white. The Kentucky fans waving a Confederate flag in the bleachers. And then, he writes: “Walking toward the red ‘M’ at center court, in their orange uniforms and white Converse All-Stars, are the five starters for Texas Western. They are all black.”Email: sandor@nytimes.comA version of this article appears in print on March 28, 2016, on Page D2 of the New York edition with the headline: A Game Changed History, but It’s Hardly Been Seen Since.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »