By SCOTT CACCIOLANOV. 4, 2016
CHICAGO — Tyler Pleiss was home from college on April 28, 2012, a date that sticks in the minds of many here. Pleiss was on the couch at his parents’ home in Omaha, watching the Bulls rough up the Philadelphia 76ers in a first-round playoff game. Thinking the game was essentially over, he had lost interest. And then it happened.“I saw him on the ground,” Pleiss said of Derrick Rose, “and my heart just sank.”It was, for many longtime fans of the Bulls, the defining image of Rose’s eight years with the team: crippled under the basket at United Center, the victim of a torn anterior cruciate ligament in his left knee. The injury signaled the end of Rose’s rapid rise, and the slow decline of a team that had finally made a resurgence in the post-Michael Jordan era.“There’s always going to be that huge ‘what if?’” said Pleiss, 26, who works in marketing and contributes to BlogaBull.com, a site on the SB Nation network.Rose and Joakim Noah, an equally indispensable member of the Bulls for nine seasons, acknowledged the complicated history that formed the backdrop for their joint return to Chicago on Friday night with the Knicks — a return during which Rose heard some boos, Noah heard plenty of cheers, and the Knicks left with a 117-104 victory.Advertisement“It was harder than I thought,” Noah said, “just in terms of trying to keeping my emotions in check.”AdvertisementThe Bulls traded Rose in June. Noah signed with the Knicks in July. Both still have emotional connections to Chicago, just as the city has deep ties to them. On Friday, the crowd stood to give both players an ovation after a video tribute in the first quarter.“I watched some of it,” Rose said, “but Jo was telling me to stay focused.”Rose proceeded to go about shredding his old team. He finished with 15 points, 11 assists and 7 rebounds, and Noah had 16 points and 9 rebounds. Kristaps Porzingis scored 27 points to lead the Knicks.“I still see Derrick as a guy from the South Side who made it,” said Sharone Mitchell, a 33-year-old lawyer for a nonprofit organization that focuses on criminal justice policy.Rose, of course, is a Chicagoan. Everyone here is familiar with his story. How he emerged from one of the city’s most impoverished, drug-infested neighborhoods to become a standout at Simeon Career Academy. How the Bulls made him the No. 1 pick of the 2008 N.B.A. draft. How his dizzying skills captivated the city and the league.“He was pretty much at the heart of the revitalization of the Chicago Bulls, post-Jordan,” Pleiss said. “Between him and Jo and Luol Deng, those three really got the team back to respectability, and even to being a contender for a couple of years there.”At the time of his knee injury, Rose was just 11 months removed from being named, at age 22, the youngest most valuable player in league history. And the Bulls were coming off an appearance in the Eastern Conference finals, the franchise’s first in 13 seasons. They have not been back, the road muddied by injuries and departures and mixed emotions.Widespread compassion for Rose gave way to more polarized feelings in 2013, when the team cleared him to return from his knee injury in time for the postseason. Rose chose not to play.Advertisement“After the A.C.L. surgery, there was a lot of talk that Rose was milking it,” Mitchell said. “It was this idea that he didn’t have the courage to come back.”It was not an opinion that Mitchell shared, but it persisted — at least until Rose returned the next season, only to tear the meniscus in his right knee. Another season was gone.“Chicagoans were always hoping that he’d find a way to be old Derrick again, to be vintage Derrick,” said Liz Ocasio, 37, a longtime fan who grew up on the city’s North Side. “There was a lot of sympathy, because I know I felt bad.”Rose said his biggest regret was his inability to deliver another championship to Chicago.“Only thing I can do about that is say I gave it my all,” he said. “I felt like I gave it my all. I really tried.”Still, his legacy here is complicated — because of his injuries, his caution and his unfulfilled promise. Ocasio, a sales operations manager at a consulting firm, said her view of Rose had also been tainted by sexual assault allegations made against him in a recent civil trial. Rose was found not liable, but much of the testimony was unseemly.“There are people, and I include myself, who looked at him differently after that trial,” Ocasio said. “But I’m not someone who’s going to say I’m not going to watch him or root for him.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Ocasio said she was sad when the Bulls traded Rose, but it did not come as a terrible shock. She seemed to anticipate that his time with the team had run its course. But when Noah left, Ocasio discovered that her feelings were more complex, that her sorrow was somehow deeper.“I was happy for him,” she said. “But that one hurt more.”When the Bulls drafted Noah, Ocasio was not sure what to expect. She had seen him play in college, but his skill set defied easy description. How would he fit in? Quite well, as it turned out. With the Bulls, he was a ferocious rebounder and defender, and an unusually adept passer. More important, though, was the hyperkinetic energy he brought to the court.Advertisement“He was so emotionally invested,” Ocasio said. “I know a lot of fans, myself included, were proud to have him on our team.”Noah’s value to the team became even more evident amid Rose’s injury-induced absences. Without Rose, the Bulls still advanced to the Eastern Conference semifinals in 2013. Noah towed the entire team along in his chest-thumping, floor-slapping wake.“Joakim Noah was a guy who was lovable,” Mitchell said. “He was one of us, even if he wasn’t from Chicago.”Those qualities endeared Noah to his adopted home, as did his work in the community. He started a children’s foundation and spoke out against gun violence. Rose, too, cared about the city. He became known for showing up unannounced at funerals on the South Side.On Thursday night, Rose had a get-together with family and friends. It felt odd for him, he said, to be staying at a hotel.“It’s my hometown,” he said. “Of course, I miss it.”For Mitchell and many other fans, Noah had his most unforgettable sequence with the Bulls in a first-round playoff game against the Boston Celtics in 2009. Noah intercepted a pass at one end before racing away for an open-court dunk to seal the victory in triple overtime. It was pure Noah.As for Rose’s most memorable moment? Mitchell considered the question. He sounded almost apologetic.“I remember him holding onto his knee,” he said.A version of this article appears in print on November 5, 2016, on Page D1 of the New York edition with the headline: Odd Homecoming, and a Knicks Road Win.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.