By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSAPRIL 17, 2017
MIAMI — The N.B.A. draft lottery is in May, the draft occurs in June, and free agency begins in July.The Miami Heat are not hurrying toward any of them.In a change from the team’s normal end-of-season schedule, the organization told players — whether they were about to become free agents or not — that they were welcome to stick around and keep working during the coming weeks. So while Monday was the start of the traditional exit meetings with Coach Erik Spoelstra and team officials, it was not a true parting of ways for the off-season.“It’s cleanup day, not clean-out day,” Spoelstra said. “Lockers are still going to be there. We want our guys to still feel at home here. Free agency is going to happen. A lot of our players are going to have free-agent possibilities or opportunities in July. But that’s July.”So the nameplates will remain on the lockers, the practice gear will not be packed up for the summer, and the sneakers will not be shipped to the players’ off-season homes just yet. While a few players were out of town as they firmed up their off-season plans — point guard Goran Dragic was returning to his native Slovenia to play for his national team this summer — some were already thinking about getting back to work.Advertisement“Why not? It’s Miami,” shooting guard Dion Waiters said. “What other place is better than this in the summertime? I think it’s great that guys should stick around and take advantage of it while you’re here.”AdvertisementWaiters took a $2.9 million deal for this season, saying it was a bet on himself — and it is likely to pay off, after Miami, which finished 41-41 over all, went 27-19 with him in the lineup. James Johnson, who can become a free agent, is also likely to receive a huge raise after the best season of his career by far. Luke Babbitt can become a free agent, too, and Wayne Ellington has a team option.Some changes are certainly coming, although if this core of Heat players has its way, the team will not look much different in the fall. Miami went 30-11 in the second half of the season, missing a playoff berth only because the Chicago Bulls owned the tiebreaker, and Dragic said that the Heat, if healthy, could make a run next season.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“They know we want them back,” Dragic said of the potential free agents. “They are a big part of this team. Everybody’s so close, it’s going to be hard for them to choose some other team, too. Hopefully, they stay.”Not making the playoffs was painful, but some Heat players said things had begun returning to normal. Hassan Whiteside, who led the N.B.A. in rebounds per game this season, went to Tyler Johnson’s house for a visit; players and coaches donned bunny ears at an end-of-season team party over the Easter weekend; and a few watched playoff games.There was not a lot of looking ahead, at least for now.“There’s a long way until this summer,” Spoelstra said. “It’s O.K. to still reflect and embrace how unique this season was. I think, so often, all of us fall prey to ‘What’s next?’ and ‘What is the future?’ — and you’re not able to enjoy and be present. You miss a lot of great things.”Ellington said he thought he would be back with the Heat, and Waiters, while cautioning that he could not predict the future, indicated that he was thinking about staying with Miami.“It was a blessing, man — truly a blessing,” Waiters said. “But we’re just getting started. It’s only the beginning. It’s only the beginning.”If so, most of those lockers will not need to be cleaned out for quite some time.A version of this article appears in print on April 18, 2017, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: Heat’s Season Is Over, but the Work Is Not.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.