By BILLY WITZAPRIL 17, 2017
When Matt Holliday was relegated to the bench for the weekend with a stiff back after striking out three times on Friday, it was the latest dent in a lineup already riddled with injuries.Didi Gregorius has not played at all, Gary Sanchez barely has, and Greg Bird — his swing as balky as his right ankle until Sunday night — has missed several games.And yet the Yankees have continued to win, collecting their eighth consecutive victory on Monday night as another patchwork lineup pounded the Chicago White Sox left-hander Derek Holland in a 7-4 victory at Yankee Stadium.Holliday walloped a three-run homer in his return, Aaron Judge hit a two-run homer and Starlin Castro — the cleanup hitter du jour — added three hits, giving the rookie left-hander Jordan Montgomery a comfortable route to his first major league victory.AdvertisementIf the opening weeks of the season have been instructive, the Yankees might really be something when they get the entire band together. As it is, maladies aside, they are doing just fine.AdvertisementThe winning streak, which has helped the Yankees (9-4) to keep pace with the Baltimore Orioles (8-3) at the top of the American League East, is the Yankees’ longest since 2012.And they have put it together with a lineup that was built to tread water.Monday night was no different: Shortstop Pete Kozma was supposed to be injury insurance stashed in the minors; catcher Austin Romine and first baseman Chris Carter were supposed to be break-glass-in-case-of-emergency reserves; and Aaron Hicks, the fourth outfielder, had a dreadful first year with the Yankees last season.“I think if you’re going to tell any manager that you’re going to win eight in a row, you’re going to sign up for it right away,” Manager Joe Girardi said. “It doesn’t happen all the time. I knew we had some key pieces down, but I felt like if we could get our starting pitching going, we’d be O.K.”The Yankees entered Monday with a 2.14 E.R.A. during their winning streak, and Montgomery, who emerged as a long shot to win a spot in the rotation, kept the commanding stretch going with six shutout innings before giving up a three-run homer to Yolmer Sanchez in the seventh. By then, the Yankees owned a comfortable lead.Holliday got them started, blasting a 2-2 fastball from Holland 459 feet into the left-field bleachers to give the Yankees a 3-0 lead in the third inning.Castro followed with a double, his second of the night, and scored on a double by Chase Headley, who advanced to third when Melky Cabrera, familiar with the intricacies of left field from his days with the Yankees, nevertheless failed to field the ball cleanly. Headley scored when Judge, the 6-foot-7, 275-pound outfielder, tore down the line to beat out a grounder to short.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Suddenly, Montgomery had a working margin.“You can really settle in and just pitch,” Montgomery said. “Having a lead helps and lets me use my defense.”AdvertisementMontgomery and relievers Adam Warren and Aroldis Chapman did that to great effect, getting four double plays, including one by Tyler Saladino to end the game.Judge added to the cushion, making it 7-0 when he smacked a 3-1 curveball from Holland over the left-field wall with Castro on base. It was the fourth home run of the season for Judge, who looks like a more confident hitter than the feast-or-famine slugger he was when the Yankees called him up in August.“The big thing is, it’s about learning which off-speed pitches to swing at,” Judge said. “A lot of people say, ‘Oh, this guy can’t hit a curveball, this guy can’t hit an off-speed pitch.’ But it’s about swinging at the right one. Swing at the hangers. Swing at the ones you can handle.”Judge, who began the season hitting eighth, has crept up to sixth in the order. When Sanchez returns from his biceps injury and Gregorius from his shoulder injury, Girardi will have a lot to consider in constructing his lineup, particularly if Bird, who homered, doubled and singled on Sunday, begins to warm up and Headley continues his torrid pace.Nobody has moved around more than Castro, who has hit second, third, fourth, fifth and sixth in the past nine games.Castro, who leads the Yankees with 28 total bases, doubled twice — beating center fielder Jacob May to his left and his right — and dumped a single into left field.“I just try to be up there and do my job,” Castro said. “I’m all over the place. I just missed one and ninth. In the middle of the lineup, I can drive in a lot of runs. There’s a lot of guys in front of me that can get on base.”The Yankees, at the moment, find themselves in an enviable position. A year ago, they were floundering at the start of the season, losing 16 of their first 24 games, a hole that put them in comeback mode.AdvertisementWhen they began this year losing four of their first five (along with their catcher and shortstop), it looked as if it might be a recipe for disaster.“Obviously, you don’t want to start out that way, but I don’t think there was any panic,” said Warren, who began the season with a perfect seven and one-third innings before giving up a walk in the seventh, a hit in the eighth and a run in the ninth.“Somebody said at some point you can lose your season in April, but you can’t win it. I just love the chemistry on this team. It doesn’t really surprise me as much as maybe it surprises other people because I just know how close this team is.”A version of this article appears in print on April 18, 2017, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: Yankees, Leaning on a Patchwork Lineup, Are Stringing Victories Together.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.