
On Baseball By                     
 TYLER KEPNER
 
APRIL 16, 2017
This is supposed to be the year of the youth movement at Yankee Stadium: actual young players in the lineup, budding stars on the farm, a long-overdue children’s play area at the park. The Class AAA team even sells an officially licensed “Baby Bombers” cap — for $35, you can support the Yankees’ long-term plan by wearing the logo of a snarling infant in a pinstriped diaper.“There’s excitement about the young guys, and that’s how it always is,” third baseman Chase Headley said. “It’s fun.”It is fun, indeed, to dream of a dynamic group of new cornerstones, the kind that led the Chicago Cubs to glory last fall. But here’s a secret: The 2017 Yankees are not really that young.Five of their everyday regulars have played eight seasons or more in the majors. So have three of their most important pitchers. And all of these players — Starlin Castro, Aroldis Chapman, Tyler Clippard, Jacoby Ellsbury, Brett Gardner, Headley, Matt Holliday and C. C. Sabathia — have been thriving.AdvertisementYoung and old took turns Sunday night, when the Yankees won their seventh game in a row, 9-3, by battering Adam Wainwright of the St. Louis Cardinals. Aaron Judge tripled, Greg Bird and Aaron Hicks homered, and Headley and Castro smacked two hits apiece before Wainwright departed in the fifth. Michael Pineda sparkled for the second start in a row.AdvertisementIt is very early in the season; in professional football terms, we have just started the second quarter of Week 2. But with Gary Sanchez injured and Bird starting 1 for 26 before Sunday’s breakout, the veterans have at least helped the Yankees avoid the dismal start that sank last season.“You’re old, so people don’t really expect a lot out of you,” said Sabathia, who is 2-0 with a 1.47 E.R.A. “But we feel like we still can produce and play at a high level. We’ve got a lot of guys in here that are All-Stars, good players. You take pride in playing well — not for people outside, but just internally, for our team. We’re the leaders of this team and we need to play well.”The Yankees’ pitchers have been among the best at countering the popular hitting strategy of launching fly balls and working deep counts. Before Sunday they had allowed the fewest fly balls in the American League while leading the majors in strikeout-to-walk rate.And while trading Chapman and Andrew Miller last summer was a sign of surrender for their slim playoff hopes, the Yankees did make two critical deadline acquisitions: relievers Adam Warren and Tyler Clippard. Both have been terrific this season, holding opponents to 3 hits in 41 at-bats (.073). Warren has retired all 20 hitters he has faced.“They do a good job of putting whatever we need out on the field,” Sabathia said, referring to the front office. “They made all the trades last year, but we still went out and got Clippard, who’s a big part of our team now. It’s always about winning here, and that’s why you sign up to play. At this stage in my career, I’ve only got so many bullets left. It’s at the end. I’m not interested in playing for somebody that’s not trying to win.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In some ways the Yankees retreated this winter, holding tight to their prospects even as an ace left-hander, Chris Sale, was traded to the rival Boston Red Sox from the Chicago White Sox. But they also spent $99 million on two players: Chapman (five years, $86 million) and Holliday (one year, $13 million).The Yankees were not conceding the division, but to have a chance, they needed the veterans to produce around Sanchez, Bird and Judge.Advertisement“There’s a lot to be excited for here in the future, but I think there’s some good players here right now, too,” said Headley, who reached base in all four plate appearances Sunday. “We don’t look at it as the veterans are carrying the youth. We’re all just trying to do our job.”Headley’s .410 average aside, nothing extraordinary is happening, just a bunch of veterans doing their jobs. Castro and Ellsbury were hitting above .300 before Sunday; Gardner and Holliday had on-base percentages above .380; Ellsbury, Gardner and Headley had combined for all of the team’s 12 stolen bases.That total led the A.L. through Saturday, though sustaining that pace seems unlikely. The Yankees were caught twice on Sunday.“You always know the league’s going to pay attention to what you do, and they’re going to try to combat it,” Manager Joe Girardi said. “But I’ve said all along, if we can get that extra base, let’s get it.”The rest of the division is a jumble above the Blue Jays, who have fallen flat after consecutive trips to the A.L. Championship Series. Toronto is 2-10 with a meager .212 team average. Josh Donaldson is on the disabled list with a calf injury, Jose Bautista has one R.B.I., and Russell Martin is 3 for 31.The Baltimore Orioles, at 8-3, are doing almost everything right, but their star closer Zach Britton went on the disabled list Sunday with forearm soreness. The Red Sox and the Rays also have top pitchers who are hurt: David Price for Boston, Jake Odorizzi for Tampa Bay. No team seems very likely to run away from the pack.Again, this is all so early. A few bad games and the story line changes, and a perfect week in April can be a distant memory by May. But the signs are encouraging.“I just like the way we play the game, having good at-bats all the way till the end, guys fighting, the way guys pull for each other,” Sabathia said. “You can always gauge that early in the season, to see what type of team you’re going to have. We’re very positive, very upbeat.”For now, they have good reason to be.A version of this article appears in print on April 17, 2017, on Page D2 of the New York edition with the headline: Yankees’ Prospects Hinge on Those Who Have Earned Their Stripes.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »