By VICTOR MATHERAPRIL 18, 2017
The Memphis Grizzlies can’t be too surprised to be down, two games to none, in their N.B.A. playoff series against the San Antonio Spurs. After a 43-win season, they were decided underdogs to the 61-21 Spurs, and had to play the first two games on the road.But at a brief but memorable news conference after the Grizzlies lost Game 2, 96-82, on Monday night, Coach David Fizdale did not sound like a man who was going down easily.He began his remarks in measured tones and commented briefly on the game. He noted that he was proud of his team’s effort: “I don’t think anybody watching this game could say we were outcompeted in the second half."But then he turned to the officiating.“It’s unfortunate that I got a guy like Mike Conley, who in his whole career has zero technical fouls and just could not seem to get the proper respect from the officials that he deserves,” Fizdale said. Conley had 24 points in the losing effort but went to the line only five times.Advertisement“It was a very poorly officiated basketball game,” Fizdale added, still calm. “Zach Randolph, the most rugged guy in the game, had zero free throws, but somehow Kawhi Leonard had 19 free throws. First half we shot 19 shots in the paint and we had six free throws; they shot 11 times in the paint and they had 23 free throws.Advertisement“I’m not a numbers guy, but that doesn’t seem to add up.”Fizdale’s passion began to rise as he continued, with another reference to Leonard, the Spurs star, who scored a game-high 37 points.“Over all, 35 times we shot the ball in the paint, we had 15 free throws for the game. They shot 18 times in the paint and had 32 free throws. Kawhi shot more free throws than our whole team. Explain it to me.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“We don’t get the respect that these guys deserve because Mike Conley doesn’t go crazy, he has class and he just plays the game.”Fizdale’s ardor built as he pointed out that Spurs Coach Gregg Popovich’s long coaching tenure far eclipses his own.“But I’m not going to let them treat us that way,” he said. “I know Pop’s got pedigree and I’m a young rookie, but they’re not going to rook us. That’s unacceptable. That was unprofessional. My guys dug in that game and earned the right to be in that game, and they did not even give us a chance.”He punctuated his remarks with a vehement “Take that for data,” pounded the table, and left the room.The entire session lasted less than three minutes.Fizdale, who replaced Dave Joerger last May after the Grizzlies were swept in the first round by the Spurs, is not especially well known to many basketball fans. He had no on-court career to speak of, nor had he been a head coach anywhere. But he had quietly built up a sterling reputation as an assistant, in college and then with Golden State, Atlanta and Miami. Monday night’s comments may be Fizdale’s introduction to many who follow the game only casually.AdvertisementA memorable postgame rant needs a catchphrase, and Fizdale’s has two early candidates.Fans seemed to enjoy the play on words in “They’re not going to rook us.”But even more resonant was his closing line, “Take that for data.” It seemed to have the right combination of sense and nonsense. The words were carefully chosen, but Fizdale seemed to teeter on the brink of slipping out of control. And it was delivered with panache, punctuated by the table slam.
            I know "take that for data" will become the meme but don't sleep on "they ain't gonna rook us" from the Fizdale presser. High ceiling.        
            TAKE THAT FOR DATAi officially love david fizdale        It remains to be seen whether Fizdale’s remarks enter the pantheon of postgame coaching comments along with Jim Mora’s “Playoffs?” or Dennis Green’s “You want to crown them?” But they seem to have earned him some new fans. And almost certainly a fine from the N.B.A.A version of this article appears in print on April 19, 2017, on Page B8 of the New York edition with the headline: Grizzlies’ Coach Undaunted.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.