By KEVIN DRAPERJULY 5, 2017
Four years after suing the National Basketball Players Association over his termination, Billy Hunter, the organization’s former executive director, will get to challenge the union in court. Los Angeles Superior Court Judge Huey P. Cotton, in an action on Wednesday, set a trial date for March 5, 2018.At least $10.5 million — Hunter’s remaining salary on his contract when he was fired — is in dispute.“We are pleased that the court set a trial date and we look forward to vindicating Mr. Hunter’s rights at trial,’’ said Joshua Hill, one of Hunter’s lawyers, after Cotton acted. The players union declined to comment.Hunter was the union’s executive director from 1996 until his ouster in February 2013. After acrimonious negotiations marked by union infighting during the N.B.A. lockout in 2011, Derek Fisher, the union’s president at the time, persuaded its executive committee to authorize an independent audit of Hunter’s business practices.AdvertisementThe audit, which lasted nine months and cost $6.5 million, was led by Theodore V. Wells Jr., a partner at the Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton & Garrison law firm.AdvertisementThe inquiry determined that Hunter had failed in his fiduciary responsibilities when he, among other findings, considered investing union funds at a bank in which his son, Todd, was a director; employed his daughter and daughter-in-law; paid himself $1.3 million in unused vacation time with little oversight; and spent union funds on lavish gifts.But while the report was an indictment of Hunter’s judgment, it found that he did not steal from the union or otherwise break the law. A month after the report’s release, 24 player representatives voted unanimously to fire Hunter.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Three months later, Hunter sued for wrongful termination. The union later countersued for breach of fiduciary duty.At its core, the main issue before the court is a contractual dispute. The union contends that Hunter’s contract was invalid because player representatives did not ratify his 2010 extension. Hunter contends that ratification was unnecessary for contract extensions, and even if it was necessary, it was Fisher’s responsibility to obtain it, not his. Hunter also argued in court filings that his contract was implied in fact because all parties operated under its terms and as if it were valid for more than two years.Last month, Cotton granted Hunter’s request for a bifurcated trial. The first trial will address only the issue of whether Hunter had a valid contract. The issue of damages — if Hunter’s contract is determined to be valid — and the union’s counterclaims will be addressed in one or more separate trials.This four-year legal saga has spilled internal union business into the public, and the trial will continue to do that. A number of N.B.A. players in union leadership roles, including Chris Paul and LeBron James, have given depositions, according to ESPN. The contents of those depositions have not been made public.Additionally, last year, Cotton ordered the union to give Hunter internal documents generated during the nine-month audit, including emails, notes and draft reports. The union appealed that ruling to the California Court of Appeals, which has yet to rule.According to federal filings, the union spent more than $6.1 million in legal fees from July 2013 to June 2016. Orrick, Herrington & Sutcliffe, the primary law firm representing the union in Hunter’s lawsuit, was paid $3.2 million.A version of this article appears in print on July 6, 2017, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: 4 Years Later, Fired Leader Gets Court Date Against the Players’ Union.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.