By WALLACE MATTHEWSJULY 4, 2017
Throughout his 17-year career, C. C. Sabathia has been a creature of habit. He thrives on a regular schedule of four days’ rest between starts, and he publicly opposed the idea of a six-man rotation when Manager Joe Girardi considered it a couple of years ago.To Sabathia, even one extra day of rest is a major disruption.On Tuesday, however, the Yankees chose to send Sabathia out to the mound on not one extra day’s rest, or two. In fact, it was 17. Not surprisingly, a more rested Sabathia was not a better Sabathia.Pitching for the first time in three weeks, Sabathia allowed four earned runs in two and two-thirds innings as the Yankees lost to the Toronto Blue Jays, 4-1, at Yankee Stadium.“I think I was just overhyped to be out there,” he said. “I would get two strikes on a guy and I just couldn’t finish. I think I was overthrowing a little bit.”AdvertisementThe Yankees, who beat Toronto on Monday, have not won back-to-back games since June 11 and 12, the tail end of a six-game winning streak.AdvertisementThat was also the day before Sabathia was last on a pitcher’s mound. The Yankees have lost 15 of 21 games since that day and have gone from four games ahead of the pack in the American League East to four games behind the first-place Boston Red Sox, who beat the Texas Rangers, 11-4, on Tuesday night.Over that stretch, the Yankees have also lost Adam Warren, Starlin Castro, Matt Holliday, Aaron Hicks, Tyler Austin and Dustin Fowler to the disabled list.“It’s the injuries, of course,” Sabathia said, playing down the effect of his absence on the team’s downturn. “We haven’t had a full lineup for a couple of weeks now.”Nor have they had Sabathia since he limped off the mound with a hamstring strain at the end of the fourth inning of a road game against the Los Angeles Angels on June 13. At the time, Sabathia (7-3, 3.81 E.R.A.) was the most effective pitcher in the rotation. He had won five of his previous six starts, in which he allowed just four earned runs over 36 ⅓ innings.That he returned exactly three weeks from the date of his injury, instead of the six weeks that was estimated by General Manager Brian Cashman, was evidence of the 37-year-old Sabathia’s determination to compete. But the Yankees’ decision to put him back on the mound without the customary minor league rehabilitation start might have been more a product of the state of the team and the rotation.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“We thought he was ready to go,” Girardi said. “We did a simulated game, and we felt that was like a rehab start.”The Blue Jays made hard contact off Sabathia from the first inning, although they did not get a hit until there were two out in the third. The trouble started when Sabathia walked the No. 9 hitter, Darwin Barney. Then the floodgates opened.Jose Bautista singled hard to left, driving in Barney, who had advanced on a wild pitch. Russell Martin singled, followed by walks to Josh Donaldson and Justin Smoak, the second of which forced in a run. Kendrys Morales then singled to left field, bringing in two more runs and ending Sabathia’s day after 63 pitches.AdvertisementWarren, also pitching in his first game since June 13, got the final out of the inning. Luis Cessa pitched the next four and two-thirds innings, allowing five hits but no runs.“He looked like he might have been a tick off,” said Martin, who caught Sabathia for two seasons as a Yankee. “He wasn’t missing by much. He was running it up there all the way to 94. It looked like the stuff was there, but the command wasn’t as good as it could be.”The Yankees’ offense was having its usual tough time with the left-handed Blue Jays starter J. A. Happ, who beat them three times in 2016 and whom they have not beaten since Aug. 22, 2013. Happ had limited the Yankees to an infield single by Gary Sanchez in the first inning before Aaron Judge, leading off the fourth, launched a low-altitude missile that dented the facing of the terrace beyond the left-center-field fence. Judge’s major-league-leading 28th home run of the season was measured at 456 feet. But when Happ next faced Judge — in the fifth inning, with two on and two out and the Jays leading, 4-1 — the left-hander challenged the slugger and won, striking him out with a 3-2 fastball clocked at 96 miles per hour.“He was attacking the zone all game, and I knew he was going to come after me,” Judge said. “He got me that time.”INSIDE PITCHAfter the game, the Yankees designated first baseman Chris Carter for assignment for the second time in 11 days. Carter has been a disappointment at the plate, batting .201 with eight home runs, 26 R.B.I. and 76 strikeouts in 184 at-bats, and in the field — he dropped a routine throw from Didi Gregorius in the seventh although the play was scored a hit. Carter accepted an assignment to Class AAA Scranton/Wilkes-Barre when he was designated for assignment on June 23. The Yankees recalled infielder Ji-Man Choi, who played 54 games for the Angels in 2016, from Scranton/Wilkes-Barre and added him to the active roster.A version of this article appears in print on July 5, 2017, on Page B7 of the New York edition with the headline: Sabathia Returns From Injury, but His Top Form Stays Away.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.