By DAVID WALDSTEINJULY 5, 2017
WIMBLEDON, England — When Petra Kvitova won the warm-up tournament in Birmingham, England, last month, a successful run at Wimbledon seemed an enticing possibility.A two-time champion at the All England Club, Kvitova had missed months of action after her left hand was slashed in a terrifying encounter when an intruder broke into her home in the Czech Republic. She came back ahead of schedule to play in the French Open, but Wimbledon, where she has performed so well, had been her real target.But on Wednesday, Kvitova, the No. 11 seed, was crouched over, sweat pouring from her forehead as she gasped for air in the third set. Exhausted and overwhelmed, she succumbed in the second round, 6-3, 1-6, 6-2, to Madison Brengle, an American ranked 95th.Kvitova said she had trouble breathing and felt sick at times. She also said she was not certain her problems stemmed from a lack of conditioning after missing half a year of time on court.Advertisement“Who knows, maybe,” she said, adding, “It happened at Wimbledon, which is not nice.”Kvitova lost in the second round at Roland Garros but won five matches to capture the title in Birmingham. Perhaps the sudden accumulation of time on court caught up with her here. She said she felt sluggish before Wednesday’s match, and the feeling grew worse as play went on.Advertisement“So I couldn’t really move,” she said. “I was so slow. I felt like, I don’t know, like an animal. But a very slow animal.”Kvitova’s loss was one of several upsets in the women’s draw on Wednesday. No. 17 Madison Keys of the United States lost to Camila Giorgi of Italy, who overcame a disheartening loss in the second-set tiebreaker to win, 6-4, 6-7 (12), 6-1.Giorgi had four match points in the second set. With Keys sitting on a set point at 7-6 in the tiebreaker, Giorgi fell down, got up to make a slice backhand, then ripped a backhand cross court past Keys, who was left motionless at the net.With a match point at 8-7, Giorgi hit a backhand into the net. Two points later, she had the match on her racket again at 9-8, but Keys hit a deep return and followed it up with a forehand winner down the line.Keys won the next two points on her serve, and Giorgi double-faulted to lose the set. It could have been a heartbreaking moment, but it was Keys who faltered. Keys has struggled with a left wrist injury this year and had a second operation on the wrist after the French Open.Venus Williams, now the only former Wimbledon champion left in the women’s draw, struggled on Wednesday as well. The No. 10 seed, Williams overcame a poor first set to beat Wang Qiang, 4-6, 6-4, 6-1.Williams was playing in her 97th match at Wimbledon, the most of any active player, a fact she said she did not know.“I never look at the stats,” she said. “So, wow. I’d love to reach 100. That would be awesome.”AdvertisementAfter her first-round match, Williams broke down in tears at her news conference while discussing the fatal accident she was involved in on June 9 in Florida. The subject was not discussed on Wednesday.She did, however, discuss her third-round opponent, Naomi Osaka, who upset No. 22 Barbora Strycova, 6-1, 0-6, 6-4. Williams praised Osaka, a promising 19-year-old from Japan, by saying they had similar games.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Osaka said she was honored.“I don’t think I would have started playing if Venus and Serena weren’t, like, there for me growing up,” Osaka said, also referring to Serena Williams, Venus’s younger sister. “I mean, it’s kind of weird to hear that she, like, maybe she even talked about me.”On the men’s side, top-seeded Andy Murray showed no signs of the aching hip that had hampered him before the tournament. He easily dismissed his friend Dustin Brown, 6-3, 6-2, 6-2, in their second-round match, and at the net, Brown acknowledged that Murray took him to school.“Yeah, thanks for that lesson,” Brown said. “It was too good.”Murray followed his fellow British player Johanna Konta, the No. 6 seed in the women’s draw, on Centre Court. Konta needed 3 hours 10 minutes to shake off Donna Vekic of Croatia, 7-6 (4), 4-6, 10-8. The final set took 1:19.When it finally ended, the crowd in the stadium, as well as a huge contingent watching on a video screen on the hill outside Court 1, let out a roar heard all around the grounds.“Definitely one of the most epic matches I have been a part of,” said Konta, who advanced to the third round for the first time in six Wimbledon appearances.Another British woman, the wild-card entrant Heather Watson, needed less drama to advance. She beat No. 18 Anastasija Sevastova of Latvia, 6-0, 6-4.AdvertisementNo. 13 Jelena Ostapenko, the surprise French Open champion, narrowly avoided joining the list of vanquished seeds when she came from behind to beat Françoise Abanda of Canada, 4-6, 7-6 (4), 6-3.Victoria Azarenka, playing in her first Grand Slam tournament since giving birth to her son in December, beat No. 15 Elena Vesnina, 6-3, 6-3, further sending notice that she is returning rapidly to form. Azarenka plays Watson next.In the last match on Centre Court, fourth-seeded Rafael Nadal, the French Open champion, beat Donald Young, 6-4, 6-2, 7-5. Nadal is in the third round at Wimbledon for the first time since 2014 and will play the promising Russian Karen Khachanov, a 21-year-old ranked No. 34.But it was too soon for Nadal to think about that matchup.“It’s quarter to 10 at night and we are still sitting here,” Nadal said. “I am just happy to have finished.”A version of this article appears in print on July 6, 2017, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Kvitova Falters in the Second Round.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.