By DAVID WALDSTEINJULY 4, 2017
WIMBLEDON, England — The emotional arc for a qualifying player at a major tennis tournament can be steep. It is not uncommon to go from exhilaration one day to an abrupt realization a day or two later when the draw is released. That is when a qualifier learns the first-round opponent, and it is often someone famous with a top pedigree.Irina Falconi, an American who was born in Ecuador, cruised through the qualifying rounds of Wimbledon without losing a set. But a day after she qualified, Falconi learned she would next play the No. 1 player in the world.In years past, that could have meant a date with Serena Williams, who has won 23 Grand Slam singles titles, on a show court. But Williams, who is pregnant, did not enter the tournament, and the No. 1 seed belongs to Angelique Kerber, the top-ranked woman for much of the year.Falconi’s match with Kerber will be the first match on Centre Court on Tuesday.Kerber is a champion, but she is not invulnerable. At the French Open in May, Kerber fell to Ekaterina Makarova, then ranked 40th, to become the first women’s No. 1 seed in the Open era to lose in the first round at Roland Garros.AdvertisementThe last women’s No. 1 seed at Wimbledon to lose in the first round was Martina Hingis, who fell to Virginia Ruano Pascual in 2001.AdvertisementFalconi, 27 and ranked 247th, has the utmost respect for Kerber, a champion at last year’s Australian Open and United States Open and a finalist at Wimbledon. If nothing else, the matchup represents a wide disparity in ranking numbers, but Falconi enters the match with confidence.“I’m feeling really good,” she said. “We’ve been working very hard ever since we took the executive decision to go back home and get better and stronger. I’ve had a lot of time on the tennis court.”As it was for Kerber, Paris was a disappointment for Falconi. She did not make it to the main draw, losing in the first round of qualifying to Petra Martic of Croatia. Soon after, she and her coaches and advisers made a somewhat risky decision.Instead of remaining in Europe to prepare on grass leading up to Wimbledon, they went to Florida to train at the United States Tennis Association’s new campus in Lake Nona, not far from downtown Orlando. There, she worked out intensely on tennis skills and conditioning, and her form improved enough for her to make a wager with her boyfriend, the boxer Travis Hartman.If she qualified for Wimbledon, Hartman would have to fly immediately to London to support her. It turned out to be a bet without a loser.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“The minute I qualified he went online and bought his ticket,” Falconi said with satisfaction.In qualifying, Falconi easily handled Tara Moore, Elitsa Kostova and Mariana Duque-Mariño. After reaching a career-high ranking of No. 63 in May 2016, Falconi is working her way back up after injuries cut short her 2016 season after the United States Open.Falconi was born in Portoviejo, Ecuador, but moved to the United States when she was a toddler and grew up in New York, on 207th Street in Manhattan. She played tennis at Georgia Tech.There was a time, about 10 years go, she said, when she considered representing Ecuador. She would have been its No. 1 player. She decided to remain a part of American tennis, but maintains an attachment to Ecuador, where many of her family members still live.AdvertisementFalconi was playing in Bogotá, Colombia, in April 2016, when a magnitude 7.8 earthquake struck the western coast of Ecuador, killing more than 600 people and injuring more than 16,000. Much of the damage was in Manabí Province and the city of Manta, not far from Portoviejo. Falconi said that none of her family members were injured, but that her childhood home was destroyed.She went on to win the Bogotá tournament, but the joy was muted by the hardship taking place to the south. So she and Hartman started an online campaign on GoFundMe and raised $25,000 for the victims, Falconi said. They visited the area later that year, and she said she hoped to go back again soon.Falconi has never won a main-draw match at Wimbledon in four previous appearances. Her best performance at a major tournament was to reach the third round at the 2011 United States Open and the 2015 French Open.She has played Kerber once, in Washington in 2013, and lost in straight sets.“That was a few years ago,” Falconi said, her tone suggesting she did not plan on seeing the same result.Kerber remembered the match, too. She also remembered practicing with Falconi in recent years.“She has to play good; she came through the qualifying,” Kerber said. “Every single match is tough here. It doesn’t matter against who you play.”A version of this article appears in print on July 4, 2017, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: Ranked 247th and Suddenly Facing No. 1.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.