By MALIKA ANDREWSJULY 4, 2017
Aaron Judge dented a metal plate above a door beyond the left-center-field wall at Yankee Stadium on Tuesday. He did not do this with his bat or with his fist.Judge dented it with his major league-leading 28th home run of the season, a line drive that left the bat with a crack and landed, roughly 450 feet away, with a clank. The homer accounted for the Yankees’ only run in a 4-1 loss to the Toronto Blue Jays, but it did something else, too: It added to Judge’s growing reputation at the Stadium.It isn’t difficult to figure out who is the most popular player on the Yankees’ roster these days. Riding on the subway toward Yankee Stadium on Monday afternoon, hours before the Yankees played the Blue Jays in the opener of their three-game series this week, it was hard to walk 10 feet and not encounter someone in a No. 99 T-shirt or jersey or even a No. 99 onesie.Later, at the Stadium, after the game began, the crowd roared in delight when the public address announcer bellowed, “All rise for No. 99, Aaron Judge.” One man even urged his young daughter to wait until Judge had finished batting before heading to the restrooms.“We don’t want to miss Judge!” he exclaimed.So it goes for Judge in the Bronx, and elsewhere. The Yankees’ 25-year-old, 6-foot-7 right fielder was the leading vote-getter in the American League All-Star balloting. Next Monday night, he will be the headliner in the home run derby, an event that may be more popular among fans than the All-Star Game itself.Advertisement“It’s incredible,” Judge said before Monday night’s game of the fan support he receives, adding, “I’m just really appreciative.”AdvertisementAs are the Yankees, who know their attendance lately owes as big a debt to Judge as it does to the team’s 44-38 record. The team even has set aside a section of the right-field stands — it calls it the Judge’s Chambers — replete with wood paneling. Before Monday’s game, the line of fans waiting to take pictures there was 30 minutes long.Fans asked about Judge’s sudden popularity cited his willingness to sign autographs and interact with them and also the fact that he is a homegrown Yankee rather than an established player acquired from elsewhere. In that respect, Judge is in the tradition of an earlier fan favorite, Derek Jeter, whose No. 2 jersey seemed to be everywhere at the Stadium when he was playing. Now there has been a clear shift toward No. 99.Saeed Ahmad, who works at Stadium Souvenirs on River Avenue, right next to the stadium, said Judge’s jersey was by far the most popular shirt sold in his store. “It wasn’t always like this,” Ahmad said, recalling Judge’s inauspicious debut in the second half of last season. “Last year, nothing. But this year, boom. Sometimes we sell 50 or 100 a day.”On Monday night, fans were granted an extended look at Judge. In the major leagues, the home team normally takes batting practice first, which means that by the time the Yankees normally open the gates to the ballpark, Judge and his teammates have already taken their pregame swings.But on Monday, the Yankees opened the ballpark an hour early — offering early arrivals a rare chance to see Judge hit some more tape-measure shots, even if they didn’t count.“I think you really notice it on the road, the buzz that he creates when we take B.P.,” Yankees Manager Joe Girardi said of Judge. “You hear a lot of oohs and ahhs. Our fans get to see it a lot of times during the games here, but now they’re going to get a chance to see it in B.P.”When the gates opened Monday, fans surged down the stairs and pooled in the right-field bleachers. Although there were cheers when Gary Sanchez, whose own slugging prowess has been overshadowed by Judge, threw a ball out into a waiting child’s glove, most fans were craning their necks to see when No. 99 would take the field.AdvertisementOne fan, Kim Tse, brought her three children — Kelsey, Lindsay and Jack — and dressed them all in the kind of black-rimmed glasses that Judge wore in a skit on “The Tonight Show.” In the skit, Judge pretended to be someone else as he asked people what they thought of Judge. At this point, though, Judge may be out of disguises.“He seems like a nice person,” Tse said. “Even though he’s young, the fame hasn’t gone to his head. It seems like he’s really down to earth.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Another fan who showed up early, 21-year-old Alex Bloom, had a more sober view. To Bloom, it is Judge’s talent that explains why he is so adored. Though amid all the Judge jubilation, Bloom also sounded a word of warning, noting that “the fans can turn on players really quickly around here.”That seems almost unthinkable for Judge, at least any time soon. When he did go onto the field for batting practice Monday, Judge ended up throwing more balls into the crowd than any other player. He winked. He waved. He tipped his cap.“I swoon every time he looks over here,” one woman said.In the game itself, Judge had two hits and scored two runs as the Yankees won, 6-3. He did not deposit any balls over the wall in that game, but there should be plenty more chances for No. 99 to add to his following.A version of this article appears in print on July 6, 2017, on Page B15 of the New York edition with the headline: As the Homers Keep Flying, No. 99 Is Becoming Tougher to Miss.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.