
Sports of The Times By                     
 WILLIAM C. RHODEN
 
MARCH 25, 2016
CHICAGO — As a high school senior in Austin, Tex., Eric McClellan knew very little about Gonzaga.“All I knew about Gonzaga was Adam Morrison,” McClellan told me last week, dropping the name of the former Bulldogs All-American. “I didn’t know where they were located. I didn’t know the success behind the university.”And McClellan, a sturdy 6-foot-4 guard, had no idea that Gonzaga would one day help him try to salvage his career and change his life in ways that had nothing to do with basketball.There are hundreds of March Madness stories: stories of players who exceed expectations, stories of players who don’t.McClellan, a star at Austin High in 2011 who is now at his third Division I program, was on the verge of embodying the classic story of a player whose missteps got him permanently cast out of the temple of big-time basketball. Instead, he is in Chicago this week, playing in the N.C.A.A. tournament for the university in Spokane, Wash.AdvertisementMcClellan’s journey began at Tulsa, where he played his first season for the coach who recruited him, Doug Wojcik.When Tulsa fired Wojcik after McClellan’s freshman season, McClellan made his first major decision: He transferred to Vanderbilt, ready to test himself at a higher level of the Southeastern Conference.AdvertisementWhich he did, briefly, leading the Commodores in scoring for 12 games.Then McClellan committed an academic transgression, which is still undisclosed, but it was serious enough to get him suspended from the team. During the disciplinary process, Vanderbilt officials discovered that McClellan had been arrested on a shoplifting charge the previous summer, and he was expelled.This was the rock bottom he had heard so much about in Austin, where stories were told and retold of players who had wasted golden opportunities with boneheaded behavior. He was certain his college career, at least at the top level, was over.In the past, McClellan’s problems — which, to be fair, were of his own creation — might not have been an athletic death sentence. But the proliferation of social media, where every misstep can become an immediate embarrassment, has made coaches and college officials wary of offering second chances to anything but first-rate players.McClellan said he had been contacted by a few programs — Nevada-Las Vegas, U.C.L.A., Missouri, Florida State — after Vanderbilt sent him packing, but none took things further than a cursory conversation.“They were scared away by my background, by my story,” McClellan said. “I hit the darkest place in my life, but I promised myself that if I had another opportunity, I would correct my wrongs and would fix everything that I messed up.”McClellan also learned a lesson about the value of maintaining relationships. Unknown to him, one of his high school coaches made contact with Wojcik, who had been fired by the College of Charleston after his own career-threatening mistake: He was accused of verbally abusing his players. Wojcik had landed at Gonzaga as a special assistant to Coach Mark Few.AdvertisementWojcik vouched for McClellan, and after an outside review by Gonzaga, which included an order that McClellan perform community service, McClellan was admitted. The university he did not know had thrown him a life preserver.Last season, McClellan, after regaining his eligibility in January, played a minor role on a team that reached the round of 8. This season, McClellan averaged 9.6 points per game during the regular season, but 20.3 in three wins in the West Coast Conference tournament.In this late-season run, McClelland has developed into a catalyst for a three-pronged attack that also features Kyle Wiltjer, a 6-10 forward, and Domantas Sabonis, a 6-11 forward and a potential lottery pick.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.After the Bulldogs upset Seton Hall and Utah to reach the round of 16, McClellan said that whatever else happened, he would constantly remind himself of how fortunate he is to simply be where he is: at Gonzaga, in the N.C.A.A. tournament, a Division I starter again.“I’ve never lost my love for basketball,” he said. “On the personal side I had to grow. In order to grow, I had to let go of some habits.“I decided to grow. I decided to listen to the people around me, surround myself with good people and continue to make the right decisions.”Few and his staff, McClellan said, “saved my life.”“Eric saved himself,” Few responded. “Eric’s the one who changed.”For a generation of players whose steps and missteps become so public so immediately, there is something to be said for second and even third chances.McClellan plans to graduate from Gonzaga in May with a degree in sports management. Beyond basketball, the right fit, the perfect place, turned out to be a place he knew very little about.AdvertisementHe just had to travel a meandering road to find it.Email: wcr@nytimes.com A version of this article appears in print on March 26, 2016, on Page D3 of the New York edition with the headline: Guard Facing Division I Exile Finds a Home.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »