By VICTOR MATHERJAN. 6, 2017
In the N.B.A.’s All-Star voting this season, a lot of names you might expect are at the top. LeBron James, Kyrie Irving, Kevin Durant, Stephen Curry, James Harden and Russell Westbrook have each cracked 400,000 votes.And so has Zaza Pachulia.For the second year in a row, Pachulia, the 32-year-old Golden State Warriors center from the Republic of Georgia, is getting vote totals that far exceed what his on-court performance would seem to deserve.Last season, when he played for the Dallas Mavericks, Pachulia finished fourth in Western Conference frontcourt voting behind Kobe Bryant, Durant and Kawhi Leonard, missing election by only 14,000 votes. This season, he ranks second behind Durant and is nearly 100,000 votes ahead of Leonard.It is a startling show of support for a player who is averaging 5.2 points a game this season and has never averaged more than 12.2 in his N.B.A. career.AdvertisementLast season’s surprise push for Pachulia was led by celebrity endorsers like the rapper Wyclef Jean, the teenage internet personality Hayes Grier and the president of Georgia, Giorgi Margvelashvili.
#NBAVote ZAZA PACHULIA ! pic.twitter.com/a7VcygMuAd Pachulia does have a following, and fans enjoy his occasional goofy celebration and unfamiliar accent. His memorable first name is probably also a factor. And don’t count out simple mischief. The stakes are a lot lower than in an important political election, so why not cast a “funny” vote?AdvertisementThe situation is reminiscent of the N.H.L. All-Star Game last year, when a journeyman  enforcer named John Scott rode a wave of good-humored fan support to an improbable berth on the team. Amid discomfort from the league and some purist fans, he was traded and sent to the minor leagues. But he was allowed to play in the All-Star Game and scored twice to win the Most Valuable Player Award. The N.H.L. has since tweaked its rules to make minor leaguers ineligible for the game.A rule change in the N.B.A. means that despite his support, Pachulia will almost certainly not be suiting up as a starter for the game on Feb. 19 in New Orleans.Fan voting, formerly the sole criterion to determine starters, now accounts for only 50 percent. Media voting and player voting have been added and will count for 25 percent each. It is hard to see Pachulia finishing very high among either of those groups. And with coaches choosing the reserves, Pachulia probably won’t make the bench either.A version of this article appears in print on January 7, 2017, on Page D6 of the New York edition with the headline: An All-Star Bid Supported  by a Single Stat: Fan Votes.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.