By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSJAN. 4, 2017
METAIRIE, La. — Donatas Motiejunas, the New Orleans Pelicans’ new 7-footer, may sound delusional to cynical N.B.A. observers.Two of the first topics Motiejunas discussed after his first practice with the Pelicans on Wednesday were the health of his back and the Pelicans’ playoff prospects, and he was optimistic on both fronts.“I’m going to prove it when I get on the floor,” Motiejunas said when asked about fighting the perception that he has been hampered since having back surgery near the end of the 2014-15 season. “I don’t see an issue to fighting through this.”Motiejunas, a versatile Lithuanian who has post-up moves from both the left and the right, has hit about 31 percent of his career 3-point attempts and has drawn praise for his passing ability. Having signed a free-agent contract on Tuesday to spend the rest of this season with New Orleans, he sees himself as a boost to the Pelicans’ playoff chances: New Orleans is eight games below .500, at 14-22, but sat just two games out of the final Western Conference playoff spot on Wednesday morning.AdvertisementWhen Motiejunas was asked whether he saw his stint with the Pelicans — who will pay him about $600,000, the prorated veteran minimum — as an audition ahead of becoming a free agent again over the summer, he deflected the question.Advertisement“I’m here to help the team win,” Motiejunas, 26, said. “I’m not here to look at my personal stats. If this team is going to make the playoffs and I’m going to help them, it’s going to put my value up regardless.”He added, “As long as we’re going to stay healthy, this team right now can make a big push.”A handful of teams had expressed interest in Motiejunas, who played four seasons with the Houston Rockets, averaging 7.8 points and 4 rebounds per game. They were all offering about the same pay because most teams at this point in the season are restricted to paying the N.B.A. minimum for free-agent acquisitions.As a restricted free agent in the off-season, Motiejunas signed an offer sheet with the Nets worth about $36 million over four years. Houston initially sought to match it but ultimately allowed him to become an unrestricted free agent after negotiations broke down, in part because of Motiejunas’s history with back injuries. He played in only 37 games last season, but he also missed only one regular-season game after Feb. 27 and played in five playoff games.Motiejunas said he had been working out on his own in Vancouver the past five months and was in “really good shape.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Coach Alvin Gentry said the Pelicans had had internal discussions about trading for Motiejunas last year and were pleased to get him now in a low-risk deal.Gentry said the presence of the star big man Anthony Davis and the up-tempo, evenly spaced offense that the Pelicans run appealed to Motiejunas.“The opportunity to play alongside a great player — obviously it makes the game easier,” Gentry said.And for New Orleans, Motiejunas’s passing skills and shooting range could help Davis avoid being double-teamed.AdvertisementIndeed, Motiejunas said his mission was to help Davis “get wide-open shots.”“I’m a creator,” Motiejunas said. “I can take the ball to the paint, force the defense to collapse on me.”The Pelicans have used a smaller, quicker lineup recently, with the 6-foot-11 Davis at center. It has paid off: New Orleans has recorded five victories in seven games. Gentry said Motiejunas would most likely play center, but his ability to run and pass should keep the lineup shift, with Davis moving back to power forward, from disrupting the rhythm the team has found.Davis said Motiejunas had “a high basketball I.Q., but the thing that stands out to me the most is his ability to pass.”Davis added, “It gives me another opportunity to get out on the floor and roam, step out and shoot the ball, or be able to attack more.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.