By DAVE CALDWELLMARCH 23, 2016
Lee Stempniak, a 33-year-old Boston Bruins forward (and former Blue, Maple Leaf, Coyote, Flame, Penguin, Ranger, Jet and Devil) arrived at Madison Square Garden on Wednesday for the 782nd game of his much-traveled N.H.L. career.Stempniak was preparing to face the Rangers for a fourth time with a third team since the Rangers traded him less than 13 months ago. He said, good-naturedly, that moving around was just the nature of the business for him.The Bruins acquired Stempniak, a native of West Seneca, N.Y., from the Devils at the trading deadline on Feb. 29. The $850,000 contract he signed with the Devils in October expires at the end of the season, so he will be looking for work again. But he thinks he has proved something as he has scored 18 goals this season and kept a spot on Boston’s top line.“I feel like maybe people will see me in a different light now after this season,” Stempniak said Wednesday before the Bruins’ 5-2 loss to the Rangers, in which he scored a goal and had another waved off.AdvertisementThe trade to Boston gave Stempniak; his wife, Lindsay; and their 2-year-old twin daughters a homecoming. The family spends off-seasons in Boston, and Stempniak, who played at Dartmouth, said he and his family had just moved back to Boston from Hoboken, N.J., where they lived when he played for the Devils. (The twins were born when Stempniak was playing with Calgary, which was six teams ago.)Advertisement“It’s always difficult, but it makes things a little easier going to a place where you have a home,” Stempniak said of being traded. “It’s always hard with kids, when you get a new routine, to get comfortable.”The Bruins (39-27-8), who have lost four in a row, acquired Stempniak for hockey reasons — namely, they needed a steady right wing for center Patrice Bergeron and left wing Brad Marchand.Although the linemates entered the Rangers game with no points in four games, Boston Coach Claude Julien has kept them together.“He brings the experience he’s acquired over the years,” Bergeron said of Stempniak before Wednesday’s game. “He definitely calms the play down, and his positioning is great. He’s always in the right position defensively or offensively, creates a lot of things for us. It’s basically been a seamless transition for us.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Bergeron said he regarded it as a plus that Stempniak had a lengthy résumé — he has not played more than 200 games for any team since the Blues traded him early in the 2008-9 season.“He’s one of those players that any team needs, with the style he brings,” Bergeron said. “Any time a player has been traded a lot, it seems like it’s easy for him to get used to the guys and the system. He’s used to it. It helps with the whole transition, with him being comfortable.”Asked what Stempniak provided to the line, Julien said: “Some experience, some speed, some skill. Again, when you look at that line, a lot of time they’re playing against top lines. He’s been a player you can rely on quite a bit. I think that’s kind of what he’s brought to us here. He’s kind of stabilized our lineup a little bit.”AdvertisementBefore a California trip last week, the Bruins had won five of seven games with Stempniak and lost the other two games in overtime. Boston beat Chicago in his second game, and Stempniak scored the winning goal in overtime against Florida in his fourth game. The Bruins are 3 points behind Tampa Bay and Florida in the Atlantic Division.Marchand said of Stempniak: “He controls the puck well. He makes good plays. He’s fast. He can play any position. He’s added a lot of depth, and he’s a player we really needed.”Stempniak was a free agent after last season, in which he scored 15 goals in 71 games combined for the Rangers and Winnipeg. He scored the Jets’ first postseason goal in 19 years on April 20, but he was out of a job after Winnipeg was swept by Anaheim.One of his former teams was Pittsburgh, whose general manager, Ray Shero, moved to the Devils last May. Shero, who had acquired Stempniak from Calgary at the trading deadline in 2014, offered him a tryout. Stempniak made the rebuilt team.He also lifted the Devils to their first victory of the season with an overtime goal against the Rangers at Madison Square Garden on Oct. 18. He led the Devils in scoring, and they were a threat to make the playoffs for a while.But Stempniak was Shero’s choicest piece of trade bait. So he was on the move again.“We were building something in New Jersey, and to not be able to see it through, it’s difficult,” Stempniak said. “I really liked the guys there. I thought there was a good foundation there for a great team.“To leave that, it’s difficult. But to come to a team that’s looking more toward the Stanley Cup than the playoffs, it’s exciting.”A version of this article appears in print on March 24, 2016, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Forward Settles In With 9th Team.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.