By AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSEMARCH 23, 2016
MIAMI —  Novak Djokovic made peace with Billie Jean King, Chris Evert, Serena Williams and others Wednesday, supporting equal prize money for men and women in tennis after days of controversy.In remarks Sunday after winning the BNP Paribas Open in Indian Wells, Calif., the top-ranked Djokovic suggested that men attracted more spectators and deserved better paydays.“Stats are showing that we have much more spectators on the men’s tennis matches,” he said. “I think that’s one of the reasons why maybe we should get awarded more.”He also added that women “have to go through a lot of different things that we don’t have to go through, you know, the hormones and different stuff.”AdvertisementDjokovic issued an apology of sorts on social media Tuesday but did not back down from his remarks, leaving that for his news conference at the Miami Open, where he is the top men’s seed and the defending champion.“I never had an issue with equality in gender or sport or other areas of life,” Djokovic said. “We all deserve more of the wealth distribution from the tournaments.”He added: “I feel very sorry if I hurt my female colleague tennis players. I have a huge respect for all of them.”Djokovic said he had sent messages to Andy Murray, Serena Williams and others who had been critical of his remarks.“I never had any intention to offend them or come up with any negative connotations in my statement,” Djokovic said. “I don’t make any differences between the genders. I am for equality in the sport.”AdvertisementDjokovic spent 30 minutes speaking with King and Evert about his comments, and he said that King was not in a fiery mood despite her years of fighting for gender equity in prize money.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“She was in a very good mood with me,” Djokovic said. “We spoke about opportunities that a tennis player has, to use his influence to make a positive difference in the world. We had a nice and friendly chat.”King and Evert had spoken to reporters earlier, generally speaking about gender-equity issues beyond tennis but saving a few choice words for Djokovic.“I didn’t quite understand the hormones thing,” Evert said. “You don’t talk about women’s hormones. Anywhere.”“He was talking about our monthly situation,” King said. “Like it was the dark ages.”King noted that Djokovic and his wife had recently had a son, and she said that event and culture could have played a role in his remarks.“My prayer is that most of the guys have daughters,” King said. “I think it changes them.”Djokovic said he was shocked at the magnitude of outrage his comments had caused.The debate began with disparaging remarks about women’s tennis from Raymond Moore, the Indian Wells tournament director, who resigned Monday.The American player Nicole Gibbs expressed her support for gender equity on Twitter and said she received praise for it in the locker room. But she found that other women were worried about what others might think or had been dissuaded by coaches from making a public stand.“Our generation is privileged because we had the trail blazed by you guys,” Gibbs told King and Evert, to which Evert replied: “Never be fearful of telling the truth. I admire you for speaking out.”A version of this article appears in print on March 24, 2016, on Page B15 of the New York edition with the headline: Djokovic Says He Supports Equal Prizes.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.