By SETH BERKMANMARCH 23, 2016
When Teyvon Myers learned that West Virginia was headed to Brooklyn for the opening rounds of the N.C.A.A. men’s basketball tournament, he knew it was time to call in favors.Myers grew up in Flatbush Gardens, only seven subway stops from Barclays Center. Since each West Virginia player would be allotted only four tickets for friends and family members, that presented a predicament for Myers, who boasted he could have 6,000 fans in attendance.“I feel like it would have been a lot easier if it wasn’t the N.C.A.A. tournament,” Myers said. “Everybody wants to come.”During the tournament, tickets become valuable commodities for players, particularly if they are traveling to sites in or close to their hometowns. When demand exceeds supply, players often turn to bartering — or other methods — to procure what they need from their teammates.Advertisement“You just blackmail them,” Myers said. “You bring something up from the past: ‘Bro, remember when I gave you that Starburst? You really wanted some candy. I gave it to you. You got to give me this ticket.’ ”AdvertisementAt Notre Dame, players occasionally compete for unused tickets.Fighting Irish guard Matt Farrell, who is from Bridgewater, N.J., secured four extra tickets in Brooklyn from teammates to supplement the six given to him by the team. He will most likely have to do the same this weekend at the East Regional in Philadelphia.“We have fun with it,” Farrell said. “We’ll play, like, games for it, stuff like that — ‘What do I got to do for that ticket?’ ”A more popular method relies on an informal exchange of I.O.U.s.Iowa’s Dom Uhl rarely needed his player tickets for home games in Iowa City (he attended high school in Point Pleasant, N.J.), and the majority of his family lives in Frankfurt, Germany. So when the Hawkeyes traveled to Barclays Center last week, Uhl cashed in the good will he had built up over months of games and was able to collect 18 tickets.But that does not always work. The Oregon freshman Kendall Small, who on Thursday night will play a round-of-16 game that is a 15-minute drive from the Anaheim, Calif., neighborhood where he grew up, said he had given the six tickets Oregon provided to him to his parents, three siblings and his grandfather. But he could use four more.His teammate Jordan Bell, who is from nearby Long Beach, found himself similarly short, despite pleas to teammates. “Nobody was going for it,” he said, leaving him no option but to disappoint people.“I totally told them they can’t come to the game,” he said of his unfulfilled requests.Success, though, can bring other burdens. Villanova forward Darryl Reynolds said his relatives had recently traveled from Philadelphia to watch him play in New York, but because of issues like travel costs, hotels and the need to request more time away from work, they did not return for last weekend’s games in Brooklyn. That was a disappointment, but it also allowed him to give all of his tickets to teammates.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Locating extra tickets can also become a sudden nuisance if a team advances further than expected.Stephen F. Austin traveled approximately 1,500 miles to Barclays Center. Because of that distance, and because the 14th-seeded Lumberjacks were not favored in their first-round game, many players did not face high demand for their allotment of six tickets. (Forward JaQuan Smith, who is from Baltimore, said he had needed only five.) But after they upset West Virginia, friends and family members began calling and texting players to ask for tickets as they made last-minute reservations to fly in and support the team against Notre Dame.According to the N.C.A.A., universities may provide each student-athlete with up to six tickets per tournament game. The good news is that paying for family travel expenses can get easier as teams get closer to the championship.AdvertisementLast year, the N.C.A.A. started a pilot program to help cover trips for players’ families to the men’s and women’s Final Four sites, providing up to $3,000 per family in travel, hotel and meal expenses for the national semifinals and $4,000 for those who made the championship game.At last year’s Final Four in Indianapolis, Josh Gasser and Coach Bo Ryan of Wisconsin and Kentucky Coach John Calipari suggested that the N.C.A.A. should provide family travel stipends for every round. Wisconsin’s Sam Dekker was critical of the fact that players had received only six tickets a game for the event in Lucas Oil Stadium, which can hold about 70,000 spectators.“The N.C.A.A. makes a lot of money, I think,” said the Iowa freshman forward Ahmad Wagner, an Ohio native who added that his parents took turns traveling to road games when they could not bring both of his younger siblings. “I think they’d be able to support that. It’d obviously be helpful. Why wouldn’t they want kids’ parents at the games, kids’ families at the games?”The pilot program was extended for this year’s Final Four, but several players said they hoped stipends and ticket allotments would increase in the future, perhaps negating the need to worry about bargaining for seats in addition to preparing for tournament games.“There’s only four teams that make the end,” Villanova guard Ryan Arcidiacono said. “What happens for the teams that have to travel out to Washington from Virginia or something like that? Why are you taking it away from teams like maybe a 16 seed, who pretty much probably will only have one or two games, or a 15 seed?“I think if they’re able to go out to a game and enjoy the overall experience of the N.C.A.A. tournament, I think that would be pretty big and pretty unique and something they’d remember forever.”Mike Tierney contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on March 24, 2016, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: Players Get Extra Tickets, If They Haggle.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.