By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSJUNE 7, 2016
SAN JOSE, Calif. — The task facing the San Jose Sharks is daunting: No team in nearly three quarters of a century has rallied from a 3-1 deficit to win the Stanley Cup finals.But if the Sharks hope to accomplish that goal, they will first need to take much smaller steps. Simply getting a lead — at any point in a game — would most likely help.Through four games, the Sharks have yet to play with a lead against the Pittsburgh Penguins. The Sharks have allowed the first goal in each game, and they never led in their only win, Game 3, until Joonas Donskoi scored the game-winner in overtime.“We’ve got to find a way to stick one of those in early and put them in the spot where they’re chasing the game a little bit, which we haven’t done yet,” Sharks Coach Peter DeBoer said Tuesday.AdvertisementDoing that would be a good start to what would be an improbable comeback if the Sharks pulled it off. Of the 32 teams that have fallen behind by 3-1 in the Stanley Cup finals since it became a best-of-seven series in 1939, 31 have lost the series. The only winner in that span came in 1942, when the Toronto Maple Leafs rallied from a 3-0 deficit to beat the Detroit Red Wings.AdvertisementDeBoer has been in a tough spot in the final before. In 2012 with the Devils, his team lost the first three games to Los Angeles before rallying for two wins and ultimately losing in six games.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Everyone was writing us off,” he said. “We took the approach of, ‘Why not us?’ I don’t care what the record book says, that only one or two teams have come back from this situation, whatever those numbers are. Why can’t we be the first team to do it? It starts with one game.”The formula that got the Sharks to their first Cup finals has been missing. They jumped on teams early for most of the first three rounds and then wore them down with their forechecking and cycle game. The power play was potent, providing timely goals, and the Sharks managed to knock off Los Angeles, Nashville and St. Louis on the way to the final.But little has worked against the Penguins, who have used their decided edge in speed to control play for most of the four games, often keeping the Sharks hemmed in their own zone.Pittsburgh has shut down San Jose’s top guns. Joe Pavelski, who leads the N.H.L. with 13 playoff goals, has no points through four games. Brent Burns had two assists in Game 1 and has not recorded a point since. Logan Couture, who leads the N.H.L. postseason with 26 points, has just two against the Penguins.“I thought every game we’ve created a little bit more chances to score,” DeBoer said. “I think our big guys have gotten more shots off and more looks as the series has gone on. We’re doing some good stuff. But you can’t change the fact that we’ve played behind the entire series.”San Jose has trailed for 121 minutes 44 seconds of the series, about 25 minutes less than they trailed over 18 games in the previous rounds when the Sharks scored first in 13 games and forced the opponent to chase the game.The Penguins have not played from behind in what seems like ages. They have gone 435:46 of game time without playing with a deficit since losing Game 4 to Tampa Bay in the Eastern Conference finals. Pittsburgh’s only two losses since have come in overtime games where they did not trail until the final goal.Advertisement“We’re doing our best to score first and get a lead,” Couture said. “It hasn’t happened yet. I don’t know how it would change their game. I imagine they would keep playing the same way. When we have the lead, we play good defense and keep it simple.”A version of this article appears in print on June 8, 2016, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: For Sharks to Rally, a Lead Could Help.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.