By JAMIE TRECKERJUNE 7, 2016
CHICAGO — While his most notable comments were related to the job security of the United States men’s national team coach Jurgen Klinsmann, the U.S. Soccer president Sunil Gulati addressed a number of issues in a wide-ranging roundtable Tuesday before the United States played Costa Rica in the Copa América Centenario at Soldier Field.Among the subjects addressed were the continuing negotiations for a new collective bargaining agreement with the United States women’s national team; news media reports of a combined Copa América and Gold Cup competition to be held in the United States; and the prospect of a U.S. Soccer bid for the 2026 World Cup.A NEW AMERICAN COMPETITION? ESPN Deportes reported Monday that a decision was “close” on merging the Gold Cup and the Copa América into a new, United States-hosted tournament to be held every four years. Despite the idea’s being quickly endorsed by Klinsmann and greeted with enthusiasm from fans, Gulati quickly poured cold water on the concept.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“The report is inaccurate,” Gulati said flatly. “There have been no discussions about future events with U.S. Soccer or between Concacaf and Conmebol” — the regional governing bodies for the Americas — “but having said that there could be discussions in the future. It would have to be some new event.”AdvertisementCONTRACT TALKS WITH THE WOMEN’S TEAM Gulati was upbeat about reaching a new agreement with the women’s national team in the wake of a legal victory for U.S. Soccer in federal court last week. That decision affirmed the validity of the team’s collective bargaining agreement, meaning the players would not be allowed to strike before this summer’s Rio Olympics, where they will be a gold medal favorite.Advertisement“I have no doubt we will reach an agreement,” Gulati said. “And it’s possible we will have an agreement before Brazil. We would love to get this done as soon as possible, but there is no uncertainty about our agreement now, so we’re talking about next year and beyond.”WORLD CUP 2026 Gulati said the United States presidential election — and the presumptive nominees Hillary Clinton and Donald J. Trump — would affect any bid U.S. Soccer makes to host the World Cup, including a potential shared bid with its regional rival Mexico.“I think the world’s perception of the United States is affected by who is in the White House, so yes, it has some bearing,” he said. “Having someone in the White House who has an outward-looking view and a personality more easily accepted around the world is probably easier for the U.S.A. and for hosting major events. A co-hosted tournament with Mexico would be a little trickier if Secretary Clinton is not in the White House.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.