

 Michael Powell
 

SPORTS OF THE TIMES
APRIL 25, 2016
Somewhere in the middle of my N.B.A. TV stupor this past weekend — Hawks-versus-Celtics bleeding into watching the 7-foot Andre Drummond shoot free throws (and wondering if he’d be better off wearing a blindfold) and then looking on blurry-eyed as the Spurs administered yet another beat down to the Memphis Grizzlies, who had taken to playing the toddler children of their many injured players — this thought crept into my brain pan: Less is more. In late April, the N.B.A. playoff season has an event horizon out there at the edge of Alpha Centauri, with too long series and too long games. (More on that last point in a minute.)The N.B.A. truly is our Beautiful Game, and it would gain a lot more with a lot less. First-round series should come capped at five games, maximum. The kid Pistons are entertaining and promising, but didn’t their three losses to the LeBrons establish that they are not yet ready for prime time? Now that the Hawks and the Celtics have exchanged haymakers and the series is tied at 2-2, let’s bring on the coup de grâce of a last game.For connoisseurs of sweaty palms, we could return to the late 1970s, when first-round series were best two-out-of-three cage fights. I checked: The better team still won all but a handful of those long-ago showdowns.Make the first-round series two out of three, and the second series three out of five. When the best teams reach the conference finals and the championship round, let it expand to seven games.AdvertisementMuch credit should flow to the N.B.A. As Commissioner Adam Silver noted the other day, the league is admirably willing to innovate and upend its verities. Unlike baseball, where faithfulness to its history has become a cargo cult, the N.B.A. breathes. It put in a 3-point line, widened the lane and instituted prohibitions that diminished the blood-sport defensive muggings of the 1990s: All good.AdvertisementOn its best nights, the N.B.A. offers a free-jazz apex, as good teams (none of which are found within hundreds of miles of that basketball despond in New York City) offer jukes and passes and shooting. Why let Steph Curry get injured in a meaningless match against an egocentric Houston Rockets team? Last year the Cavaliers lost a key player, Kevin Love, in the first round of a meaningless romp over the Celtics. Cavs guard Kyrie Irving went down a few weeks later with a knee injury. The result was an N.B.A. finals clash less titanic than advertised.I called Fran Fraschilla, who embodies the hoops lifer. He’s played, coached, yakked on ESPN and analyzed European basketball with a Talmudic intensity. We are in late April of a basketball playoff season that will stretch into summer. Why not shave a few games off the front end?Fraschilla cleared his throat by noting that television networks and the league had “monetary considerations,” which is to say lots of dough at stake. But from a basketball perspective ... “It doesn’t make sense to win 63 games and have to play a seven-game series against an inferior team,” he said. “The better teams are pretty much blowing through the bottom four, except for the Celtics and the Hawks.”Fraschilla did not endorse my proposal for two out of three. That carries a too-strong whiff of random death.“I don’t for the life of me get why baseball plays 162 games each year and lets some teams live and die with a single-game playoff,” he said.Let’s continue on this reform jag. The last few minutes of N.B.A. playoff games are an unsightly mess. The N.B.A. allows games like rivers to snake and plunge toward the sea for the first three and a half quarters, only to encase those waters in cement at the end.The N.B.A. has acquired a mortal fear of the analytics-and-computer-perfection crowd and so instructed referees to halt games at their furious peak only to walk to the sidelines, don ear phones and watch replays. This can stretch minutes, and with no discernible logic. Mistakes still are made because, well, pro basketball games are played by brilliant, fast, quick-jumping human beings and even the best refs miss stuff.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Then there is the timeout, which for coaches becomes a finishing school to prove their brilliance. This is to get the game precisely wrong. The best teams are well coached, which is to say that when it comes to the crunch, players often take what they know and intuit and create beauty. The Hawks offered their own point-counterpoint on Sunday. On one play, Hawks Coach Mike Budenholzer let point guard Jeff Teague freelance. He came down in rhythm and hit a sweet 3-pointer.AdvertisementNot many seconds later, that same coach felt compelled to call a timeout and scratch out his brilliance for his players. Teague came out and dribbled and dribbled as teammates watched, stolid as statues. With a second to go, Teague jumped to shoot a long, contested jump shot, and the ball slipped out of his hands.For this, we sat through brain-numbing commercials?The path out of this cul-de-sac is found across the Atlantic. Coaches given fewer timeouts per half cannot call one while the ball is in play. The European game is also absent that malformed disaster known as the television timeout. “The game is much more free-flowing,” Fraschilla noted. “As a former coach, I like the ability to coach my team so that they are prepared for game situations with the clock running.”At its best, the N.B.A. game is the Count Basie Orchestra played in shorts and jerseys. Why not free the band to play its best music?Email: powellm@nytimes.com A version of this article appears in print on April 26, 2016, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline:  N.B.A. Should Cut to the Chase: Best of 3 to Start .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »