By SETH BERKMANJUNE 7, 2016
The thought of 6-foot-7 Michael Pineda and Larry Rothschild, the Yankees’ 62-year-old pitching coach, hunkered down in a small room deciphering videotape as if they were detectives conjures up a comical picture. Nonetheless, it is an image the two have spent hours recreating recently.Before Pineda’s start June 2 at Detroit, they had a breakthrough. Pineda, who at the time was 2-6 with an E.R.A. approaching 7.00, needed to lower his arm angle so his slider would cut more from side to side and his fastball would have more bite.Since then, the Yankees seem to be seeing the Pineda of old. He had his longest outing of the season Tuesday night, containing the Los Angeles Angels for seven innings, and the Yankees’ bullpen safeguarded a 6-3 win at Yankee Stadium.“My last two starts I threw the ball good,” Pineda said. “That’s what I’m working to do every start. Try to keep the ball down and hit the corner, making good pitches and getting outs.”AdvertisementPineda allowed only one hit through four scoreless innings. In his previous five home starts this season, he had yielded a two-out first-inning home run each time.Advertisement“Pineda’s been battling the first inning, and today he was able to come out of the inning perfect,” Carlos Beltran said. “After that he seemed like he had a great rhythm on the mound, and he was able to execute pitches.”Pineda eventually encountered trouble in the fifth, giving up three runs, including a two-run homer off a changeup to Kole Calhoun.Instead of crumbling, however, Pineda retired the Angels in order in the sixth and the seventh to cap his second straight encouraging start. Last Thursday, he held the Detroit Tigers to one run over five and two-thirds innings in a no-decision.“He did a good job tonight,” Manager Joe Girardi said, adding that he was particularly pleased by Pineda’s perfect work in the sixth and the seventh. “That’s encouraging because that’s something that hasn’t happened this year.”Pineda yielded four hits, a season low, and recorded his longest start since July 4, 2015.“I think his last inning was the best I saw his slider all night,” catcher Austin Romine said. “Slider depth was back where it needed to be; his fastball’s cutting so it’s going to be harder to hit. He’s pitching down in the zone. We stressed that in pregame meetings, and he’s doing it, and that’s why he’s having success.”Pineda was not the only pitcher reverting to form. After giving up runs in each of his last four appearances, Dellin Betances struck out two of the three batters he faced for a scoreless eighth. Andrew Miller earned his first save since May 6 after Aroldis Chapman, who became the Yankees’ closer upon returning from suspension last month, had pitched in the last three games.Pineda was staked an early 5-0 lead, highlighted by a two-run homer by Carlos Beltran in the first. On Monday night, Beltran hit a tiebreaking three-run homer in the eighth inning to beat the Angels.AdvertisementRob Refsnyder, starting at first base in place of Mark Teixeira for the fourth straight game, added an R.B.I. and scored a run.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Before the game Teixeira, who is an impending free agent, elaborated on why he declined to have surgery after tearing cartilage in his right knee. The hope is that rest and treatment, including injections of cortisone to help manage the pain, will reduce inflammation and prevent the knee from locking up.The Yankees hope that Teixeira can play in a game in three weeks, probably on a rehab assignment.After the 2007 season, Teixeira had surgery to clean out the cartilage in his left knee. He estimated that a similar operation on his right knee could lead to a four-to-six-month recovery. Teixeira also said he experienced soreness for 12 to 18 months after the 2007 knee procedure.“Our whole focus, was, ‘Can I get through this season?’” said Teixeira, who consulted with doctors Monday. “And we determined yes. At the end of the season, I’ll worry about how it feels. If it feels O.K., if I can play through it O.K., then I don’t want the surgery.”He added: “Next year doesn’t matter to me at all right now. It’s all about getting through this season and trying to help this team win.”That Teixeira might risk his long-term future to help the Yankees this season is admirable and will probably be worth a few popularity points to fans. But there are probably other motives behind the decision, too. A 36-year-old free agent coming off knee surgery is about as appealing as damaged canned goods in a supermarket bargain bin.Beltran, who will also be eligible for free agency after this season, has had little difficulty increasing his value. Depending on the Yankees’ standing next month, he could be a valuable trade chip.But he seemed to believe that if Pineda continues his upward trajectory, the Yankees could be in a prime position themselves.“I know we’re getting old,” Beltran said, “but we don’t feel like that.”A version of this article appears in print on June 8, 2016, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: Pineda Strong as Yanks Top Angels; Teixeira Opts Against Surgery.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.