By JAMIE TRECKERJUNE 7, 2016
CHICAGO — The United States soccer team kept its Copa América hopes alive Tuesday night in front of a thin crowd at Soldier Field, downing Costa Rica by 4-0, thanks to three first-half goals by Clint Dempsey, Jermaine Jones and Bobby Wood. The substitute Graham Zusi added a capper in the 87th minute, but the game had been decided long before.The result leaves the United States in second place in Group A after Colombia beat Paraguay, 2-1, later Tuesday night at the Rose Bowl in Pasadena, Calif. The top two teams from the group will advance to the quarterfinals, and Colombia is already assured of doing so.“We were eager to get on the field and get our first three points,” Manager Jurgen Klinsmann said after the game. “It took us a while to grind ourselves into the game, but then when the first goal came, we kept pushing for the next one.”Though the Americans appeared confident before the game, there was severe pressure for a positive result. To emphasize the point, the president of U.S. Soccer, Sunil Gulati, called Klinsmann’s status into question before kickoff, noting the team’s run of disappointing performances.AdvertisementIf Klinsmann was worried, he did not show it. He fielded the same starting 11 that had lost to Colombia by 2-0 in the tournament’s opener.AdvertisementThe Americans did not tempt fate the way they did in their opener, and instead sat back and absorbed the Costa Rican pressure, waiting for a break. Costa Rica had an early chance when the Arsenal star Joel Campbell latched onto a hacked clearance from defender DeAndre Yedlin and slashed a ball just to the right of the goal in the fifth minute. But the Ticos faded quickly.Yedlin atoned with a play that led to the first goal. Breaking free down the far side, Yedlin lost Oscar Duarte and fired in a cross intended for a waiting Bobby Wood at the back post. The pass looked heavy, but Cristian Gamboa inexplicably shoved Wood, sending both men to the turf.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.It was an unambiguous penalty. Dempsey stepped up afterward and smashed the ball home, sending Costa Rica goalkeeper Patrick Pemberton the wrong way. Just nine minutes had elapsed, and the Americans led, 1-0.The United States doubled its lead in the 37th minute when Jones buried a layoff from Dempsey in the far right corner. Jones had stolen the ball and set Dempsey off on a rangy run down the middle. Dragging Duarte with him across the top of the penalty area, Dempsey paused as if to shoot, then squared the ball left. Jones took a single touch and slammed a shot right across Pemberton, igniting pandemonium in the stadium’s south end.The Ticos seemed rattled, pausing to huddle before the restart of play. But the floodgates had opened, and Wood soon grabbed a goal of his own. Again, Dempsey stepped up, firing through traffic to Wood, who was posting up the hapless Duarte.A little turn, a little shiver, and with a stroke of his foot, Wood gave the Americans a 3-0 lead. Klinsmann allowed himself a moment to celebrate, thrusting both fists into the air.Costa Rica gambled in the second half, removing the increasingly isolated Campbell for Randall Azofeifa, but the Ticos never seemed to regain their shape.AdvertisementCosta Rica’s manager, Oscar Ramirez, said after the game that it had been “one of the strangest games we ever played,” but it was hard to agree with his contention that his team had played well considering the score.It was not a perfect night for the Americans. Gyasi Zardes muffed two gorgeous first-half chances that would have put the game away earlier, and the United States’ defense as a whole looked ragged, with John Brooks and Geoff Cameron forced into several awkward clearances. Costa Rica’s Celso Borges almost made that defensive pairing pay when he skipped between Brooks and Cameron in the 55th minute, only to chip his shot over the bar.Dempsey said his teammates are not looking past their next opponent, Paraguay. “We know the job is not done,” he said. “We have one game to go, but now, after tonight, we’re in a good position.”A version of this article appears in print on June 8, 2016, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: The Americans Rebound, Just in Time.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.