By TAL PINCHEVSKYNOV. 4, 2016
LOS ANGELES — Before their home opener last month, the Los Angeles Kings kicked off a yearlong celebration of their 50th anniversary with a pregame ceremony that featured many of the team’s greats, including Wayne Gretzky. But one of the loudest ovations was accorded Bob Miller, a Hall of Fame broadcaster who enters his 44th season as the voice of the Kings.It was a triumphant return for Miller mere months after open-heart surgery threatened his career and his life.“It meant a tremendous amount to me,” said Miller, who took an indefinite leave from the Kings after a January angiogram revealed that he had four arteries in his heart that were at least 90 percent blocked.“I must have received 500 get-well cards and emails from people,” Miller said. “They would say, ‘You don’t know me and we’ve never met, but you’ve been in our living room for 43 years.’ It wasn’t only in Southern California. It was throughout the U.S. and Canada. It was really gratifying to see how many people you had pulling for you.”AdvertisementMiller’s quadruple-bypass procedure left the Kings missing a local institution. Since becoming the Kings’ lead announcer in 1973, Miller, a Chicago native, has become a legend in a city that has seen transcendent broadcasters enjoy long tenures with local teams. That group includes Chick Hearn, who died in 2002 at age 85 after calling 3,338 consecutive regular-season and playoff games for the Lakers, and Vin Scully, who retired in October at 88 after spending 67 years as the voice of the Dodgers.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Miller, 78, received a friendly email from Scully shortly after his surgery, but he is preemptively rejecting any notions of matching his friend’s broadcasting run.“He’s in his 67th year, I’m in my 44th,” Miller said. “At my age, I’ll tie him when I’m 101 years old. It’s not going to happen.”AdvertisementThat became clear when Miller returned home from the hospital.“I would watch the games from home and say to my wife, ‘I think I can do it,’” Miller said. “Then I’d get up and do something so trivial and just be wiped out. I realized I couldn’t do one period. When you realize you can’t do it, it’s easier to accept.”The expectation was that Miller would play a prominent role in the franchise’s anniversary celebration, which will include a series of pregame ceremonies honoring past players, and serving as host of the All-Star Game on Jan. 29. But still recovering from surgery, Miller had an important decision to make entering the 2016-17 season.“I just talked to my wife and decided it would be better to take little two-game trips and do all the home games and not go on those long trips,” he said. “It’s not the flying. It’s getting in at 2:30 in the morning and having a game the next night. Pretty soon, your body clock is all messed up.”With that, the man so closely associated with the team that hoisted the Stanley Cup in 2012 and 2014 would not be embarking on long trips, particularly those to the Eastern time zone.Many of the most prominent voices in hockey were more than happy to help fill out the Kings’ broadcast schedule. With Miller out, Gary Thorne, Chris Cuthbert, Ralph Strangis and Jiggs McDonald will provide play-by-play this season. Thorne will do play-by-play for the team’s weeklong trip to Toronto, Montreal, Ottawa, Winnipeg and Denver, which begins next Tuesday.McDonald said: “There’s never been any doubt about the respect colleagues have for Bob, whether it be broadcasters, writers, fans. Bob is Bob. He is so genuine. Just one of the great human beings. I think any of us would do anything for Bob if need be.”For McDonald, who will provide play-by-play when the Kings visit the Florida Panthers on Feb. 9, it is an unexpected final curtain call for a broadcasting career that began in 1956. The lead broadcaster for the Islanders during that franchise’s dynasty in the 1980s, McDonald was the voice of the Kings when the club first joined the N.H.L. in 1967.McDonald left Los Angeles to join the Atlanta Flames in 1972 and sees his one day working in place of Miller as a fitting close to his 60-year career.Advertisement“It’s very appropriate,” McDonald said. “It’s almost like a script. The timing of the whole thing with Bob’s situation. It just meshes together. Like it’s meant to be.”Miller has not provided any insight into his own retirement. The seven months he spent away from the broadcast booth gave him plenty of time to contemplate a career that is closer to its end than its beginning.When he does retire, he said, he still hopes to be healthy enough to enjoy a few more years with his wife of 53 years, Judy. He will give more thought to retirement this summer.Until then, he intends on enjoying a celebration of the team he’s voiced for more than four decades.“So far, I feel fine after games, not exhausted or anything,” Miller said. “So I think it’s going to work out O.K. This is my 44th year. After that many years, it would be a shame to not be around to celebrate the 50th season.”And he is thrilled to have some of his closest colleagues along for the ride.“It’s gratifying to me,” Miller said. “I’m friends with all those guys, and I think they picked some really good guys to fill in. Not that it takes that many to replace me.”A version of this article appears in print on November 5, 2016, on Page D3 of the New York edition with the headline: 44th Season in Booth, Yet Hardly Approaching That Voice Across Town.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.