By BENJAMIN HOFFMANNOV. 4, 2016
The Denver Broncos are the defending Super Bowl champions, but they will have a fight for control of their division on Sunday night — the Oakland Raiders are not pushovers anymore. In a week with relatively few matchups of quality teams, the chance to see an explosive offense try to prove itself against the N.F.L.’s gold standard for defense should provide ample entertainment.Follow our live coverage of N.F.L. Week 9 here.Here is a look at Sunday’s matchups and who we think will win them:8:30 p.m. Line: Raiders by 1It would be hard to call what the Broncos and the Raiders have had in recent years a rivalry. Since the start of the 2003 season, Denver has beaten Oakland in 18 of 26 games, including nine of the last 10.But the Raiders beat the Broncos last December, and they may be able to get a modest winning streak going if their offense, led by quarterback Derek Carr, can find some breathing room against Wade Phillips’s punishing defense, including the stacked secondary.That may prove difficult, but the Raiders have two great wide receivers in Amari Cooper and Michael Crabtree, who create such havoc that Carr is able to find options on most every play.AdvertisementLast week, in an overtime win over Tampa Bay, Carr threw for a franchise-record 513 yards, with four touchdowns and no interceptions. He spread the ball around: to Cooper (173 yards), to Crabtree (108 yards), and with touchdown passes to Seth Robert, Mychal Rivera and even offensive tackle Donald Penn.AdvertisementBut even Carr seems to know how difficult it will be to achieve similar success against the Broncos and their cornerbacks Chris Harris Jr. and Aqib Talib.“To have them on the same team, it’s ridiculous,” Carr told reporters. “I think the world of them.”The Broncos should be expected to win this division matchup, but if Carr somehow prevails, it will be time to remove qualifiers like “young” and “promising” from his description and just call him a great quarterback.Pick: Broncos1 p.m. Line: Vikings by 6What a difference two weeks make. The Vikings came out of their bye week with a 5-0 record and a great deal of optimism. Minnesota’s secondary was dominant, and Sam Bradford seemed to have found an offensive system he could thrive in.Now the Vikings are 5-2, and Norv Turner, the team’s offensive coordinator, resigned midweek without a real explanation. He said, “It just wasn’t working.”The Vikings are still in first place in the N.F.C. North, one game ahead of Green Bay and two games ahead of Detroit, but the Lions could put a dent in that by taking advantage of Minnesota’s disarray and winning on the road.Pick: Lions4:25 p.m. Line: Packers by 7 ½The Packers’ offense has hardly been at its best this season, averaging 24.6 points a game. But in the last three games, Green Bay has increased that average to 29.7 points a game, and now will face a porous Colts defense. In a one-on-one test of quarterbacking skill, Andrew Luck of the Colts may be able to compete with Aaron Rodgers of the Packers, but once you factor in their teammates, this high-scoring affair should be a home win for Green Bay.AdvertisementPick: Packers1 p.m. Line: Giants by 2 ½Philadelphia’s three losses have come by a combined 14 points. Carson Wentz has been efficient and has made the offense competitive, but he has lacked the big-play ability to attack a team and put it away. His one attempt to score a knockout blow resulted in an interception that cost his team the game in Week 5. Eli Manning, while hardly perfect, is a good role model for Wentz as a player who has found a way to get big plays when he needs them.Pick: Giants4:05 p.m. Line: Panthers by 3A Panthers win over Arizona last week stopped the bleeding of a four-game losing streak, but with Cam Newton having lost the joy that he showed for much of last season, the team is far less compelling and far less dangerous. A chance to exploit the Rams’ subpar secondary may be just what the doctor ordered to bring Newton’s smile back, provided he does not sustain any more late hits.Pick: Panthers1 p.m. Line: Cowboys by 7If you were going to rank the Browns’ quarterbacks this year, you would probably go: Cody Kessler, Josh McCown, Charlie Whitehurst, Terrelle Pryor, Robert Griffin III, Kevin Hogan. That there are six players to rank is troubling. That one of them is a wide receiver, and that he is not last on the list, is worse. Kessler, who looked fairly good in five starts (all losses), is expected to be back on Sunday, so Cleveland may lose by fewer points than it would have otherwise.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Pick: Cowboys1 p.m. Line: Ravens by 1Ben Roethlisberger has yet to be officially named the Week 9 starter for Pittsburgh.“Don’t fall for that. I saw this movie before,” Ravens linebacker Terrell Suggs told reporters about the quarterback’s status. “He’s going to act like: ‘I’m not playing. I don’t know. I did individual today and threw a little bit. I still don’t know.’ Then he’s going to walk on out there.”Pick: Steelers4:05 p.m. Line: Saints by 4 ½The 49ers are allowing an N.F.L.-worst 31.3 points a game, which is misleading because of a shutout of the Los Angeles Rams in Week 1. After that fluky game, San Francisco has allowed an average of 36.5 points and now has to face a robust New Orleans offense that is riding high after the team beat Seattle last week.Pick: Saints1 p.m. Line: Dolphins by 3 ½In the first 13 games of Jay Ajayi’s career, his highest rushing total was 48 yards. With Miami off to a 1-3 start, the team gave Ajayi, a second-year running back, a greater chance. He responded by becoming the fourth N.F.L. running back to record consecutive games with 200 or more rushing yards.Coming out of a bye week, Ajayi said all the right things about the credit going to his line, but he also did not rule out making it three in a row.“If it does happen again, that’s going to be an amazing thing, an incredible thing, and we’ll just see what happens,” he told reporters.AdvertisementPick: Dolphins4:25 p.m. Line: Chargers by 5The Titans have unexpectedly become something of a playoff contender, and the team has done it by consistently being able to run the ball enough to offset its flaws. DeMarco Murray has a tough challenge this week against the Chargers, but he and Marcus Mariota could pull off an upset.Pick: Titans1 p.m. Line: Chiefs by 7 ½It seems to be an open question as to whether Alex Smith sustained a concussion last week when his head slammed into the turf. Regardless of why he’s out, Nick Foles will be Kansas City’s starting quarterback. Also missing will be Jamaal Charles and probably Spencer Ware. That the Chiefs are still heavily favored says a lot about how much Jacksonville has struggled to live up to the preseason hype.Pick: ChiefsAll times are Eastern. Picks do not reflect the betting line.A version of this article appears in print on November 6, 2016, on Page SP3 of the New York edition with the headline: In A.F.C., a Rivalry Revived Out West.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.