By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSNOV. 4, 2016
ARCADIA, Calif. — For the last quarter of a mile, Songbird and Beholder refused to yield. They ran neck-and-neck, with their Hall of Fame jockeys looking for the tiniest edge.Gary Stevens, aboard Beholder, called it “just a street fight.”Beholder, a 6-year-old mare, landed the final blow, edging Songbird by a nose in the $2 million Distaff on opening day of the Breeders’ Cup on Friday at Santa Anita Park.Even the jockey Mike Smith had to agree it was “an amazing, amazing race” after Songbird, his 3-year-old filly, lost for the first time in 12 races.“It was fun to be part of a battle,” Stevens said. “The show that those two just put on is worth the price of admission for everybody that showed up. This was horse racing at its best.”AdvertisementIt was a thrilling finish to the four Cup races Friday, three of which involved New York-based long shots winning on an 80-degree day. Nine Cup races will be run Saturday, capped by the $6 million Classic, in which California Chrome is the early favorite.AdvertisementBeholder ran 1 ⅛ miles in 1 minute 49.20 seconds and paid $8.60, $3.60 and $3 as the 3-to-1 third choice. Songbird returned $3.20 and $2.80 as the even-money favorite.“I’ve had some good feelings in racing, but this is tops right here,” said Stevens, a three-time Kentucky Derby winner.It was the final career race for Beholder, who finished with 18 victories and was never worse than second in 16 starts at Santa Anita, her home track. The Distaff was her third Cup victory after the Distaff in 2013 and the Juvenile Fillies in 2012.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“You saw the real Beholder show up today, maybe even the best race she ever ran in her life,” Smith said, “and she had to do it to beat us.”When the win photo was shown on the video board, the crowd roared at the slight margin between Songbird, who was along the rail, and Beholder, who was on her outside.“Other than losing, it was an amazing, amazing race,” Smith said. “That much more and I’d have been the one hooraying.”Songbird set the pace through the early stages of the race, with I’m a Chatterbox and Beholder in close pursuit.AdvertisementBy the top of the stretch, it was a two-horse duel, with neither Beholder nor Songbird willing to give an inch.“She put Songbird away three different times through the stretch,” Stevens said of Beholder, “and she kept coming back, like she wouldn’t go away.”Smith thought he could put a length or two between his filly and Beholder when they got to the far turn. “But, man, she jumped on me,” he said of Beholder. “I couldn’t do it.”Forever Unbridled was a further 1 ¼ lengths back in third and paid $4.40 to show. Stellar Wind, the 5-2 second choice, finished fourth in the eight-horse field, followed by I’m a Chatterbox, Curalina and Land Over Sea.Corona Del Inca was euthanized after sustaining multiple fractures of her right front leg. The injuries were much more serious than it appeared after she was pulled up at the top of the stretch by the jockey Pablo Falero.The day’s biggest upset belonged to Smith aboard the 11-to-1 shot Tamarkuz, who won the $1 million Dirt Mile by 3 ½ lengths. Oscar Performance won by 1 ¼ lengths in the $1 million Juvenile Turf, and New Money Honey won the $1 million Juvenile Fillies Turf by a half-length.A version of this article appears in print on November 5, 2016, on Page D2 of the New York edition with the headline: In Breeders’ Cup Distaff, a First Loss and a Final Win.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.