By VICTOR MATHERNOV. 4, 2016
A one-man team, it turns out, can go only so far.For eight seasons, Russell Westbrook played magnificently for the Oklahoma City Thunder. He made five All-Star Games and led the N.B.A. in scoring. The team went on six playoff runs, including a trip to the N.B.A. finals. And throughout those years, he was accompanied by his fellow superstar Kevin Durant.With the shocking news in July that Durant had signed as a free agent with the mighty Warriors, Westbrook was left without a co-star for the first time. He has responded by trying to do it all, and has mostly succeeded.In his first four games this season, Westbrook scored 32, 51, 33 and 35 points. The 51-point effort against the Suns was only the second 50-point game of his career. A 6-foot-3 point guard, he pulled down 10 or more rebounds in three of those games. And Oklahoma City won them all, as well.But the real test came Thursday night, when Westbrook and the Thunder faced Durant and the Warriors in Oakland. Early on, with the Thunder leading by 12-7, Warriors Coach Steve Kerr charged onto the court to protest a no-call when Stephen Curry was knocked to the ground. He was hit with a technical and flirted with ejection. At one point in the first quarter, the Thunder were up, 31-21. It seemed like the Westbrook show was ready for another big night.The Warriors then went on a 47-12 run to put the game out of reach by halftime.Westbrook shot 4 for 15. In contrast, Durant was dominant, putting in a season-high 39 points on 15-for-24 shooting. He matched a career high with seven 3-pointers. The Warriors beat the Thunder, 122-96.Of course, Durant’s teammates include Curry, Klay Thompson and Draymond Green. Westbrook’s are more the likes of Victor Oladipo and Domantas Sabonis. The Thunder were also playing the second game of a back to back, an always difficult task in the league.The preseason consensus was that the Warriors would be one of the best teams ever, while the Thunder would fall. Both teams currently stand 4-1.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Westbrook has reacted frostily to Durant’s departure and was not seen to acknowledge his longtime teammate before Thursday’s game. He was terse with reporters afterward, ducking numerous efforts to get him to talk in depth about Durant.If Westbrook’s fast start to the season sent the message that he did not need Durant anymore, Thursday’s game showed that predictions of a challenging season for Oklahoma City were on the mark.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.