By JAMES WAGNERNOV. 5, 2016
Eight hours after the final out of the World Series on Thursday, the first of many critical periods in the Major League Baseball off-season calendar began. Starting then, teams knew they had until Monday to extend a $17.2 million qualifying offer to any of their players eligible for free agency, who would then have a week to accept.Teams can exclusively negotiate with their pending free agents until a minute before Tuesday. If no deal is reached, the players may sign with anyone.Saturday, however, brought one of the most significant dates of the hot stove season: Mets outfielder Yoenis Cespedes exercised the opt-out clause in his contract ahead of a midnight deadline. He will forgo the $47.5 million and two years remaining on his contract, but given his strong 2016 season, many in baseball think Cespedes could draw offers of $100 million.During Cespedes’s year and a half with the Mets, his powerful bat helped carry them to the World Series in 2015 and to the National League wild-card game this season. He hit .280 with 31 home runs and a .884 on-base plus slugging percentage in 2016. The Mets would like to retain Cespedes and could employ the same strategy they used last off-season, when re-signing him initially appeared to be a long shot.AdvertisementMets General Manager Sandy Alderson waited out the rest of the market, and Cespedes, who wanted to stay in New York, signed a three-year, $75 million deal in late January that included the opt-out clause.AdvertisementPlayers often hope for one large long-term contract that could last the rest of their careers, and Cespedes, who turned 31 last month, is likely to seek such a contract this off-season. Cespedes said during the season that he would like to finish his career with the Mets and that he planned to honor his contact, but he never dismissed the idea of opting out. On Saturday afternoon, his agents informed the Mets of his decision.As a result, the Mets are likely to extend the one-year, $17.2 million qualifying offer to him. Although M.L.B. and the players’ union have been negotiating a new collective bargaining agreement because the current one expires next month, the qualifying-offer system was expected to be retained in some form. Under the current system, if a player rejects a qualifying offer and signs elsewhere, his old team receives a draft pick from his new one.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.As a free agent, Cespedes will arguably be the top player on the market. The other position players include the designated hitters-first basemen Edwin Encarnacion and Mark Trumbo; outfielders Jose Bautista, Ian Desmond and Dexter Fowler; third baseman Justin Turner; catcher Wilson Ramos; and second baseman Neil Walker.The Mets acquired Walker to take over from Daniel Murphy, and Walker played well, hitting .282 with 23 home runs and an .823 on-base plus slugging percentage before undergoing season-ending surgery on a herniated disk in his back in September.The Mets are likely to extend a qualifying offer to Walker, which could yield a rare instance in which a player accepts one. The Mets were impressed with Walker’s leadership and production, and Walker said he loved his time in New York. But given the weak free-agent class of infielders, Walker could still command a multiyear deal if teams feel comfortable about his back operation, which was considered an ordinary procedure.The potential departure of the right-handed-hitting Cespedes is significant because the Mets’ roster is heavy on left-handed-hitting outfielders. On Thursday, the Mets exercised a 2017 team option, worth $13 million, for Jay Bruce, who was acquired in a midseason trade but struggled until the final weeks of the season.The Mets also exercised a 2017 team option for Jose Reyes, who can offer insurance at second base should Walker not return or at third base for the often-injured David Wright, who had season-ending neck surgery.AdvertisementAs opposed to the Yankees, the Mets have many notable free agents, including Bartolo Colon, who also said he hoped to stay in New York. The free-agent starting pitching market will be weak, headlined by Jeremy Hellickson, Rich Hill and Ivan Nova. Nova and Hill cannot receive qualifying offers because they were traded during the season.The strength of the free-agent pitching class is in the relievers. Three elite closers — Aroldis Chapman, Kenley Jansen and Mark Melancon — are expected to be coveted by many teams, perhaps even the Yankees, who are intent on improving their pitching.The Mets could also be in the market for relief help, with Jerry Blevins and Fernando Salas, two solid relievers last season, eligible for free agency. The Mets also face uncertainty around closer Jeurys Familia, who was arrested in Fort Lee, N.J., on Monday on suspicion of a domestic violence episode.A version of this article appears in print on November 6, 2016, on Page SP2 of the New York edition with the headline: Hot Stove Warms Up: Cespedes Opts Out of Deal.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.