AdvertisementSupported byOn SoccerBy Rory SmithSUNDERLAND, England — Just outside the dressing rooms at Sunderland’s Stadium of Light, the walls are decorated with outsize portraits of the club’s players. They are pictured with arms crossed, eyes narrowed.Each image, as well as an inspiring slogan urging them to “fire the city,” is superimposed on a backdrop of coal. The iconography has not yet had the desired effect; this season’s Sunderland team runs the risk of becoming the worst side the Premier League has ever seen. The message, though, is clear: This is who you are, and this is where we came from.Amid the Premier League’s global glamour, the bond between a team and its home can be easily broken. As clubs have become ever more internationalist, seeking out new markets on new horizons, a sense of dislocation has grown. They exist in a place, but they are not necessarily of it.That is not true of Sunderland. It is not a relic, but it is certainly a reminder of what teams used to represent, a time when a club was a cornerstone of a community.Echoes of that history reverberate around the Stadium of Light, ghosts of the heavy industry — mining and shipbuilding — that gave first the city and then the team its identity. At one corner of the stadium stands a pit wheel; at another, a statue of a Davy lamp, the only safe source of light for miners hacking away at the coal face, deep below the surface.The stadium itself stands on the abandoned shaft of Monkwearmouth Colliery, shut down in 1993, five years after the city’s last shipyard closed its doors, a rapid double blow that stripped Sunderland not just of its past, but of a generation of its future, too.It is all there to remind fans and players of Sunderland’s origins, its place, its meaning. The redesign of the stadium tunnel, and the images of pitmen that went up at the club’s training complex at the same time this summer, was inspired by the same motive: a desire to root the club in its home, to assert the team’s history in the present.On Thursday, the club’s manager, David Moyes, did his bit to maintain that tradition, taking his squad on a tour of the Nissan automobile factory in nearby Washington. It is the largest such factory in Europe, directly providing 7,000 area jobs, and as many as 30,000 more in the supply chain.It is not a replacement for the mines and the yards, but it is as close as the city will get, and a considerable source of local pride. “It is important we are in touch with the people from the area,” Moyes said. “And let them know we know how well they are doing.”That is more crucial now than ever. Sunderland’s team, Moyes knows, must rely on the patience and understanding of its fans during a season that promises to be a particularly hard slog. Sunderland is at the bottom of the Premier League, yet to win a game, marooned on 2 points through 10 matches. There is a mounting fear that Moyes’s side might even fail to reach 11 points, the low-water mark for the division, set by Derby in 2008, and thus earn the label of the worst Premier League team of all time.For the last few years, Sunderland has flirted with relegation almost habitually, firing and hiring managers while locked into an apparently unbreakable cycle of despair followed by last-gasp rescue. Now, as Andy Dawson, a lifelong fan and presenter of the Athletico Mince podcast, says, there is a feeling that “our luck has run out.”“It has the feel of ‘Groundhog Day,’” he said. “It verges on emotional abuse. We have moved from one managerial catastrophe to another. The only real bright spot was the appointment of Sam Allardyce last year: By the end of the season, we felt we had some kind of platform.”Allardyce left, though, spirited away by England’s national team. When he was fired after one game, after a newspaper sting, it rendered Sunderland’s loss of its leader somehow needless, and even more painful. “It’s so frustrating,” Dawson said. “It’s like there’s some sort of curse.”Throughout it all, however, the fans have kept coming. Sunderland averaged more than 43,000 fans for home games last season; it is a little short of 42,000 this year, an astonishing perseverance given the results. “It is Einstein’s definition of insanity,” Dawson said. “Doing the same thing again and again and expecting a different outcome.”Gareth Barker, a co-founder of the Sunderland supporters website Wise Men Say, bristles at the reputation the club’s fans have picked up for leaving early. That so many are there in the first place, he argued, is much more noteworthy.“We sell out our allocation at every away match,” he said. “This is not an affluent place, but we still took 1,500 people to Southampton for a League Cup game on a Wednesday night. Most wouldn’t have got back until 5 a.m. the next day.”On Saturday, Moyes’s team will be cheered on by 1,200 at Bournemouth, on England’s south coast. It is a round trip of 700 miles.That dedication is proof of the other side of the bond: how much the city needs the club. Sunderland’s is still a fragile economy, as illustrated by the aftermath of Britain’s June referendum on whether to leave the European Union.Sunderland was the first city to report its vote. Despite considerable European Union investment in the city in recent years and Nissan’s threatening to depart in the event of Brexit, 61 percent of voters chose to leave. Paul Watson, the local council leader, warned that the consequences of such a move would be seismic, not just to those employed at the plant but to the “butchers, bakers and candlestick makers” who relied on those workers’ wages for their own incomes.Last week, Nissan struck a deal with the British government to keep the plant open. The scare served as proof, though, of how delicate the city’s future remains; the soul-searching that followed its apparently self-immolating Brexit vote exposed deep fault lines within a disaffected community.Rebecca Ball described the image of Sunderland portrayed after the referendum as “the story of a lost city.” Ball is the director of Sunderland’s bid to become the United Kingdom’s City of Culture for 2021. The project is intended to imbue the city with a collective identity and purpose.That is a role that, for more than a century, the club has taken. Roy Keane, who once managed Sunderland, noted in his autobiography that it is the kind of place where “what happens on the pitch makes or breaks” the city’s week. Barker calls the club Sunderland’s “lifeblood,” and it has endured even in the lean years.Barker is clear that it should not, however, be taken for granted. Over the last few years, Sunderland has drifted into disrepair under the stewardship of Ellis Short, the club’s billionaire, Missouri-born owner. Signings have made “the squad bigger, but not much better,” Barker said. Managers have come and gone; so, too, models, with two sporting directors appointed and then dismissed. Rumors that Short will sell the club — if only he could find a buyer — are constant. True or not, they have allowed fans to detect that, at the top, apathy has been allowed to set in.“People at the club need to switch on,” Barker said. “If that passion goes, all that’s left is apathy. That’s like carbon monoxide. It quietly kills you. Once the fans go, they can be hard to get back.”That is, in part, why Moyes and his players took an afternoon off to visit Nissan this week. The city has always sought strength in its club in times of weakness. Now it is time for the club to do the same.Advertisement