By MIKE VORKUNOVAPRIL 16, 2017
Michele Roberts, the executive director of the National Basketball Players Association, has rebuked the Knicks’ president, Phil Jackson, for publicly indicating that he would like Carmelo Anthony to play elsewhere next season.In a statement released late Saturday, Roberts said the union had taken its concerns about Jackson’s “inappropriate comments” to the commissioner’s office.“If players under contract cannot, under threat of league discipline, speak openly about their desire to be employed elsewhere, we expect management to adhere to the same standards,” Roberts said. “The door swings both ways when it comes to demonstrating loyalty and respect.”The Knicks declined to comment on Roberts’s statement. The league did not immediately comment Sunday.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Roberts’s remarks came after Jackson seemed to indicate that he hoped Anthony, 32, would waive the no-trade clause in his contract. Anthony has two years remaining on a five-year, $124 million deal.Advertisement“We’ve not been able to win with him on the court at this time,” Jackson said Friday. “I think the direction with our team is that he is a player that would be better off somewhere else and using his talents somewhere where he can win or chase that championship.”AdvertisementThe relationship between Anthony, a 10-time All-Star forward, and Jackson became uneasy this season after Jackson made public comments criticizing Anthony’s style of play.Anthony’s future became a frequent topic of discussion as the Knicks floundered to a 31-51 record and missed the playoffs for a fourth consecutive season. They have yet to make the postseason with Jackson leading the franchise.Anthony started 74 games and averaged 22.4 points and 5.9 rebounds this season. And while Jackson said Anthony would not fit into the kind of team he aimed to build, he also called Anthony a future Hall of Famer.This was not the first time Jackson had been accused of breaking league rules. The N.B.A. fined him $25,000 in 2014 for tampering after he expressed interest in Derek Fisher as a head coaching candidate while Fisher was still playing in the postseason for the Oklahoma City Thunder. Jackson, then just a few months into his job with the Knicks, went on to hire Fisher as his head coach.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.