By JAMES WAGNERAPRIL 17, 2017
The Mets’ three straight losses to the Miami Marlins over the weekend occurred under different circumstances but had one common theme: The Mets’ bullpen — both its top relievers and its lesser ones — stumbled in the final innings.Thursday’s 16-inning win in Miami had tired the bullpen, and it showed as the weekend progressed.First, Josh Edgin lost Friday’s game by surrendering a run-scoring double with two outs in the ninth. Then the steady but much-used Fernando Salas blew a two-run lead in the eighth inning of Saturday’s game (although he insisted afterward that he was not tired). And then Addison Reed, arguably the Mets’ best reliever last season, lost Sunday’s game, again with two outs in the ninth.At this point, the bullpen could use a boost, and one is coming: Jeurys Familia, the team’s closer, is eligible to return on Thursday from a 15-game suspension in connection with his domestic-violence case.To stay in pitching shape, Familia spent part of the first week of the regular season throwing at the Mets’ academy in the Dominican Republic. He then threw eight pitches in a spotless inning for the Mets’ Class A affiliate, the St. Lucie Mets, on Saturday.AdvertisementFamilia continued his tuneup with Class AA Binghamton on Monday, throwing nine pitches with one strikeout in one hitless inning. By the end of the week, he could be back on the mound at Citi Field, where the Mets will meet the Washington Nationals, their division rivals, for the first time this season in a series that starts Friday night.AdvertisementIt was not until Saturday’s loss that Mets Manager Terry Collins conceded that “maybe” Familia’s absence was beginning to be felt.“You go with who you’ve got,” Collins said. “We’ve played very well, and we’ve gotten the job done with the guys we have down there.”To this point, the workload for the Mets’ pitching staff has been significant, with 125 ⅓ innings pitched — the most in baseball — going into Monday’s games. Part of that is because the Mets have already played two long extra-inning games, the 16-inning one and one that lasted 12 innings. In addition, the Mets had played 13 games; more than half the other clubs had played either 12 or 11.The Mets’ rotation, which includes three pitchers returning from injuries and two from operations, has averaged 5.8 innings per start, which was tied for the fifth-highest mark in baseball going into Monday’s games. The bullpen was third in baseball with 49 ⅔ innings.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.And the Mets had three of baseball’s five most frequently used relievers: Hansel Robles, Jerry Blevins and Salas, all with eight outings, although Blevins had pitched fewer innings because he is used for spot matchups against left-handed hitters.So Familia’s return should help. During Familia’s suspension, Reed and Salas slid up to the closer and setup man roles. Now they can move back.It was Salas who entered Saturday’s game in the eighth inning, after Collins had pulled Jacob deGrom, who pitched seven sterling innings and had 13 strikeouts. At that point, deGrom had thrown 97 pitches, and Collins said it was too early in the season to push him further, particularly because deGrom had had elbow surgery in September.“We could’ve ran Jake back out there, but if something happens during the summertime and he runs out of gas or something, we can’t look back on a game on April 15 when he threw 115 pitches,” Collins said later.AdvertisementSo Collins called on Salas, who had not been scored on all season but was making his eighth appearance in the Mets’ 12th game. He surrendered a game-tying, two-run homer with two outs and then a go-ahead home run to the next batter, saying later that it was not fatigue but his command that failed him.After Sunday’s loss, Reed also maintained that he was not tired when he let the game get away.“Throughout the year, you’re going to get overworked,” Reed said. “I don’t think any of us can’t handle it.”Perhaps if the starters pitch deeper into games as the season progresses, that will lessen the bullpen’s load. And then there is the return of Familia, giving Collins another reliable option.“This is a good baseball team,” Collins said after Sunday’s game. “We have issues like everybody else, but we’re trying to mesh a pitching staff that we’ve got to be careful of and a bullpen that we’ve got to be careful of. We’re going to be O.K.”A version of this article appears in print on April 18, 2017, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: Long Game Leaves Mets’ Bullpen Weary, and Ready for a Reinforcement.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.