By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSAPRIL 17, 2017
BOSTON — Geoffrey Kirui of Kenya won the 121st Boston Marathon on Monday, pulling away from the American Galen Rupp with about two miles to go to win in 2 hours 9 minutes 37 seconds.Rupp, a three-time Olympian making his Boston debut, was 21 seconds behind, and Suguru Osako of Japan was another 30 seconds back. Americans had six of the top 10 finishers in the men’s race and two of the top four in the women’s race.Edna Kiplagat, a Kenyan police officer, won the women’s race in 2:21:52, needing only one try in Boston to add to wins in London, New York (in 2010) and Los Angeles. She pulled ahead of Rose Chelimo of Bahrain in the Newton hills to win by 59 seconds.“When I was running, my body was feeling good,” said Kiplagat, who was greeted at the finish line by two of her children.Kiplagat had a comfortable enough lead to go back at one point and get the correct water bottle after grabbing the wrong one.
            Women's leader Kiplagat passed water table, went back, grabbed the wrong bottle, put it back and then kept going. She has a 28 sec lead... pic.twitter.com/uvoGNmAp7i AdvertisementJordan Hasay of the United States, making her debut at the distance, was third, and Desi Linden fourth; it was the first time since 1991 that two American women finished in the top four.AdvertisementThe warm temperatures, which hit 79 degrees at the 20-kilometer mark, slowed the runners, but a strong tailwind delivered a boost — especially in the wheelchair races.Marcel Hug won Boston for the third time, outpushing the 10-time champion Ernst van Dyk and finishing in 1:18:04 to beat the course record and world best by 21 seconds. His fellow Swiss Manuela Schar shattered the women’s mark by more than five minutes, winning in 1:28:17.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The winners’ times on the point-to-point Boston course are considered a world best, and not a world record, because of the possibility of a supportive tailwind like the one on Monday.“The wind is so important,” Hug said. “The roads were good. Everything was fantastic today.”Earlier Monday, city officials announced plans for memorials to mark the sites where two bombs exploded during the 2013 Boston Marathon.City officials and the families of five people who died in the bombing or its aftermath say there is also a plan to build a separate, larger memorial to victims, survivors and responders.Pablo Eduardo is a Massachusetts resident and internationally known sculptor. He will create the memorial markers on Boylston Street where bombs killed three spectators and wounded more than 260 others.Eduardo said Monday that his goal was to “embody the spirit of those we lost and the spirit of the city they loved.”Because of an editing error, a picture caption on Tuesday with an article about the Boston Marathon misspelled the surname of the winner of the men’s race in some copies. As the article correctly noted, he is Geoffrey Kirui, not Kiriu.A version of this article appears in print on April 18, 2017, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Kenyans Lead the Way, But Americans Impress.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.