AdvertisementSupported byMarlins 4, Mets 2By James WagnerMIAMI — The Mets’ tiring weekend here began Thursday with a 16-inning win that did not end until Friday morning. The hangover effect on the bullpen was evident in the next two games, both won by the Miami Marlins in their final at-bats.It was only fitting that Sunday’s game, the Mets’ 12th in 12 days, would also come down to the very end.“This was a strange series,” Mets second baseman Neil Walker said.With four outs to go, the Mets put an end to a potential no-hitter. With one out to go, they mounted a spirited rally to tie the game, 2-2. So when they executed a perfect relay to home plate to prevent a Marlins run in the bottom of the ninth inning, Manager Terry Collins foresaw for his team a reversal of fortune.“We’re going to win this game,” Collins said he remembered thinking to himself.Instead, the next hitter, J. T. Riddle, hit a two-run home run off Addison Reed with two outs to hand the Mets a 4-2 defeat — the third straight game in which their bullpen stumbled in its final inning.“Fastball, belt-high over the middle of the plate: Those usually get hit pretty well,” Reed said. “He didn’t miss it.”It was a climactic end to a game loaded with drama. Dan Straily, a 28-year-old right-hander playing for his fifth major league team, did not surrender a hit through his five and one-third innings.The Mets’ Matt Harvey also pitched well in his third start of the season. His command was solid and his velocity strong again — another positive sign in his return from surgery for thoracic outlet syndrome last July. And the hamstring cramps that forced him to leave his previous start early were not an issue.Harvey struck out five and surrendered two runs on small mistakes that were magnified by a Mets lineup that could not solve Straily beyond drawing five walks.But after Straily reached 93 pitches by issuing consecutive free passes to Walker and Yoenis Cespedes in the sixth inning, Marlins Manager Don Mattingly pulled him with a one-run lead.Straily exited to applause from the home crowd, and the Marlins’ talented bullpen took over. Jarlin Garcia finished the sixth inning, and Kyle Barraclough fired a perfect seventh.Brad Ziegler took over in the eighth and got two outs before Walker, who also drew three walks on Sunday, spoiled the no-hit bid by slapping a single to center field. Cespedes followed with a single, but the Mets could not convert the opportunity into runs.“We knew we didn’t have any hits, but we also knew that any chance to get on, whether it be a walk or whatever the case may be, we had to keep fighting,” Walker said.An inning later, the Mets finally broke through. Travis d’Arnaud, who is off to a strong start to the season, singled with one out. Wilmer Flores smacked a two-out single to right field and advanced to second when Giancarlo Stanton could not field the ball cleanly.The error proved critical when Asdrubal Cabrera, who did not start because he needed rest, poked a pinch-hit, two-run single to center field off Marlins reliever David Phelps. It also helped that Collins had replaced Flores on the bases with the speedier Juan Lagares.“I just tried to, in that situation, put the ball in play,” Cabrera said.Then Collins sent Reed to the mound in the bottom of the ninth, hoping to hold the tie. Marcell Ozuna led off with a single, but Reed struck out Ichiro Suzuki. Then came the play most full of false promise for the Mets.Miguel Rojas smacked what looked like a game-winning double to left field, sending Ozuna toward home plate. But Cespedes played the ball flawlessly off the wall and threw it to shortstop Cabrera, who spun and fired to d’Arnaud. Positioned perfectly at the plate, d’Arnaud tagged out Ozuna.“That was a heck of a sequence,” said Reed, who like Collins, thought the Mets were turning the game in their favor.Reed, however, faltered. Entering the day, the Mets had three of baseball’s most heavily worked relievers: Hansel Robles (seven appearances), and Jerry Blevins and Fernando Salas (eight outings each). Sunday was Reed’s fifth appearance in the Mets’ first 13 games.“There’s always stretches throughout the year where one or two guys go what seems like every day,” Reed said. “It just happens to be that it’s in the second week of the season. I, personally, am feeling fine and feeling great.”Adrenaline takes over, too, regardless of exhaustion. But on the next batter, Reed gave up the game-winning blast to Riddle. Despite the oddities of the weekend, the Mets finished their trip 4-3.But the team, and the relievers most of all, were looking forward to a day of rest on Monday.“We’re tired here,” Collins said. “The day off can’t come at a better time.”Advertisement