AdvertisementSupported byCanadiens 3, Rangers 1 | Canadiens lead series, 2-1By Allan KredaRangers goaltender Henrik Lundqvist held court briefly after his team went through its morning paces before Game 3 of a first-round playoff series against the Montreal Canadiens. Lundqvist explained succinctly how he isolated his emotions, especially amid intense playoff pressure.“Just going out there is a great feeling. I’m pumped up,” Lundqvist said of defending his net before the home crowd at Madison Square Garden. “I feel locked in.”The Rangers surely needed Lundqvist at his postseason best, a level he established during the first two games of this series against Montreal. He blanked the Canadiens in the opener and made a career-high 54 saves in Game 2, which the Rangers lost, 4-3, in overtime.Back at the Garden on Sunday, Lundqvist held the Canadiens at bay for most of two periods — until the rookie Artturi Lehkonen broke a scoreless tie with a power-play goal at 17 minutes 37 seconds of the second period.When Montreal defenseman Shea Weber made the score 2-0 with another power-play goal at 7:42 of the third, Lundqvist stayed face down on the ice for a few seconds, exhausted or frustrated or both. The Canadiens went on to win, 3-1, to take a 2-1 lead in the best-of-seven series.“They have skilled players that can make some plays and that’s what they did,” Lundqvist said in a somber Rangers locker room after the game. “They exposed us with a couple of good plays.”Alexander Radulov, who scored the overtime winner in Game 2, made it 3-0 at 15:35 of the third, and Montreal goaltender Carey Price made 20 saves for the victory, although Rangers defenseman Brady Skjei ruined his shutout bid at 17:04 of the third period.“We played with a lot of confidence,” Price said. “As you progress in the playoffs, you gain momentum. It’s exactly the spot you want to be in.”For the Rangers, the defeat was the sixth straight home playoff loss over three postseasons. They have been outscored by 21-4 in those six defeats since winning Game 1 against Tampa Bay in the 2015 Eastern Conference finals.They will be return to the Garden for Game 4 against the Canadiens on Tuesday.“I think you’ve just got to relax your mind a little bit,” Rangers center Derek Stepan said. “I think we were all gripping our sticks so hard because the building was ecstatic to start.”The Rangers also failed to convert on three power plays of their own, bringing their series streak of futility to 10. The Garden crowd booed as the Rangers blundered their way through their final chance midway through the third.“You have to manage the puck well against a team like this, and we’re not doing it well enough right now,” Rangers Coach Alain Vigneault said.Lundqvist was sharp early, making a stick save on Tomas Plekanec, a mask stop on Max Pacioretty and a sprawling kick to thwart Paul Byron.But when Lehkonen, 21, finally broke through for the visitors, he celebrated with a small dance at the top of the crease in front of Lundqvist, who finished with 26 saves.Lundqvist, 35, has started every Rangers playoff game since Game 3 of their first-round series against the Devils in 2006. The game against the Canadiens on Sunday was his 118th straight postseason start.He came in fully aware that the Rangers needed to win at the Garden. They have the worst home record of any playoff team this spring.“We have to give more at home in the playoffs or we aren’t going to win,” said Lundqvist, who has four Game 7 victories on home ice on his Rangers résumé. “We need more, it’s as simple as that.”And the Rangers did start well in the wake of their Game 2 loss at Bell Centre in Montreal, when they allowed the tying goal in the waning seconds of the third period before Radulov scored in overtime.Chris Kreider nearly scored in front of Price. Then the crafty center Oscar Lindberg burst into the Montreal zone and whipped a shot that clanked off the post to Price’s right.The Rangers continued a series of near-misses and not-quite finishes as the minutes ticked away, much to the disappointment of the Rangers’ fans.“Certainly it wasn’t lack of effort,” Stepan said. “We were almost at times trying too hard.”As far as the pressure that will accompany Game 4 for the Rangers, Lundqvist was direct.“We are going to need our best from everyone and from myself,” he said. “That’s the only way for us to win the next game.”The Canadiens arrived in New York with history on their side: They were 9-3 in the third games of series against the Rangers, including a 7-2 record in New York.On Sunday, they added another win to those totals.Advertisement