AdvertisementSupported byCanadiens 4, Rangers 3 | OvertimeBy The Associated PressMONTREAL — The Montreal Canadiens were in serious trouble until Tomas Plekanec gave them new life with a tying goal with 18 seconds left in regulation. When Alexander Radulov scored 18 minutes 34 seconds into overtime, it gave a whole new look to their playoff series with the Rangers.Instead of trailing by two games, the Canadiens, who won, 4-3, on Friday night, evened the best-of-seven Eastern Conference quarterfinal at one game apiece. Game 3 is set for Sunday night at Madison Square Garden.“Every time you win you kind of change the momentum,” Plekanec said. “You feel better about yourself and your game. But it’s just one game. We have to get better because we haven’t played a great game yet.”Montreal Coach Claude Julien felt it was important to get the puck right away when he pulled goalie Carey Price for an extra attacker. So on the final shift of the third period, in came Plekanec, who had a 63 percent win rate on face-offs.Plekanec ended up redirecting Radulov’s pass past goalie Henrik Lundqvist to send the Bell Centre crowd into a frenzy. It was the latest tying playoff goal in Canadiens history, beating a 1975 goal by Jacques Lemaire that came with 24 seconds remaining.Then Radulov, with his third point of the night, jammed the puck under Lundqvist from the edge of the crease in overtime.For a team that could not buy a goal in a 2-0 loss in the series opener, finally getting some offense was huge.“I sat here and had to answer questions I felt we didn’t deserve, and it gave us a little chip on our shoulder,” the Montreal captain Max Pacioretty said. “Obviously, we didn’t want to go down 2-0 going on the road, but every shift you have a chance to make a difference in a game, and everyone had that same mind-set.”Jeff Petry and Paul Byron scored first-period goals for the Canadiens, who outshot the Rangers by 58-38.The Rangers looked to be protecting their lead in the third period, and they gave up most of the scoring chances in overtime, including a Shea Weber shot that clanged off a goal post.“It was a good game,” Rangers Coach Alain Vigneault said. “Both teams battled hard and got some looks. Both teams’ goalies made some good saves.”Michael Grabner, Mats Zuccarello and Rick Nash scored for the Rangers as they fought back from early 1-0 and 2-1 deficits. With 54 saves, Lundqvist bested his previous playoff high of 49.A melee broke out when Steve Ott flattened Zuccarello in the second period, and it was the Rangers who seemed to get a lift. With Montreal making a slow line change, Jimmy Vesey took a pass at the blue line and sent it to Nash, who made a perfect shot off the far post. The Rangers went ahead, 3-2, late in the second when Brendan Smith banked in a shot off Zuccarello.Advertisement