By BEN ROTHENBERGJULY 3, 2017
WIMBLEDON, England — As Petra Kvitova continued her improbable return to form with a first-round win at Wimbledon on Monday, she was joined by a special guest whose own skilled hands saved hers. Dr. Radek Kebrle, the surgeon who operated on Kvitova’s left hand after it was wounded during a home invasion in December, came to watch her match on Centre Court, which she won, 6-3, 6-4, over Johanna Larsson.“I’m really glad that he took the invitation,” said Kvitova, who has won two titles here.Kebrle expressed awe himself at how Kvitova, seeded 11th here but a favorite of bookmakers for the tournament, has performed in her comeback.“It was a disaster that changed into a miracle,” Kebrle told TSN.Though the speed of Kvitova’s recovery is surprising — she won in June in Birmingham, England, her second tournament back from the injury — her success on grass is less so. Kvitova has the third-best winning percentage on grass of the 128 women entering the draw, at 75.8 percent, behind only Venus Williams (82.9 percent) and Madison Keys (78.7 percent). Both also won Monday, with Williams beating Elise Mertens, 7-6 (7), 6-4, and Keys prevailing by 6-4, 6-2 over Nao Hibino.Count Keys, too, among those impressed by Kvitova’s strong return. Keys is playing at Wimbledon against the urging of her team, having undergone minor wrist surgery after the French Open to fix complications from a different operation last fall. The operation meant she was unable to defend her title in Birmingham, which Kvitova claimed in her absence.Advertisement“I mean, who better to win it than Petra?” Keys said.She added: “Every time I watch her play now, I’m, like, an emotional wreck and crying and everything, so I try not to watch too many of her matches. But, I mean, it’s an amazing, amazing comeback.”AdvertisementVictoria Azarenka is on a comeback of her own, after the birth of her first child, Leo. She gained some momentum after a slow start Monday, beating CiCi Bellis, 3-6, 6-2, 6-1. Azarenka said she had a “nervous start” as she dropped the first four games of the match, which began in the early evening.“I had to be here the whole day, which is, for a new mom, is a little tough,” Azarenka said. “Hopefully, I won’t play like this again.”On the men’s side, fifth-seeded Stan Wawrinka was the unfortunate victim of the day’s biggest upset. He crashed out, 6-4, 3-6, 6-4, 6-1, to 49th-ranked Daniil Medvedev of Russia.That win only furthered a wave of success for Medvedev over the last 12 months. Last year at this time, Medvedev was ranked outside the top 200, too low even to play the qualifying at Wimbledon. But on Monday he dominated with his serve and whipping groundstrokes.Wawrinka, who has won a title at each of the other three majors, has never reached a semifinal at Wimbledon. This year, he brought in Paul Annacone, former coach of the Wimbledon juggernauts Roger Federer and Pete Sampras, as a grass-court consultant. It would prove no use, however, as Wawrinka struggled with Medvedev’s power and his own left knee throughout the match.“Apparently grass is not the best surface for my knee,” Wawrinka said.Another injured player, Nick Kyrgios, also had a short-lived run. Kyrgios, the No. 20 seed, retired after two sets because of a persistent hip injury, allowing Pierre-Hugues Herbert to advance to the second round. Herbert had won the first two sets, 6-3, 6-4.Kyrgios, who has said he hopes to avoid surgery to repair the hip, said before the tournament that he was only “60, 65 percent” healthy. He aggravated the injury two weeks ago when he slipped and fell at Queen’s Club in a match against Donald Young.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I was in such a good place for one set at Queen’s: I was really enjoying myself, I was healthy,” Kyrgios said. “It was like I had a taste of it, then that was it.”AdvertisementAs he did against Kyrgios then, Young advanced here after an injury retirement in his first match. He led Denis Istomin by 5-7, 6-4, 6-4, 4-2 before Istomin retired. Young will next face fourth-seeded Rafael Nadal, who cruised to a 6-1, 6-3, 6-2 win over 137th-ranked John Millman.Nadal has been hampered by balky knees on grass in recent years, impairing his ability to reach balls on the low-bouncing surface (an issue to which Wawrinka can now relate), and he sounded a note of caution about his prospects at Wimbledon, where he has not reached a quarterfinal since 2011.“It was a very positive match for me, a good start — that doesn’t mean a lot,” Nadal said. “The only thing that means was today was a very positive start. I am through to the second round. That’s a very important thing for me, and I’m happy because I didn’t win a lot of matches last couple of years here in Wimbledon.”Nadal last played at Wimbledon two years ago and lost in the second round to Dustin Brown.Brown, who returned to the second round with a 3-6, 7-6 (5), 6-4, 6-4 win over João Sousa, will have a chance at another major Wimbledon upset, as he next faces the top seed and defending champion, Andy Murray. Brown, ranked 97th, said he would not feel any sort of pressure to repeat the feat.“He’s the favorite; I can be pretty relaxed and try and play my game,” Brown said. “If I lose in three sets, no one is going to worry. I will just go out there and try my best.”Murray began his title defense with a comfortable win against an inexperienced opponent, beating Alexander Bublik, 6-1, 6-4, 6-2.Facing Bublik, an unorthodox player who hits big serves and ill-advised drop shots, added uncertainty to Murray’s lead-in to his title defense, which had already been marred by defeat in his opening match at Queen’s Club and by hip problems.“I was a bit nervous this morning, yeah,” Murray said. “I hadn’t been able to do as much as I would have liked in the buildup. Didn’t know the guy I was playing. Obviously, first match at a Slam, there’s always a few extra nerves.“Once I got out there and got the early break, saved a few break points my first service game, I felt good. I moved well. So, yeah, for a first match, considering how I was feeling five, six days ago, it was really positive.”A version of this article appears in print on July 4, 2017, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: With Her Surgeon Watching, Kvitova Shows Off Skilled Handiwork.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.