AdvertisementSupported byPhillies 7, Mets 1By Wallace MatthewsThere were more than 30,000 people at Citi Field on a gorgeous summer Sunday, and in the second inning of a game between the Mets and the Philadelphia Phillies, it seemed that only one person had no idea where the baseball was.That was the Mets’ catcher, Rene Rivera, and he was the one who most needed to know.A slider from Mets starter Rafael Montero had scooted under Rivera’s glove and caromed off the leg of the home-plate umpire, Ramon De Jesus, and as Rivera searched frantically for the ball, Phillies catcher Andrew Knapp raced home from second base with the Phillies’ fourth run.That was not even the most bizarre play of the game, which came in the bottom of the seventh when Phillies center fielder Aaron Altherr allowed a fly by Lucas Duda to pop out of his glove and over his shoulder.But Altherr turned quickly and caught the ball before it hit the ground and fired to first, doubling off Jay Bruce, who had broken for second thinking the ball had dropped.Neither play was the sole reason the Mets lost to the Phillies, 7-1, but both plays certainly were indicative of the kind of day the Mets had in a game they needed to win.The Mets are now five games under .500 and nine games behind the first-place Washington Nationals in the National League East. They open a three-game series against the Nationals in Washington on Monday.“We got our work cut out for us, but there’s no reason we can’t be optimistic,” Manager Terry Collins said. “If we can put together a second half like some of these teams did in the first half, we’ll be fine. If not, it’s going to be tough to catch back up.”The loss, in their 81st game of the season, stalled whatever momentum the Mets had built after winning seven of their previous eight games. And their poor first half has left them very little room for error: They will need to play .600 baseball over the next 81 games to match last season’s 87 wins, which slid them into the second N.L. wild-card spot.Rivera said that the team was not disappointed by the loss and had been playing good baseball.“There’s not a team that I can recall in the history of baseball that won 162 games,” he said.On Sunday, many of the Mets’ weaknesses were on full display. The day started with another injury. Curtis Granderson, who batted .316 and hit eight homers in June, sat the game out with hip tightness. It is unclear when he will return.And for the fourth time this season, the Mets needed to start Montero because of the injuries to the pitching staff. Montero had a strong first inning, but he looked as if he were a different pitcher in the second, allowing hard singles by the first two hitters before Maikel Franco drove a two-run double off the base of the left-center-field wall.Knapp singled in a third run, and then came that pitch that disappeared on Rivera.“I called for a changeup, and he threw a curveball,” Rivera said. “It hit me, it hit the umpire and the ball kicked the other way. I was trying to get some help. Montero pointed toward third base, and that’s where I found it.”After that, Montero settled down to last six and a third innings, allowing eight hits, striking out six and walking two. The Phillies, who have the worst record in the majors, added three runs in the eighth off reliever Chasen Bradford.“He kept us right there,” Collins said of Montero. “He had one bad inning, but if we get a couple of runs, we’re right back in the game.”But the Mets were held hitless by the Phillies’ rookie starter, Nick Pivetta, until T. J. Rivera lined a solo home run with one out in the fifth.“His fastball is a little sneaky,” Rivera said of Pivetta. “It plays a little quicker than the radar gun says. At times we weren’t catching up to it.”That was the only hit Pivetta, who is 2-4 with a 4.85 E.R.A., allowed in seven innings, by far the best performance of his 10-start major league career. The only other Mets hit was a bloop single by Matt Reynolds in the eighth inning. The Mets did have two base runners in the ninth, thanks to two infield errors.“It’s frustrating, but we got to keep moving because we got a big series coming up,” T. J. Rivera said. “We know the situation we’re in. We know it’s going to be tough, but we’re trying to stay positive.”INSIDE PITCHOutfielder Michael Conforto was the only Met named to the National League All-Star team. Conforto has a bruised left hand, and he was placed on the 10-day disabled list Saturday. The move was retroactive to Wednesday, so Conforto will be eligible to return July 8, four days before the All-Star Game in Miami.Advertisement