AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressLIÈGE, Belgium — The thriving state of German cycling stood in sharp contrast with the sport’s dirty past during the second stage of the Tour de France on Sunday.As Marcel Kittel rode toward a commanding sprint victory to conclude a leg that began before large crowds in Düsseldorf, Germany, the disgraced 1997 champion, Jan Ullrich, stood by the road as an uninvited spectator.“It makes me really, really proud to see that this sport is now well accepted again in my home country,” Kittel said. “There was definitely a time where not so many spectators were standing next to the road,” he said referring to doping scandals that had hurt the sport in Germany.Without any teammates in the final 500 yards of a mostly flat stage concluding in Liège, Belgium, Kittel wisely stayed on his rivals’ wheels before bursting ahead at the final moment for his 10th career stage win in the Tour.The defending champion, Chris Froome, had to work to catch the main pack after falling in a mass crash on a wet corner. But Froome’s Sky Team teammate Geraint Thomas held on to the leader’s yellow jersey.Having won the opening time trial Saturday, Thomas remained five seconds ahead of Stefan Küng in the overall standings. With a 10-second bonus, Kittel moved up to third, six seconds behind Thomas. Froome is sixth, 12 seconds behind.“It was stressful. You kind of forget what the Tour is like,” Thomas said. “The weather didn’t help things at all.”In the sprint, Arnaud Démare of France finished second, and André Greipel of Germany crossed third in a banner day for Germany.A day like this would have been unthinkable just a few years ago, when German TV stopped broadcasting the Tour because of a series of doping scandals.Ullrich was suspended in 2006 in the fallout from the Operation Puerto blood-doping scandal in Spain, and he retired a year later. Other scandals involved prominent German riders like Patrik Sinkewitz, Stefan Schumacher and Erik Zabel.These days, a new generation of German riders led by Kittel and Greipel — who have won 21 Tour stages — has drawn German fans back. The Tour of Germany, which was canceled in 2009, is slated to return next year.While Kittel and other German riders had campaigned for Ullrich to be invited by Tour organizers to Düsseldorf, race organizers refused. So Ullrich showed up on his own in Korschenbroich, a town along the stage route.“The image of cycling and also the way people see it now has changed,” Kittel said. “They understand this is a sport that had a very tough time, a very big problem with doping. They also, I think, understand that this is a sport that always has to pay attention to this heritage and that we are actively trying to work on it.”As Kittel rode through Düsseldorf, he was close to shedding tears over the fan turnout.“It was a really touching moment,” he said. “And a memory that I will never forget.”The Tour remains in Belgium for the start of Stage 3 on Monday, a 132-mile leg from Verviers to Longwy, France, that passes through Luxembourg.Advertisement