By ADAM SCHUPAKJULY 4, 2017
Few countries are blessed with such an abundance of golf riches as Ireland and Northern Ireland are.So, asking Padraig Harrington, the two-time British Open champion, to name his top five courses in those places is a bit like asking a chef to choose only five spices from the rack.“It’s hard for me,” Harrington said. “Can I give you six?”He actually reeled off seven. But he did distinguish a Big Three that separate themselves from the rest.1) Royal Portrush “It gives as much as it takes,” Harrington said. “You can make a bunch of birdies but just as many bogeys.”1a) Portmarnock “This is where I attended my first Irish Open. I couldn’t have been more than 14. I’ve often said, it’s the fairest links golf course you’ll ever play. That’s not a term often expressed with links golf courses. It’s a big golf course but very fair.”Advertisement3) Ballybunion “It’s traditional links golf at its best. It’s funky, and all sorts of crazy things can happen, but I love it.”Advertisement4) Waterville “It gets a little complicated after my Big Three. Waterville is stunning. Lovely views of mountain ranges and the Atlantic Ocean. All you need to know about the layout is the first hole is named ‘Last Easy.’”5) Royal County Down “Many golfers will tell you that this links along the Irish Sea and beneath the Mountains of Mourne is their No. 1, but not me. It’s beautiful, but it beats you up. It doesn’t give anything back to you.”Others receiving his vote: Doonbeg and European Club. “I haven’t played some of the other good ones like Ballyliffin, Old Head and Rosapenna.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Rory McIlroy’s top five include repeats of Harrington’s along with some that were the sites of personal successes that may have swayed his opinion, but who can blame him?1) Royal County Down “I was part of the winning side at the 2007 Walker Cup here,” McIlroy said. “The views and the selection of shot-making required are like no other course in Ireland.”2) Royal Portrush “This is probably the best 18-hole layout in the world. The fact that I shot 61 here in 2005 has me looking forward to when it hosts the 2019 British Open.”3) Portmarnock “A great driving course with history like no other in Ireland. This is where Arnold Palmer and Sam Snead had success in the past. Portmarnock has it all.”4) European Club “It’s a different-style links with some phenomenal views. It took some of my best golf to win the 2006 Irish Amateur Close Championship here.”5) K Club “Winning the 2016 Irish Open here, I became a huge fan. It rewards long hitters and has some risk-reward holes.”A version of this article appears in print on July 4, 2017, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »