By JAMES WAGNERJULY 3, 2017
WASHINGTON — Off the bat of the Washington Nationals’ Ryan Raburn, the hit did not seem like much. But it was one of those sputtering bloops that had just enough energy to evade the defense.Yoenis Cespedes, the Mets’ left fielder with a history of leg injuries, wanted to prove otherwise. He ran, dived, and came up without a catch, having trapped the ball after it hit the ground. Perhaps worst of all, he was limping.“As I was running, I saw my chances dropping,” Cespedes said afterward.In a taut pitchers’ duel between Steven Matz and Stephen Strasburg, a matchup of division rivals that devolved into a battle of bullpen misdoings, the winning play felt anticlimactic: a sinking walk-off single to end a 3-2 Mets loss that elicited a range of emotions, perhaps confusion most of all.Jerry Blevins, who had been the Mets’ most reliable reliever until some recent stumbles, gave up a go-ahead two-run home run to Michael Taylor in the bottom of the eighth inning. In the next inning, pinch-hitter Curtis Granderson, who could not start the past two games because of hip pain, hit a game-tying, two-run home run off Nationals reliever Matt Albers, rescuing the Mets when they were one strike away from defeat.AdvertisementThen, in the bottom half of the ninth, Cespedes failed to snag Raburn’s hit and felt a cramp in his right hamstring while sliding. He hobbled to his feet, which was a worrying sight for a team that saw him spend six weeks on the disabled list with a left hamstring strain.AdvertisementRaburn was mobbed by teammates after Matt Wieters scored the winning run, but the Mets lingered as umpires reviewed the play. After the call was upheld, Raburn pumped his fist from the dugout.“That’s just part of baseball,” Granderson said. “A lot of things are going to happen over the course of a game, a series, a season. With two more games left in this series, I’d expect similar.”Pitchers’ duels have been rare for the Mets this season because of injuries and inconsistency, but Matz has brought quiet reliability into their rotation since his return from an elbow injury three weeks ago.Facing off against Strasburg — one of the Nationals’ two All-Star starters — Matz more than held his own. He extended his scoreless innings streak to 17 with seven stellar frames against the highest-scoring offense in the National League.But then came the bullpen. In the eighth inning of a scoreless game, Mets Manager Terry Collins brought in the left-handed Blevins to face the left-handed pinch-hitter Daniel Murphy.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Bryce Harper, another left-hander, loomed three batters later. But two right-handers, Raburn and Taylor, were sandwiched in between. The problem: Entering Monday’s game, Blevins had held left-handed batters to a .157 average but right-handers had hit .324 against him. With a patchy bullpen, the move backfired.“For me, Jerry maneuvers through those righties with ease,” Collins said. “He fell behind in the count and then left a ball in the middle of the plate and that’s something he has not been doing.”AdvertisementBlevins walked Raburn on five pitches and then coughed up an opposite-field two-run home run to Taylor to end the eight innings of scoreless play. Despite the Mets’ bullpen struggles, the Nationals statistically have the worst bullpen in the majors, so there was a chance for a comeback.Much of the day, the Mets offense was meager against Strasburg. Asdrubal Cabrera, T. J. Rivera and Lucas Duda drew walks to load the bases with two outs in the fourth inning. Travis d’Arnaud fought off tough pitches from Strasburg before striking out looking.The Mets again threatened in the eighth inning, only to trip over themselves. Brandon Nimmo, starting in place of Granderson, led off the inning with a single. Matz’s sacrifice bunt moved Nimmo to second base.When Jose Reyes singled to left field, Glenn Sherlock, the Mets’ third base coach, waved Nimmo home. It was a risky decision and Brian Goodwin threw out Nimmo at home, a play that was upheld by a Mets challenge.“You got to make the guy make a good throw, and he did,” Collins said. “He made a good throw. That ball is one foot either side, he’s safe.”It was a wasted opportunity for the Mets. But Granderson washed that all away with one swing in the ninth inning.Granderson said his hip felt well enough to test it before the game, and he told Collins he could pinch-hit. Thankfully for the Mets, Granderson’s parabola of a fly ball carried out to tie the game.“I was just hopeful that it would get out because I wasn’t sure what I was going to be able to do after that in terms of trying for extra bases,” Granderson said. “It went just enough.”While Collins was hopeful that Granderson could play on Tuesday, he said he would be more cautious with Cespedes, who may have been dehydrated on the hot night.Advertisement“It’s just cramping,” Cespedes said. “That can happen to anyone. It could happen walking or sleeping.” Either way, when the Mets tried to wriggle out of a ninth-inning jam created by Paul Sewald and Josh Edgin, Raburn hit the second pitch he saw from Fernando Salas into left field, a ball Cespedes could not reach.A version of this article appears in print on July 4, 2017, on Page B8 of the New York edition with the headline: Ball That Seems Innocuous Closes Door on a Mets Rally.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.