By MIKE VORKUNOVJAN. 4, 2017
As Giannis Antetokounmpo backpedaled down the floor of Madison Square Garden, gazelle-like strides propelling him in his moment of glory, the Bucks chased him, waiting to envelop their hero.It was a felicitous ending to a tortuous night for Milwaukee. They had started the fourth quarter down by 14, but here they were, celebrating a 105-104 win over the Knicks. Floating a jumper over the arms of Lance Thomas while fading away from the free-throw line, Antetokounmpo had nailed a buzzer-beater that extended the Knicks’ losing streak to six games.Another wretched end for the Knicks, another bitter defeat, all seeping in as Carmelo Anthony stood on that same court, stone-faced and sullen. His hands at his hips, he shook his head again and again, rubbing his right temple. What else could he do? The Knicks had played well for most of the night, had built up a double-digit lead and had even played competent defense. And still they had lost.“I think we gave this one away,” Anthony said. “It’s a tough one to swallow.”The Knicks appeared to be headed toward a relatively comfortable streak-busting win. They held a 16-point advantage in the third period and took an 87-73 lead into the fourth.AdvertisementThen it all unraveled. In 3 minutes 15 seconds, the Bucks went on a 14-2 run and chipped that deficit down to 2.AdvertisementWith 8.6 seconds remaining, after an inbounds pass by Anthony had slipped through Derrick Rose’s hands, the Bucks had one last shot. In the hands of Antetokounmpo, who finished with 27 points and 13 rebounds, it was barely guardable. He received the ball at the baseline and tried to back down Thomas, who refused to give way. Then Antetokounmpo turned toward the lane, pushed off from the free-throw line and lofted a shot. All Thomas and the Knicks could do was watch the 6-foot-11 frame and 7-foot-4 wingspan.“When the game is decided at the end, it’s 50-50,” the Knicks’ Mindaugus Kuzminskas said.It had looked as if the Knicks were finally about to break their fall. They had done what they intended to do.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Anthony was a marvel, scoring 30 points, grabbing 11 rebounds and dishing out 7 assists. Despite the absence of Kristaps Porzingis, still sidelined by a right Achilles’ injury, Anthony received plenty of help. Kuzminskas scored 15 points off the bench, Derrick Rose also had 15, and Joakim Noah played like a center worthy of the $72 million contract he signed in the off-season. Noah scored 8 points and grabbed 16 rebounds while serving as a half-court facilitator.The Knicks even played defense — the real gauge for them on this night.As Jeff Hornacek recited the usual platitudes while spelling out the keys to the Knicks’ game plan before the game had begun, he had wound up in a moment of truth at the end. No matter how well the Knicks moved the ball or rebounded, he said, one attribute would prove most important against the Bucks.“Really, the focus tonight, I think,” he said, “is going to be how our guys play defense.”It was a frank and obvious assessment, as well as a dire one, considering their recent past. If the Knicks want to bring themselves back to .500, they needed a drastic course correction. And facing an Eastern Conference peer, they took significant steps in the right direction.Antetokounmpo had just 15 points entering the fourth, and the Knicks had forced 13 turnovers. They had controlled the pace and kept Milwaukee in check. Then came the implosion.“I think right now we’re at a point in the season, we lost six in a row, and we have to look ourselves in the mirror,” Noah said. “And see what we can do better.”AdvertisementWith 8:45 remaining, the Knicks led by just 2. It seemed Milwaukee would tie up the game when Jabari Parker stole a sloppy pass by Rose, breaking into the open court with only Courtney Lee at his hip. But Parker could not finish the opportunity as Lee swatted away his layup and maintained the Knicks’ tenuous advantage, at least for a moment.But with the Knicks’ turnover and Antetokounmpo’s final stroke, that edge dissipated in the final moments.“We still don’t have that killer instinct,” Kuzminskas said.A version of this article appears in print on January 5, 2017, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Buzzer-Beater by Antetokounmpo Deals Knicks Their 6th Loss in a Row.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.