By MIKE VORKUNOVJAN. 5, 2017
A day after a last-second loss to the Milwaukee Bucks, the Knicks received a bit of additional sting in the form of the N.B.A.’s report on the last two minutes of the game.On Thursday, the league office released its report on the calls and noncalls by referees in the game’s last two minutes, something it does for any game in which the teams are within 5 points with that amount of time remaining. For the Knicks, who lost by 105-104 to Milwaukee on Giannis Antetokounmpo’s jump shot at the buzzer on Wednesday, it was only more salt in the wound.The report said Antetokounmpo had technically committed an offensive five-second violation. With 7.8 seconds left, he took an inbounds pass and began dribbling near the baseline with his back to the basket, starting the five-second count. He turned to shoot with 2.2 seconds left, which would have been a violation.The 6-foot-11 Antetokounmpo sank the shot over Lance Thomas to give the Bucks the win and the Knicks a sixth straight loss. The foul was detectable only with the help of a stopwatch, the report said, and thus was not ruled an incorrect noncall by the referees.But that final play was messy in other ways. The report also found that the Knicks’ Carmelo Anthony had committed a defensive three-second violation with 4.8 seconds left by standing in the lane without guarding anyone — though that was deemed “incidental or immaterial” to the possession’s outcome and thus was not ruled an incorrect noncall. The report also said the referees had been right not to call a loose-ball foul on the Knicks’ Joakim Noah and the Bucks’ Greg Monroe for briefly engaging near the basket during the shot.That final possession came after the Knicks’ Derrick Rose had fumbled an inbounds pass from Anthony while being guarded by Antetokounmpo. After the loss, Rose intimated that a foul should have been called. Instead, the report said the referees had been correct to avoid assessing a foul against Antetokounmpo and in overturning the initial ruling, which had given the ball to the Knicks.A version of this article appears in print on January 6, 2017, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: League Detects Problems on Play That Beat Knicks.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.