AdvertisementSupported byBy Victor MatherAgonizing losses are often better remembered than great victories. And all fans think their team has suffered the most. But of the teams still alive in the N.F.L., the Green Bay Packers have a fair claim for the most agonizing recent playoff history.Since Mike McCarthy took over as coach for the 2006 season, the Packers have suffered a series of heartbreakers. Four of their seven playoff eliminations in that time came in overtime, and a fifth was on a last-second field goal. On Sunday, they will try again, hosting the Giants at Lambeau Field.Here are those five crushing January defeats.2008 N.F.C. Championship vs. giantsThe game: After missing the playoffs in McCarthy’s first season, the Packers were 13-3 the next year. They trounced the Seattle Seahawks and advanced to a home playoff game against the Giants. They were 8-point favorites and looked good to make their first Super Bowl appearance in 10 years.The situation: A temperature of minus-1 seemed to point to favorable frozen tundra for the Packers, who were led by the 38-year-old Brett Favre. The Packers led several times but could not pull away, and they survived into overtime when Lawrence Tynes of the Giants missed a 36-yard game field goal that would have won the game.Fatal decision: The Packers won the coin toss to start the overtime, and on the second play they elected to pass. It went wrong.Result: Favre threw an interception to Corey Webster. Tynes did not miss the field-goal attempt this time, and the Packers lost, 23-20. Favre never played for Green Bay again.Packers Coach Mike McCarthy: “What does it feel like? It doesn’t feel good.” 2010 N.F.C. Wild Card vs. cardinalsThe game: After a year out of the playoffs, the Packers were 11-5 and played in the wild-card round against the Arizona Cardinals.The situation: In the highest-scoring game in postseason history, Aaron Rodgers rallied the Pack from 17-0 and 31-10 down to force overtime at 45-all. Rodgers had 423 yards passing and five touchdowns in the game.Fatal decision: The Packers won the toss for overtime, and on the second play they elected to pass. It went wrong. Again.Result: Rodgers was sacked and the ball came loose. Karlos Dansby completed a scoop and score to win the game, 51-45.McCarthy: “It’s clearly one of the toughest losses I’ve been a part of.”2014 N.F.C. Wild Card vs. 49ersThe game: The Packers won the Super Bowl in 2011, Rodgers’s only championship. They then had two relatively straightforward playoff eliminations. But the hurt began again three seasons ago, when they played the San Francisco 49ers in a home wild-card game.The situation: With the temperature 5 degrees, pundits again saw the Packers having an edge. After a tight game, Rodgers led a drive to tie the score at 20-20, leaving five minutes on the clock.Fatal decision: On third-and-8 with a minute left, the Packers’ defense bought a pump-fake from 49ers quarterback Colin Kaepernick, who scrambled for the first down.Result: Kaepernick, at the height of his powers, led his team into field-goal range. Phil Dawson kicked a 33-yarder to win the game, 23-20, with three seconds left.McCarthy: “We did not get it done as far as keeping the quarterback in the pocket.” 2015 N.F.C. Championship vs. seahawksThe game: The 12-4 Packers beat the Dallas Cowboys in the divisional round, then faced the Seahawks in the N.F.C. championship game.The situation: The Packers led by 16-0 at halftime, but missed chances to put the game away by settling for field goals on two fourth-and-goal situations at the 1. The Seahawks forced overtime in part because of a successful onside kick that the Packers’ Brandon Bostick muffed with two minutes left.Fatal decision: Some timid offensive play-calling in the second half contributed to Seattle’s comeback.Result: The Seahawks won the toss and drove the field for a touchdown and a 28-22 win. Rodgers and the Packers never touched the ball.McCarthy: “This is a hard one to swallow.” 2016 N.F.C. Divisional vs. cardinalsThe game: After a win over the Washington Redskins, the 10-6 Packers faced the Cardinals in the divisional round.The situation: Rodgers converted a fourth-and-20 from his end zone, then threw a 41-yard desperation pass to Jeff Janis for a touchdown on the last play of regulation to force overtime.Fatal decision: The Packers called tails before the start of overtime, and the coin landed on heads, but it never actually flipped in the air. The Packers complained and a retoss was ordered. Rodgers said he had wanted to switch to heads for the second toss but was not allowed to. It landed on heads again.Result: On the first play of overtime, Carson Palmer threw a 75-yard completion to Larry Fitzgerald, and the Cardinals scored two plays later. Rodgers and the Packers never touched the ball. Again.McCarthy: “I didn’t like the explanation, but that’s football.” — On the coin tossVictor Mather is a general assignment sports reporter and editor.  Advertisement