By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSMARCH 22, 2016
Alex Ovechkin scored his 43rd goal, and the Washington Capitals clinched the Metropolitan Division and the top seed in the Eastern Conference with a 4-2 road win over the Ottawa Senators on Tuesday night.Mike Richards, Nicklas Backstrom and T .J. Oshie also had goals for the Capitals, with Oshie scoring into an empty net. Braden Holtby stopped 28 shots. STARS 6, BLACKHAWKS 2 Vernon Fiddler scored two of Dallas’s four goals in the first period, and the visiting Stars clinched a playoff spot by routing Chicago.Dallas leads the Western Conference with 97 points with eight games left on its schedule and is on track for its first division title since it took the Pacific in 2006.AdvertisementChicago has dropped six of seven to fall off the pace in the tough Central Division, LIGHTNING 6, RED WINGS 2 Erik Condra ended a 20-game drought by scoring two goals as host Tampa Bay cruised past Detroit.AdvertisementTampa Bay tied Florida atop the Atlantic Division with 89 points. Each team has nine games remaining, and the Lightning own the tiebreaker with more non-shootout victories (39-33).Detroit fell into a tie with Philadelphia for the final playoff spot in the East, 2 points behind the Islanders. The Red Wings own the tiebreaker with the Flyers.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.BLUE JACKETS 3, FLYERS 2 Boone Jenner scored late in the third period and again in the shootout after Cam Atkinson’s tying goal with 8 seconds left, rallying lowly Columbus to an improbable victory over visiting Philadelphia.Jenner scored in the fifth round of the shootout.WILD 2, KINGS 1 Devan Dubnyk made a season-high 38 saves, and host Minnesota edged Los Angeles to move back into possession of the final playoff spot in the West.After losing, 5-2, in Nashville to the Predators, who hold the first wild-card spot in the West, the Kings got a look at another potential first-round playoff opponent.CANADIENS 4, DUCKS 2 Lucas Lessio scored his first goal in 11 games with Montreal, and the Canadiens edged visiting Anaheim.Torrey Mitchell, Alex Galchenyuk and Mike Brown also scored for the Canadiens.CAMMALLERI OUT FOR SEASON Devils forward Mike Cammalleri, who has not played since Jan. 26, will miss the rest of the season because of an injury to his right hand and wrist, Coach John Hynes said.A version of this article appears in print on March 23, 2016, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: Ovechkin and Capitals Wrap Up the Top Seed in the East .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.