By KAREN CROUSEMARCH 22, 2016
AUSTIN, Tex. — The Belgian golfer Thomas Pieters awakened in his hotel room Tuesday to a buzzing smartphone. It was around 6 a.m. on the eve of Pieters’s debut in the World Golf Championship match-play event at Austin Country Club. Pieters, 24, scrolled through the numbers and saw that friends from all over the world had contacted him, and his heart sank. He said he “kind of knew” before he turned on the television that terrorists had struck again.“Everybody was telling me, ‘Is your family O.K.?’” Pieters said, adding, “So I opened the news sites, and it was just one of the worst days to wake up.”Pieters, who is from Antwerp, never would have imagined that one of the targets was the Brussels airport, where he regularly flies out of to get to tournaments on the European and Professional Golf Association Tours. “Almost every time I fly out, that’s where I go,” he said. “It’s shocking to see the images and the videos.”Pieters, ranked 57th in the world, spent five hours combing through the news sites and texting family members and friends back home before making his way to the course. He said he has many friends who live in Brussels. Everyone was accounted for, he said, except one friend, who was thought to have been traveling on the subway line that was attacked.“He hasn’t been in contact,” Pieters said, “so it’s still a nervous time. But we’ve heard that there’s still a lot of people just stuck in the Metro because there was only one exit to get out. And hopefully he just comes out there.”Pieters made his 2016 United States debut last week at the Arnold Palmer Invitational in Orlando and finished 76th. His five stops before that were in Thailand, Malaysia, Dubai, Qatar and Abu Dhabi, with a short trip home squeezed in. After this week, he plans to fly to Belgium through London. Pieters said he was not afraid to travel, but the fact that the world has become a dangerous place “does cross your mind sometimes,” he said, adding, “It’s just tough to understand. I just don’t get it. So many innocent people, it’s frustrating.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.