By GARY SANTANIELLOMARCH 23, 2016
BOSTON —  The Northeastern men’s hockey team needed to get away — far away — to save its season.After starting 1-10-2, the Huskies headed to Belfast, Northern Ireland, to play in the inaugural Friendship Four tournament over Thanksgiving weekend.Although missing its two best offensive players, the team found its time away from school and a hockey-centric city beneficial.“It was exciting to be over there for a week,” the senior defenseman Colton Saucerman said. “It kind of drowned out the bad start we had. No one over there cared what our record was.”AdvertisementThe Huskies have lost only two games since returning from Northern Ireland and completed an unlikely run to a conference championship on Saturday: Their 3-2 win over Massachusetts-Lowell, the Huskies’ 13th consecutive victory, earned them their first Hockey East title in 28 years and sent them on to the 16-team N.C.A.A. tournament for the first time since 2009.AdvertisementNortheastern (22-13-5), the fourth seed in the Midwest Region in Cincinnati, plays Friday against North Dakota (30-6-4), the region’s top seed and a seven-time national champion.“It’s the best time of year to having everything going well,” the senior captain Kevin Roy said.Northeastern’s turnaround began in Belfast. In the opening game, the Huskies led Massachusetts-Lowell, then ranked fourth, with a minute left in regulation but lost in overtime, 3-2. Its confidence given a boost, Northeastern came back the next afternoon and clobbered Colgate, 7-1.Still, Coach Jim Madigan described his team’s status as “fragile,” its season on the brink. Northeastern was playing without Roy, who had sustained a concussion; the senior defenseman Dustin Darou, who was recovering from a broken ankle; and the junior forward Dalen Hedges, who has not played since Nov. 12. And Madigan still had not settled on a goalie.Having to rely on many young players prematurely, Madigan recalibrated.“We weren’t defending well, and we had a lot of new players in the lineup,” he recalled. “So for us to succeed, we needed to keep things a lot simpler.”Madigan — a member of Northeastern’s only Frozen Four team, in 1982 — is now reaping the benefits of the experience many players gained.“We have much more depth now,” he said, “and we’ve used it down the stretch.”The Huskies dug themselves out of their hole with a 7-0-1 stretch heading into the Beanpot tournament on Feb. 1, only to lose, 3-1, in the first round to Boston University.AdvertisementBut again Northeastern stepped on the gas, buoyed by the return of Roy on Jan. 22. Roy had not scored a goal when he sustained his concussion. In his 19 games since returning, he has 10 goals and 10 assists.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Once it came to February and we kept winning, we knew we could run it out,” said Roy, whom the Anaheim Ducks drafted in the fourth round in 2012.Also fueling the run was goalie Ryan Ruck, a freshman from Coto de Gaza, Calif. Ruck initially shared the duties with the junior Derick Roy, Kevin’s brother. Ruck took over in November and has allowed only 44 goals in his last 23 games, during which Northeastern has gone 20-1-2.Madigan said Ruck’s initial stretch of starts gave the team confidence, “but we just were not able to get him wins.” That changed in the new year as Ruck benefited from a stouter defense and greater confidence.“A lot of freshmen come back from their first Christmas break and everything is different,” Madigan said. “Ryan came back oozing with confidence, and the other players fed off that.”With one loss since Dec. 6, Northeastern is the hottest team in college hockey. It is a welcome distinction for a program that has never been top dog in its own city. Boston College and Boston University have 10 national titles between them, and Harvard won it all in 1989. The Huskies have not even won the Beanpot since 1988, when Madigan was an assistant coach.Despite three months of virtually uninterrupted success, the Huskies remember how they got to this point. The foundation, Saucerman said, has been “putting in the work every day in practice.”“It’s not like the formula to Coca-Cola,” he said. “It’s just doing the same things well every week.”Madigan said: “This team was humbled by its start, and we learned what that tasted like. That bad taste continues to fuel us.”AdvertisementNortheastern has faced stiff competition in Hockey East, which sent six teams to the N.C.A.A. tournament. But North Dakota will pose special challenges with 12 N.H.L. draft picks on its roster, including two first-round picks — Nick Schmaltz and Brock Boeser — on the same line. Madigan characterized them as “a good blend of skill and grit and physicality.”Madigan, who has worked for Northeastern, in a variety of capacities, every year but one since graduating in 1986, said his Huskies were North Dakota’s equal.“Going into the game, we’re going to focus on what we do well,” he said. “We now have an identity to our team that has served us well.”A version of this article appears in print on March 24, 2016, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Northeastern’s Journey to N.C.A.A. Tournament Began With a Trip Abroad.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.