By KAREN CROUSEMARCH 22, 2016
AUSTIN, Tex. —  The handshake line for the superstar formed near the courtside seats reserved for Jordan Spieth, his girlfriend and four other friends during the Mavericks’ game last week against the Golden State Warriors in Spieth’s hometown, Dallas. As Stephen Curry entered the court for pregame warm-ups, Spieth stood alongside other avid basketball fans and extended his left arm to try to make a connection with Curry, who jogged right past him.Never mind that Spieth, like Curry, is sponsored by Under Armour. Or that an introduction had been arranged for them after Curry warmed up. Spieth is the reigning Masters champion and the world’s No. 1 player, with more than $21 million in official PGA Tour earnings since 2013, but during a rare week away from competitive golf, he was just another 22-year-old hanging out with his best friends on a Friday night.Asked on Tuesday about his brief meeting with Curry, during which they discussed getting together when their schedules permit a friendly round of golf, Spieth described it as a “cool experience” and said, “What a role model he is.”Spieth added, “We stayed after, and he was nice enough to come out and hang out with us.”The way Spieth spoke, it was as if it had never crossed his mind that Curry might have felt charmed to have made his acquaintance.AdvertisementSpieth enters this week’s World Golf Championships match-play event at Austin Country Club as the headliner, and not merely because of his ranking. During his only full year of college, he helped lead the University of Texas to the N.C.A.A. Division I championship.Spieth’s 2014-15 season, in which he won five tour events, including the Masters and the United States Open, elevated his status outside Texas, but Spieth treats the pedestal that people want to place him on as if it is suitable only for chopping. He is coming off a year, he acknowledged, “that sets you kind of into a non-golf audience and puts you in the spotlight there.”Spieth said a way to cope was to “stay away from all the outside influences, whether it’s TV, where you see yourself, or it’s social media, whatever it may be. Just do less of it and find something else to do, whether it’s reading or whether it’s discovering a new place.”After winning the Tour Championship in September to secure the FedEx Cup title, Spieth filled pages of his passport with new stamps. Between his victory at the Tournament of Champions in Maui and his next PGA Tour start five weeks later, Spieth played, and recorded top-five finishes, in Abu Dhabi and Singapore. But in four starts since returning to the United States, Spieth’s best showing is a tie for 17th.Last week Jason Day, who can overtake Spieth at No. 1 if Spieth fails to advance out of his round-robin group and Day advances to the quarterfinals, gave voice to a widely whispered concern in golf circles when he said, “I’m worried about him because I don’t know if he’s playing too much and if he’s doing too many things with golf and sponsor obligations that he may get burned out and go through a rut where he doesn’t want to be on the golf course for a while.”AdvertisementSince the 2014 United States Open, Spieth has made 47 worldwide starts to Day’s 35.“You can look at his world ranking and how many events he’s played over the last couple years and you can see that he’s kind of wearing himself out,” Day said.Spieth said he had no regrets about his world detour. “I had a great time, I saw some really cool places,” he said, adding, “And I really do have good memories from it.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.One longtime resident of Austin appreciates better than most the stresses inherent in trying to satisfy sponsors and tournament directors and ignoring the siren call of appearing at money-driven events to focus on performance. Andy Roddick, who was 21 when he won tennis’s United States Open and soon thereafter advanced to No. 1 in the world, said, “ ‘No’ might have to be a part of his vocabulary moving forward.”Roddick, the last American man to occupy the top spot in his sport’s rankings, marveled at how well Spieth had handled the trumpeting that attends the crown.“I think Jordan’s inherently a nicer, more patient person than I was at 21,” said Roddick, a celebrity guest at Monday’s draw presentation.Roddick, now 33, recalled moments during his reign when he avoided the news media or acted like a self-described punk. Spieth, he added, “doesn’t seem like he has that kind of thing — at least, he hides it better.”Roddick said he respected the loyalty Spieth had shown to tournaments that gave him an opportunity to play before he had earned his tour membership.“Jordan’s so good and genuine and wants to do the right thing,” Roddick said. “I don’t know that you can do it all or have it all at the same time. I think he’s going to have to realize that people won’t like him less if they understand his reasoning for turning them down and that reasoning is valid.”Whether he is owning up to his receding hairline by making jokes about it or lining up with other basketball fans before a game to cheer Curry, Spieth has a humility that Roddick described as “kind of endearing.”Roddick added, “The way he talks to his caddie, like he’s on the golf course and there’s a bunker 140 yards ahead of him and he’s got a 3-wood in his hand and he asks, ‘You think I can clear that?’ ” Roddick said, laughing.Advertisement“A lot of athletes can play the humble role,” Roddick said, “but with him, it’s real. It’s part of the thing that attracts people to wanting to watch him play.”A version of this article appears in print on March 23, 2016, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Well-Traveled Spieth Adjusts to Being the Main Attraction .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.