AdvertisementSupported byOn BaseballBy Tyler KepnerSCOTTSDALE, Ariz. — The first baseman’s toss was high, but Jeff Samardzija was there, racing from the mound and gliding through the air by the bag at Scottsdale Stadium on Monday. He plucked the ball from the sky and landed with his foot in the right place.The move is familiar to Samardzija. A decade ago, he was a star wide receiver at Notre Dame, where he set the school record for receptions. Samardzija’s athleticism — and the relatively fresh condition of his arm for 31 years old — attracted the San Francisco Giants in free agency this off-season.The Giants signed Samardzija for five years and $90 million, and gave a six-year, $130 million contract to another right-hander, Johnny Cueto. The spending binge followed an 84-78 season and sets up the Giants, perhaps, to continue their funky new tradition: Every even-numbered year of the 2010s, they have won the World Series.“This is as good of a rotation as I’ve ever been a part of, top to bottom, with the depth,” said Jake Peavy, who has won championships in Boston and San Francisco. “Nothing’s going to be given to us, but we’ve got guys in the room who understand that if we’re ready to go, it’s going to be a fun year.”There is no doubting the talent of Cueto and Samardzija, who slide into the rotation after the ace Madison Bumgarner and before Peavy and Matt Cain, with Chris Heston — who threw a no-hitter at Citi Field last June — also in the mix. The issue with both is consistency.Cueto beat the Mets in Game 2 of the World Series last fall, twirling a complete-game two-hitter for Kansas City. In his other 16 starts, he had a 5.27 E.R.A. Samardzija, meanwhile, led the American League in hits allowed (228) and earned runs (118) for the Chicago White Sox. Both pitchers were 11-13 in the regular season.Then again, they both made the All-Star team in 2014, when they finished with E.R.A.s below 3.00. Given that the Giants also pursued Zack Greinke and David Price — who both earned contracts worth more than $200 million — they believe they might have gotten bargains with Cueto and Samardzija.“If we were signing them after the 2014 season, we wouldn’t be anywhere near the dollars we ultimately signed them for,” said Bobby Evans, the Giants’ general manager, adding that both pitchers’ durability was part of their appeal. “To bring them here, first and foremost, was really about them: their talent, their past success and the fact that we believe they can have that kind of success here.”The Giants have reason for optimism. Few organizations nurture pitching so well, and while talent clearly matters most, nearly every factor of the Giants’ experience favors the pitcher. They play in a spacious National League park, and they have a premier catcher in Buster Posey; a highly respected manager, Bruce Bochy, and coaching staff; and a strong defensive infield.“They’re one of the last organizations that put as much onus on pitching and defense, and you feel that when you come here,” Samardzija said. “In other organizations, that is not apparent whatsoever. It’s: ‘Let’s score as many runs as we can and let the pitcher fend for himself out there.’ ”There is no defense against a home run, though, and Samardzija allowed 29 last season, tied for the most in the A.L. He allowed two to the Oakland Athletics in a 6-4 loss on Monday — one on a sinker, one on a slider. Samardzija allowed six runs in six innings, swelling his spring E.R.A. to 8.53, but he said he was not concerned.Samardzija issued no walks and used his splitter to generate ground balls. That pitch is crucial for him, he said, as is the sinker, which he threw less often last season while playing in front of a porous infield defense in Chicago. With the Giants, Samardzija plans to be more aggressive.“There’s a lot of confidence as a pitcher when you’re looking at those guys behind you,” Samardzija said. “A 3-1 count, it changes a little bit. Just go ahead and put it in play and let those guys work behind you.”Samardzija is 6 feet 5 inches and 225 pounds, and his long limbs make his timing even more important, said Dave Righetti, the Giants’ pitching coach. Righetti said Samardzija’s mechanics reminded him of A. J. Burnett, who also turned his shoulders as he started his delivery. Samardzija nodded at the comparison.“I’ve watched a lot of A. J. and I love how he throws his fastball,” he said. “That little turn saves a lot of your energy, too. If you want to throw 200, 220 innings in a season, you’ve got to use your body, not just your arm. So my turn is based on just generating 94, 95 miles an hour without having to use all arm, which can lead to fatigue. “I want to use my lower half, my turn, my height and my length to generate that speed and that power.”That height, length and power could have led Samardzija to pursue a football career, but baseball has been the smart choice. It pays well, of course, and Samardzija chose wisely in free agency to maximize his chance of success.Alas, he gets few chances to show off his old skills, so Monday’s putout was a treat. A reporter said he marked it down as one reception for 30 yards, and Samardzija laughed.“That’s about how far it was,” he said, smiling. “No broken tackles, but that’s O.K. Got out of bounds, stopped the clock. It was perfect.”Advertisement