AdvertisementSupported byBy Ben RothenbergRaymond Moore stepped down late Monday as chief executive of the Indian Wells Tennis Garden in California and director of its tournament, the BNP Paribas Open, a day after making comments about female tennis players that drew strong rebukes from many in tennis, including Serena Williams, the runner-up at the tournament and the world’s No. 1 women’s player.Moore’s decision to resign was announced in a statement by Larry Ellison, the billionaire businessman who owns the tournament.“Ray let me know that he has decided to step down from his roles as C.E.O. and tournament director effective immediately,” Ellison said. “I fully understand his decision.”Moore ignited controversy Sunday morning at a news conference when he asserted that women’s tennis players owed a debt of gratitude to stars of the men’s game.“In my next life, when I come back, I want to be someone in the WTA, because they ride on the coattails of the men,” Moore said. “They don’t make any decisions, and they are lucky. They are very, very lucky. If I was a lady player, I’d go down every night on my knees and thank God that Roger Federer and Rafa Nadal were born, because they have carried this sport. They really have.”Moore apologized for his remarks Sunday afternoon, but after Williams had already condemned them. Others soon followed, including Steve Simon, the chief executive of the WTA, whom Moore had succeeded as tournament director at Indian Wells. Simon called Moore’s words “a breach of our code of conduct” and indicated that the WTA board would consider disciplinary measures.In his statement, Ellison praised the leadership of Billie Jean King, Martina Navratilova, Venus Williams and Serena Williams.“I would like to personally thank all the great women athletes who fought so hard for so many years in the pursuit of equal prize money in professional tennis,” Ellison said. “And I’d like to congratulate them on their success. All of us here at the BNP Paribas Open promise to continue working with everyone to make tennis a better sport for everybody.”On Tuesday, speaking from the Miami Open, some of tennis’s top players continued to criticize Moore’s comments.“I think there should be equal pay, 100 percent, especially at all combined events,” Andy Murray said, according to The Associated Press. “The timing of it was just so strange. It was right before you had a great women’s final with, like, 16,000 people sitting in the stadium.”Players were also reacting to comments from Novak Djokovic, who suggested Sunday that male players should seek more money because their matches tended to attract more spectators.“If I have a daughter and she plays tennis and I have a son who plays tennis, I wouldn’t say that my son deserves more money because he’s a man,” Serena Williams said, according to The Associated Press. “I would say they deserve the same amount of money.”She added of Djokovic: “If he has a daughter — I think he has a son right now — I think he should talk to his daughter and tell her his son deserves more money than you because he’s a boy.”Advertisement