AdvertisementSupported byN.F.L. RoundupBy Ken BelsonBOCA RATON, Fla. — Eager to expand its footprint internationally to generate more revenue, the N.F.L. plans to play a regular-season game in China as early as 2018.Immense logistics must be solved, including finding a suitable stadium and teams that want to play in Asia, and determining a kickoff time that would allow fans in the United States to watch the game at a reasonable hour.But the league’s 32 owners, who are holding their annual meeting this week, view overseas markets as ripe for expansion. The league already plays three games a year in London, and this season, it will return to Mexico City for the first time in more than a decade.On Sunday, N.F.L. executives told the owners that the fastest way to reach the commissioner’s target of $25 billion in annual revenue was by expanding digital offerings like games streamed over the Internet and through developing the N.F.L.’s brand outside North America.“I’ve always felt if you look at what we’ve achieved in the U.S., if you could take just a fraction of that globally, then the upside has to be incredible,” said Mark Waller, who runs the league’s international operations.The N.F.L. canceled a planned preseason game between the New England Patriots and the Seattle Seahawks in China in 2007 as it turned its attention to developing the market in Britain.The league now feels that after spending a decade developing its brand there, it is ready to expand elsewhere. The N.F.L. has 23 television and digital partners in China and about 17 million fans measured by those who follow the league online. About half a million fans watch “Sunday Night Football” in China, where the game is broadcast on Monday morning.Taking games to China will be more difficult. The league will have to decide whether to play in Beijing, the capital, or Shanghai, the country’s financial center.The Rams, who were granted the right to move to Los Angeles in January, agreed to give up one home game a year for the three years it plays in the Los Angeles Coliseum. The team is open to playing in China, and several other teams have shown interest in playing a road game there.Playing in China, though, will not happen soon. Any stadium would have to accommodate two N.F.L. teams, practice sites would have to be found, and scheduling conflicts would have to be solved.“To do it well in China, it’s not a one-year preparation,” Waller said. “From a planning perspective, local government perspective and from the logistics and broadcast perspective, there’s a lot of work to be done.” PATRIOTS SEEK REDRESS The New England Patriots’ owner, Robert K. Kraft, said he sent Commissioner Roger Goodell a letter more than a month ago asking him to consider returning the draft picks he took from the team last year.Goodell fined the team $1 million and took away two draft picks, including the team’s’ first-round draft pick this year, as penalty for the team’s role in deflating footballs used in the A.F.C. championship game in 2015.Tom Brady was suspended for four games, but a District Court judge later overturned the penalty. Kraft suggested that the commissioner had yet to reply to his letter.  LURING ANOTHER SUPER BOWL The owners of the Jets and the Giants said they would like to bring another Super Bowl to the New York-New Jersey area. Woody Johnson, the Jets’ owner, and Steve Tisch, the Giants’ co-owner, said that Super Bowl XLVIII was a success and that the metropolitan area was a popular destination for fans and the N.F.L. The next two Super Bowls are in Houston and Minneapolis. APPAREL DEAL EXTENDED The N.F.L. extended its deal with Fanatics.com, which runs the league’s online shops, for at least 10 more years. The league has also taken an undisclosed equity stake in the company, according to a source familiar with the deal. That stake could become valuable if the company went public.Fanatics.com also acquired the licensing rights so it can produce merchandise commemorating specific plays or games.Advertisement