By JAMIE TRECKERJUNE 6, 2016
CHICAGO — The United States men’s national soccer team faces what its coach, Jurgen Klinsmann, flatly declared a “must-win” game against Costa Rica in the Copa América Centenario on Tuesday night. But if the Americans are feeling the pressure, they are not showing it.On Sunday, several United States players serenaded fans at Wrigley Field with a version of “Take Me Out to the Ball Game” during the seventh-inning stretch of a Chicago Cubs game. And on Monday, while visiting Soldier Field for a walk-through, players insisted they were a better team than the one fans saw lose the Copa América opener.“We know our backs are against the wall,” defender Geoff Cameron said, “but we believe in ourselves. We played well the other night.”Still, the facts are stark. Friday’s 2-0 loss to Colombia put the Americans in an early hole, and if they fail to get a positive result on Tuesday, the team will most likely bow out after the group stage.Advertisement“It’s a big game, but we’re professionals, and we’re going to play like professionals,” said goalkeeper Brad Guzan, who is expected to make his second straight start. “We are very confident we can get a result.”AdvertisementThe Americans need one: In a group-stage tournament like this year’s Copa, losing the first game is often deadly. And despite the praise Klinsmann’s team had for itself, the United States frequently looked like the weaker team against Colombia, conceding an early goal off a set piece and a second goal off a penalty kick late in the first half. Things barely went better on offense: The Americans failed to put a shot on target until nearly an hour had elapsed.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.To be sure, this is an American team in transition. Key players are aging out, and there is uncertainty over just who will replace them if the team can qualify for the 2018 World Cup in Russia. Aside from the mainstay Clint Dempsey, who remains a spark plug, there is little evidence the team can produce goals with consistency against top teams.Klinsmann acknowledged having room for improvement while discussing what his team would need to do to succeed Tuesday, saying: “We need to create more chances in the final third and finish things off. We need to score.”He added: “I think it was a good defensive performance against a very good Colombia side, aside from the corner kick and the penalty. We created five, six, seven chances — but we did not finish it off. We need to avoid mistakes and find ways to score goals.”The good news for Klinsmann is that the United States has been dominant at home against Costa Rica, with a 13-6-5 record on American soil. The Americans have not lost a meaningful home game to Costa Rica since 1989, a 15-game streak that includes a memorable 2013 win in a blizzard near Denver.Still, the Ticos edged the Americans, 1-0, in an October friendly in Harrison, N.J., and in their Copa América opener, they showed they could kill a game with the best of them by earning a 0-0 draw against better-regarded Paraguay in the stifling Florida heat.Costa Rica will be missing two key players Tuesday: Real Madrid goalkeeper Keylor Navas was dropped from the roster before the tournament because of an Achilles’ tendon injury, and defender Kendall Waston was suspended after picking up a red card against Paraguay.“We understand what is at stake,” Klinsmann said. “When you lose the first one, there are only two games left, so we have to get our first 3 points tomorrow, and then you see how things play out. We’re full of energy and optimism, and we have a lot of respect for this Costa Rican team, but we’ve got to get it done tomorrow night.”A version of this article appears in print on June 7, 2016, on Page B16 of the New York edition with the headline: An American Team in Transition Faces High Stakes in Only Its Second Game.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.