AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressCOLUMBUS, Ohio — The Montreal Canadiens were the last team in the N.H.L. to lose a game in regulation this season — and they did it in astonishing fashion Friday night.The Columbus Blue Jackets set their own record in delivering the loss.Cam Atkinson, Nick Foligno, Scott Hartnell and Josh Anderson each scored two goals as Columbus swamped Montreal, 10-0, matching the biggest loss in the Canadiens’ history and breaking the Blue Jackets’ franchise record for most goals in a game.Montreal lost by 10 goals for the fifth time, and for the first time since an 11-1 loss to Detroit in February 1995. The Canadiens dropped to 9-1-1.“I don’t think you’re going to forget one like that,” Montreal wing Brendan Gallagher said. “We got taught a lesson here tonight. We had it coming. Last game we were sloppy, we got away with it. Tonight we didn’t.”Sergei Bobrovsky made 30 saves, and Seth Jones and David Savard added goals for the Blue Jackets, who improved to 5-3-1. Columbus eclipsed its previous record of eight goals in a game.After surrendering 13 goals in its first 10 games, Montreal gave up eight to Columbus in the first two periods on Friday, half of them on power plays. Sixteen Columbus players picked up at least 1 point.“There’s nothing positive about tonight — nothing,” Montreal Coach Michel Therrien said.The record output was no big deal to Columbus Coach John Tortorella.“All it is is one tick in the win column and one tick in the loss column,” he said.The Blue Jackets banged away at Al Montoya, Montreal’s backup goalie who started in place of Carey Price in the first game of a back-to-back set. On a power play with 9 minutes 4 seconds left in the first period, Foligno tapped the puck out from behind the net to Atkinson, who picked up his third goal of the season.Jones and Savard added goals in the first period, then the Blue Jackets poured it on the second. Atkinson got his fourth of the season 4:01 into the period, and Columbus got a goal each from Anderson and Hartnell, while Foligno added two.Hartnell got his second in the third, then Anderson finished the scoring 10:45 into the final period.Seth Jones found the net just 58 seconds later from the left circle on a pass out from behind the goal line from Anderson to make the score 2-0.“You’ve been on the other side where everything is not going right,” Foligno said. “It just seemed to be the case tonight where we were just getting every bounce. But we were earning it, too. I’m not going to take away from our game, either. We did a lot of good things. But I’ve never been up by 10 in my entire career.”Montoya had 30 saves for Montreal.Advertisement