

      By THE NEW YORK TIMES

NOV. 4, 2016

“It might as well be a matchup from a movie,” wrote Tyler Kepner, The New York Times’s national baseball correspondent, in his preview for this year's World Series.


Seven games later, the Series did seem like it had unfolded from a Hollywood script, complete with a dramatic extra-innings finish in the finale.


The following is a collection of every On Baseball column from the 2016 World Series, as well as the Series preview — the ups and downs and unexpected story lines of a Series 176 years in the making.
The two teams left standing after the league championship series carried decades of misery with them into the World Series. It was a tantalizing plot seemingly made for the movie screen. Terry Francona, the Indians’ manager, and Theo Epstein, the Cubs’ president for baseball operations, have a common thread in their extraordinarily successful careers: Each builds absolute trust with players conditioned to view authority figures with suspicion. It wasn’t as bad as the Cubs’ last World Series game – a Game 7 loss in 1945 in which they gave up 5 runs in the first inning – but Chicago did not look much better in their highly anticipated return to the Series. They struck out 15 times (including eight times against Corey Kluber in the first three innings) in a listless 6-0 loss to the Indians. It was the unofficial victory cry of the Indians: “Party at Napoli’s!” And Mike Napoli has had plenty of practice throwing celebrations, as he has helped three different American League teams reach the World Series in six years. The young Cubs slugger Kyle Schwarber tore knee ligaments on April 7 and went 200 days without playing in a major league game. But he didn’t look like he had taken any time off at all when he returned for the World Series, recording two singles, two R.B.I. and a walk in the Cubs’ 5-1 Game 2 win in Cleveland. In the middle of a scoreless Game 3, Indians Manager Terry Francona made a move that raised eyebrows, bringing on his best reliever, Andrew Miller, in the fifth inning. The strategy paid off as Miller ended a threat in the fifth and struck out the side in the sixth. Francona’s strategy did have precedent, but you have to go back to Rollie Fingers’ early entrances in the 1972 and the 1974 World Series to find it. The Indians’ formula — timely hitting and a few great pitchers — seemed to give them a limited pathway to victory, but after four games it was the Cubs who had been unable to solve Cleveland’s pitching staff. After Cody Allen was drafted in the 23rd round of the 2011 draft, he wasted little time in progressing through the minor leagues. In July 2012, just 13 months after signing, he joined the Indians. Nobody else from his round has made the major leagues. Allen continued to climb, and in Game 4 he earned his sixth save of the postseason. Before Game 5, with his Cleveland Indians ahead by three games to one, Terry Francona was asked to ponder what another title might mean for his personal legacy. Only 10 managers have won at least three World Series. But the topic didn’t interest him. The dominant theme of this World Series was the long title droughts for both teams. But an intriguing subplot was the resurgence of a strategy that once seemed radical but that has crept back into the game over the past couple seasons: deploying top relievers early and often. In Game 5, Cody Allen, usually the Indians’ closer, entered in the seventh inning, and Aroldis Chapman, the Cubs’ closer, came in for the first eight-out save of his career. It was more or less smooth sailing for the Cubs through a 103-win regular season, but the playoffs seemingly could not have been laden with more strife. Chicago barely escaped tough situations in the N.L.D.S. and the N.L.C.S., and the World Series offered the biggest tests of all. But through Game 6, the Cubs had risen to the occasion and had given themselves — and baseball fans everywhere — a gift: a decisive Game 7 that would end one franchise’s long championship drought. Heading into Game 7, the Indians placed their hopes on an unassuming yet supremely talented starter: Corey Kluber, who had already defeated the Cubs twice in the Series. It was a chance for Kluber to become the first pitcher since Mickey Lolich of the Detroit Tigers in 1968 to start and win three games in a single World Series. It might have seemed greedy for fans of the Indians and the Cubs to look beyond 2016 before the World Series was even over, but considering the way the clubs’ rosters were built, they could be forgiven. Both teams included a core of talented young players under club control for several more years, a result of shrewd planning. Ben Zobrist grew up in Illinois, where thousands of young children have surely imagined over the years what it would be like to deliver the hit that would give the Chicago Cubs a World Series title. Zobrist said he was never one of those children. But in the top of the 10th inning in Game 7, he lived that fantasy with a one-out, opposite-field double that drove in the go-ahead run for the Cubs in the decisive game. Since Anthony Rizzo was 3 years old, his father knew he would be a baseball player. Rizzo’s father would chip him golf balls and he would “catch everything” with his mitt, his father said. At age 27, Rizzo caught the out that ended the Cubs’ 108-year wait for a World Series title. He was part of a collection of players that fought through a trying postseason and an epic Game 7 — complete with a rain delay and a players-only meeting — to change a franchise’s identity. Advertisement