AdvertisementSupported byBy Ken BelsonBOSTON — The former running back Kevin Turner, one of the lead plaintiffs in the landmark N.F.L. settlement over concussions and brain trauma, had the most advanced form of chronic traumatic encephalopathy, the degenerative brain disease linked to repeated head hits, researchers said Thursday.Turner was 46 when he died in March from complications associated with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, or Lou Gehrig’s disease. Turner, who played for the New England Patriots and the Philadelphia Eagles, had suspected that the pounding and concussions he had absorbed as a fullback at Alabama and in the N.F.L. had contributed to his deteriorating health.Researchers at the Boston University C.T.E. Center who studied Turner’s brain said he had had the fourth and highest stage of C.T.E., which has been shown to lead to A.L.S. symptoms in some cases.“The severity of Mr. Turner’s C.T.E. was extraordinary and unprecedented for an athlete who died in his 40s,” said Ann McKee, a professor of neurology and pathology at the Boston University School of Medicine and the director of the C.T.E. Center.In a speech Thursday to medical professionals and families of athletes who were found to have C.T.E., McKee said that though a link between C.T.E. and A.L.S. had not been confirmed, she was convinced that C.T.E. led to Turner’s A.L.S.McKee said that C.T.E., which can be diagnosed only by examining brain tissue after death, appeared to have “decimated the motor cortex of his brain at a young age, likely leading to his A.L.S. symptoms.”Turner’s brain, she said, “was riddled with C.T.E.” and was “one of the most striking cases we’ve seen.”Robert Cantu, clinical professor of neurosurgery at the Boston University School of Medicine, said the “extreme severity” of Turner’s disease was related to the number of years he had played football — 25 — and the fact that he had begun playing tackle football at age 5, while his brain was still developing and vulnerable.McKee said that after analyzing the brains of 228 former football players, “we have seen a clear trend that length of career is associated with C.T.E. severity.”Turner is the 91st former N.F.L. player McKee has found to have C.T.E., out of the 95 brains she has examined. Those found to have Stage 4 of the disease often had dementia, difficulty finding words and aggression.McKee said that while researchers had determined a link between repeated head hits and C.T.E., much more work was needed to determine why some players got the disease and others did not.Raymond Turner, Kevin’s father, said that his son was taught to lead with his head when playing football from a young age. Kevin, he said, persuaded one of his sons to delay playing tackle football.Turner was found to have A.L.S. in 2010, a year after he began noticing symptoms, including weakness in his hands and arms. Over time, he lost the ability to move and speak freely, and he needed full-time assistance. Symptoms of C.T.E. include memory loss, confusion, impaired judgment, paranoia, impulse-control problems, aggression, depression and, eventually, progressive dementia.Although his condition deteriorated, Turner lent his name to a class-action suit against the N.F.L. by thousands of retired players who said the league knew about the dangers of concussions and repeated hits to the head but deliberately hid that information from the players.Turner represented the class of players who had diseases covered in the settlement, and he urged players to accept a deal from the N.F.L. that would include payments of up to $5 million for those with severe neurological diseases.After a court hearing in 2013, before the settlement was announced, Turner, in slurred and halting speech, acknowledged that he and some other players did not have much time.“I am very glad that we are at last moving forward with this and hope that it won’t drag and drag,” Turner told reporters. “Unfortunately, there’s a lot of us that don’t have 10 years to find out what the decision is.”The estates of retired players who were found to have C.T.E. before the settlement was approved can receive up to $4 million. But Turner’s estate is expected to receive $5 million because of his A.L.S. diagnosis once the final appeals to the settlement are exhausted. Turner had three children.Advertisement