By STEPHANIE SAULNOV. 3, 2016
Four years after Jerry Sandusky, a former Penn State assistant football coach, was convicted of sexually abusing 10 young boys, the federal government is seeking to fine the university nearly $2.4 million for failing to alert the public about Mr. Sandusky’s conduct and other campus dangers.In announcing the proposed fine — the largest ever for failure to comply with the Clery Act, a federal law requiring prompt public alerts about safety threats as well as annual disclosures of campus crime statistics — the United States Department of Education painted a damning picture of how university officials permitted Mr. Sandusky “unfettered access” to campus buildings and facilities even though officials knew he posed a danger to the campus community.The largest portion of the proposed fine — $2,167,000 — is not directly related to Mr. Sandusky’s case but involves the university’s failure to properly classify and report crime statistics during the years from 2008 to 2011. The department said it found more than 300 crimes Penn State had not disclosed, including five sexual assaults.The proposed fine is the university’s latest financial setback related to the Sandusky scandal. Last month, a jury awarded $7.3 million in damages to Mike McQueary, a former Nittany Lions assistant football coach who had testified to a grand jury that, in 2001, he told the former head coach, Joe Paterno, as well as other officials that he had witnessed Mr. Sandusky, by then retired from the university, abusing a young boy in a campus shower.AdvertisementIn a statement on its website, Penn State said it was reviewing the government’s findings and would issue a full statement. The university said that it had significantly strengthened its compliance with campus crime reporting since 2011. “Regrettably, we cannot change the past,” the statement said.AdvertisementPenn State has the right to appeal. In that case, the fine would be determined by an administrative law judge. The scandal has cost the university more than $100 million in penalties, legal fees and settlements to victims.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.After Mr. McQueary’s accusation, the university failed to notify the public, but instead came up with a plan encouraging Mr. Sandusky to seek professional help and barred him from bringing children alone to the football building, according to a report on the events commissioned by Penn State trustees.The letter also said that Mr. Sandusky continued to be present on the University Park campus, with keys and full access to athletic facilities, an office in the university, and premium seating at the Nittany Lion Club at the stadium, where he brought children as guests. In addition, he had access to university golf courses, where he also brought children.He also conducted mentoring programs for children on university campuses through his Second Mile Foundation.According to the letter, Mr. Sandusky had been removed as a volunteer coach at a nearby high school in 2008, after accusations of inappropriate sexual contact with a young boy, and was denied a volunteer coaching opportunity at Juniata College after failing a routine background check. “Individuals within Penn State’s Department of Intercollegiate Athletics were aware of these events,” the letter said.Even after law enforcement officials began contacting officials in their investigation of Mr. Sandusky, his access continued.“In short,” the letter said, “a man who was about to be charged with violent crimes against defenseless minors was free to roam the Penn State campus, as he pleased.”The Education Department began its Penn State investigation several days after Mr. Sandusky’s arrest in 2011, demanding records from the university covering more than a decade.AdvertisementPreviously, the largest fine ever imposed under the Clery Act, which was enacted in 1990, was $350,000 against Eastern Michigan University, after it failed to warn the campus about the murder of a student in her on-campus residence hall in December 2006.An earlier version of this article misstated the year in which a student was murdered at Eastern Michigan University, leading to a fine for the university under the Clery Act. It was 2006, not 2005.A version of this article appears in print on November 4, 2016, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Penn State Is Facing Record Fine by the U.S.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.