By WALLACE MATTHEWSAPRIL 15, 2017
Two diametrically opposed pitching performances, one sublime and the other ridiculous, were on display at Yankee Stadium on Saturday, and both helped the Yankees extend their winning streak to six games.The sublime came from C. C. Sabathia, the 36-year-old former flamethrower who has remade himself as a finesse pitcher. He worked into the eighth inning against the St. Louis Cardinals, limiting them to one run and three hits.The ridiculous came from Carlos Martinez, the immensely talented 25-year-old St. Louis right-hander, for whom the strike zone was a moving target. Martinez, who throws a 99-mile-per-hour fastball, posted one of the rarer pitching lines ever seen in Major League Baseball, striking out 11 batters and walking eight in a mere five and one-third innings.It added up to a 3-2 victory for the Yankees, who struck out 17 times, stranded 12 base runners and managed just one hit with a runner in scoring position in 13 attempts.Advertisement“That’s one of the stranger lines that I’ve seen,” Yankees Manager Joe Girardi said, referring to Martinez’s performance. “His stuff was good, but we were patient on it and made him work.”AdvertisementMartinez, who had one walk and 13 strikeouts combined in his first two starts this season, threw 118 pitches and left the mound with the Yankees holding a 3-0 lead. According to Baseball Reference, no one in the last century had recorded more strikeouts and walks in less than six innings.Herb Score of the Cleveland Indians had come the closest — 60 years ago. He struck out 12 and walked eight through six and one-third innings in a winning effort against the Washington Senators on May 1, 1957.Sabathia did have one thing in common with Martinez. Both wore No. 42, as did everyone else on the field, to commemorate the 70th anniversary of Jackie Robinson’s first game, when he broke baseball’s color barrier.Sabathia worked quickly and mostly efficiently with the diminished arsenal he has shown the past several seasons. He once routinely fired 97-m.p.h. fastballs past hitters, but Sabathia now keeps them off-balance with an assortment of changeups, cutters and sliders that slice through both sides of the plate. He mixes in a fastball that can reach about 90 m.p.h.“This is who I am now,” said Sabathia, who improved his record to 2-0 while dropping his E.R.A. to 1.47. “It was fun to throw 97. I don’t really miss it, though. I enjoy what I’m doing now. I feel confident that I can get hitters out with what I have now.”Sabathia was forced to walk a fine line for much of his day because of the Yankees’ inefficient offense, which could not capitalize on Martinez’s wildness. With a lineup altered by the late scratch of designated hitter Matt Holliday, who reported lower-back soreness, the Yankees left the bases loaded in the first and fifth innings and stranded two runners in the second and third innings.But they were able to scratch across a run in the first on two walks, a passed ball and a wild pitch. They added two more runs in the sixth when Ronald Torreyes hustled to second base on a routine pop fly that dropped in short left field after Randal Grichuk seemed to lose it in the sun.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Torreyes eluded a tag by second baseman Jedd Gyorko with a swim move into the bag, and he scored from third when Martinez fired the ball over the head of catcher Yadier Molina after fielding a comebacker. Designated hitter Chris Carter, who replaced Holliday in the lineup, drove in the Yankees’ third run with a single to left.Advertisement“That’s just Toe being Toe,” Girardi said, using the diminutive Torreyes’s nickname. “Guys get excited whenever he’s on the field.”Sabathia held the 3-0 lead until the eighth, when he left a fastball over the plate for Gyorko, who drove it over the right-field wall.With the Yankees unwilling to use closer Aroldis Chapman, who had worked the previous three games, or the setup man Dellin Betances, who had worked the last two, they turned to Tyler Clippard in the ninth. He allowed a home run to Stephen Piscotty that narrowed the Yankees’ lead to one run, and the Cardinals got two runners on before Grichuk struck out to end the game.Sabathia has been one of the surprises of the Yankees’ season. He is the only one of their starters to have averaged more than six innings per outing, and he has allowed just 12 hits and three earned runs in 18 ⅓ innings.“We really needed a performance like that from C. C.,” Girardi said. “I don’t know if he’s a more complete pitcher, but I think he goes to more areas now. He was pretty complete when he was winning 20 games, throwing 97 with a real good changeup and a slider. But I think he’s more creative now.”Sabathia attributes this season’s effectiveness to more stability in his degenerating right knee, which was surgically cleaned out in the fall. He bounced back from injury-riddled years in 2014 and 2015 to post a 3.91 E.R.A. last season.“Before, I wasn’t able to plant my leg and finish my delivery and drive towards the plate,” he said. “That was the goal of getting it cleaned out, just being able to come in with a clear mind knowing it wasn’t going to hurt.”Sabathia is in the final year of the five-year, $122 million contract extension he signed before the 2012 season. But while this may be his last season as a Yankee, he does not believe it will be his last in the majors.“Feeling the way I do now, I want to pitch as long as I can,” he said. “I want to pitch as long as possible.”AdvertisementRidiculous? Or sublime?A version of this article appears in print on April 16, 2017, on Page SP3 of the New York edition with the headline: Refined Sabathia Allows Yankees to Outlast a Haphazard Pitcher.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.