By RICHARD GOLDSTEINJULY 3, 2017
Darrall Imhoff, the all-American center who led the University of California to the 1959 N.C.A.A. tournament basketball championship and to the runner-up spot the next season, played on a gold-medal-winning United States Olympic team and then had a long career in the N.B.A., died on Friday in Bend, Ore. He was 78.His death was confirmed by the university. The Portland Trail Blazers, the last of the six N.B.A. teams for which he played, said the cause was a heart attack.Imhoff, 6 feet 10 inches tall and about 220 pounds, scored 22 points and had 16 rebounds in the semifinals of the 1959 N.C.A.A tournament against a University of Cincinnati team featuring the all-American Oscar Robertson. He scored the decisive basket in the waning seconds of the final against West Virginia and its all-American guard Jerry West, leading the Golden Bears to a 71-70 victory.Imhoff’s Cal team made it to the N.C.A.A. tournament final in 1960 but lost to Ohio State and Jerry Lucas.AdvertisementImhoff played on the United States team that won gold at the Rome Olympics in 1960 with a lineup led by West, Robertson and Lucas and coached by Pete Newell, the California head coach.The Knicks, seeking a center to help them compete against Bill Russell of the Boston Celtics and Wilt Chamberlain of the Philadelphia Warriors, selected Imhoff as the third overall pick in the 1960 N.B.A. draft, after the Cincinnati Royals chose Robertson and the Minneapolis Lakers selected West.But Imhoff was a disappointment as a Knick. He was remembered mostly as the starting center who faced Chamberlain when he scored 100 points against the Knicks in a March 1962 game in Hershey, Pa.Chamberlain was in the midst of season he would finish with an average of 50.4 points a game, so Imhoff’s reaction when he protested a first-quarter call against him was understandable.“Imhoff whined to the referee with unwitting foresight, ‘Why don’t you just give the guy his hundred now,’” Gary M. Pomerantz wrote in “Wilt, 1962” (2005).Advertisement“I only played the first 10 minutes of the game and the first 10 minutes of the fourth quarter before I fouled out,” Imhoff once told The San Francisco Chronicle. “Somebody else was responsible for the other 28 minutes.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.It was Cleveland Buckner who shared the misery of guarding Chamberlain, whose record scoring spree sent the Warriors to a 169-147 victory.Darrall Tucker Imhoff was born on Oct. 11, 1938, in San Gabriel, Calif. He was a walk-on, or unrecruited athlete, when he played for Cal’s freshman basketball team. But Newell, who gained a reputation for working with big men, honed Imhoff’s talents, especially shot blocking and rebounding.Imhoff received second-team all-American mention in his junior year and was a first-team all-American as a senior.After two seasons with the Knicks, he was traded to the Detroit Pistons for Gene Shue, one of the N.B.A’s leading guards and a former Knick. Imhoff later played for the Los Angeles Lakers, the Philadelphia 76ers, the Cincinnati Royals and, finally, the Trail Blazers.He was an All-Star in the 1966-67 season, when he averaged 10.7 points and 13.3 rebounds for the Lakers. He was among three players traded to the 76ers in July 1968 for Chamberlain, who had reached a contract impasse with Philadelphia.In 12 N.B.A. seasons, Imhoff averaged 7.2 points and 7.6 rebounds.He was a broadcaster for the Trail Blazers, and he worked in marketing after his playing days.Information on survivors was not immediately available.Two nights after the Knicks’ debacle at Chamberlain’s hands, they faced him again at Madison Square Garden.“Darrall Imhoff, playing one of his best games in two seasons with the Knicks, hounded Chamberlain throughout,” The New York Times reported.This time, the Knicks lost by 1 point. And Imhoff and his teammates held Chamberlain to 58.A version of this article appears in print on July 4, 2017, on Page A19 of the New York edition with the headline: Darrall Imhoff, 78, College and N.B.A. Star.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.