By CHRISTOPHER CLAREYJULY 3, 2017
This year’s Wimbledon tournament is Venus Williams’s 20th. Here are some of her most memorable matches.Defeated Serena Williams, 6-2, 7-6 (3)Venus, then 20, and Serena Williams, 18, became the first sisters to play at this late stage at Wimbledon since Maud Watson beat her sister, Lilian, in the inaugural women’s final in 1884.Richard Williams, the father of the Williams sisters, could not bear to watch the match, instead taking a walk in the village of Wimbledon with reporters shadowing him. The match ended on a double fault from Serena, and the all-Williams handshake afterward at the net bore a closer resemblance to group therapy.“It’s really bitter, but someone had to move on,” said Venus, who two days later would win her first major singles title — 10 months after her younger sister — defeating Lindsay Davenport in the final.AdvertisementLost to Serena Williams, 7-6 (4), 6-3Serena, who was already guaranteed to take over the No. 1 ranking from Venus by reaching the final, also deprived her sister of the champion’s trophy, the Venus Rosewater Dish, which suddenly seemed in need of a new name.Advertisement“We’re sisters, bottom line,” Venus said before the match, proving it after her defeat by shepherding Serena through the on-court ceremony protocol.“No one told me the first year that you have to curtsy, so I was just running around like a fool,” Venus said.She had served less forcefully than usual, perhaps hampered by a sore right shoulder.“I got off easy today,” Serena said.But there was no mistaking the trend: Serena rising and Venus dipping.Defeated Lindsay Davenport, 4-6, 7-6 (4), 9-7Williams was an underdog when she arrived at the All England Club ranked just 16th, but she was finally healthy after a series of injuries. “Everyone has their trials and tribulations,” she said in classic Venus fashion.But so few get to play a classic Wimbledon final.She and Davenport were both particularly hungry: Davenport had not won a major in nearly five years; Williams hadn’t in nearly four.For 2 hours 45 minutes of power tennis, they tested each other’s reach and nerves. Davenport failed to serve out the match at 6-5 in the second set. Williams saved a match point on her own serve with a backhand winner in the 10th game of the third set.AdvertisementWhen the longest women’s final in Wimbledon history finally ended, the handshake turned into an embrace, and Williams was soon leaping — and then leaping some more — on her favorite patch of grass.“I wasn’t supposed to win,” she said. “I guess whoever put a bet on me really came in good on that at the beginning of the tournament, but I always bet on myself.”Defeated Marion Bartoli, 6-4, 6-1The suspense had come much earlier in the tournament for Williams, who was seeded 23rd. She had been a game away from losing her first-round match to Alla Kudryavtseva; two points from losing her third-round match to Akiko Morigami.The final was, by comparison, not much of a match as Williams, now in a deep grass-court groove, pulled away from Bartoli, who was playing in her first major final.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But there was plenty of symbolism as Williams, who had lobbied so eloquently for women to receive as much prize money as men at Wimbledon, became the first women’s champion to receive equal pay.“People heard us,” she said. “People believed in us.”Lost to Elena Vesnina, 6-1, 6-3Williams was unseeded at Wimbledon for the first time since her debut in 1997 and played the tournament as if it might be her last. Struggling to manage the draining effects of Sjogren’s syndrome, an autoimmune disorder, she felt sluggish, and it showed in her play. She missed her first five serves and lost the first five games.It did not get better from there.“A shadow of her grass-court self,” said Pam Shriver, an analyst and former player, watching the match on Court 2.David Witt, Williams’s coach and hitting partner, was uncharacteristically downbeat afterward. But Williams — proud, even defiant — was not.“I feel like I am a great player,” she said. “I am a great player. Unfortunately, I had to deal with circumstances that people don’t normally have to deal with in this sport. But I can’t be discouraged by that, so I’m up for challenges. I have great tennis in me. I just need the opportunity.”Twelve days later, she and Serena won the doubles title.A version of this article appears in print on July 3, 2017, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »