By DAVID WALDSTEINJULY 3, 2017
WIMBLEDON, England — A tearful Venus Williams broke down and left her news conference after a first-round victory at Wimbledon on Monday when asked about the fatal automobile accident she was involved in last month.Williams was driving through an intersection in her Toyota S.U.V. in Palm Beach Gardens, Fla., during the afternoon of June 9, when she collided with a car being driven by Linda Barson, according to a police report. Barson’s husband, Jerome, 78, was a passenger in the car, and he died on June 22 from injuries he sustained in the crash.A daughter of the victim has since filed a wrongful-death lawsuit against Williams. On Monday, a Wimbledon official, sitting next to Williams to facilitate the news conference, said Williams would be unable to answer questions about the accident.But before that, Williams was asked if she would like to say anything about the accident.“There are really no words to describe, like, how devastating and — yeah, I’m completely speechless,” she said. “It’s just — yeah, I mean, I’m just…”AdvertisementHer voice trailed off as she wiped tears from her eyes. She tried to compose herself until the officials asked if she would like to leave. Williams replied, “Maybe I should go.”AdvertisementShe returned a few minutes later, but the moderator reiterated that she would take questions about only tennis.
            Venus Williams emotional at #Wimbledon after being asked after car accident -- heavy situation pic.twitter.com/LSdkvumiw0 A five-time Wimbledon champion, Williams, seeded No. 10, had just defeated Elise Mertens, 7-6 (7), 6-4, in 1 hour 40 minutes.There was never much doubt that Williams would win, although she did have to fight to capture the first set. She took a commanding lead, but Mertens clawed her way into a tiebreaker, which finally tipped in Williams’s favor after it went to 7-7.In the second set, Williams was two points from the win when a light rain forced a delay, but it lasted only a half-hour.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Williams will face Wang Qiang of China, ranked 55th, in the second round.On the court, Williams seemed to have compartmentalized her job from the accident. She said she was grateful to return to Wimbledon.“Today, walking on the court, I love it here, so it’s always a feeling of coming back home,” she said. “It’s a special time of year.”On Friday, after news of the accident was first reported, Williams wrote on her Facebook page that she was “heartbroken by this accident. My heartfelt condolences go out to the family and friends of Jerome Barson and I continue to keep them in my thoughts and prayers.”According to the police report of the accident, Williams was said to be driving around 5 miles per hour when another car ran into hers. The report said Williams was at fault for “violating the right of way” of the other vehicle, which was being driven by Linda Barson, 67.Witnesses told investigators that Williams ran a red light just as Barson’s car entered the intersection on a green light.AdvertisementMalcolm Cunningham, a lawyer for Williams, noted she was not charged or cited for the accident. Williams was cited in Palm Beach County, Fla., for driving without proof of insurance in 2011 and for driving with a suspended license in 2013.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.