

 Michael Powell
 

SPORTS OF THE TIMES
AUG. 10, 2016
MANAUS, Brazil — Late Tuesday evening, as the Amazon temperature danced at 90 degrees with humidity in step, Janine van Wyk, a defender with South Africa’s women’s soccer team, paused just a second to take in the packed and throbbing Amazônia Arena, filled with 43,000 gloriously nuts fans.She thought to herself, “This is amazing, to realize that all these people are supporting the women’s game,” she told me later. “This lets younger girls everywhere know our sport is growing.”She flashed a quick smile even though her team had just been knocked out of the Olympic tournament.The wheels of change are turning in what Brazilians freely describe as their macho society. Their men’s team collapsed in a heap in the World Cup two years ago and continues to play with a listlessness and diffidence in these Olympics. (Manauaras, the locals here, say the male players “are walking on high heels,” which means, roughly and after consultation with eminent linguists, “arrogant snots.”)The women’s game — the Brazilian women in particular, but with applause left over for foreign teams as well — has captured the collective imagination here. As a colleague, Tania Franco, and I wandered around Manaus before the game, and later as we walked through the stands, the sense was that this nation’s enraptured, besotted relationship with soccer had finally lapped over onto the women’s side.AdvertisementMuch of this is owed to the Brazilian women’s players, who kick and run with an artful joie de vivre, offering ankle-breaking stutter steps and swashbuckling kicks. Marta, the ponytailed star long known as the Pelé of the women’s game, spent too much of her career as a soccer prophet without much honor in her own country. Now she hears loud applause every time her foot touches the ball.
CreditJeffrey Furticella/The New York Times        We came upon Danyelle Christine da Silva Beleza, 14, standing and jumping and cheering in this stadium, which was built at fantastical cost and sits like a massive white orb astride northern Manaus. Her family and their neighbors’ family had taken two cars and driven from Rondônia to Manaus for this game. That sounds easy enough; a map shows mileage roughly equivalent to the seven-and-a-half-hour trip from New York City to Cleveland. Except that they traversed a “highway” that had been closed for 30 years and that remained a dirt track through the Amazon jungle. The two families bounced and jostled for 14 hours.AdvertisementNo matter. They wanted to see the women play.“Brazil is a macho-man society; it is wonderful this is changing,” Danyelle said, beaming. “I want Marta’s jersey instead of Neymar’s.”Neymar is the star of that other team, the Brazilian men.As it happened, the Brazilian women could not deliver a grand victory on Tuesday night. The South African women, by their own admission playing over their heads in the drive-a-stake-through-the-eye heat, held the Brazilians to a 0-0 tie.A similar fate befell the favored American women in their game here on Tuesday as the Colombian women, riding two brilliant free kicks by Catalina Usme, a striker with a ponytail Mohawk, tied the score at 2-2.One kick went directly through Hope Solo’s legs. It was that sort of night.Both games were accompanied by asterisks. The Brazilian and American teams were already assured of spots in the next round, and their coaches were not willing to watch key players melt into puddles in the Amazonian heat. So some key players sat; others played part of the game. Marta played only in the second half, and only because another player came up lame at halftime.“I wanted to spare Marta this heat,” the Brazilian coach, Vadão, said. “If I got her hurt here. …”He allowed that thought to trail off unspoken, no doubt figuring that had Marta gone down, he’d have had to take up residency under an assumed name in a distant corner of the Amazon.AdvertisementThe American coach, Jill Ellis, offered a wry, are-you-kidding look when asked if her players had slowed toward the end of their game. “Yeah, I would challenge anyone to run around in that heat,” she said.There was another subtext, which plays out everywhere the Americans play in Brazil this year. Solo, at 35, is a brilliant goalkeeper; she also tends to let impolitic thought escape her subconscious when she would be wiser to bar the door. Before the Olympics, she posted on social media a photo of herself wearing a black mosquito hat and holding a big bottle of insect repellent. “Not sharing this!!!” she typed. “Get your own! #zikaproof #RoadToRio.”Solo tried to backtrack. She began tweeting photos of the sunset over the Amazon. That fooled no one. She has been jeered since the Olympics began, and a boom of boos lowered on her every time she touched the ball on Tuesday. As she ran off the field at the half, she was washed over by chants of “Zika! Zika!”Christiane Luizedo was one of those lustful booers. “We know that some people see Brazil as a third-world country,” she said. “She has disrespected our nation. Now she has to deal with the consequences.”That Solo had one of the worst games of her career was occasion for paroxysms of joy. Although, in truth, that anger did not feel deep. More striking was the newfound support for the women. Wandering through downtown Manaus, a place of pastel-colored, colonial-age buildings and perpetually busy markets that is ringed by a forest of office towers, I heard again and again a respect mixed with chagrin that fans had taken so long to embrace the women’s game.Renato Andrade da Silva, a cabdriver, had the Olympics playing on a tiny screen in his cab as he hurtled through traffic. That night’s game was must-see television.“The women are such a great surprise, and the men, not so much,” he said. “I used to like the men more; that was my mistake.”At a cafe in a baroque old opera house, I spoke with the barista Marcelo Gadhella, 30. “The women should be given a lot more credit,” he said. “And the men deserve less credit.”At a nearby table, Karen Marinho, 25, nodded. She is an aspiring archaeologist and loves the women’s game. “There’s a lot of women nowadays who go to watch, and they bring their spouses,” she said. “The macho men say: ‘Oh! Now the women play like little men.’”AdvertisementShe rolled her eyes. More money, she said, needs to go into promotion and player development. The women’s championship games run only on obscure cable channels; the men’s game is on all public channels.Vadão, the Brazilian coach, noted that his team took a cheap flight to Manaus, which is four hours by air from Rio de Janeiro. There was no food, and his players were crowded in economy.Such problems are not unique to Brazil. American female players have filed suit seeking pay equity with the less successful American men’s national team. Players in women’s leagues in Europe and elsewhere remain distinct second-class citizens, their games underpublicized and spottily attended.Perhaps Tuesday evening’s double bill offered a window into a better future. Such was the view of Vera Pauw, the lithe Dutch woman who coaches the South African team. She came to the interview room with jaw set grim, her Olympic road at an end. Then she spoke of the artistry of the Brazilians and of the grit of her team, and especially of all those cheering fans.“Brazil showcased a very mature women’s play and pace; it was beautiful,” she said. “Now we know what we could do with a professional league in South Africa.”She smiled at herself. People, she said, will tell you that she is not one to gush. She could not help herself. “To see a huge stadium filled, with fans behind every women’s kick, was fantastic,” she said.That is an Amazonian reverie right there.Email: powellm@nytimes.comA version of this article appears in print on August 11, 2016, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Role Models, Minus the Machismo.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »