By FILIP BONDYJULY 3, 2017
HELP WANTED:AMAZING JOB OPPORTUNITY to join an established professional basketball organization, the New York Knickerbockers, in the entry position of president and director of basketball operations.We are a very profitable franchise in the National Basketball Association with a proud tradition that includes zero titles in 44 years, one playoff series victory in the last 17 years and four consecutive losing seasons. The Knickerbockers are headquartered at Madison Square Garden, the world’s most famous arena, until the city finally decides to do something about Penn Station.The successful candidate will be given the responsibility to hire a new coach whenever he sees fit and then to fire that coach after a series of early setbacks. An extended period of bad blood should precede the dismissal.Excellent chance for promotion to the position of former president and director of operations.Qualifications and assets we are seeking in a successful candidate include:Celebrity status. This is mandatory. Name must be recognized and initially applauded by all corporate season-ticket holders, until it is inevitably reviled by an entire city. Talk-show hosts must get very excited and begin fresh cycle of hope-to-despair.AdvertisementNo experience as an executive is preferred. We are searching for someone who has achieved considerable success while employing an unrelated skill set. Applicant can be a coach, lawyer or short-order cook.AdvertisementApplicants with some executive experience may be considered, but that experience would have to be truly disastrous — such as when Scotty Stirling was hired in 1986 as the Knicks’ general manager after he had traded Robert Parish and the rights to draft Kevin McHale to Boston for Joe Barry Carroll while he was working for the Golden State Warriors.Priority will be given to candidates past retirement age, with waning energy and nothing left to prove.Applicant must be willing to risk and forfeit a hard-earned Hall of Fame reputation. Past self-sacrificing employees have included Don Nelson, Lenny Wilkens, Isiah Thomas, Larry Brown and Phil Jackson.Individual should be eager to ignore all requests for interviews as he walks past reporters in the corridor after every game. Must be comfortable with security guards at his seat. He will also be expected to bar reporters from speaking with other members of the organization, for no particular reason.Candidate’s name should be easily abbreviated or transformed into a tortured pun to facilitate mockery by tabloid headline writers.Wiseguy Twitter account is mandatory in order for candidate to maintain superficial interaction with fan base.Applicant is expected to be a stubborn proponent of a specific offensive system that should not necessarily fit personnel on the court. Preferable if system is named after geometric shape, such as “rhombus.” Other acceptable tags: college teams (“U.C.L.A.!” — Larry Brown) and parts of body (“Run the fist!” — Hubie Brown).Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Must demonstrate ability to sign team’s aging free agents to long-term contracts, featuring no-trade clauses, then to sour on them during ugly, public campaigns.AdvertisementAt the same time, applicant must be adept at demoralizing promising young players who tire of constant controversies. Threats to deal gifted youngsters should successfully lower their trade value.Candidate may never, ever question why, on planet Earth, fans of the Knickerbockers are still filling Madison Square Garden nightly and paying exorbitant prices for beer.Preference will be afforded any applicant fluent in the language of “Potential-ese.”Candidate will be required to boast of a vague connection to the Knicks’ glory days, or to anybody’s glory days. At very least, must have been a big fan of the unselfish 1973 championship team.Applicant should instinctively know how to appear busy until the 2018 draft, despite having little freedom to act because of limited cap space and ironclad player contracts.Applicant must agree, in advance, to “a mutual parting of the ways” after two or three seasons. Departure will be arranged soon after a contract extension is signed.Salary will be commensurate with lack of experience, times a hundred.A version of this article appears in print on July 4, 2017, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: Want to Run Knicks? Experience Is a Minus.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.