By SERENA WILLIAMSMARCH 22, 2016
Editor’s note: The Miami Open, a joint ATP/WTA tournament that began this week, is subject to a legal battle over possible renovations to the site, which is a public park. The dispute has led to speculation that the event, one of the biggest tennis tournaments in the United States, will move.People often say, “Home is where the heart is.” As a professional tennis player, I’ve crisscrossed the world more than 20 times over, and along the way found a few places I’ve come to consider home. London, Melbourne, Paris, New York, Madrid and Rome are all cities I hold dear.But one place that’s been a true home for me over the past 20 years is Miami, the host of one of the world’s most special sporting events: the Miami Open.I grew up in Compton, Calif., and moved to West Palm Beach, Fla., at 9 years old. Every March, my dad would take Venus and me to Crandon Park on Key Biscayne for what was then called the Lipton International Players Championships. Miami is where I had the chance to watch some of the greats compete.AdvertisementLittle did I know back then, sitting on the sideline with braids in my hair, but I was about to embark on an incredible life journey that would see me play at the Miami Open across three decades.When I think about the Miami Open having to leave a city I love because it isn’t able to make improvements that would benefit the players and fans, it saddens me.AdvertisementI made my first appearance there in 1998, reaching the quarterfinals. The next year, Venus and I faced off in the final, in what would be the first of our 11 finals meetings. I was coming off back-to-back tournament wins and riding high with confidence. But Venus has always been my most challenging opponent, the best player I’ve ever played.It was an incredible day for our family, and I remember my nervous excitement before the match. My dad held a sign that read, “Welcome to the Williams Show.” After I lost the first set, he switched it to another sign, “Go, Serena. Go!” A capacity crowd of 14,000 shouted from the stands, “Go, Williams!”I think my dad was more nervous than Venus and me combined, but he was so proud of how far we’d come and what each of us had achieved. Venus beat me that day and went on to win the Miami Open in 1998, 1999 and 2001. I made sure we kept it in the family, following up with the first of my eight Miami Open wins in 2002.The tournament’s attendance through the years has continued to increase, and I’ve been fortunate to have the fans’ loyal support. I hear “Come on, Serena!” cheers in many languages when I play in Miami. I love the diversity and the passion of the crowds. The mix of cultures and the incredible energy make it so fun to play.The Miami Open has played an important role in my life and the lives of so many others. The event has always supported up-and-coming players, giving wild cards over the years to Pete Sampras, Andre Agassi, Andy Roddick, Steffi Graf, Monica Seles and James Blake before anyone had heard of them. In 1997, the tournament offered a wild card to Venus when she was just 16 years old.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Miami also helped lead the way for gender equality in the tennis world. Before 1985, the only combined men’s and women’s events were the four Grand Slams. In its inaugural year, the Miami Open broke that convention and featured both men and women.AdvertisementPerhaps even more significant, the Miami Open paid equal prize money to men and women during the first staging of the event in 1985. In 2007, a decade after playing in her first Miami Open tournament, Venus led the successful battle for equal prize money for women at Wimbledon, ensuring that all four Grand Slam events paid women and men equally. The Miami Open had carried out Venus’s vision of equality two decades earlier.As a tennis tournament, Miami has always achieved greatly despite the odds. It doesn’t take place in the biggest city; it’s not the oldest, nor is it the most traditional. But the tournament keeps moving forward, finding creative ways of improving each year.Leaving Miami would be a blow to our sport, to the city of Miami and to me. The tournament has, in many ways, set the standard for tennis events around the world in a unique time and place, and I hope we can all work together to improve this home court.I am so grateful for the opportunities the Miami Open has afforded Venus and me, and I can’t wait to get another chance at holding that trophy a week from Saturday.Serena Williams, a 21-time Grand Slam singles champion, is ranked No. 1 on the WTA Tour. She is represented by WME/IMG, which also owns the Miami Open. A version of this article appears in print on March 23, 2016, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: A Home Court Advantage for the Sake of Tennis.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.