By VICTOR MATHERSEPT. 19, 2016
An elite triathlon race in Mexico ended dramatically Sunday with one brother helping another across the finish line.At the final race of the World Triathlon Series in Cozumel, Mexico, Jonny Brownlee of Britain was leading with less than half a mile to go when he slowed and staggered over to a water station. His brother, Alistair, in a battle for second with Henri Schoeman of South Africa, veered over, pulled Jonny’s arm over his shoulder and began hauling him along. Meanwhile, Schoeman raced on for the win.When the Brownlees reached the finish, Alistair pushed Jonny across the line in second. Jonny immediately collapsed. He was admitted to a hospital, suffering from dehydration.
            The 2016 WTS season ends in a dramatic fashion. What. A. Year. #WTS2016 pic.twitter.com/nvqNrrI13D Though a protest was filed, the result stood, perhaps surprisingly.Although it seemed clear that Jonny would have had difficulty finishing without his brother’s aid, Appendix K, Rule 7 of the official triathlon rules allows athletes to receive assistance from either race officials or other athletes.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“If it had happened to anyone, I would have helped them across the line,” Alistair said. “It’s an awful position to be in. If he conked out before the finish there, and there isn’t medical support, it was a dangerous position to be in.”AdvertisementThe Brownlees have dominated the sport for years. Alistair, 28, is the two-time defending Olympic champion, and Jonny, 26, won the bronze in 2012 and silver in 2016.AdvertisementHad Jonny hung on to win, he would have clinched the series title. Instead, that title went to Mario Mola of Spain, who was fifth in the race.The brotherly affection, of course, was a feel-good story on social media, with fellow athletes like the basketball player Pau Gasol and the heptathlete Jessica Ennis-Hill weighing in:
            This is why I love sports! Amazing gesture by @AliBrownleetri helping his brother @jonny_brownlee finish! #Triathlon pic.twitter.com/6kybLHVEvT 
            Incredible! I have so much respect for @AliBrownleetri and @jonny_brownlee #sportatitsbest https://t.co/BSUe21rvAb The finish might have reminded many of another British athlete getting help from a relative to finish a big race. At the 1992 Olympics, Derek Redmond tore his hamstring during a 400-meter heat, but decided to try to hobble to the finish. His father raced out of the stands and helped him to the finish.In the women’s 5,000 meters at this year’s Olympics, the American Abbey D’Agostino and Nikki Hamblin of New Zealand collided and fell, then helped each other across the line.In the marathon, sisters Anna and Lisa Hahner of Germany finished hand-in-hand. But German track officials were critical, accusing them of treating the Olympic marathon “like a fun run.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.