AdvertisementSupported byRangers 4, Panthers 2By Dave CaldwellRick Nash did not whoop, because he never does, but he exhaled as his shoulders drooped in relief Monday after his first goal since Dec. 30. He had missed 20 games with a bone bruise and had yet to rediscover the net since his return.His 13th goal of the season could not have been more exquisitely timed. Nash pounded in a shot with 8 minutes 46 seconds left in the third period, just after a power play ended, and lifted the Rangers to a critical 4-2 victory over the Florida Panthers at Madison Square Garden.“Anytime the puck goes in, you exhale,” Nash said with a slight smile. “It’s nice to help the team by scoring, but I’m just really concentrating on finding my game right now and finding some consistency.”Two days after the Rangers were pelted with 52 shots in a loss to the San Jose Sharks that felt like “garbage,” as defenseman Marc Staal described it, they rebounded to post their 13th straight victory after a regulation loss, the longest such streak within one season in franchise history.The Rangers (41-24-8) passed the idle Pittsburgh Penguins (40-24-8) for second place in the Metropolitan Division, though the Rangers have played one more game. The Rangers will play Boston on Wednesday, and the Penguins will face the Devils on Thursday.Henrik Lundqvist made 13 of his 25 saves in the third period — and benefited when an apparent goal by defenseman Steven Kampfer was waved off because Kampfer was judged to have knocked in the puck with a high stick.“It was great to see how we responded as a group after the last game,” Lundqvist said. “It also shows how much focus to details and determination can change the look out there. Going from last game to this game, it’s like two different teams.”Nash was the hero simply because he had not scored since the Rangers’ 38th game. His goal, off a pass from defenseman Kevin Klein just after a high-sticking penalty on Jonathan Huberdeau had expired, increased the Rangers’ lead to 3-1.“I’ve been saying it since he’s been back: We have to be patient,” Coach Alain Vigneault said of Nash, who played his sixth game since returning to the lineup March 12. “That injury kept him from doing anything as far as weight-bearing for close to six weeks. He’s probably not still fully recovered.”The Panthers had closed the gap to 2-1 at 6:51 of the third period, when Vincent Trocheck charged toward Lundqvist and tipped in Jussi Jokinen’s sharp pass from the left wing. The Rangers were caught flat-footed in their zone, with Panthers forward Reilly Smith launching a fierce rush.With the backup Florida goaltender Al Montoya pulled for an extra attacker, Jiri Hudler scored a power-play goal with 36 seconds left to cut the Panthers’ deficit to 3-2. But Tanner Glass scored an empty-net goal with 8.2 seconds left to seal the victory.It helped that the Rangers pushed the puck into the Panthers’ zone early, compiling an 8-3 edge in shots on goal in the first period. The Rangers scored on their sixth shot, with the fourth-line forward Viktor Stalberg recording his ninth goal of the season and his first since Feb. 12.Stalberg poked the puck away from Jaromir Jagr, the Panthers’ 44-year-old forward, and steamed up the left wing, with center Dominic Moore joining him on a two-on-one rush. Stalberg slipped a pass to Moore under defenseman Aaron Ekblad. Moore fed the puck back to Stalberg, who flipped a backhand shot between Montoya’s legs at 11:15. The Rangers, who are 29-5-4 when scoring first and 22-3-3 when leading after the first period, allowed one shot the rest of the period. “He might not be as fast as he used to be,” Stalberg said, referring to Jagr, “but I’ve got to step up.”Mats Zuccarello, falling to the ice for the third time in a minute, gave the Rangers a 2-0 lead by taking a pass from Derick Brassard and flicking a shot from the high slot past Montoya at 3:33 of the second.But the Panthers (40-24-9) are in first place in the Atlantic Division with good reason. During one furious scramble late in the second, they did everything but score, knocking the puck along the goal line and off the post to Lundqvist’s left.The referee T. J. Luxmore added some drama to the play by jumping to avoid Jokinen’s rebound attempt and then landing next to Lundqvist, nearly clipping his blocker. “Maybe next time he’ll stay outside the post,” said Lundqvist, who was in a good mood for a change. Advertisement