By TAL PINCHEVSKYJUNE 5, 2016
By every measure, 2015-16 was a breakthrough season for the San Jose Sharks prospect Ryan Carpenter.An undrafted free agent, Carpenter, a 25-year-old forward, was the leading scorer for the Sharks’ American Hockey League affiliate, the San Jose Barracudas, was named the team’s most valuable player and went to the A.H.L. All-Star Game. He also earned the Yanick Dupre Memorial Award as the A.H.L.’s man of the year for his community involvement and played one game with the Sharks, on Dec. 12.For his efforts, he was recalled to join the Sharks for their run to the Stanley Cup finals. But Carpenter did not see the ice for the first three games of the series, which the Penguins lead, 2-1, going into Game 4 on Monday.In fact, Carpenter was not even in the building for the first two games in Pittsburgh. He was instead back in San Jose, patiently waiting for the opportunity, no matter how remote, to make his N.H.L. playoff debut.This is the life of the Black Aces, players who are called up from the A.H.L. when N.H.L. teams are allowed to expand their rosters when they make the playoffs.Advertisement“Hanging around, I think, has been good — I feel like it’s definitely motivating,” Carpenter said. “You watch these playoff games and you see the intensity, and you see how hard the Sharks have been playing.”As one of five Black Aces called up by the Sharks on May 1, Carpenter has been doing a lot of watching. The expansion of N.H.L. rosters for the postseason, coupled with the Barracudas’ first-round loss to the Ontario Reign in the A.H.L. playoffs, allowed Carpenter to join the Sharks in a limited role.AdvertisementBarring an injury to another player, Black Aces do not see any playoff action. They do not participate in warm-ups or travel with the team for road games. They do not practice with the team, either, instead participating in a separate session reserved for extra skaters. The assignment requires hard work and focus, even if opportunities can come slowly, if at all.It is an unusual existence that can be instantly altered by injury. For the Black Aces, a teammate’s pained sneer or sudden limp during a game could be the first sign that a career-defining opportunity is coming.“We’re just working out almost every day,” forward Nikolay Goldobin said. “Ready for the chance. Happy for the team that they made the final. It’s hard. I’m happy for the team, but, of course, I wish I could play and help more. Still, it’s an exciting time for everyone who is playing and not playing.”San Jose’s first-round pick in 2014, Goldobin, 20, played nine regular-season games with the Sharks this season and scored his first N.H.L. goal. But the latest stage in his N.H.L. development feels very foreign to Goldobin, a star Russian prospect who was not previously familiar with the term Black Ace, let alone the responsibilities required of the role.The term comes from the dead man’s hand, the fabled poker hand containing both black aces and two eights. As the legend goes, the Old West gunfighter, lawman and gambler Wild Bill Hickok was holding the hand when he was murdered in 1876. Eddie Shore, an N.H.L. star in the 1920s and ’30s and later an A.H.L. owner and coach, is believed to have brought the term to hockey, adopting it to refer to players working their way back into the lineup.The distinction has taken on new meaning in the modern N.H.L. as a promotion that tends to involve plenty of watching and waiting.Advertisement“Typically, the playoffs in the N.H.L. are so long that usually there’s a couple of guys who get banged up. So there’s always a good chance,” Carpenter said. “That’s pretty much what they told us. Just to be ready. You’ve got to look at it as a really good thing and a great opportunity.”As remote as the opportunity may seem, there is a precedent for Black Aces getting the call in the Stanley Cup finals. Earlier this season, Carpenter and Goldobin did not need to look too far to find a player who could attest as much.Ben Smith spent much of this season playing with the Barracudas before being traded to the Toronto Maple Leafs on Feb. 27. But after beginning the 2013 playoffs as a Black Ace with the Chicago Blackhawks, Smith was thrust into duty in Boston against the Bruins in Game 3 of the finals because of an injury to Marian Hossa.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Playing near his alma mater, Boston College, and within driving distance of his childhood home in Connecticut, Smith saw his first N.H.L. action in almost two months and played in his first Cup finals game.The following season, Smith scored four goals in 19 playoff games to help the Blackhawks advance to the Western Conference finals, where they lost in seven games to the eventual champion Los Angeles Kings.“Even if we don’t end up getting to play for the Sharks in a playoff game, we’re still really close and just taking that as motivation,” Carpenter said. “Trying to watch the playoff games and picture yourself in those guys, and follow guys you want to play like. It’s pretty cool.”The hope among team coaches and management is that tangential as it may seem, the presence on hockey’s grandest stage could someday help prized San Jose prospects like Carpenter and Goldobin develop.“I think this thing is something that will help me a lot next year,” Goldobin said. “For the rookie camp and training camp, show the coaches I can play.”For the time being, it is imperative that this fringe group remains prepared for the sudden opportunity to make N.H.L. history.Advertisement“It really can happen at any moment,” Carpenter said. “Part of just being a professional is realizing you just have to be prepared. Coaches try to remind us that you really are just one injury away from being there. You really can’t predict, so it could happen at any time.”A version of this article appears in print on June 6, 2016, on Page D3 of the New York edition with the headline: Call-Ups Present An Opportunity, One Injury Away.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.