AdvertisementSupported bySports BriefingBy The Associated PressLiverpool’s prolific forward line delivered again in a 4-1 win over visiting Stoke in the Premier League on Tuesday, lifting the team back into second place and to within 6 points of Chelsea.Liverpool fell behind when Jonathan Walters scored in the 12th minute, but the playmaker Adam Lallana equalized for the Reds in the 34th, and Roberto Firmino added the second goal just before halftime.Liverpool stretched the lead in the second half through an own goal by Giannelli Imbula and Daniel Sturridge’s first league goal of the season.The victory was the sixth time this season that Jürgen Klopp’s team has scored four goals or more in a league game. The Reds are the top scorers in the division, with 45 goals in 18 games.“Confidence is not a problem of the team at the moment,” Klopp said. “We know about our quality, but obviously we don’t show it all the time.”Nick Foligno scored a power-play goal midway through the third period, Sergei Bobrovsky had 37 saves, and the N.H.L.-leading Columbus Blue Jackets beat the visiting Boston Bruins, 4-3, to extend their winning streak to 13 games.Scott Hartnell, Seth Jones and Matt Calvert scored to put the Blue Jackets up, 3-0, in the first period, but they were outplayed from there by the more aggressive Bruins. Columbus stayed in the game thanks to another sterling performance by Bobrovsky, who beat Boston for the first time.Columbus has not lost since Nov. 26, setting a franchise-best winning streak. The Blue Jackets lead the brutal Metropolitan Division a season after finishing in last place.“When we focus on our game and do the things necessary to win, we’re a hard team to play against, and it makes it fun,” Foligno said.AROUND THE N.H.L. Sidney Crosby scored a goal for the fourth straight game and added two assists in leading the visiting Pittsburgh Penguins, who are in second place in the Metropolitan Division, to a 5-2 victory over the Devils, their 10th win in December. Andrew Ladd and Anders Lee scored 43 seconds apart early in the third period to lift the host Islanders over the Washington Capitals, 4-3, their third win a row. The Minnesota Wild defeated the host Nashville Predators, 3-2, extending their franchise-best winning streak to 11 games.Russell Westbrook notched his 15th triple-double of the season with 6 minutes 40 seconds to play in the third quarter, and the Oklahoma City Thunder beat the host Miami Heat, 106-94, to extend their winning streak to four games.Westbrook finished with 29 points, 17 rebounds and 11 assists. He was two rebounds shy of the triple-double at halftime, and now has six before the end of three quarters this season.JAMES VOTED MALE ATHLETE OF YEAR The Cavaliers’ LeBron James, who ended 52 years of sports heartache by bringing Cleveland an N.B.A. championship and used his superstar platform to address social causes, was chosen as The Associated Press 2016 male athlete of the year, an award he also won in 2013.The Olympic champion Kjetil Jansrud extended his perfect start to the season in super-G, winning a World Cup race in Santa Caterina Valfurva, Italy, by a comfortable margin.Jansrud became only the second man to win the first three super-G races of the season. The Austrian great Hermann Maier accomplished the feat twice — in 1997-98 and 1999-2000.“Looking at his career and mine, I’m not even comparable to him,” Jansrud said.SHIFFRIN WINS GIANT SLALOM Mikaela Shiffrin of the United States earned her second career World Cup giant slalom win and increased her lead in the overall standings.Shiffrin held on to her first-run lead on the icy Panorama course in Semmering, Austria, to beat Tessa Worley of France by 0.78 of a second, and Manuela Moelgg of Italy by 1.09.It was the 24th career win for Shiffrin, a slalom specialist. She also extended her overall lead to 55 points over the defending champion Lara Gut of Switzerland, who finished fourth Tuesday.Jason Day ends the year at No. 1 in the world ranking.This is the eighth straight year that a different player was at No. 1 in the final world ranking: Tiger Woods in 2009, Lee Westwood in 2010, Luke Donald in 2011, Rory McIlroy in 2012, Woods in 2013, McIlroy in 2014 and Jordan Spieth in 2015. Beginning in 1998, Woods was at No. 1 in the final ranking 11 of 12 years.Supermaxi Perpetual Loyal won the Rolex Sydney Hobart Yacht Race with a time nearly five hours faster than the old record, set in 2012.Skippered by Anthony Bell, Perpetual Loyal crossed the finish line at Constitution Dock in Hobart, Australia, around 2:30 a.m. local time Wednesday to complete the 630-nautical-mile race in 1 day 13 hours 31 minutes 20 seconds.Advertisement