By KAREN CROUSEJUNE 4, 2016
DUBLIN, Ohio — Jason Day’s long and winding road to the world No. 1 ranking began with him circumventing the short-game practice area at his boarding school in Australia. Defying the orders of his instructor, Colin Swatton, Day chose to play a par-3 course over working on his chipping and putting, leading to a loud row with Swatton that Day paved over with a public apology.Lesson learned. Fifteen years later, Day possesses one of the best short games in men’s golf. He earned the distinction by embracing the unsexy truth that club manufacturers prefer to hide behind the massive heads of their high-priced drivers: a 30-yard or 30-foot shot counts the same on the scorecard as a 300-yard drive.The weekend golfers love the long game, because as Day’s countryman Geoff Ogilvy pointed out, “They think they’re practicing to have nice scores, but they’re really only practicing to have fun.”The superstitious touring pros love the long game in part because they don’t want to invite calamity, however subliminally, by practicing difficult chips or awkward bunker shots. “You’re hoping that you’re not going to have those shots,” Ogilvy said. “You practice them when you get them.”AdvertisementDay, a three-time winner this season, is known for his length. He averaged 318 yards off the tee in the first two rounds of the Memorial Tournament, but he credited his short game with keeping him within range of the leaders (he was tied for first in the field in sand saves through 36 holes). If the driver is his show-off club, his wedges and putters are his scoring clubs.“I enjoy hitting drivers because I can just get out there and hit it as hard as I can, and you’re on the driving range, it’s going to go semi-straight,” Day said. Some of his short-game sessions, he added, have ended with him walking away “kind of pulling my hair out” and feeling as if his No. 1 ranking is a mirage. “Like, yeah, I’m the best player in the world,” he said, scoffing.AdvertisementDay no longer requires prodding from Swatton, with whom he still works, to spend time on his short game. He said he would typically spend four and a half hours practicing chips, sand shots, putts and approaches inside 150 yards and two hours hitting his long irons and woods.If he gratifies his ego by smashing balls with his driver, Day has gotten better by putting in the work around the greens. Day said his short-game practice could be the opposite of fun.“The hard thing about trying to improve something like that when it is one of your weaknesses is to actually get up and do it, because it really sucks trying to work on weaknesses at the start,” he said. “But as you slowly do it over time, it gets better and better and better, and then becomes a lot more exciting.”Jordan Spieth, the world No. 2, clinched his eighth PGA Tour victory last week in Fort Worth with a holed chip for birdie on the penultimate hole of the tournament. It was Spieth’s ninth holed shot in 12 tour starts this season, and his reaction was intoxicating, a fizzy cocktail of surprise and satisfaction. Or, as Spieth described it, “I think it was like a bit of shock, and then I think after that it was just a lot of happiness.”According to numbers compiled by his caddie, Michael Greller, Spieth has had 10 hole-outs from off the green in his last 15 worldwide starts. Greller and Spieth have borrowed a betting game they picked up from Day and Swatton during the 2013 FedEx Cup playoffs. Greller sets a standard for hole-outs – this season it is 20, matching Spieth’s total last season – and if Spieth exceeds that number (hole-outs in a major tournament are worth double), Greller will treat Spieth to dinner. If not, Spieth will buy.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“You don’t have to twist our arms for us to nitpick a small wager with each other,” Spieth said.AdvertisementIn the first round in Fort Worth, John Huh holed a 7-iron shot from 200 yards for an eagle on a par-4. It was his tour-leading 15th hole-out of the season. “Really?” Huh said Friday. “I wasn’t even aware of that stat.”Huh added, “If I wasn’t that good in the short game, I wouldn’t be here, but I’m trying to improve it every year, every month, every week that I’m playing on tour.”Day’s caddie, Swatton, said he dreamed of the day when short-game statistics were highlighted like driving distances, thereby encouraging young players to work on their imaginations and not just their power. The long hitters know who they are (and so does the average golf fan). But what does it say about the value assigned to the short game by the golf industry that Huh didn’t know he led all his peers in hole-outs?“Swinging the driver as hard and fast as you can is probably the least nuanced part of the game, so that generally gets most of the attention from the recreational player,” said Harry Arnett, the senior vice president of marketing and brand management for Callaway Golf. “But all golfers come to the cold, hard realization that dedication to the complete game through the bag is the only sure way to lower their scores dramatically.”Like other 3-year-olds, Day’s son, Dash, enjoys playing in the sand. He will drag a club into a bunker and try to whack balls out. There is just one problem, Day said. Dash insists on using a driver for his sand shots. Day grinned and said, “It’s like me as a kid.”A version of this article appears in print on June 5, 2016, on Page SP13 of the New York edition with the headline: Driving May Be More Fun, but Work on Short Game Goes a Long Way.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.