By CARLA CORREAAUG. 6, 2016
For Simone Biles, the wait is over. Her Olympic competition begins Sunday with the women’s artistic gymnastics qualifying round. She and her American teammates are all but assured spots in the team final, the all-around final and event finals: vault, uneven bars, balance beam and floor exercise. Here’s what to know as the competition kicks off.The qualifications will start at 8:45 a.m. Eastern. The Americans will begin at 4:30 p.m., but NBC has scheduled its coverage in prime time. To avoid the tape delay and see more competition, stream the full day of gymnastics via the NBC Olympics site or NBC Sports app. You will need cable credentials to log in. To watch international broadcasts, use a VPN.Biles, 19, is the three-time defending world champion in the all-around. If everything goes right for her, and not so right for her competitors, she could win five gold medals. Biles, who is from Spring, Tex., is exceptionally consistent while doing some of the hardest gymnastics in the world.Read The New York Times’s profile of Biles from February.Gabby Douglas, the reigning Olympic all-around champion, is in Rio after a disappointing Olympic trials. Before leaving for Brazil, Martha Karolyi, the national team coordinator, said that Douglas had made strides at a pre-Olympics training camp. Douglas, 20, who trains in Ohio, has been known to peak at the right time.AdvertisementAly Raisman, 22, the most decorated American gymnast at the 2012 Olympics, is the captain of the squad. Raisman, who is from Needham, Mass., is a likely contender for a medal in the all-around, and on beam and floor.AdvertisementLaurie Hernandez, 16, is a New Jersey native and the youngest American gymnast in Rio. Hernandez won fans at the trials with her upbeat floor exercise, but make no mistake, she is on the team for the scores she can post on the beam.Read The Times’s profile of Hernandez from June.Sam Manchester will guide you through the 2016 summer Olympics in Rio de Janeiro.Hey. It’s Sam from the NYT Sports desk. I’m at the Olympics in Rio (so you don’t have to be :)). Grab a limited spot and I’ll text you updates, answer your questions and share the behind-the-scenes stuff nobody else gets.Thanks! Talk to you soon.Madison Kocian, a 19-year-old from Dallas, is on the team for her stellar work on uneven bars. She is a world champion on the apparatus and hails from the same gym that produced the 2008 Olympic champion Nastia Liukin.There are 11 other teams in Rio: Belgium, Brazil, Britain, Canada, China, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the Netherlands and Russia. Romania is noticeably absent: The team of Nadia Comaneci failed to qualify and will be represented solely by Catalina Ponor, a 2004 Olympic gold medalist.(Among the 38 individuals to watch are Giulia Steingruber of Switzerland, Hong Un-jong of North Korea and Oksana Chusovitina of Uzbekistan, who are some of the world’s strongest vaulters. Chusovitina, 41, competed in her first Olympics in 1992, five years before Biles was born.)Teams will use four of their five gymnasts on each apparatus, and three of those scores will count. The eight highest-scoring squads will qualify for the team final on Tuesday, where the United States has a nearly 90 percent chance of winning gold. China, Britain and Russia are in contention for silver and bronze.The top-24-ranking gymnasts who compete on every apparatus Sunday will compete Thursday in the all-around final. The catch: Only two women per country can advance. Let’s say Biles places first, Raisman places second and Douglas places third in the qualifications; Douglas would sit out the all-around, and women from other nations — with lower scores — would participate.The top-eight-ranking gymnasts for each apparatus in the qualifications will move on to the event finals. Again, two women per nation may advance. Kocian, for example, will perform Sunday on uneven bars, to contribute to the Americans’ team score and possibly vie for the bars title. Hernandez will perform on vault, beam and floor.AdvertisementIn the 1970s and 1980s, Americans found medals hard to come by. What changed?First, the Iron Curtain fell. The former Eastern Bloc, a gymnastics powerhouse, saw state funding shrink. Top coaches, and their knowledge, fled to the West.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Years later, the United States adopted a semi-centralized training system. Instead of working year-round in their local gyms, national team members and coaches train once a month in Texas under the tutelage of Karolyi. It has fostered development and camaraderie.The most glaring change was the elimination of the perfect 10. In the 1980s and early 1990s, the iconic mark seemed plentiful and was awarded for routines that were not technically perfect. Current athletes get a difficulty score and an execution score.A basic explanation: The difficulty score rewards skills. It is, theoretically, open-ended, but generally spans 5 to 7 points. The execution score is out of 10, and judges take deductions for poor technique and other errors. The marks are then combined. At the elite level, totals are typically in the 12s to low 16s.The Americans’ physical and mental strength means their gymnastics is often harder, faster and higher-flying — and, therefore, higher-scoring. Biles’s potential points are so great that she could have a big error, even a fall, and still come out on top.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »