By SARAH LYALLNOV. 3, 2016
Step into the crowd outside Wrigley Field in the bottom of the 10th inning, moments before the Cubs’ World Series win.CHICAGO — Fifth inning, Game 7 of the World Series, and the Chicago Cubs were comfortably ahead by four runs. What more auspicious moment could there be for an out-of-town visitor to sneak into a friendly bar full of happy fans who were watching their team coast to victory?I ordered a drink and took my seat in front of one of the TVs. Not 10 minutes later, a wild pitch touched off a bizarre series of events, with the Cleveland Indians scoring twice and reducing the Cubs’ lead to two. The guy to my right immediately blamed me.I had forgotten how important it is not to disturb the atoms in the universe while watching a Cubs game. “You walk in, and look what happens!” he said.On the blackboard outside the tavern, the Bar Below, the soup of the day was listed as “the tears of our enemies.” Inside, it was a heaving mass of anxiety, fear and superstition. Cubs fans have intensely personal relationships with their team. Everyone at that bar was convinced that something he or she had done, worn or said, or not, was specifically driving the action on the field.AdvertisementA bartender was carrying a lucky nut, apparently some sort of walnut that worked better when left in her pocket, although it was unclear. A customer said she had come to that particular bar, despite living five miles away, because “the Cubs always win when I watch games here” and she did not dare go anyplace more convenient. The waiter announced that everyone would get a free shot if the Cubs pulled it off, then berated himself for raising the possibility, convinced that he had jinxed the outcome by prematurely placing the shot glasses on the bar.AdvertisementIt was excruciating. They were ahead and it was going to be fine. They were tied and it was not going to be fine at all. The curse hung heavy in the room. Except for the guy on my left, who was from Belgium and did not have a good explanation for what he was doing there, most of the people at the bar seemed in danger of contorting themselves into coronaries.Philip Dobosz, who grew up in Chicago and said you “never get the Cubs out of your system,” even when you move away (he moved away to Wyoming), began nervously relating what had happened to him in 1969 when he was in eighth grade at a Catholic grammar school on the South Side. School would let out and he would run across the street to the Sinclair gas station, where he could buy a soda for a dime and, if he was lucky, watch the ninth inning on the black-and-white set behind the counter.It was a great year for a great team — Ernie Banks, Ron Santo, Billy Williams, Ferguson Jenkins — until it wasn’t. The Cubs collapsed in mid-September, breaking Dobosz’s heart and shattering his faith. “I was very religious back then,” he said. “After that, I stopped believing in God.”Now 62, Dobosz learned to manage his expectations. “I used to say, ‘I hope the Cubs win a Series before my dad dies,’” he said. “Then he died. Now I hope they win before my kids die.”He ordered another beer.“I get the feeling that this isn’t going to go too well,” said Chris Helin, 58, who designs security systems. Once he did some work at Wrigley Field, he said, and was struck by how the metal door frames of the doors leading from the dugout were completely beaten up, as if from an industrial accident or natural disaster. “It turned out to be guys whacking the doors with their bats as they walked by,” he said. “Years of pent-up frustration.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The lady who lived five miles away looked at the television. “That’s Jerry Sachs!” she exclaimed, pointing to a man in the stands at Progressive Field who was gnawing his fingers with anxiety. The people at the bar wondered whether they were supposed to know this person — so many celebrities to keep track of, and Pete Rose, what was he doing there on the TV? — until the woman explained that Jerry Sachs used to be her boss.Oh no, it was now the 10th inning. All those squandered leads. An ancient script was being reenacted.But the Cubs scored, twice. People were screaming. They were grabbing people they did not know and hopping around. But why get your hopes up? They’d been there before. Indeed, the Indians scored, too, but just once.AdvertisementIt all felt too familiar and too frightening, until suddenly we were watching Kris Bryant, the world’s chillest third baseman, field a no-room-for-messing-around slow roller for the final out. He had the hugest grin on his face the whole time, as if to say: We’ve won it.And they had. People took videos of the celebration in the bar. The waiter passed out the shots, some indeterminate liqueur in a lurid blue, and everyone waited until everyone else had been served, so as to drink together. “To the Cubs!” we yelled.Clearly, it was all due to the bartender’s lucky walnut.A version of this article appears in print on November 4, 2016, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: A Reporter Walks Into a Bar, and the Universe Collapses.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.