DEC. 25, 2016
The health of the former Yankees pitcher Mel Stottlemyre was said to be improving Sunday.“Please know that the greatest warrior I have ever known is doing a lot better,” Stottlemyre’s son Todd wrote on his Facebook page. Stottlemyre, 75, was found to have multiple myeloma, a bone marrow cancer, in 2000.The younger Stottlemyre had said Friday that his father was fighting for his life in a hospital.“He is recovering at God speed and he is looking forward to getting out of the hospital,” Todd Stottlemyre wrote.Stottlemyre pitched for the Yankees from 1964 to 1974, winning 20 or more games in 1965, 1968 and 1969. He was a five-time All-Star and had a career record of 164-139 with a 2.97 E.R.A. in 360 games.After he retired, Stottlemyre served as a pitching coach for the Mets and the Yankees.CUBS’ SERIES WIN VOTED TOP STORY The Cubs’ first World Series title since 1908 was the runaway winner for The Associated Press’s top sports story of 2016, collecting 48 of 59 first-place votes and 549 points in balloting by A.P. members and editors. The death of Muhammad Ali after a long battle with Parkinson’s disease was second with 427 points, and LeBron James leading the Cleveland Cavaliers to the franchise’s first N.B.A. title took third with 425 points.LaMarcus Aldridge had a season-high 33 points and the host San Antonio Spurs held on to beat the Chicago Bulls, 119-100, on Sunday after nearly blowing a hot start.AdvertisementKawhi Leonard added 25 points, 10 rebounds and 4 assists. Tony Parker had 13 points and 8 assists.Chicago rallied from a 20-point deficit to lead by 3 points midway through the third quarter but could not sustain the push, taking its third straight loss.AdvertisementDwyane Wade led the Bulls with 24 points, including 10 in the final quarter.WESTBROOK LEADS THUNDER OVER TIMBERWOLVES Russell Westbrook had 31 points and 15 assists as the Oklahoma City Thunder defeated the visiting Minnesota Timberwolves, 112-100.Westbrook had 10 assists in the second half, but fell short of becoming the first Thunder player to score at least 40 points in four straight games.Karl-Anthony Towns led Minnesota with 26 points.Houston quarterback Tom Savage was not great in his first career start in place of Brock Osweiler.But Savage did not make any major mistakes during the Texans’ 12-10 win over the Cincinnati Bengals on Saturday night, allowing Houston to clinch a second straight A.F.C. South title.Savage and the Texans know he will need to improve in the postseason.“I think we can build, and obviously I think it’s a good thing that we protected the ball — not put the defense in a tough situation,” Savage said.Savage threw for 260 yards last week to help Houston rally for a 21-20 win over the Jacksonville Jaguars in his first regular-season action since 2014. Osweiler was benched that game after throwing interceptions on consecutive possessions in the second quarter. Coach Bill O’Brien left Osweiler on the bench and stuck with Savage, and early on against the Bengals it looked like a mistake.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Savage, in his third season, completed two passes for 13 yards in the first half, and the Texans trailed by 3-0 at halftime. He was much better in the second half, and he finished with 176 passing yards to help Houston win. He completed 18 of 29 passes and has not turned over the ball. Osweiler threw more interceptions (16) than touchdown passes (14) in his 14 starts.“We went to no-huddle, and he was able to get rid of the ball a little bit quicker,” O’Brien said. “The no-huddle helped our pace, our rhythm, and it was just a good job by the offensive staff of getting him into a rhythm.”AdvertisementThough the Texans have already secured the division title, next week at Tennessee will be important for Savage to get more experience before the playoffs begin. They are looking for more this year after an embarrassing 30-0 home loss to the Kansas City Chiefs in the first round last January.“The goal is to win it all, but this is the first step,” the owner, Bob McNair, said.The Texans are looking to pick up that elusive 10th win after going 9-7 in each of O’Brien’s first two seasons. The Titans will be without quarterback Marcus Mariota after he broke his leg in a loss to the Jaguars on Saturday that helped Houston secure its playoff berth.BEARS ARE WOEFUL The Bears’ 41-21 loss to Washington on Saturday was as ugly as any this season, and it guaranteed the Bears (3-12) will at best match their worst record in 14 years. The loss also left open the possibility that Chicago will equal its lowest win total in a nonstrike year in more than four decades.In one sense, normalcy has returned to the Premier League after the craziness of Leicester’s improbable surge to the title last season.The top six on Christmas Day were the teams that many predicted would challenge for the title: Chelsea, Liverpool, Manchester City, Arsenal, Tottenham and Manchester United.There is nothing normal about Chelsea’s current form, however.After 11 straight wins, Chelsea leads the league by 6 points over Liverpool. Only once — Arsenal in 2001, with 13 straight wins — has a top-tier club had a longer winning streak in one season since World War II.With a stingy defense (two goals conceded in the last 11 games), a dynamic midfield marshaled by N’Golo Kante and a forward line led by the league’s top scorer, Diego Costa, there are no apparent weaknesses in Chelsea’s lineup. It is hard to see how Chelsea can be stopped. Costa, who last season appeared more interested in picking fights than scoring goals, has been consistent this season, with 13 goals and 5 assists.Chelsea has three tough away games left — at Spurs, Liverpool and United — and is proving adept at eking out 1-0 wins. Four of its last six games have finished with that score line, including the last three.One thing seems certain: There will be no miracle sequel for Leicester, which is languishing in 15th place.A version of this article appears in print on December 26, 2016, on Page D6 of the New York edition with the headline: Stottlemyre’s Health Is Said to Be Improving.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.