By JAMES WAGNERAPRIL 15, 2017
MIAMI — In the daily battle of attrition that is the long baseball season, every game counts the same but some come at a greater cost. It is all about survival, which was the Mets’ primary task on Friday night.The Mets’ 16-inning win over the Miami Marlins on Thursday, a five-hour-and-38-minute game that required all but three players on the roster, took a toll on the team that was still felt a day later. Three relievers were unusable after pitching too much Thursday, so the Mets called up a reinforcement, Sean Gilmartin, from the minor leagues.Their starter, Noah Syndergaard, knew exactly what he needed to do in this situation. He did all he could to eat up innings, a small victory in itself, until two torn fingernails prematurely ended his night. So a tired bullpen tried to bridge the gap, until Josh Edgin surrendered the game-winning double by J. T. Realmuto with two outs in the bottom of the ninth of a 3-2 loss for the Mets.“It was unfortunate,” Syndergaard said. “I wanted to stay in the game as long as I can. It’s frustrating after a long game last night.”AdvertisementSyndergaard provided six solid innings, but his night ended after 87 pitches because of an annoying discomfort. It was not a flare-up of the blister he dealt with last week. Instead, the fingernails on his right index and middle fingers pulled back as he pitched.Advertisement“I guess if I keep my fingernail too short, I get a blister,” Syndergaard said. “If it gets too long, the nail splits. So it’s about finding that happy medium.”His right hand appeared to be his only nemesis so far this season. Through three starts, he has allowed four runs (two earned) while striking out 20 and walking none over 19 innings.“Throughout the minor leagues, I had to deal with this problem quite a bit,” Syndergaard said. “I’m not really sure why it’s starting to flare up now, but as simple as this sounds, I’ve got to maintain my fingernails. An excuse to get a mani-pedi now.”Without Syndergaard, the Mets had to turn a taut game over the team’s drained bullpen. Michael Conforto, Lucas Duda and Jose Reyes, who walked twice, tried to lift the team. But Edgin, in his second inning of work, surrendered the game-winning double to Realmuto.“It’s just what we’re facing when you have a night like last night,” Mets Manager Terry Collins said.It was a lackluster defeat for a worn team. Yoenis Cespedes, who hit two home runs on Thursday before the flu plagued him the rest of the game, was out of the starting lineup but pinch-hit late. Neil Walker, who also played all of Thursday’s game, was off, too.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The bullpen was in worse shape. Addison Reed, who had pitched four of the previous five games, was off. So was Hansel Robles, who pitched four days in a row, and Josh Smoker, who tossed a career-high three innings on Thursday.Syndergaard understood the position the Mets were in and did some of his best work with runners on base before exiting the game. In the first inning, however, he was not helped by his defense. He gave up a leadoff single to Dee Gordon and then got a ground ball.AdvertisementBut the normally consistent Asdrubal Cabrera, a shortstop, made a bad throw to second baseman Wilmer Flores. Christian Yelich then hit a sacrifice fly to give the Marlins an early 1-0 lead.Syndergaard gave up another run in the fifth inning and was fortunate not to give up more. He surrendered three straight singles, including a bloop R.B.I. hit into shallow right field by Gordon to tie the game at 2.The Mets had several chances to turn base runners into runs, but they failed. They had the bases loaded with two outs in the second. They again had the bases loaded in the third with one out and scored only one run, on Conforto’s sacrifice fly.Before Syndergaard allowed the game-tying hit in the bottom of the fifth inning, Duda homered to center field to give the Mets a brief 2-1 lead. The Mets have homered a major-league-leading 21 times in 11 games.The Mets’ most impressive escape of the game came in the seventh because of Conforto’s strong arm. Syndergaard was relieved by Rafael Montero, who notched one out, allowed two singles and intentionally walked Realmuto to load the bases.Jerry Blevins came in to face Yelich and got him to line a ball to left field and Conforto, who has played well in limited action and started in Cespedes’s place. Conforto snared the ball and fired a strike home to Rene Rivera, who swipe-tagged Miguel Rojas’s elbow. Rojas was ruled out, and replays upheld the play despite a Marlins challenge.“As soon as the ball came off the bat, I knew I had the arm to get there,” Conforto said. “I had to go over the cutoff man, but that’s the lead late in the game, so I think you’ve got to go for it.”With the teams deadlocked in the later innings, it appeared destined for a second straight late-night affair. But just at the precipice of extra innings, Realmuto ended it. With Rojas aboard, Realmuto lashed a pitch from Edgin into deep right center, sending a weary Mets team off with a loss.A version of this article appears in print on April 15, 2017, on Page D5 of the New York edition with the headline: Asked Yet Again for Multiple Innings, Mets’ Bullpen Lets a Game Slip Away.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.