By PETER KERASOTISJULY 2, 2017
DAYTONA BEACH, Fla. — Like a plaintive wail, the roar of racecars rumbled in the distance. Instead of driving one of them, speeding around Daytona International Speedway, Dale Earnhardt sat in the passenger seat of a golf cart, signing autographs.“Whoooo-hoo!” one fan hollered, hopping away as he examined his newly signed hat.Earnhardt autographed about a half-dozen other items deep inside the speedway’s infield before the man behind the wheel of the golf cart slowly leaned on the accelerator.“Sorry,” he said. “Dale’s gotta go.”As the cart whirred away, attention shifted back to Saturday night’s Coke Zero 400.Sort of.At any other race, an early exit from Earnhardt’s No. 88 car would not be too big a deal. But when the face of the sport announces that he is making his last go-round — literally and figuratively — as a Nascar driver, the spotlight tends to linger.AdvertisementEver since Earnhardt announced he would retire after this season, Nascar has ensured his spot on center stage. Daytona International Speedway did its part, too, during what may have been Earnhardt’s last race at the track.AdvertisementIn honor of Earnhardt, who has been voted the fans’ favorite driver for 14 consecutive years, a video tribute played before the race. A huge No. 88 had been painted on the infield grass, and fans were prompted to give Earnhardt a standing ovation on Lap 88.Not that the spectators needed prodding. Many displayed signs that said, “Welcome to Dale-tona” or simply “Dale-tona.”Though Earnhardt was unquestionably the story here, there would be no storybook ending this time. In 2001, he produced a poignant victory in this same race, winning only five months after his father, Dale Earnhardt Sr., died when he  crashed into the wall on the final lap of the Daytona 500.Earnhardt Jr. won 16 other races at Daytona, including the Daytona 500 in 2004 and 2014, and the Coke Zero 400 in 2015. But it was the 2001 victory, he said, that he holds most dear.“It’s not the bigger race. It’s not the Daytona 500,” he said Friday. “But because of the circumstances, that one is pretty important.”Even though Earnhardt was the pole-sitter for Saturday’s race, he could not come through again. Early on, he clipped his car against the wall. On Lap 105, when he was in sixth and surging, a blown tire caused Kevin Harvick to spin out in front of him. The ensuing wreck was minor, but it ended his night.Earnhardt finished 32nd in the 40-car race, which was won by Ricky Stenhouse Jr. It was a typical result for the year Earnhardt has had. He is 22nd in the standings, well out of contention for a championship.AdvertisementHe has not won a race in two years, but his merchandise still outsells that of the other Nascar drivers, and his Twitter account has 2.18 million followers.For many fans, Earnhardt is a powerful link to the past. His grandfather Ralph Earnhardt raced in the 1950s and ’60s. His father — the man he still refers to as Daddy — was a seven-time Winston Cup champion and was Nascar’s most popular driver when he was killed.But it is not just the Earnhardt name that appeals to the sport’s followers. It is that the driver they call Junior never came across as pretentious at a time when other drivers started seeing themselves as a brand to be marketed. For sure, the Earnhardt name is a brand, and a powerful one, but it never felt that way with Junior.Instead, he came across as a neighborhood mechanic. In fact, early in his adult life, he lived in a double-wide trailer and worked on cars at his father’s Chevrolet dealership in North Carolina, mostly doing oil changes and brake jobs.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Even now, Earnhardt describes himself on his Twitter account as a “Retired automotive service mechanic. Former backup fullback for Mooresville Blue Devils varsity soccer. Aspiring BBQ Pitmaster. Friends, Music, Beer!”Some might wonder why, at 42, he is retiring. The answer, perhaps, is that 42 is old in Earnhardt years. His grandfather died of a heart attack at 45, 13 months before he was born. His father died at 49. For racecar drivers, there are no guaranteed tomorrows.There have also been health issues. He has sustained two concussions in the past four years, the second one sidelining him for about half of last season.At the same time, Earnhardt has not entirely shut his car door. He left it slightly open to the possibility of racing in select events in the Monster Energy Cup Series, Nascar’s top circuit. More likely, though, he said, he will dabble in the second-tier Xfinity Series with the team he owns, JR Motorsports.It will not be the same. Without him as a constant presence, nothing about Nascar will be.A version of this article appears in print on July 3, 2017, on Page D1 of the New York edition with the headline: Downshifting Into Daytona.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.