By WALLACE MATTHEWSJUNE 30, 2017
His team was six games below .500, 10 ½ games behind the division leader and about to embark on a mini-homestand before heading out on the road again, and yet in his periodic state-of-the-team news conference, Mets General Manager Sandy Alderson was positively jocular Friday evening.Asked about the injury status of one of his main pitchers, Matt Harvey, Alderson cracked, “You mean where is he, other than on Page Six?,” referencing a New York tabloid gossip column.And when asked to describe the Mets’ level of interest in a reunion with Bartolo Colon, who has been let loose by the Atlanta Braves, Alderson joked that he had asked the Braves for a price “on their surplus inventory of Bartolo bobbleheads.”But that is what winning five of six games on the road will do for a general manager’s mood. That, along with the prospect of playing three games at home against the Philadelphia Phillies, who have the worst record in the majors.AdvertisementAnd if the pregame session was Alderson’s warm-up act, one can only imagine what his late show was like following the Mets’ 2-1 win over the Phillies behind yet another outstanding pitching performance by Jacob deGrom.AdvertisementThe Mets’ playoff chances might still be a long shot — even with the Washington Nationals losing in St. Louis, the Mets remain nine and a half games back in the division and nine games out of the second National League wild-card spot — but as Alderson said before the game: “I think we feel differently about ourselves than we did two weeks ago.”The Mets and Alderson can continue to feel that way because of deGrom, who limited the Phillies to one run on three hits while striking out 12 over seven innings. DeGrom carried a no-hitter into the fifth, only to see it end when center fielder Curtis Granderson lost a fly ball off the bat of Andrew Knapp in the twilight.It was scored a triple, and deGrom lost his shutout when the next hitter, Ty Kelly, singled. At the end of the inning, deGrom angrily fired his glove at a water cooler in the dugout.“I got to get that out right there,” deGrom, now 8-3 with a 3.55 earned run average, said afterward. “Granderson lost the ball and that happens. But I got to be able to get that out right there. I left a fastball right down the middle. It was just a bad pitch on my part and I was very frustrated.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Granderson said: “Can’t catch what you can’t see. There’s a time every night where the ball goes up and you just hope it’s not hit to you. It’s called twilight.”As for the Mets’ offense, it produced a second-inning run on Granderson’s infield single that came at the end of a 10-pitch at-bat, and a fourth-inning run when Travis d’Arnaud singled in Jose Reyes, who had tripled off the wall in right-center.The result, as Alderson would be happy to tell you, was the Mets’ sixth win in their past seven games following what appeared to be a disastrous series in Los Angeles, where they were swept in four games by the Dodgers and outscored, 36-11.“I think going into L.A. and getting our teeth kicked in was a kind of wake-up call,” deGrom said. “Let’s go. If we’re going to do it, we’re running out of time.”AdvertisementAlderson saw parallels to last season, when the Mets pulled off a second-half 27-13 run to transform themselves from a sub-.500 club to a playoff team, if only for one wild-card game. Last week, they followed their debacle in Los Angeles with a three-game sweep of the Giants.“Last year we turned it around in San Francisco,” Alderson noted. “And I think that we have to be a little more optimistic after the last six days than we were coming out of Los Angeles. And I think it’s fair for us to feel that way.”INSIDE PITCHManager Terry Collins hinted it was likely that outfielder Michael Conforto, sidelined for the past five days after being hit by a pitch Sunday in San Francisco, would be placed on the disabled list when the Mets need to open up a roster spot to reactivate Zack Wheeler in time to start Saturday’s game.A version of this article appears in print on July 1, 2017, on Page D4 of the New York edition with the headline: Alderson’s Mood Brightens, and So Do Mets’ Hopes.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.