AdvertisementSupported bySports BriefingBy The Associated PressThe N.F.L. disciplined the Giants and Coach Ben McAdoo on Tuesday because McAdoo used a walkie-talkie for about five plays during a 10-7 win over the Dallas Cowboys on Dec. 11.The league fined the Giants $150,000, fined McAdoo $50,000 and moved the team’s fourth-round pick in next year’s draft to the end of the round.“It was a clear violation of the rules, and we accept full responsibility and the penalty,” the Giants said in a statement.McAdoo, a rookie coach, used the walkie-talkie early in the fourth quarter after his communications system malfunctioned.The league prohibits the use of two-way radios by coaches to communicate plays during a game. The drive on which McAdoo used the walkie-talkie ended in a Dallas interception.RAIDERS LEAD PRO BOWL SELECTIONS The Oakland Raiders, who lead the A.F.C. West, had seven players selected for the Pro Bowl, the most of any team. Six members of the Atlanta Falcons were selected, most among N.F.C. teams. The Falcons lead the N.F.C. South.New England Patriots quarterback Tom Brady was picked for the 12th time, despite having missed the first four games of the season. Cleveland Browns offensive tackle Joe Thomas and Arizona Cardinals wide receiver Larry Fitzgerald were selected for the 10th time.Four Giants players were selected, including wide receiver Odell Beckham Jr. The Jets had none.HEARING FOR HERNANDEZ The lone survivor of a 2012 double homicide in Boston identified the former New England Patriots tight end Aaron Hernandez as the triggerman during a pretrial hearing.BLUE JACKETS WIN 10TH IN A ROW Cam Atkinson had two goals and scored in a shootout, helping the host Columbus Blue Jackets beat the Los Angeles Kings, 3-2, for their 10th straight victory, setting a team record.Curtis McElhinney made 44 saves, and Sam Gagne scored the decider in the shootout, keeping Columbus unbeaten since Nov. 26.The Jackets, who have points in 12 straight games, improved to 21-5-4 and will host the Stanley Cup champion Pittsburgh Penguins on Thursday night with a chance to jump into first place in the brutally competitive Metropolitan Division.AROUND THE N.H.L. Devan Dubnyk made 18 saves for his N.H.L.-leading fifth shutout this season, and the host Minnesota Wild beat the Colorado Avalanche, 2-0, for their eighth straight victory. The Florida Panthers beat the visiting Buffalo Sabres, 4-3, and Jaromir Jagr had three assists to pull into a tie for second place on the N.H.L.’s career points list. James Neal scored twice in the first period, Juuse Saros stopped 27 shots and the Nashville Predators beat the host Devils, 5-1. Thomas Greiss stopped 48 shots, Anders Lee scored twice and had an assist, and the Islanders beat the host Boston Bruins, 4-2, to end a five-game losing streak.YANKEES TRADE A PITCHER The Yankees traded pitcher Nick Goody to the Cleveland Indians for a player to be named or $50,000.The teams said the swap must be completed by May 5.Goody, a 25-year-old right-hander, had a 4.66 E.R.A. in 27 relief appearances for the Yankees last season, striking out 34 in 29 innings.The longtime TNT broadcaster Craig Sager was remembered for his love of family, sports and colorful attire at a memorial service in Atlanta that produced laughs and tears.Among those attending the service were San Antonio Spurs Coach Gregg Popovich, and Ernie Johnson and Reggie Miller, who worked with Sager at TNT.The Rev. Randy Mickler led the service. Mickler noted he decided against wearing his black robe and instead wore a purple shirt and colorful jacket he said would have made Sager “extremely proud and pleased,” referring to Sager’s flair with his wardrobe.Sager, 65, died Thursday following a two-year fight with acute myeloid leukemia.SPURS END ROCKETS’ STREAK Patty Mills hit a 3-pointer with 12.9 seconds left to lift the San Antonio Spurs over the visiting Houston Rockets, 102-100. The loss ended Houston’s 10-game winning streak.A 3-point attempt by the Rockets’ James Harden bounced off the rim at the buzzer. Harden finished with 31 points, 10 rebounds and 7 assists.The victory was San Antonio’s fifth straight. Kawhi Leonard led the Spurs with 21 points.Advertisement