By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSDEC. 1, 2016
Chapecoense, the Brazilian soccer club that lost 19 players, many of its coaches and much of its support staff in a plane crash in the mountains of Colombia that killed 71 people this week, will try to take the field again to honor the memories of those it has lost.“In the memory of those who died and to honor their families, we will rebuild this club from scratch so it is even stronger,” said Cecilio Hans, a club director.Six players and a handful of support staff members were not on board when the team’s plane crashed. Six people survived, including three players.Other clubs have offered to lend players to Chapecoense, and a proposal would guarantee the club a place in the top division for three years.AdvertisementIvan Tozzo, Chapecoense’s acting president, said Wednesday that the club hoped to play a Dec. 11 match using a team made up mostly of junior players.AdvertisementGoalkeeper Marcelo Boeck said he and other players were reconsidering plans to leave the club.“We hope we can help rebuild in the memory of our team,” he said.TORONTO REACHES M.L.S. CUP Benoit Cheyrou and Tosaint Ricketts scored two minutes apart in extra time, and Toronto F.C. advanced to the M.L.S. Cup final by defeating the visiting Montreal Impact, 5-2, for a 7-5 aggregate victory.It took extra time and 12 goals to decide the two-leg Eastern Conference final. Toronto will be the first Canadian team to play for the title when it hosts Seattle on Dec. 10 in the M.L.S. championship game.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Russell Westbrook scored 14 of his 35 points in overtime and posted his fourth straight triple-double as Oklahoma City beat visiting Washington, 126-115.Westbrook added 14 rebounds and 11 assists for his ninth triple-double of the season and the 46th of his career. The Thunder have won all four games during his triple-double streak, and he heads into December averaging a triple-double on the season.WIPING THE FLOOR The Philadelphia 76ers’ home game against the Sacramento Kings was postponed because of condensation that turned the court into a slippery hazard. Unseasonably warm and humid weather coupled with the presence of the Philadelphia Flyers’ ice under the court was blamed for the problem.Minnesota Coach Mike Zimmer had emergency eye surgery, and it was unclear if he would be on the sideline for Thursday’s game against Dallas.AdvertisementVikings General Manager Rick Spielman said he had met with coaches to discuss a contingency plan in case Zimmer could not coach against the Cowboys.Zimmer had an operation about a month ago to repair a torn retina. He experienced vision trouble before an Oct. 31 game at Chicago and scratched the eye inadvertently during the game.Anders Lee scored a tiebreaking goal with 27 seconds remaining to lift the Islanders over the visiting Pittsburgh Penguins, 5-3, after they had surrendered a three-goal lead in the third period.Johnny Boychuk, Jason Chimera and Casey Cizikas scored as the Islanders built a 3-0 lead.Lee put the Islanders back up when he deflected a slap shot from Thomas Hickey. Nikolay Kulemin scored into an empty net off the ensuing face-off.A judge ruled in favor of a whistle-blower claim brought against Penn State by the former assistant football coach Mike McQueary. That adds $5 million to the $7.3 million a jury had already awarded him over the university’s treatment of him after Jerry Sandusky’s arrest in a child sexual abuse case.O. G. Anunoby scored 16 points, and No. 13 Indiana beat No. 3 North Carolina, 76-67, in Bloomington, Ind. Justin Jackson had 21 points for the Tar Heels.A version of this article appears in print on December 1, 2016, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: Club Vows to Rebuild After Plane Crash.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.