AdvertisementSupported byNotre Dame 61, Wisconsin 56 | East RegionalBy Ben ShpigelPHILADELPHIA — A peculiar smell greeted the Notre Dame basketball team Thursday when it got off its bus. The scent, an industrial bouquet of exhaust and grime, offended the noses of players hailing from the Midwest and farther afield. To which guard Matt Farrell, a proud New Jersey native, retorted: “We’re right by the interstate. Get used to it.”That ribbon of highway, Interstate 95, courses through Notre Dame’s march to a second consecutive regional final. It flows behind Wells Fargo Center, where the Fighting Irish survived a frenzied final minute to edge Wisconsin, 61-56, and pulses not far from Brooklyn, where last weekend they swatted two lower seeds. It also flavors a roster loaded with players from this mid-Atlantic corridor, and by design. Their coach, Mike Brey, from suburban Washington himself, relishes recruiting players who have what he calls an I-95 edge — a certain grittiness, a mental toughness. The farther east Notre Dame plays, the stronger its fortitude, and it permeates the entire team. On Friday, no one embodied that more than the pride of Mishawka, Ind., guard Demetrius Jackson, who offset an early display of horrific shooting with a remarkable final 19 seconds: 6 points and 2 steals.“We took our punches and we just kind of got back up,” said Jackson, who finished with 16 points on 6-of-18 shooting. “Kept fighting, kept believing.” He kept believing through a 1-for-7 first half, and when Wisconsin took a 5-point lead with three minutes left, and when Vitto Brown sank a tiebreaking 3-pointer that put the Badgers ahead by 56-53. Twenty-seven seconds remained.Jackson sliced through the defense for a layup. Down by 1.Off a trap in the Wisconsin backcourt, Jackson swiped the ball from Nigel Hayes, and he dropped it in. Up by 1.After two free throws by V. J. Beachem, who led Notre Dame with 19 points, Jackson poked the ball away from Bronson Koenig, drawing a foul. He made both shots, sealing a matchup in the East Regional final Sunday against North Carolina or Indiana. “You blink your eyes, and the next thing you know, Jackson’s shooting two free throws, and now we’re down 5, and now we’re going home,” Hayes said, adding, “The farther you go, the more important the game, the bigger risk you run, and if you don’t come out the winner, it gets harder and harder and tougher to deal with.”Given how last weekend’s games unfolded for Notre Dame (24-11) and Wisconsin (22-13), a dramatic finish seemed preordained. Their four victories had been by a total of 15 points, and the teams reached this round because of late baskets — a tap-in with 1.5 seconds left for the Irish, a buzzer-beating 3-pointer for Wisconsin.At halftime, Notre Dame trailed by 23-19, a deficit not nearly as daunting as the one the Irish had faced midway through their opening-round victory over Michigan. Behind by 12, the Irish absorbed a vocal pummeling from Brey, who, according to the longtime assistant Rod Balanis, bellowed something to the effect of: “You guys are really nice guys. I love you to death. You do everything I ask, your grades are good, you don’t get in trouble. But can you freaking get in a stance and freaking guard these guys for 20 minutes?”Humbled and inspired, the Irish held Michigan to 22 second-half points. This time, they entered the locker room and ... laughed.“’God, we can’t play any worse,” Brey told his team. “I said, ‘We’ll play better.’ ”Starting around the 12-minute mark — three minutes after Brey, leaping in excitement, pulled a calf muscle — he started telling coaches and players on the bench: “They’re going to feel us coming. We’re coming.”Unlike last season’s team, whose coaches surveyed the roster and detected a team of championship timbre, these Irish needed time to evolve. An uneven November, marred by defeats by Monmouth and Alabama, left them chastened. But also prepared to handle again the rigors of March.After halftime, the Irish continued struggling to contain the freshman forward Ethan Happ, whose superior positioning in the paint produced a team-high 12 rebounds and 14 points. Their first half had been sloppier than a 3-year-old eating spaghetti, stained by shot-clock violations and 24.1 percent shooting. Notre Dame’s stagnant ball movement gave way to sharper passing, and after taking their first lead in nearly 30 minutes at the 8:50 mark, the Irish never trailed by more than 5 again. “Obviously this is going to sting for a long time,” said Wisconsin Coach Greg Gard, whose Badgers, after entering Friday averaging 10.9 turnovers, among the lower rates in the nation, committed 17 on Friday. “I don’t know if there’s a program in the country that prides itself more on taking care of the ball and valuing every possession more than Wisconsin. I don’t know if there’s anybody that works on it more than we do.” On Monday, Brey noticed that a website had rated Notre Dame as the 16th-best team remaining. Of 16 teams. “But I thought we were the toughest team, the No. 1 team in toughness,” Brey said. “And I think it’s played itself out again.”And now Notre Dame is one of eight teams left, with two more days to savor the sweet smell of victory.Advertisement