By TOM SPOUSTAMARCH 25, 2016
SARASOTA, Fla. —  Ivan Nova walked off the mound Friday, a lonely trudge toward the dugout after an exasperating four and two-thirds innings that might have lost him the last spot in the Yankees’ starting rotation to C. C. Sabathia.Nova, a right-hander, fell behind in counts and said he had lost control of his fastball. Three of the five hits he allowed to the Baltimore Orioles were home runs — he had not given up one in four previous starts — and all were headed over the wall at the crack of the bat.He gave up six runs (five earned), struck out five, issued two walks and was called for a balk. The only positives were that he did not hit a batter or throw a wild pitch in a game won by the Orioles, 11-10, in 10 innings.With nine days remaining until opening day, Nova could not have scripted a worse time for a sloppy start. And he knew it.Advertisement“I put myself in a really bad position right now, if you look at the numbers,” he said. “Obviously they have to make the decision, but sometimes you have to help them. I didn’t help myself today. I think I’ll have one more time out there. We’ll see what happens.”AdvertisementHe and Sabathia, a left-hander, have been locked in a duel to become the fifth starter, and until Friday it looked like a tight race. Sabathia had pitched five innings Thursday against the Tampa Bay Rays, allowing two runs and six hits while striking out four and walking one.Sabathia and Nova are expected to have one more start each to sway Manager Joe Girardi, whose tone afterward suggested that Nova had not lost the job yet.“We’re still evaluating,” Girardi said. “We’re going to evaluate all the way through. That’s the only fair way to do it.”Nova’s E.R.A. stands at 5.50 through five starts. He has pitched 18 innings and allowed 18 hits and 12 runs (11 earned) with 13 strikeouts.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“He was behind a lot today; that’s where he got in trouble,” Girardi said. “The balls they hit were fastballs. He didn’t have as many first-pitch strikes as he’s had and put himself in some bad counts.”Sabathia has a 5.84 E.R.A. in four starts, having worked 12 1/3 innings and allowed 17 hits and 12 runs (eight earned) with eight strikeouts.“In this position, this is more frustrating,” Nova said. “You know it’s a tight race. Sabathia is a guy with a lot of mileage on his arm, and it’s a really good, tight competition, but you’ve got to go out there and do your job no matter who you’re competing against.”Nova added: “I’m not thinking about the bullpen yet. I’ve got one more start, and we’ll see what happens after that.”AdvertisementSabathia’s legacy as a Yankee and his stature in the clubhouse might also factor into the decision. Girardi called the choice between Nova and Sabathia the most important one he had to make at this point in camp.“We don’t win a World Series without C. C.,” Girardi said before the game. “We don’t get to all those playoffs without C. C. C. C. led us in innings last year.“C. C.’s meant so much to this club. And Nova’s been here. It’s something that has to be well thought out. The decision has to be made but it’s not a permanent decision. I have the utmost respect for what C. C. has done in his career, what he’s done for us. So this is a tough decision.”A version of this article appears in print on March 26, 2016, on Page D7 of the New York edition with the headline: Poor Outing Puts Nova in Bind With Yankees.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.