By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSMARCH 26, 2016
The Washington Capitals got a missing piece back, and it helped them move within grasping distance of the Presidents’ Trophy — and the top seed when the playoffs start next month.Defenseman John Carlson scored 2 minutes 17 seconds into overtime in his return to the lineup, Braden Holtby made 22 saves, and the Capitals all but clinched the N.H.L.’s best record in the regular season with a 1-0 victory over the Devils on Friday night in Newark.“He looked a lot more like he did the first stint of the year,” Holtby said after Carlson played for the first time since Feb. 24, ending his second injury layoff this season.The win gave Washington 111 points. On Saturday, they can clinch the Presidents’ Trophy, which goes to the team that finishes with the most points during the regular season, if they earn a point against St. Louis or if Dallas loses. The Capitals last won the trophy in 2009-10.AdvertisementOn the winning goal, Carlson took a pass from Jason Chimera and ripped a shot from the right circle past Scott Wedgewood.Advertisement“It was a quick play,” said Wedgewood, whose shutout streak was stopped at 159:34. “I saw him walk down the wall, and I had my eye on him and I tried to follow the pass. He put it in a good spot. Take nothing away from him, but it would have been nice to keep them off the board for a shootout opportunity.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Wedgewood, who shut out Pittsburgh on Thursday night, has given up two goals in three N.H.L. starts. He stopped 25 shots Friday.Wedgewood made his N.H.L. debut against Columbus on Sunday and gave up a goal to Jared Boll at 2:43 of the second period in a 2-1 win. He shut out the Penguins, 3-0, and blanked the Capitals until overtime.“He’s played great since he got here,” Devils forward Kyle Palmieri said. “Hopefully he can keep that going. It makes it a lot harder on other teams. They come in and see that he’s only had three N.H.L. games, and they think it’s going to be point night. He goes out and surprises them.”BLUES 4, CANUCKS 0 Brian Elliott made 15 saves for his third straight shutout, and host St. Louis clinched a playoff spot and tied Dallas for the Central Division lead.Robby Fabbri had a goal and an assist; Kyle Brodziak, Carl Gunnarsson and Joel Edmundson also scored; and Paul Stastny had two assists.A version of this article appears in print on March 26, 2016, on Page D2 of the New York edition with the headline: Capitals Top Devils and Move Closer to Presidents’ Trophy.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.