By TIM ROHANMARCH 24, 2016
TAMPA, Fla. —  Alex Rodriguez was driving with his two young daughters on Wednesday when they asked him a complicated but appropriate question: Was he retiring?Earlier in the day, Rodriguez had told an ESPN New York reporter that he would stop playing when his contract with the Yankees expired after the 2017 season. The news made headlines, but since then Rodriguez has been sending a message that a final decision has not been made.Rodriguez did not provide any more clarity when he held a five-minute news conference on Thursday.Even by Rodriguez’s standards, it was an awkward and confusing event.In one moment, he said, “I stand by my comments.” The next moment he said that when his contract expired, he had “a right to make a decision then, too.” At this moment, he said, he felt as if he would retire after the 2017 season, when he would be 42. But he reserved the right to change his mind.Advertisement“I’m having a lot of fun,” Rodriguez said. “For the first time in a long time, I have wind at my back. It’s a lot more fun than having it right in my face. A lot more fun running downhill than uphill.”AdvertisementAfter being criticized for years for his connection to performance-enhancing drugs, Rodriguez finally built up some good will among fans last season, hitting 33 home runs. That is perhaps why the news conference appeared hard for him, as he tried to avoid controversy but keep his options open.As the first question was being asked, Rodriguez interrupted and yelled three greetings to Randy Levine, the team’s president, who was walking by. Rodriguez tried to defuse the tension, joking about his age and hip operations and saying he was perpetually “day to day.” He said he was not sure he could make a trip to Dunedin, Fla., less than an hour away.Earlier in the day, as the news cycle continued churning and Rodriguez’s retirement remained a hot topic, he had approached Manager Joe Girardi, and, according to Girardi, asked, “Why is it news that a guy that’s 42 might retire?”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.There was that qualifier: “might.”When pressed, Rodriguez deftly avoided straight answers.“Those are such hypotheticals,” he said when asked whether it would affect his decision in two years if he had a chance to break Barry Bonds’s career home run record.“I cannot answer that,” Rodriguez said when asked what he would do if the Yankees offered him another contract in two years. Then he repeated his joke about Dunedin.Rodriguez even suggested that being honest about his own uncertainty about retirement was a sign that he had matured.“Look,” Rodriguez said, “if you guys asked me six or seven years ago, maybe I would’ve said something that was untruthful or maybe what you guys wanted to hear.”With that, Rodriguez abruptly ended the news conference, patting the ESPN New York reporter who had broken the story on the back as he left.When Rodriguez came to bat for the first time Thursday, Jameis Winston, the Tampa Bay Buccaneers’ starting quarterback, who had thrown out the first pitch, leaned over to chat with him. As Rodriguez walked to the plate, the crowd cheered him, except for one fan who jeered him above the din.Advertisement“Ster-oids,” the man yelled, in a singsong manner. “Ster-oids!”INSIDE PITCHAcross the state, the Mets lost to the Houston Astros, 8-5, as Matt Harvey gave up six runs in three innings. It did not help Harvey that Yoenis Cespedes made a defensive gaffe that allowed an inside-the-park home run. When Houston’s A. J. Reed hit a fly ball to center field, Cespedes saw the ball disappear underneath padding on the center-field wall and threw up his hands, calling for play to stop. The ball was still in play, though, and Reed trotted home easily. Video of the play, during which the second-base umpire C. B. Bucknor showed Cespedes the ball, quickly spread on the Internet.A version of this article appears in print on March 25, 2016, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: After Retirement Report, Rodriguez Plays Coy on Questions About His Future.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »