By MELISSA HOPPERTMARCH 25, 2016
After Art Sherman, the 79-year-old trainer of the 2014 Kentucky Derby and Preakness Stakes winner California Chrome, arrived in Dubai, United Arab Emirates, from Southern California on Monday, he tried his best to sleep, but it was of no use.He wanted to lay eyes on his prized colt, who had been overseas with Sherman’s son Alan since January in preparation for Saturday’s $10 million Dubai World Cup, the world’s richest horse race. So he showered, shaved and headed to Meydan Racecourse.“I got up to the barn, and I yelled at him,” Sherman said. “I said, ‘Hey, Chrome, what are you doing?’ He kind of looked at me and started making that little noise that he does.”Sherman took advantage of their alone time, sitting with him and feeding him the same cookies he has devoured since he was young and remarking on how strong he looked. “I said, Either I’m getting smaller or he’s getting bigger,” Sherman said.AdvertisementThe consensus in Dubai is that California Chrome, who finished second in last year’s Dubai World Cup and is this year’s favorite, looks more powerful than ever at age 5. If he wins on Saturday, California Chrome will become the leading thoroughbred in career earnings, with $12.5 million.Advertisement“I watched him grow into the individual he is, since he’s been a 2-year-old, and now he’s 5, and I said, ‘Wow, what a big change,’ ” Sherman said. “He looks just absolutely terrific and is training great.”California Chrome, the shiny chestnut colt with the signature white blaze, charmed rugged horsemen and casual fans alike during a thrilling Triple Crown run that ended with a thud when he finished fourth in the Belmont Stakes after getting banged up coming out of the starting gate. The fairy tale also ended for his Everyman owners, Perry and Denise Martin and Steve and Carolyn Coburn, who had endeared themselves to many when they hit the jackpot with their very first foal. After the Belmont, Coburn ridiculed the connections of the winner, Tonalist, for taking “the coward’s way out” and entering him in only one Triple Crown race.After last year’s trip to Dubai, California Chrome headed to England for a shot at the Group I Prince of Wales’s Stakes at Royal Ascot, but he was scratched two days before the race with an injury that was later determined to be a bruised cannon bone. In July, Taylor Made Farm in Kentucky bought the Coburns’ share in California Chrome, with the intent to stand him at stud in 2017, and helped nurse him back to health. The colt returned to the racetrack in January, winning the Grade II San Pasqual Stakes at Santa Anita Park, and followed that with a victory at Meydan in a prep race for the World Cup.Through all the ups and downs, California Chrome has amassed quite a fan club, whose members call themselves Chromies. Now that club has an international flavor.“He’s got a fan base that you cannot believe, all over the world,” Sherman said. “It is unbelievable. The day he won here, for a prep race, the people here gave him a standing ovation, and I said: ‘Wow. They love this horse.’ It is cool, and it makes you feel good.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.During his time in Dubai, California Chrome has routinely come out at 7 a.m. to train, and fans from all over the world gather three or four deep just to catch a glimpse of the 2014 Horse of the Year.The jockey Victor Espinoza, who was able to capture the elusive Triple Crown a year later with American Pharoah, was among California Chrome’s many fans Thursday. He escorted him to the track, even though he does not ride him in the mornings, and walked him back to the barn when he was finished. He left his side only to do a quick interview with a Russian news outlet.As he did during his Triple Crown run, California Chrome seems to thrive on the attention. He stopped to take in the crowd and pose for the cameras, all while receiving pets from Team Chrome. “You know, the horse just loves everybody that’s attached to him,” Sherman said. “He just seems to blossom when they’re around. You have to be there to see it. You’d think, Wow, he looks part human.”AdvertisementAlso representing the United States in the field of 12 are the Grade I winners Mshawish, Hoppertunity, Keen Ice and Frosted, who is owned by Godolphin, the breeding and racing stable founded by Sheikh Mohammed bin Rashid al-Maktoum. Despite being thought of as California Chrome’s main competition, Frosted has been mostly out of sight, training at Marmoom, Sheikh Mohammed’s private training complex on the outskirts of Dubai.Duncan Taylor, president and chief executive of Taylor Made, said he was enjoying the experience and not worrying about the next step for California Chrome, although the ultimate goal is the Breeders’ Cup Classic in November.“It is quite an experience to be over here with all the different countries represented,” Taylor said. “It really gives you a sense of just how awesome the horse business is, and how many people from all around the world are involved.”No matter what happens Saturday, California Chrome’s fans, from California to Dubai, will celebrate his unusual journey, one that has kept him on the racetrack well beyond the Belmont.“He’s got fanfare like I’ve never seen for a horse,” Sherman said. “I’ve been around for a long time, and I know American Pharaoh had a great following, but I think the Chromies are different. It’s a different group of people — you know what I mean — and he’s probably their hero.”Amanda Duckworth contributed reporting from Dubai.A version of this article appears in print on March 26, 2016, on Page D6 of the New York edition with the headline: A Global Presence Deepens Over Time .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.