By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSNOV. 18, 2016
Josh Hart of third-ranked Villanova scored a career-high 30 points, including six 3-pointers, to lead the Wildcats to a 96-77 victory over Wake Forest. Villanova (4-0) advanced to the final of the Charleston Classic in South Carolina, slowing a Demon Deacons offense that had scored 103 points a day earlier.Hart, a senior preseason all-American, hit 11 of 14 shots and added four rebounds, three steals and two assists.“We lost by 20,” Wake Forest Coach Danny Manning said. “It was a beat-down.”AROUND THE N.C.A.A.  The No. 14 Syracuse women (3-0) forced 34 turnovers in a 78-60 victory over host Stony Brook (0-3). • Andrew White scored 18 points as the Syracuse men (3-0), ranked 18th, defeated visiting Monmouth (1-2), 71-50. • Christian Sengfelder made four 3-pointers and scored 18 points in leading host Fordham (2-1) to a 68-55 victory over Fairleigh Dickinson (1-2). • Georgia State led host Purdue, the nation’s No. 15 team, by 12 points with 7:08 left, only for the Boilermakers (2-1) to score the game’s last 20 points and win, 64-56.Matt Calvert returned from taking a slap shot to his forehead that required about 30 stitches and scored a short-handed, tiebreaking goal in the third period to lift the Columbus Blue Jackets to a franchise-record seventh straight home win, 4-2, over the Rangers. Michael Grabner and Mika Zibanejad scored for the Rangers.AdvertisementSALARY CUT The National Women’s Hockey League is slashing its players’ salaries, to an undisclosed extent, in a cost-cutting measure. “If we want to exist and we want to save the season,” Commissioner Dani Rylan said during a conference call with reporters, “we have to make the appropriate decisions to do so.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.ISLANDERS LOSE AGAIN Kris Letang scored 1 minute 24 seconds into overtime, helping the visiting Pittsburgh Penguins beat the last-place Islanders, 3-2.AdvertisementThe Yankees released the utility player Dustin Ackley and announced that the injured pitcher Nathan Eovaldi had been designated for assignment, as were pitchers Nick Rumbelow and Joe Mantiply. The team also traded the left-hander James Pazos to the Seattle Mariners for the minor league right-hander Zack Littell.TWINS DROP PLOUFFE The Minnesota Twins cut third baseman Trevor Plouffe, who cleared waivers and elected to become a free agent. Plouffe, 30, hit .247 with 96 home runs and 357 R.B.I. in seven seasons with the Twins.The former Los Angeles Clippers owner Donald Sterling has dropped an appeal of a lawsuit that claimed the N.B.A., his wife and others conspired to illegally sell the team for $2 billion. Sterling’s lawyer, Bobby Samini, said he had filed a request to have the federal case dismissed. Samini said that a settlement had been reached and that Sterling was “very happy with the outcome.” The lawyer for his wife, Shelly Sterling, said it was a capitulation.NETS FALL Russell Westbrook had 30 points, 13 assists and 11 rebounds, and the Oklahoma City Thunder defeated the Nets, 124-105. Brook Lopez, who led the Nets with 22 points, equaled his career high for a game by making four 3-pointers in the first quarter.The top-ranked Lydia Ko shot a 10-under-par 62 to take a three-stroke lead in a season-ending tournament in Naples, Fla. Ko had 11 birdies and a bogey to score a 12-under 132. Ryann O’Toole (67) and So Yeon Ryu (68) were tied for second. “I think I was putting good,” Ko said, “so if I was within a distance that I felt comfortable, I felt like, ‘Hey, I could hole this.’”A version of this article appears in print on November 19, 2016, on Page D2 of the New York edition with the headline: Villanova Stays Undefeated; Hart Scores 30.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.