By CHRIS GORDONJUNE 10, 2016
PITTSBURGH — On Friday morning, the San Jose Sharks hopped on a charter flight from here to their home base in Silicon Valley, happy to have found a way to keep their championship hopes alive.Down by three games to one in the Stanley Cup finals, the Sharks defeated the Pittsburgh Penguins, 4-2, in Game 5 on Thursday night.“We found a way to stay alive and bring it back to San Jose,” Sharks Coach Peter DeBoer said after the game.The Sharks did find a way to win, but they may not want to repeat their strategy in Game 6 on Sunday. They allowed 46 shots in Game 5 and managed only 22 of their own. The Sharks were saved by a transcendent showing from goaltender Martin Jones, who made 44 saves. After a 40-save performance in Game 3, which the Sharks won in overtime at home, Jones is the first goalie since the N.H.L. expanded from six to 12 teams in 1967 to have multiple 40-save victories in the Cup finals.Advertisement“He’s our best player every night,” defenseman Marc-Edouard Vlasic said Thursday night.Modest and unassuming, Jones said little after the game to suggest that he had done exceptional work in perhaps the biggest game of his life.Asked if he had played his best game of the playoffs, he said: “I don’t know. It’s hard to say.”Asked whether a goaltender takes pride in staving off elimination, he hesitantly acknowledged that a game that saved his team’s season in June was different from one played in October.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Undrafted out of junior hockey, Jones earned a spot at the Los Angeles Kings’ rookie camp in 2008 as a free-agent invitee. Those players rarely do much but fill space on a roster with the team’s top prospects.But Jones shined and was summoned to the team’s main training camp. Once again, he impressed the Kings, who signed him to an entry-level contract, which went into effect when Jones turned professional in 2010.AdvertisementAfter toiling in the minor leagues for a few seasons, Jones became the backup to Jonathan Quick during the Kings’ championship run in 2014. He is the only current Sharks player with his name on the Stanley Cup.Traded twice last summer, eventually to San Jose, Jones, 26, became a starting goaltender for the first time in the N.H.L. this season. He finished with 37 wins, the third most in the league. One spot ahead of him was Quick, his old mentor.“A lot of people unfortunately don’t get to see him, us being on the West Coast,” Sharks forward Logan Couture said after Game 5. “He’s been unbelievable for us.”Jones faced Quick in the first round of these playoffs as the Sharks dispatched the Kings in five games.“He’s one of the best playoff goalies around,” Jones said of Quick. “That’s something you try to emulate.”So far, Jones has done a fine imitation of Quick, posting a .933 save percentage in the finals.On Thursday night, the Sharks jumped to 2-0 lead less than three minutes into the game, only to falter. Evgeni Malkin was able to put the Penguins on the board with a fantastic shot on the power play 4 minutes 44 seconds into the first period. Just 22 seconds later, Pittsburgh’s Carl Hagelin tied the game on a deflection after a misplay by the Sharks’ defense.Jones faced another 40 shots over nearly 55 minutes of play after the Penguins’ second goal. None of them got past him. Once San Jose retook the lead with a little more than five minutes left in the first period, they held it for good.But the Sharks, who are down by three games to two in the finals, are still one game away from elimination, and Jones cannot do it all. For San Jose to come back from the hole it dug itself, it will need to possess the puck more. The Penguins have outshot the Sharks in four of five games in the finals.Advertisement“We have to do a better job of taking those chances away going forward,” said Justin Braun, who, with Vlasic, forms the Sharks’ shutdown defense pair.Until Game 5, San Jose had not played with a lead in the championship round. But help may be coming.Through the first four games of the series, most of San Jose’s offensive stars — Couture, the postseason leader in points; Joe Pavelski, the playoffs’ leading goal producer; and Brent Burns, perhaps the league’s best offensive defenseman — had failed to score a goal. All three put the puck in the net Thursday, with Couture adding two assists.“We have to continue to build on that,” DeBoer said.An article in some editions on Saturday about San Jose Sharks goaltender Martin Jones referred incorrectly to the playoff performances of his teammates Logan Couture and Joe Pavelski. Couture was the postseason leader in points and Pavelski was the leader in goals, not the other way around.A version of this article appears in print on June 11, 2016, on Page D4 of the New York edition with the headline: Humble Shield Protects the Sharks’ Net.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.