By TOM PEDULLAJUNE 9, 2016
Lani is running out of time to display the talent that appears to lurk within one of the most volatile, headstrong and quirky thoroughbreds to compete in the Triple Crown races in many a generation.Keita Tanaka, the agent for the owner Koji Maeda, said the mercurial colt will make his last scheduled start in the United States when he competes in the Belmont Stakes on Saturday before returning to his home base in Japan.Lani’s odyssey began March 15, when he traveled almost 5,000 miles from Japan to Dubai, where he won the U.A.E. Derby 11 days later to qualify for the Kentucky Derby. On April 1, he flew approximately 7,200 miles from Dubai to Chicago. He was driven to Louisville two days later to prepare for the Derby, where he finished ninth before improving to fifth in the Preakness.With the exception of a brief stay at Pimlico Race Course in Baltimore for the Preakness, Lani has been based primarily at Belmont Park since the Derby to familiarize him with the surroundings. His trainer, Mikio Matsunaga, said the mile-and-a-half Belmont Stakes was always their main target because the son of the high-strung Tapit has the training and pedigree to handle the extraordinary distance.Advertisement“We are here to win this race,” Matsunaga said, with Tanaka serving as interpreter.It might be possible if Lani can overcome his greatest opponent — himself.AdvertisementHe drew national attention for his pre-Derby antics, particularly his visibly studdish behavior at the mere sight of a filly and his lack of responsiveness to his rider that led him to accomplish less in workouts than desired.When the massive Churchill Downs crowd viewed the field in the post parade during the annual rendition of “My Old Kentucky Home,” Lani was nowhere to be found. Yutaka Take, his jockey, had taken him to the final turn, far away from other horses and the fans. Take also handled him that way before the Preakness and is expected to do the same before the Belmont.Matsunaga was apologetic. “I know all horses should attend the post parade. Because of his characteristics, it is very hard,” he said. “He has a great chance to give trouble to the other horses, which I never want.”Matsunaga emphasized that he is protecting the rest of the field by missing the post parade. “He goes closer to the other horses to fight them,” he said. “He wants to show ‘I am the best.’ ”In an attempt to keep Lani calm, he has essentially been reduced to the equine equivalent of solitary confinement in Barn 6 at Belmont Park. His stall was boarded to keep him from seeing other horses, a sight that triggers his aggressiveness without fail.“He doesn’t prefer to mix with other horses,” Matsunaga said.Exaggerator, the Derby runner-up and the Preakness winner, is the 9-5 favorite in the 13-horse Belmont. He and Lani (20-1) are the only ones to compete in all three legs of the Triple Crown.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Lani’s chances may be determined early. It is not uncommon for the gray colt to kick his hind legs and whinny in complaint before he reluctantly enters the starting gate. Once underway, he seemingly needs to collect himself before doing any serious running.Eishu Maruuchi, Lani’s exercise rider, said it was very difficult to help Lani eliminate that quirk. “If the rider tells him to run, he doesn’t run,” Maruuchi said. “When we have the same opinion, the horse wants to run and the rider wants to run, he can run very fast.”AdvertisementThe poor starts were nearly impossible to overcome in the Derby and the Preakness. “The problem is he keeps making the same mistakes. He completely loses his mojo in the first sixteenth of a mile in the race,” said Randy Moss, an analyst for NBC. “He actually leaves the gate O.K., but his initial sixteenth of a mile is just incredibly slow, so he falls far behind.”It also appears that Lani, who will break from post 10, does not care to be near the rail with others outside of him. Take has kept him extremely wide.He lost so much ground in the Preakness, where his finished five lengths behind Exaggerator, that he was awarded him a Thoro-Graph number of 1 ½, matching that given to runner-up Cherry Wine. In a system in which low numbers are desirable, Lani was assigned a 5 for the UAE Derby, 3¾ for the Kentucky Derby.“He’s just beginning to find himself,” said Jerry Brown, president of Thoro-Graph.Whether he does that on Saturday, Tanaka said Lani would be given two to three months after he returns to Japan to recover from his stressful experience. Undoubtedly, his handlers would welcome time off as well.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.