By MIKE VORKUNOVNOV. 8, 2016
While the triangle offense has been the alpha and omega of the Knicks’ rebuilding issues during Phil Jackson’s tenure as team president, the team’s concerns now extend beyond the geometric shapes it employs when it has the ball.The Knicks are one of the better teams in the N.B.A. this season when it comes to putting points on the scoreboard. Their problem has been a consistently shoddy defense.The Knicks are 2-4 in large part because they have yet to hold an opponent to fewer than 102 points in a game. They had the worst defensive rating in the league going into Tuesday night’s games, and the situation is dire enough that players steeped in clichés cannot find a positive to harp on.“We’re last in defense,” Joakim Noah said. “So there’s not one thing defensively we’re doing well.”AdvertisementNot surprisingly, on Tuesday the Knicks began efforts to turn matters around. On the court, the team held a lengthy, defense-centric practice that began at 11 a.m. and ended close to 2 p.m. At the same time, Coach Jeff Hornacek said that Kurt Rambis, an assistant coach, would become the team’s de facto defensive coordinator.AdvertisementHornacek also said he was switching the team’s defensive strategy for guarding the pick-and-roll, a staple of any N.B.A. defense.As he explained the changes, Hornacek also had to deal with an ESPN report that said Jackson was unhappy about how little his new head coach had been using his beloved triangle. The Knicks have the 13th most efficient offense in the N.B.A., which is based on points per 100 possessions.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Asked about Jackson, Hornacek maintained his stance since training camp — that his boss has essentially been hands-off.“It’s still the case,” Hornacek said. “When he sees something, he’ll tell us. But he’s been the same way ever since Day 1. Nothing’s changed.”But something does have to change on defense. The Knicks rank in the bottom third of the league in most defensive categories, according to NBA.com. They had allowed both the third-highest 3-point shooting percentage this season going into Tuesday’s games and the fifth-most points in the paint. They had also contested the fourth-fewest percentage of shots in the league, among many other defensive sins.Their defensive transformation, if it comes, could stem in good part from how they defend the pick-and-roll. The Knicks will switch less frequently than before — both Hornacek and the players have cited poor communication when the team is on defense — and will try to be more aggressive in guarding the ballhandler.The Knicks previously had members of the coaching staff take turns going over the defensive wrinkles for each new opponent. Starting Tuesday, Hornacek stressed, there will be just one voice on defense. However, his explanation for choosing Rambis, a Jackson disciple who served as interim coach last season, was hardly coated in enthusiasm.Advertisement“It could have been anybody,” Hornacek said of his decision to give Rambis the defensive role.Rambis’s new title did not seem to hold much significance with the players. Derrick Rose said it mattered mostly to coaches, not to him.Still, Carmelo Anthony said, there is now a foundation for the defense to improve, regardless of who is in charge. After spending 90 percent of Tuesday’s practice on defending the pick-and-roll, he said he felt the Knicks had a better direction.“Whether we’re comfortable with it or not, it is what it is, and we got to buy into that,” Anthony said of the changes Hornacek instituted. “And embrace that and kind of just focus in on our schemes and what we’re going to do and just have kind of a foundation of how we’re going to do it.”A version of this article appears in print on November 9, 2016, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: To Strengthen a Weak Defense, the Knicks Appoint a Czar.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.