By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSNOV. 6, 2016
J. T. Miller, Jesper Fast and Pavel Buchnevich scored in a span of 4 minutes 4 seconds late in the second period at Madison Square Garden on Sunday night to lead the Rangers over the Winnipeg Jets, 5-2, for their fifth straight victory.Kevin Hayes and Mats Zuccarello also scored for the Rangers, who lead the N.H.L. with 55 goals and have scored at least five goals in each game of their winning streak.Kevin Klein and Brandon Pirri each had two assists, and Henrik Lundqvist stopped 24 shots as the Rangers won for the eighth time in nine games.Patrik Laine and Mark Scheifele scored for Winnipeg, which has lost four of its last five. For Laine, who was the No. 2 pick in this year’s draft, it was his second straight game with a goal after going without a point in his previous four.AdvertisementConnor Hellebuyck started in goal for the Jets and gave up four goals on 16 shots before he was replaced late in the second period by Michael Hutchinson, who finished with one save.AdvertisementAfter a scoreless first half of the second period in which Winnipeg had a 4-to-1 advantage on shots, the Rangers outscored the Jets by 4-1 over the final 10 minutes.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Zuccarello took a pass from Chris Kreider and fired a wrist shot past Hellebuyck from the left face-off circle for his sixth goal and put the Rangers up by 2-1 just past the midpoint of the period.Scheifele tied the score two minutes later as he pounced on a puck sitting in front of an open net after a shot by Paul Postma was stopped by Lundqvist. It was Scheifele’s seventh goal of the season.Miller then skated up along the right side and fired a wrist shot over Hellebuyck’s right shoulder for his fifth goal of the season, putting the Rangers up by 3-2 with 6 minutes 59 seconds left in the period.Fast gave the Rangers a two-goal lead with 3:36 left as he tipped a shot by Klein from the right face-off circle for his second goal. That chased Hellebuyck and brought on Hutchinson.Buchnevich made the score 5-2 just 41 seconds later as he skated in from the right side, slid the puck from his backhand across to the left side as he crossed in front of the goal, and fired it over a sprawling Hutchinson. It was Buchnevich’s second goal of the season and second in two games.The Jets controlled play in the scoreless third period, outshooting the Rangers by 9-0, but could not get the puck past Lundqvist.Hayes got the Rangers off to a fast start with his sixth goal of the season 2:12 into the game. Skating with an extra attacker on a delayed penalty, Klein sent a pass across to Hayes at the right point, and Hayes fired a slap shot from inside the blue line, giving him a goal in four straight games.AdvertisementLaine tied the score seven minutes later.An Associated Press article in some editions on Monday about the Rangers’ 5-2 victory over the Winnipeg Jets misstated the Jets’ shot advantage in the third period. They outshot the Rangers by 9-0, not 9-1. And because of an editing error, the article described incorrectly in some copies the performance of Jets winger Patrik Laine. Sunday’s game was his second straight with a goal after he went without a point in his previous four games, not his second time scoring this season after four games without a point.A version of this article appears in print on November 7, 2016, on Page D7 of the New York edition with the headline: Four Hot Minutes Give Rangers a Fifth Straight Win.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.