By SAM BORDENNOV. 7, 2016
COLUMBUS, Ohio — Sixteen years ago, a man named Jim Smith sketched out the first plan.It was November 2000. On a blank piece of paper he found at home, Smith — then the general manager of the Columbus Crew of M.L.S. — began to play around with a concept.The schedule for the final round of 2002 World Cup qualifying had just been released. As a bit of a thought exercise, Smith scribbled and scratched, did some adding and multiplying, and ultimately determined that, if sales were conducted just so — 5,625 tickets to Crew season-ticket holders, 6,800 tickets to in-state youth associations, 4,200 to U.S. Soccer and its supporters’ club, and so on — the club might be able to sell out Crew Stadium for a match between the United States and Mexico in the dead of winter. Then Smith called the Crew’s owner, Lamar Hunt.“I remember that I told him, ‘We need to host this U.S.-Mexico game in February,’” Smith said recently, “and he sort of paused and then said, ‘Are you crazy?’”Smith laughed. “I said: ‘It’s perfect. We can sell it out, and I’ll tell you how.’ And then he listened and supported it 100 percent. And then we went out and did it.”AdvertisementThat match, which was ultimately played in February 2001, may be remembered for many things — the result, certainly, as well as the atmosphere and the frigid weather and the fact the Mexican team stayed inside its heated dressing room instead of warming up before kickoff. But more than anything, the match will be seen as a beginning.AdvertisementOn Friday night, Columbus will host its fifth consecutive home World Cup qualifier between the United States and Mexico, a run that began with that game 15 years ago and includes four straight wins for the Americans, all by the score of 2-0 (or, as you may have heard in countless advertising slogans, “Dos a Cero”).That record of success, along with a mix of unmatched ambience, undying support and — not surprisingly — a little bit of superstition, has turned this college-football-mad town in the Midwest into the de facto caretaker of what is the United States’ biggest soccer match on home soil.“I’ve said it before, and I’ll say it again,” said Sunil Gulati, the president of U.S. Soccer. “Until we lose, there may be someone who moves the Mexico game away from Columbus, but it’s not going to be me.”As usual, this week’s game will be a major happening here, with fan parties, a live event featuring former national team players talking about that 2001 game and a scavenger hunt in which fans can enter a contest to win prizes by seeking out — and taking selfies with — seven life-size cutouts of current American players scattered throughout downtown.The primary United States national team fan group, American Outlaws, will hold several events, including block parties and an oversize tailgate, which is expected to attract as many as 15,000 fans, according to Brock Hemphill, the president of the organization’s local chapter.“I locked down a babysitter months ago,” Hemphill said, adding that, because of the expected “intensity” of the activities, “I’ve got her booked for three days.”It was not always like this. For the first game in 2001, Smith said, “If you weren’t at the game in Columbus, you probably didn’t know it was even taking place in the city.”AdvertisementThe whole premise was new. While other teams in Concacaf, the governing body overseeing soccer in North and Central America and the Caribbean, often created hostile conditions for visiting teams — bags of urine have been thrown at players in Mexico City, and hotels in Central America are routinely surrounded by loud fans on the eve of matches — the United States back then was frequently a guest in its own house.Ticket sales and in-stadium revenue were often the driving forces in site selection then, leading to situations that were less than ideal. Bruce Arena, the former national team coach, explained to the news media before that first game in Columbus that they were there, in part, because “a lot of places were blocked out” as potential hosts, “even by the X.F.L., of all things.”Columbus, then, was a natural alternative because the city boasted M.L.S.’s first soccer-only stadium, built to host the Crew. Although significantly smaller than, say, Foxboro Stadium — which had hosted the previous game against Mexico, in 1997 — Crew Stadium, now known as Mapfre Stadium, offered an energetic fan base and the opportunity for U.S. Soccer to fill the venue while still largely controlling the number of visiting fans who could get in.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“We could certainly make more money in tickets going to bigger places,” Gulati said. “But this isn’t a friendly. The equation is much more than that.”As soccer’s popularity has risen exponentially in the United States, so, too, has the scale of its international showpiece game. The city estimates that between $4 million and $5 million in spending is generated by hosting the match, and it pegs the value of the news media exposure of the game, which will be televised in about 100 countries, as multiples of that.This week’s game does have some unusual circumstances surrounding it. While only a few hundred fans of Mexico are expected to be in the stadium — they are generally allocated a place in the corner of the upper deck — the atmosphere could be especially charged because the game will be played just three days after an Election Day in which Mexico, and Mexican-Americans, have been thrust into a prominent place by the Republican Party nominee, Donald J. Trump.These matches already have a complex security operation around them, according to Lt. Marc Dopp, who works in the special events division of the Columbus Police Department, and because of Ohio’s perennial status as a battleground state, the police are very familiar with how to handle potential political discord.“To be honest,” said Hemphill, the supporters’ group president, “I’m really hoping that Florida decides the election this time.”AdvertisementRegardless of any political fallout (or the result of the game itself), there is no official mandate that the game return to Columbus during the 2022 World Cup qualifying cycle. Club and city officials do a fresh bid each time a game comes on the calendar, and other cities with newer, larger soccer-only stadiums could offer similar weather and crowd advantages.Kansas City, Kan., for example, opened its stadium in 2011 and hosted World Cup qualifiers in the last cycle. It often has been mentioned as a potential host if U.S. Soccer ever moved the game away from Columbus. But the magic around Columbus has grown so strong that, for the moment at least, it is difficult to imagine the match anywhere else.“It’s a real turnkey situation there,” said Tom King, the managing director of administration for U.S. Soccer. “So when the Mexico fixture gets put up on the board and we know the dates, one of our first calls is to Columbus.”A picture caption on Tuesday with an article about the history of World Cup qualifying games between the United States and Mexico being played in Columbus, Ohio, misidentified the American player shown in the 2001 game. He is Clint Mathis, not Josh Wolff.A version of this article appears in print on November 8, 2016, on Page B7 of the New York edition with the headline: U.S.-Mexico? Get to Columbus!.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.