

      By THE NEW YORK TIMES

DEC. 21, 2016

From a baseball player turned hit man to the amazing ability of Simone Biles, a look at some of the most compelling stories of the year.
April 10 — Cheating in sports took a strange turn when Julie Miller, an age-group champion at the 2015 Ironman Canada, was disqualified after detective work by athletes who believed she had cut the course there and at other races. Read more March 24 - An investigation by The New York Times raised questions about the N.F.L.’s concussion research and its relationship with the tobacco industry. Read moreJune 4 — Ali was the most thrilling if not the best heavyweight boxer of all time, a towering figure with an agile mind who was both admired and vilified for his religious, political and social stances. Read moreApril 1 — Shock. Anger. Agony. Pain. Behold the faces of Mets fans in this picture, taken by Chang W. Lee of The New York Times as the Royals’ Eric Hosmer dived safely home to tie the score in the ninth inning of Game 5 of last year’s World Series. Three innings later, the Royals scored five runs to win the championship. We managed to track down 11 of the people in the photo, and we asked those with the best view of the play to relive it. Read moreJune 26 — Michael Phelps’s road to becoming the most decorated athlete in Olympic history had been treacherously steep and single-file narrow, as isolating as a deep free diver’s plunge. But before he finished his record-setting career at the Rio Games, he had to overcome his own issues by attending rehab. Read moreMay 13 — Dozens of Russian athletes at the 2014 Winter Olympics in Sochi, including at least 15 medal winners, were part of a state-run doping program, meticulously planned for years to ensure dominance at the Games, according to Grigory Rodchenkov, the director of the country’s antidoping laboratory at the time. Read moreMarch 28 — Two men entered the ring for their first professional fight, a four-rounder in the hall of a Ukrainian church in Youngstown. What happened next would change everyone. Read moreAug. 5 — The question wasn’t if she was going to win a gold medal, but how many. Heading into the Rio Games we took a look at what made Simone Biles so good. Read moreSept. 25 — Palmer was the champion golfer whose full-bore style of play, thrilling tournament victories and magnetic personality inspired an American golf boom, attracted a following known as Arnie’s Army and made him one of the most popular athletes in the world. Read moreOct. 30 — Baseball scouts used to scrutinize Maury Lerner’s every move. Then F.B.I. agents were the ones watching. Lerner batted .328 for the Boise Braves in 1957. Twenty years later, he was serving time at the Adult Correctional Institutions in Rhode Island. Read moreAug. 21 — In 2012, the Brazilian judoka Rafaela Silva was a medal favorite, but she was disqualified. At the Rio Games, she sought to show that her humble background could not squelch her dreams. WatchMay 16 — The attempt to identify promising talent for an audacious plan: To use science to facilitate a sub-two-hour marathon by 2019, a decade or two sooner than many experts think possible. Read moreAdvertisement