By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSDEC. 17, 2016
Alabama Coach Nick Saban announced that Steve Sarkisian would replace Lane Kiffin, who has taken over the Florida Atlantic program, as the Crimson Tide’s offensive coordinator. Both Sarkisian and Kiffin have been head coaches at Southern California.U.S.C. fired Sarkisian in October 2015 after Athletic Director Pat Haden said he showed up in no condition to lead practice after an embarrassing public display earlier at a pep rally where he appeared to be intoxicated while giving a speech. Sarksian later sought treatment for alcoholism.Minnesota Vikings running back Adrian Peterson said he was ready to return Sunday against the Colts after having missed the last 11 games with a torn meniscus in his right knee.Ilka Stuhec of Slovenia moved from third to first and won a World Cup Alpine combined race in Val d’Isère, France, for her third victory of the season.AdvertisementIn third place after the downhill run, Stuhec finished 0.12 of a second ahead of Michelle Gisin of Switzerland and 0.16 ahead of Sofia Goggia of Italy after the slalom run on the Oreiller-Killy course. Goggia moved up to second place in the World Cup standings behind the American slalom specialist Mikaela Shiffrin, who skipped the speed events at Val d’Isère.AdvertisementU.S. SWEEPS BOBSLED United States sleds swept gold medals in World Cup bobsled races, with Jamie Greubel Poser and Aja Evans winning the women’s competition in Lake Placid, N.Y., after Steven Holcomb and Sam McGuffie prevailed in the two-man race. Greubel Poser and Evans finished their two runs in 1 minute 52.02 seconds. In the two-man, Holcomb teamed with Sam McGuffie to finish in 1:49.47. It was the first competition since international officials elected to pull this season’s world bobsled and skeleton championships out of Russia.Nikola Vucevic had 21 points and 10 rebounds, Evan Fournier also scored 21, and the Orlando Magic defeated the Nets, 118-111, to end their six-game home losing streak.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Brook Lopez had 22 points and 5 blocked shots for the Nets before fouling out with 20.1 seconds to play.ROCKETS 122, PELICANS 100 James Harden had his sixth triple-double of the season, and Houston made an N.B.A.-record 24 3-pointers in a win at home.HAWKS 125, RAPTORS 121 Dwight Howard had 27 points and 15 rebounds, and Atlanta won at Toronto to end the Raptors’ four-game winning streak.The N.H.L. suspended Dallas Stars forward Cody Eakin for four games without pay for charging Rangers goalie Henrik Lundqvist in the first period of the Rangers’ 2-0 win on Thursday. The suspension will cost him $85,556.SABRES 3, ISLANDERS 2 Rasmus Ristolainen scored 42 seconds into overtime to give Buffalo a victory at home. Ryan Strome and Alan Quine scored for the Islanders, and Jean-Francois Berube had 34 saves in his first start this season.AdvertisementSHARKS 4, CANADIENS 2 David Schlemko, Patrick Marleau, Timo Meier and Melker Karlsson scored to chase Carey Price in the second period, and San Jose won in Montreal. Looking for his 250th victory, Price was pulled after conceding the four goals on 18 shots.A record six teams are paying the luxury tax, led by the Los Angeles Dodgers at $31.8 million and the Yankees at $27.4 million.The Boston Red Sox ($4.5 million), the Detroit Tigers ($4 million), the San Francisco Giants ($3.4 million) and the Chicago Cubs ($2.96 million) were also sent bills by the commissioner’s office. The Yankees are paying for the 14th straight year since the tax began.A version of this article appears in print on December 17, 2016, on Page D4 of the New York edition with the headline: Louisville Suspends Assistant Over Game Plan.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.