AdvertisementSupported byBy Allan KredaGREENBURGH, N.Y. — Henrik Lundqvist visibly exhaled during his walk to the team dressing room after the Rangers’ Game 4 victory over the Montreal Canadiens. He had ample reason to express relief.With stout defense, a hint of nastiness, and a return to their speed and puck-control game, the Rangers tied the first-round playoff series at two games apiece with a 2-1 win on Tuesday.“These are tough games to play, but you feel the pressure, the adrenaline,” Lundqvist said after practice Wednesday morning. “I enjoy it.”The Rangers used a speed and puck-control game efficiently earlier this season when they were winning regularly. The same style was on display for the Rangers in Game 1 at Montreal, when Lundqvist and the team in front of him blanked the Canadiens, 2-0.At least for the night on Tuesday, the Rangers rediscovered their game, and the series is now a best-of-three showdown, beginning with Game 5 on Thursday at Bell Centre in Montreal.“I am really happy and proud of the way the guys came together and played their best,” said Lundqvist, who recorded his 57th career playoff win, the most among active goaltenders. “We worked really hard until the end.”The Rangers were fiery all game, and defenseman Brendan Smith, who absorbed all sorts of punishment in front of Lundqvist. Smith was slashed on the wrist by Canadiens forward Alexander Radulov but returned. He and his teammates skirmished with the pesky Montreal forwards Brendan Gallagher and Andrew Shaw.Added to the Rangers at the trade deadline, Smith said he preferred the physical tone the series had developed.“That’s where I flourish, being in the middle of it all and playing many minutes,” he said after Wednesday’s practice. “It keeps me engaged, and I like that.”The brisk and feisty play did not surprise Rangers center Derek Stepan, a veteran of 89 playoff games over his seven seasons. “Each team is trying to get the edge with physicality,” Stepan said. “It’s making for a great series. We have to do the things that gave us success in Game 4 and apply those to Game 5.”Even without the agitator Tanner Glass, who scored the winner in the opener, the Rangers played with plenty of ferocity. They also received a strong performance from the rookie forward Pavel Buchnevich in his playoff debut.He skated on a line with center Mika Zibanejad and Chris Kreider, a group that had early season success before Zibanejad sustained a broken leg in late November. Zibanejad had his best game of the series, chipping in physically and winning 10 face-offs.Coach Alain Vigneault was pleased with Buchnevich, who did not shy away from shoving and jawing with his fellow Russians Andrei Markov and Radulov.“He went out on the ice and played a good game,” Vigneault said of Buchnevich, 21, who scored eight goals in 41 games this season. “And that line had some good zone time, and they used their speed and their skill.”The same could be said for all four Rangers lines — almost in direct contrast with what happened in Game 3, when the team was listless. The effort Tuesday pleased Vigneault.“We played a real solid first period, and that carried over into the second,” Vigneault said Wednesday. “We were coming out of our end with better pace and better control. That carried over into our offensive-zone play.”Mats Zuccarello said the team was confident for the return to Montreal in part because the Rangers had a league-best 27 road wins this season.“We saw what happens with hard work when you play good defense,” Zuccarello said. “We have to go in with some confidence and swagger, believing we can win.”The Rangers’ captain, Ryan McDonagh, said he felt the team had more hop to its game, a shift from Game 3, when the Canadiens smothered them and emerged with a 3-1 victory.“The guys were on their toes,” said McDonagh, who set up the decisive goal by Rick Nash with a slick pass from the point. “They wanted to compete, wanted to battle and wanted the puck on their sticks. We proved to ourselves now that there’s no reason we can’t play like this every time. It’s a matter of backing up this win.”The Garden fans, louder than in Game 3, seemed to sustain the Rangers even after Montreal’s Torrey Mitchell tied the score at 1-1 late in the first period.“The patience we showed and the confidence in the situation was great to see,” Lundqvist said. “We felt like we had to play our best here to get this win and go back to Montreal with a tied series.”Advertisement