By WALLACE MATTHEWSJUNE 16, 2017
This is what passes for good news at Citi Field these days: On Friday, all the Mets lost was a baseball game.For the first time all week, they came through an entire nine innings without a player getting injured and made it through the postgame news conference without having to announce a new addition to the club’s overflowing disabled list.After all, on Tuesday it was Asdrubal Cabrera going on the disabled list with a sprained thumb. He was joined on Wednesday by Neil Walker (left hamstring tear) and Matt Harvey (scapular injury). Thursday it was Juan Lagares, who broke his thumb diving for a ball in center field.By contrast, a 7-2 loss to the Washington Nationals and the formidable Max Scherzer seemed more like a shrug of the shoulders than a kick in the ribs.AdvertisementBefore the game, Manager Terry Collins had been asked how he has managed to keep his team’s morale up considering the recent run of injuries.Advertisement“I’ve been very lucky,” he said. “We have a good clubhouse. They don’t get down. Certainly, it’s a punch in the gut anytime you look up and you lose good players, but one thing, if you’ve been on this team for the last couple of years or three years, you’re pretty used to key guys going down.“But you know what? At the same time, you got to have other guys who say, ‘There’s my chance to step up and help out.’”Friday was Steven Matz’s turn to step up after the loss of Harvey, who might be out until August, as scapular injuries generally take four to six weeks for a full recovery.Matz worked seven innings but allowed three home runs, putting the Mets into a hole too deep to climb out of, at least against Scherzer.“Outside of the home runs, I thought Steven threw the ball very, very well,” Collins said. “That lineup is very, very, very dangerous.”In the space of four third-inning pitches, the Nationals’ lineup gave Scherzer all the runs he needed to ensure a victory. Matt Wieters belted Matz’s first pitch of the inning into the left-field seats, and three pitches later, Michael Taylor did the same, only to right field.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In the sixth, Anthony Rendon belted a two-run home run. The Mets’ bullpen did the rest, with relievers Fernando Salas and Neil Ramirez allowing three ninth-inning runs.Advertisement“The pitch to Wieters was a fastball right over the plate,” Matz said. “You’re facing a guy like Scherzer, one of the best pitchers in the game, those mistakes are going to hurt you.”It was Matz’s second start after missing the first two months of the season with left elbow inflammation. In his first, he limited the Atlanta Braves to one run and five hits over seven innings in an 8-1 victory on Saturday.The Mets’ two runs Friday came on solo shots, one by Jose Reyes, who had not homered since May 1, leading off the eighth, and the other by Jay Bruce leading off the ninth. Scherzer worked eight innings, allowing four hits and striking out 10.“It’s been tough for us; a lot of key players are hurt,” Reyes said. “But it’s no excuse for me. We just need to go out there and compete with what we have. Everybody here is in the big leagues now. Everybody should be able to contribute.”The loss dropped the Mets to third place in the National League East, 10 ½ games behind the Nationals.Still, it did not seem as dispiriting as the news about Harvey. Before the game, Collins said the team had “no idea” when he might return.“We talked to our doctors, and they’re saying they’ve got to strengthen his back muscles up, and that will be two to three weeks,” Collins said.But Harvey’s agent, Scott Boras, who said his clients had included “four or five pitchers” with similar injuries, added that the standard recovery time for a scapular injury was four to six weeks. That would put Harvey’s return closer to August.Advertisement“It’s a very painful injury once it manifests itself,” Boras said. “But it’s a rather routine injury. It’s muscular. It’s not like a ligament injury or a rotator cuff. It’s usually from overthrowing the baseball. I’ve never had any player have any long-term effect from this.”On Thursday, the Mets recalled outfielder Brandon Nimmo, a first-round draft pick in 2011, and infielder Matt Reynolds from Class AAA Las Vegas to replace Harvey and Lagares.Asked what steps he might take to safeguard the healthy bodies in his clubhouse, Collins let out a laugh.“Bubble Wrap,” he said.A version of this article appears in print on June 17, 2017, on Page D2 of the New York edition with the headline: Adding to Loss Column but Not D.L., Mets Find a Small Measure of Solace.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.