By WALLACE MATTHEWSJULY 8, 2017
When Clint Frazier stepped to the plate in the bottom of the ninth inning on Saturday, with two men on base and the Yankees trailing the Milwaukee Brewers by a run, his goals were decidedly modest.“Just try to get a fastball down the middle,” Frazier said, “something I could drive back up the middle to at least advance the runners over one base.“I was really amped up. I wanted to make sure I didn’t go up there and take a really big swing.”There were several reasons for Frazier’s self-restraint: He was making just his sixth start in the major leagues, and this would be only his 20th major league at-bat. After batting three times against Brewers starter Brent Suter, who never hit 90 miles per hour with his fastball, he was now facing closer Corey Knebel, who routinely hits 99.AdvertisementAnd besides, Frazier was all of one day into learning a new swing.On Friday, the Yankees’ hitting coaches, Marcus Thames and Alan Cockrell, had called Frazier’s attention to a “hitch” in his swing, a tiny hesitation that was messing up his timing and causing him to jump at the baseball. After the flaw was pointed out, Frazier put himself through a crash course over the next 24 hours, taking what he estimated to be 300 swings and wearing out two pairs of batting gloves.AdvertisementFrazier, a 22-year-old with flaming red hair, had all that going through his mind as Knebel prepared to throw his 1-0 pitch.In it came, at 97 m.p.h. and over the inside of the plate to Frazier, who bats right-handed. And out it went, in a hurry, into the lower left-field seats at Yankee Stadium, giving the Yankees a come-from-behind 5-3 victory that ended a three-game losing streak.And with one swing, Frazier — a highly regarded rookie acquired from the Cleveland Indians in a trade last year for Andrew Miller — experienced all the side benefits of winning a game for the Yankees: the mob scene at home plate, the ritual dousing, the curtain call and the on-field interview.“It’s a feeling I’ve never had before,” Frazier said. “That’s my first walk-off home run in my professional career. I’m sure I’ve had a lot of walk-off singles, but it doesn’t compare to this.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The home run was not just Frazier’s second of the season (he hit one in his debut on July 1); it was also his third hit of the game. He had a fifth-inning single that broke up Suter’s no-hit bid and a run-scoring triple in the seventh that pulled the Yankees to within a run.Frazier’s homer could not have come at a better time for the Yankees, who were two outs from losing their eighth consecutive series; they last won a series when they swept three games from the Baltimore Orioles starting on June 9.The Yankees could still lose this series — they have one more game against the Brewers on Sunday, their final game before the All-Star break — but they have put themselves in a position not only to take two out of three games from a team but to win two games in a row for the first time since June 11 and 12.“We needed this,” Manager Joe Girardi said.Starter Luis Severino, one of the team’s five All-Star representatives, worked seven impressive innings, striking out 10, but after two errant pitches in the first inning, he appeared headed for defeat until Frazier hit his homer.AdvertisementThe first errant pitch was ruled to have grazed the jersey of Brewers third baseman Travis Shaw with two outs and one man on. The second was hit into the right-field seats by Domingo Santana for a three-run homer.That lead held up until the Yankees were down to their final two outs and had a rookie, who was on the roster only because of injuries to outfielders Aaron Hicks and Dustin Fowler, coming to the plate.“It takes a lot of pressure off my shoulders,” Frazier said. “Last year, I was trying to do too much, to prove I was the guy that they traded for. Now I’m just trying to go day by day and make a splash every time I step into the batter’s box.”A version of this article appears in print on July 9, 2017, on Page SP4 of the New York edition with the headline: Rookie’s Game-Winning Homer Lifts the Slumping Yankees’ Hopes.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.