By MIKE VORKUNOVJULY 7, 2017
After skulking around in free agency with little to show for their patience, the Knicks struck late Thursday night, signing guard Tim Hardaway Jr. to a four-year, $71 million offer sheet, his agent, Mark Bartelstein, confirmed. Hardaway is a restricted free agent, and the Atlanta Hawks have two days to match. ESPN was the first to report the news.If Atlanta elects not to match, it would be a circuitous road back to the Knicks for Hardaway, 25. He was a first-round pick by the team in 2013, 24th over all, before being traded two seasons ago to the Hawks for the No. 19 overall pick in the 2015 N.B.A. draft, which the team used to select Jerian Grant.The Knicks dealt Grant as part of a trade that brought them point guard Derrick Rose last summer. To make cap room for Hardaway, the Knicks would have to renounce the rights to Rose.The man who traded Hardaway — Phil Jackson — is gone. He parted ways with the club last month, vacating his job as team president. Steve Mills, the general manager, has been running basketball operations since then.AdvertisementWith the Hawks, Hardaway grew into a solid wing player who could hit shots from the perimeter and play reliable defense. He averaged 14.5 points a game last season and hit 35.7 percent of his 3-point attempts.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Still, the size of the contract was a surprise. Hardaway would have a player option for the final season, worth roughly $19 million, and would receive a 15 percent trade kicker, according to news reports. The Knicks had to make an offer large enough to discourage Atlanta from matching, which puts them at risk of overpaying. It is a touch less than the four-year, $72 million contract the club doled out to Joakim Noah last off-season.The move will at least help make the Knicks younger and more spry. They drafted Frank Ntilikina, 18, with the eighth overall pick in last month’s draft and agreed to re-sign the restricted free agent Ron Baker, 24, to a two-year deal. For the time being, Hardaway stands to be competing for minutes with Courtney Lee, whom the Knicks signed last summer to a four-year, $50 million deal. However, it is possible the Knicks will seek to trade Lee.AdvertisementHardaway is the son of Tim Hardaway, a five-time N.B.A. All-Star who is an assistant for the Detroit Pistons.A version of this article appears in print on July 7, 2017, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: Pro Basketball; Hardaway Jr. Signs Knicks’ Offer Sheet.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.