By JAMES WAGNERJUNE 15, 2017
The scene has become all too familiar to the Mets over the past few years, and particularly in the past few months: General Manager Sandy Alderson or Manager Terry Collins sitting before the microphone in the news conference room at Citi Field to announce another slew of injuries.Thursday was the latest installment.Among the collection of injury updates Collins provided, starter Matt Harvey’s and second baseman Neil Walker’s were the most pressing. Harvey will miss “several weeks,” Collins said, with a stress injury to his right scapula. Walker was placed on the 10-day disabled list with a partially torn left hamstring, sustained Wednesday.As if that was not enough, outfielder Juan Lagares, who had been playing well recently, left Thursday’s game with a fractured joint in his left thumb.After Harvey’s velocity dropped to 87 miles per hour and he complained of a tired arm Wednesday, he underwent a magnetic resonance imaging examination and a computerized tomography scan Thursday at the Hospital for Special Surgery in Manhattan, and the shoulder injury was revealed.Advertisement“The bone can inflame,” Alderson said. “It’s sort of in that niche between a fracture and a bruise.”AdvertisementHe added, “The injury that he has, if untreated or undiagnosed, could possibly lead to a fracture, but it’s not a fracture.”Alderson said the ailment was not related to the operation Harvey underwent last July for thoracic outlet syndrome, the second major arm-related operation of Harvey’s career.Harvey has been slow to rebound from that surgery. Until Wednesday, his velocity had improved throughout this season, but his command had remained inconsistent, which Harvey had attributed to bad habits from last season, when he could not feel the ball or his fingers because of the nerve problem. His 5.25 E.R.A. was the highest of the Mets’ regular starting pitchers entering Thursday.While Harvey’s injury announcement was unexpected, the Mets knew Walker had hurt his hamstring when he limped off the field after running to first base on a sacrifice bunt in the third inning Wednesday night.So when Walker officially landed on the D.L. on Thursday afternoon, the Mets had already flown in Gavin Cecchini from Class AAA Las Vegas to take his spot on the active roster. The Mets again resisted the urge to call up the top shortstop prospect Amed Rosario, with Alderson saying they did not view Rosario as a short-term fix.“I’m going to do everything I can to get back as quickly as I can,” Walker said.The Mets did not yet have a replacement pitcher for Harvey, who was expected to go on the disabled list Friday after a new player arrived.Collins said Harvey was disappointed about the latest setback.“But I said: ‘Look, it’s still not a bad scenario where you’re looking at another surgery,’” Collins added. “‘You’re looking at rest and strengthening exercises. That might be the best thing going: Build that arm back up.’”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.That was the optimistic take, but Harvey’s arm has already been through a lot in five years in the major leagues.Advertisement“I think it’s difficult to speculate on what we can expect to get from him for the rest of the season,” Alderson said.The Mets will stick to a variation of a six-man rotation, as originally planned, until they complete a stretch of 18 games in 17 days that ends June 26. That means the team will need only one spot start from someone within the organization. Alderson said it would not be Tommy Milone, who has a left knee sprain.For some time beyond then, the Mets will probably have to survive with Jacob deGrom, Zack Wheeler, Robert Gsellman, Steven Matz and Seth Lugo. Noah Syndergaard, the team’s ace, went for a checkup Thursday on the torn right latissimus that has kept him out since May 1.Syndergaard was told he needed another four weeks of rest, more time than was originally expected.Walker could be back sooner. While the Mets said he would also probably miss “several weeks,” Walker said he expected to have a better idea about his timetable after meeting with doctors again Thursday evening. He said it might take up to two weeks for the platelet-rich plasma injection he received in his leg Thursday to aid the healing.Walker said he was unsure if the left knee soreness that led him to miss three games last week was related to the hamstring injury, which he called the first of his career.“I don’t feel like I was running any differently or being hampered by it,” he said.Walker’s infirmity takes away one of the Mets’ best hitters of late. His .820 on-base-plus-slugging percentage this season was fourth on the team. Collins said he expected to use T. J. Rivera at second base and keep Wilmer Flores at third base, where he has played the most recently.The Mets also announced that reliever Josh Smoker, who threw 81 pitches Tuesday and then landed on the disabled list the following day, underwent an M.R.I. on Thursday. Smoker’s left shoulder was fine, but “loose bodies” were found in his left elbow, Alderson said.Smoker was prescribed anti-inflammatories and rest until the symptoms dissipated.Alderson said it was too early to discuss adding outside pitching help. The Mets already acquired Milone and reliever Neil Ramirez. Alderson listed relievers Hansel Robles, who has struggled, and Erik Goeddel as potential bullpen reinforcements.“You keep playing,” Alderson said of the team’s many injuries. “We continue to look at why these injuries are occurring. We have battled injuries over the last two or three years. And we’ve overcome injuries in the past, and currently we’re doing that today.”A version of this article appears in print on June 16, 2017, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: Harvey, Walker and Lagares Join the Mets’ Lengthy Injured List.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.