By DAVID WALDSTEINJULY 6, 2017
WIMBLEDON, England — A little over a year ago, just days after losing in the first round at Wimbledon, Magdalena Rybarikova had surgery on her left wrist. But that was only half of her troubles. Three weeks later, she had an operation on her right knee.The recovery process did not go well at first, and Rybarikova missed seven months of action. When she finally returned, she had to slog her way through lower-tier tournaments because her ranking had fallen so far.But Rybarikova’s perseverance was rewarded with the best victory of her career on Thursday when she upset Karolina Pliskova, the No. 3 seed, with a captivating 3-6, 7-5, 6-2 victory on Centre Court for the most surprising result of the fourth day of the tournament.“On Centre Court at Wimbledon,” Rybarikova said, “nothing could be better right now.”Pliskova, who has five consecutive second-round losses here, was considered a favorite to win the title this year. Another pretournament favorite, the two-time champion Petra Kvitova, lost on Wednesday. Now a wide-open women’s singles draw gaped even more.Advertisement“You can see even the best players, they can lose in the first round,” Pliskova said. “Every round, everybody has the chance to win.”AdvertisementNo. 1 Angelique Kerber is still alive after she defeated Kirsten Flipkens, 7-5, 7-5, on Court 1 to set up a third-round match against the American Shelby Rogers.No. 5 Caroline Wozniacki, No. 7 Svetlana Kuznetsova, No. 14 Garbiñe Muguruza and No. 24 Coco Vandeweghe were among those to advance in straight sets, while No. 9 Agnieszka Radwanska required three sets to defeat Christina McHale, 5-7, 7-6 (7), 6-3.On the men’s side, No. 2 Novak Djokovic and No. 3 Roger Federer had no troubles in their second-round matches. Djokovic opened the day on Court 1 by wiping out Adam Pavlasek, 6-2, 6-2, 6-1, in 94 minutes. Federer required four fewer minutes to subdue Dusan Lajovic of Serbia, 7-6 (0), 6-3, 6-2, despite a strange case of nerves that dogged him through most of the first set.“Then I played a great breaker,” Federer said, referring to the tiebreaker in which he did not lose a point. “I think from then on I never looked back.”Milos Raonic, the No. 6 seed, pushed through to beat Mikhail Youzhny of Russia, 3-6, 7-6 (7), 6-4, 7-5, meaning nine of the top 10 seeds in the men’s draw are still alive. No. 5 Stan Wawrinka lost in the first round.The most surprising men’s results on Thursday involved the top two American men. Dudi Sela of Israel, ranked 90th, ousted No. 23 John Isner, 6-7 (5), 7-6 (5), 5-7, 7-6 (5), 6-3, in a rollicking match that lasted nearly four hours and left Isner distraught with his tactical choices.“It’s all between the ears,” he said. “I had opportunities, of course, and when I don’t go for it, bad things happen. That was the case throughout the whole match, me not going for it. That’s why I lost.”AdvertisementA few hours later, Sebastian Ofner of Austria, a qualifier ranked 217th, eliminated the highest-seeded American man, No. 17 Jack Sock, 6-3, 6-4, 3-6, 2-6, 6-2.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Pliskova, a 25-year-old Czech, reached the final of last year’s United States Open and the semifinals of the French Open last month. She was closing in on the No. 1 ranking. By winning at Eastbourne in a Wimbledon tuneup on grass, she seemed to solidify her credentials to go far at the All England Club, despite her past stumbles here.Pliiskova had chances Thursday. Rybarikova was down a set and a break in the second set and had to rally. But coming back is not new for the 28-year-old Rybarikova, who did not return from her injuries until February. As recently as May 1, her ranking was No. 388.After a second-round exit at the French Open, she has flourished on grass, winning at Surbiton and Ilkley and reaching the semifinal at Nottingham.In an energized atmosphere on Centre Court, the match almost turned with Rybarikova up, 4-2, and serving at 30-30 in the third set. Pliskova needed just two points to break back on Rybarikova’s serve and perhaps reassert command of the match.But Rybarikova hit a running forehand from beyond the doubles alley that curled around the net pole and landed in, and she went on to win the game.The fans were treated to one more magical moment in the next game, a dramatic 18-stroke point that ended with both players at net. Rybarikova won the point with a volley winner and received a standing ovation.Now she will play Lesia Tsurenko of Ukraine, ranked 35th, in the third round, hoping to qualify for the fourth round of a major tournament for the first time. Rybarikova reached the third round at Wimbledon in 2015 and the third round at the United States Open in 2008 and 2009.Now, with Pliskova and Kvitova out, and Serena Williams not even entered, Rybarikova, a Slovakian, has a chance to continue her surprising run.“When you beat No. 3 in the world, everybody expects I’m going to win it,” Rybarikova said. “It’s not like that at all. I play next match a really good player. She will be the favorite again. I am not the favorite, for sure.”An earlier version of this article misstated the kind of surgeries the tennis player Magdalena Rybarikova had. She had surgery on a wrist and a knee, not two surgeries on her left wrist.A version of this article appears in print on July 7, 2017, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: Pliskova, Once a Threat For the Title, Is Ousted.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.