By VICTOR MATHERJAN. 9, 2017
Clemson upset Alabama and won the college football national championship, 35-31, in Tampa early Tuesday morning.Clemson was led by its star quarterback, Deshaun Watson, who threw for 420 yards despite facing a defense heralded as one of the best ever.With two minutes left, trailing by 3 points, Watson got the ball at his own 32 and started a drive. Nine plays and 68 yards later, with 1 second on the clock, Hunter Renfrow caught a 2-yard touchdown to win the game.The drive included six completed passes, notably a 24-yarder to Watson’s favorite target, Mike Williams, and a goal line pass interference call.Advertisement“I’m speechless right now man,” Watson said after the game. “We worked so hard for it; we fell short last year. This game is not just for me, it’s for all the alumni, the fans, my family in Gainesville.”AdvertisementIt was the second big title game in a row for Watson, who threw for 405 yards in a loss in this game against Alabama last season. He is likely to go in the top 5 of the N.F.L. draft this year.Watson’s Achilles’ heel during the regular season was the interception, but he threw none in this game.Alabama for its part kept the ball mostly on the ground. Its freshman quarterback Jalen Hurts was 13-31 for only 131 yards.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Alabama had raced to a 14-0 lead on two touchdowns by Bo Scarbrough. Watson cut the lead to 14-7 with a long drive that ended with his touchdown run.A game that started as a defensive struggle opened up in the second half.More Watson passing pulled Clemson to within 17-14 on a 24-yard touchdown to Renfrow.Hurts finally broke through with a 68-yard touchdown to a wide-open O.J. Howard, making it 24-14 Alabama.Another long Clemson drive concluded with a 4-yard pass from Watson to Williams, and Clemson was back within 3, 24-21.AdvertisementClemson seized its first lead in the game, 28-24, as Wayne Gallman punched in a 1-yard touchdown run. The key play in the drive was a 26-yard pass to Williams, boosted by an unsportsmanlike conduct call against Alabama.Alabama answered like champions with a quick drive. Hurts completed several passes, including a 24-yarder to O.J. Howard. Then he turned to his other strength, running, and barreled past defenders for a 30-yard score.But that only set up Watson for his two minutes of heroics.Here’s how Clemson won the championship:Alabama was 25 percent of the way to another national championship, leading Clemson, 7-0, after one quarter in Tampa.The early stages of the game were mostly dominated by defense, with the exception a lightning quick sequence of five plays that including a 20-yard scramble by quarterback Jalen Hurts and a 25-yard touchdown by Bo Scarbrough to put Alabama in front.Alabama, led by the freshman quarterback Hurts, mostly moved the ball on the ground. Hurts completed just 2 of 8 passes, for 10 yards. He looked especially ineffective going deep.Clemson had limited offensive success against the vaunted Alabama defense — quarterback Deshaun Watson was 5-of-7 for 23 yards. It never threatened to score. The Tigers were also hurt by an uninspired failed plunge on fourth-and-1 at the Alabama 41.The Clemson highlight was probably a partially blocked punt that took an Alabama roll anyway.Turnovers were expected to be critical in the game, and Clemson had the only one of the quarter, a bobbled snap by quarterback Deshaun Watson that gifted Alabama the ball in Clemson territory with 1:50 left in the period.Alabama held a 14-7 lead at halftime of the College Football Playoff Championship in Tampa.The game looked as good as won when favored Alabama went up by 14-0 in the second quarter. Alabama was breaking runs and its defense was swamping Clemson’s star quarterback Deshaun Watson.AdvertisementAlabama did it on the ground, rushing for 143 yards. The freshman quarterback Jalen Hurts was 7-for-16 for only 40 yards.Watson woke up with a 87-yard drive through the previously impenetrable Alabama defense with six minutes left. He capped it by taking the ball into the end zone himself.He finished the half 13-23 for 153 yards.The game was dominated by the defenses, which frustrated most of the game’s drives on both sides.Watson avoided throwing an interception, which he was often guilty of during the season. Clemson did lose one fumble.A poor Alabama punt gave Clemson the ball at Alabama’s 42 and Deshaun Watson took advantage with a quick drive culminating in a 24-yard touchdown to Hunter Renfrow. Watson was up to 228 yards passing.That drive notwithstanding, defense was generally trumping offense in the second half.The best drive before the touchdown came from Clemson as Watson led the Tigers from their own 16 to Alabama’s 43. The drive might have gone farther, but a catch for a first down was overruled on review, leaving Clemson with a fourth and short. Watson stayed on the field, and it seemed the Tigers might go for it, but it was a bluff, and Watson punted the ball.Jalen Hurts of Alabama had barely registered in the first three quarters of the national championship. He was 9-23 for only 49 yards. And Alabama, after racing to a 14-0 lead, was up only 17-14.Then O.J. Howard badly beat Clemson’s Van Smith, and raced down the sidelines for a 68-yard touchdown. Just like that Hurts more than doubled his yardage for the game and Alabama widened its lead to 24-14 as the third quarter drew to a close.AdvertisementIt was a huge play for Alabama, which had been struggling on offense.Watson Takes Over: A mostly defensive game opened up as the third quarter turned into the fourth, with both teams scoring.After Alabama went up by 24-14 on a 68-yard pass play, Clemson answered with a 72-yard drive consisting mostly of shortish passes from Watson. It finished with a 4-yard pass from Watson to his favorite target all year, Mike Williams.Watson was up to 294 yards passing, but Alabama still led, 24-21 with 14 minutes left to play.Gallman Gives Clemson the Lead: Clemson seized its first lead in the national championship, 28-24, as Wayne Gallman punched in a 1-yard touchdown run.The key play in the drive was a 26-yard pass to Williams, boosted by an unsportsmanlike conduct call against Alabama.Watson continued to solve the toughest defense in the country and increased his passing numbers to 30-49 for 360 yards.Alabama Retakes Lead: Alabama, behind for the first time in the game, answered like champions with a quick drive. Jared Hurts, whose passing had been vastly overshadowed by Deshaun Watson of Clemson, completed several, including a 24-yarder to O.J. Howard.Then for the touchdown he turned to his other strength, running, and barreled past defenders for a 30-yard scoreAlabama led 31-28, but Watson still had an opportunity for a two-minute drill. We all know how that ended.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.