By BILLY WITZJUNE 14, 2017
ANAHEIM, Calif. — Sluggers like Aaron Judge and Gary Sanchez — and thus far, just about anybody else in the lineup — have been the scene stealers for the Yankees over the initial two and half months of the season, as they have bludgeoned their way to the top of the American League East.But the bedrock of their ascent has been a surprisingly rock-solid starting rotation, which has kept the bullpen fresh and the big bats seemingly always in striking distance.In recent days, though, the rotation has shown fissures — the latest coming Wednesday when C. C. Sabathia was found to have a Grade 2 hamstring strain, which is likely to sideline him for at least several weeks, and Michael Pineda offering up a disappointing performance in a 7-5 loss to the Los Angeles Angels.Pineda was not around to be tagged with the defeat; that went to Ronald Herrera, who was called up from Class AA Trenton and had his debut ruined by a two-run home run by Andrelton Simmons.AdvertisementAnd Eric Young Jr., who the Yankees brought in last September as a pinch-runner and little else, tormented them for the second consecutive night — gunning down Judge at home plate and later robbing him of the go-ahead hit with a diving catch of a blistering line drive.But the tone setter for this defeat was Pineda, who was staked to a four-run lead before he threw a pitch and was fortunate not to have given it back five hitters into the game.An audacious catch by Aaron Hicks, who leapt at the wall to rob Luis Valbuena of a grand slam, spared Pineda that ignominy but it could not inspire him to pitch better.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.He allowed 10 hits and five runs — both equaling season highs he posted two starts ago at Toronto — and did not strike out a batter until the sixth inning. Pineda expressed his frustration when he spiked the baseball after covering first base for the final out in the fourth, his first scoreless inning.“Today is a really tough night for me,” Pineda said. “I tried to give the opportunity to my team.”AdvertisementManager Joe Girardi bristled at the suggestion that with Masahiro Tanaka’s inconsistency, Sabathia’s injury and a second poor performance by Pineda in his last three starts, the starting rotation might be showing cracks.“You want to make a judgment, make a judgment, but I’m not ready to make a judgment,” Girardi said. He later added: “Our rotation has been pretty good. You’re taking a snapshot. It’s a couple of games.”While Girardi acknowledged the loss of Sabathia could be a significant one — he is 7-2 with a 3.46 earned run average and had been dominant in his six starts before the injury — Girardi was vague on how long Sabathia, a 36-year-old left-hander, would be out.“He’ll be back when he’s back,” said Girardi, who acknowledged that the injury would prevent Sabathia from keeping his arm in throwing shape. “That’s all I can tell you. You’ve got to see how he reacts to treatment.”A Grade 2 strain typically sidelines players for at least four weeks, and this is the second time Sabathia has had a hamstring injury that was categorized as Grade 2. But Sabathia said this did not seem as severe as the one he suffered at the end of the 2013 season, which prevented him from making his final start of the season.“Just going off how I feel in these early stages makes me think it won’t be that long,” he said.Girardi appeared to be considering starting Chad Green in place of Sabathia, but moving him up to Saturday so that Tanaka could be given an additional day of rest and pitch Sunday, which would have been Sabathia’s spot.The Yankees were so afraid to start Tanaka at home last Sunday against Baltimore that they pushed his start to Monday against the Angels. Instead of calling up a starter from the minor leagues, the Yankees used five relievers to beat the Orioles. But that decision came at a cost with the subsequent injury to Sabathia, which limited him to four innings, and an 11-inning loss on Tuesday.AdvertisementIn the previous three days, Green had thrown 53 pitches, Chasen Shreve 60, Jonathan Holder 43, Adam Warren 46 and Tyler Clippard 36.“Our bullpen is pretty fried,” Girardi said before the game.That explains why Girardi stuck with Pineda and also why he turned to Herrera, who was awakened at 3:30 a.m. at a hotel in Hartford, and told to head west. He entered to start the seventh with the score tied and Albert Pujols at the plate.“That’s really what I had,” Girardi said. “Obviously, we’ll get some guys back tomorrow, but that was what it was today. We knew the kid was going to pitch at some point today, but we didn’t know exactly when.”Herrera allowed a two-out walk to Valbuena, and Simmons jumped on a first-pitch curveball, going down to one knee to club it an estimated 409 feet to left field.That the Yankees would be behind seemed so unlikely after Sanchez’s three-run homer had pushed the Yankees to an early lead. But the Angels got one run back on Valbuena’s near-slam, added two more in the second on a home run by Danny Espinosa (who was hitting .164 entering Wednesday) and took a 5-4 lead in the third on a wild pitch by Pineda and a single by Young.Pineda settled down enough for the Yankees to tie the score in the sixth, when reliever Parker Bridwell threw away a dribbler by Sanchez, putting him in position to score on Chase Headley’s single.The Yankees had one more chance late. Hicks appeared to have been robbed by right fielder Kole Calhoun, who leapt against the wall to snag his two-out drive. As Calhoun and the Angels celebrated, the Yankees appealed — and the call was overturned.That brought up Judge, who leads baseball with 22 home runs and seemed due for a turn of good luck after being thrown out at the plate by Young to end the fifth and being robbed of an extra-base hit by him in the seventh. But Judge, jumping on the first pitch from reliever David Hernandez, grounded sharply to third.An earlier version of this article misidentified the pitcher against whom Aaron Judge hit a grounder to third on the first pitch. He is David Hernandez, not Bud Norris.A version of this article appears in print on June 15, 2017, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Sabathia, With Strain, Looks Destined for D.L.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.