

      By THE NEW YORK TIMES

JAN. 8, 2017

Many wide receivers make impressive catches, and Odell Beckham Jr. has compiled a highlight reel of spectacular grabs. But this season especially, what has set Beckham apart is not that he holds onto the football. It’s what happens after the ball is in his hands.
Beckham’s first catch of the season, in Dallas, was a route up the sideline for 45 yards. Eli Manning’s pass traveled 28 yards, and as a sign of things to come, Beckham tacked on 17 more after the catch.Yards after catchCatchStart of playBeckham’s signature accomplishment this season has been the ability to turn routine receptions into big gains. Beckham finished third in the N.F.L. in receiving yards (1,367), but 38 percent of those yards came after a catch, the highest percentage among the league’s five top receivers.The Giants cornerback Dominique Rodgers-Cromartie, a nine-year veteran, covers Beckham in practice every day. Or tries to. Sometimes he just chases him.“It’s hard when a guy can out-run you,” Rodgers-Cromartie said. “But with Odell it’s more than speed. He has the agility to make you miss, and in a flash, get vertically up the field.”Half of Beckham’s 10 touchdowns have come on plays on which he gained more than 20 yards after the catch. He is a threat to score no matter where on the field he catches the ball; he had after-the-catch runs of 47, 60, 22, 29 and 53 yards for touchdowns.10 touchdown catches“You can’t expect to score on every pass thrown your way,” Beckham said early this season. With a smile, he added: “Just most of them, right? I mean, you can try.”But Beckham contributes in less noticeable ways too, often keeping Giants drives alive with third- and fourth-down receptions.In the play shown below, the Giants had a third-and-6 at the Eagles 30-yard line. The defense allowed Beckham to catch the ball short of the first down marker, but he then evaded each defender just enough to make the extra yards needed to give the Giants a new set of downs deep in Eagles’ territory.Beckham’s 65 first downs gained was the third most among receivers this season.“He’s one of those guys that you have to keep the screws on the whole game,” Dallas Coach Jason Garrett said of Beckham. “It might be a short pass but it’s not a short gain until you get him on the ground.”In his first two N.F.L. seasons, Beckham routinely ran deep routes down the sideline. But this season, opponents have kept two safeties deep enough to prevent Beckham from catching the long passes that have been the staple of other great receivers.The Giants have responded by making slant and crossing routes Beckham’s bread and butter. It’s called taking what the defense gives you.29 crossing routes22 slant routesBeckham and Manning have spent hours perfecting the timing between receiver and quarterback on these routes.“It has to be a precise throw that hits Odell exactly in stride and in a spot where he does not have to reach high or low for the ball,” Manning said.Of Beckham’s 101 receptions, half (51) came on a route over the middle, either a slant or a crossing route. He has averaged 13.7 yards a catch on those routes, gaining 336 yards from the ball in the air and another 339 after the catch.The Giants’ wide receivers coach, Adam Henry, sees the well-executed slant route as a thing of beauty, at least as performed by Beckham.“The angle he’s running, the burst of speed, it’s impressive to watch,” Henry said. “It’s a slant but he takes it to the house. I’m starting to expect it every time he gets the ball in his hands.”Sources: NFL.com; Pro-football-reference.comBy Bill Pennington, Wilson Andrews, Sam Manchester, Bedel Saget and Joe WardAdvertisement