By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSMARCH 24, 2016
One of the N.F.L.’s flashiest stars just a few years ago, Robert Griffin III signed a two-year contract Thursday with the Cleveland Browns, a franchise on a perpetual mission to find a quarterback. Financial terms were not immediately available.Griffin has not been the same since his dazzling rookie season with Washington in 2012. The Browns, who tried to trade up and draft Griffin four years ago, believe he can still lead on and off the field, and they are giving him a chance to revive his career and win their starting job.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“He’s a young, athletic, talented passer,” Coach Hue Jackson said, “and he’s really just starting out in this league.”Cleveland has started 24 quarterbacks since 1999, and the team is expected to take one with the No. 2 overall pick in this year’s draft.JETS RE-SIGN LINEBACKER The Jets re-signed linebacker Erin Henderson to a two-year contract. Henderson, 29, played in every Jets game last season after sitting out all of 2014. He had 45 total tackles and was a key contributor on special teams.EX-RAVEN SENTENCED IN DOG’S DEATH Terrence Cody, a former Baltimore Ravens defensive tackle, was sentenced to nine months in jail in connection with the death of his dog. Cody, 27, had been convicted of several misdemeanors in connection with the starvation death of his dog Taz, a Canary mastiff. Cody was also convicted of illegally possessing and neglecting an alligator.A version of this article appears in print on March 25, 2016, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: Browns Sign Griffin in Hopes He Can Revive Career.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.