By MARC TRACYMARCH 24, 2016
LOUISVILLE, Ky. —  Like a wildcat spotting prey, Ryan Arcidiacono opened his eyes wide. On an inbounds play under Villanova’s basket Arcidiacono, a 37.5 percent 3-point shooter, was left open on the left side. He caught the pass and stepped into his shot. Swish.Villanova has been one of the most prolific 3-point shooting teams for much of Coach Jay Wright’s tenure. As they have done all season, the Wildcats used the additional threat of the 6-foot-11 senior Daniel Ochefu to create an inside-out attack that generated open looks for the smaller snipers on the perimeter.The result Thursday night was an offensive onslaught as No. 2-seeded Villanova overwhelmed third-seeded Miami, 92-69, in the N.C.A.A. tournament’s round of 16 at KFC Yum Center.The Wildcats took an early lead and then mauled Miami in the second half on the strength of 62.7 percent shooting, including 10 of 15 from 3-point range.Advertisement“You’re seeing the best of our decision-making from 3,” Wright said. “And so when good shooters take good shots, you’re going to make them.”AdvertisementVillanova (32-5), which will face Kansas on Saturday, clinched its first berth in a regional final since its 2009 Final Four run, and the first-ever such appearance by a team from the new-look Big East, in its third season of realignment. Villanova is the last team from the storied conference still alive in the tournament.“Your national reputation in this sport is definitely based on how you perform in March,” Wright acknowledged recently. “Do you get the Sweet 16s? Do you get the final eights? Do you get the Final Fours? Do you win national championships? That puts you with the elite. We’d certainly like to be there, but we’ve got to earn it.”The top-ranked team in the country for several weeks this season, Villanova deliberately played fewer than its usual allotment of games at Wells Fargo Center, the Philadelphia 76ers’ home court, to remain eligible to play there in a tournament regional. A Big East championship would have almost certainly handed the Wildcats a No. 1 seed and, this week, a short bus ride into Philadelphia.Instead, they lost the conference tournament final to Seton Hall and were slotted into the South Region.Arcidiacono finished with 21 points, and the junior forward Kris Jenkins added 21 points and 9 rebounds. The junior guard Josh Hart seemed to gain a feel for the exact distance — about 10 feet from the basket — where Miami defenders could not adequately challenge him, and he added 14 points.Already 15th in Division I with an average of 1.118 points per possession, the Wildcats scored 1.51 points for every time they had the ball this game.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I know the big guy is quote-unquote obsolete — everybody wants to be the Warriors nowadays,” said the junior Darryl Reynolds, a 6-8 forward who contributed 8 points. “But I honestly think with us playing inside-out, with Daniel being able to score the way he does, our decision-making outside makes it easier for the guards.”Miami (27-8) was led by guard Sheldon McClellan, a senior, who scored a game-high 26 points. The star guard Angel Rodriguez, also a senior, was limited to 13 points on 11 shots, including three 3-pointers and one slick Eurostep drive to the basket.AdvertisementVillanova jumped to an 8-0 lead, which rapidly grew to 22-10. Miami rallied and went on a 16-2 run later to close the gap to 43-37 at halftime.But Miami came out flat in the second half, beginning with the 7-foot Tonye Jekiri missing an easy shot underneath the basket.Miami tried to combat Villanova’s barrage by pounding the ball inside, where the Hurricanes enjoyed a size advantage. Villanova, in turn, tried to play to its strengths by slowing the pace of play. The Wildcats pressed on defense, walked the ball up the court on offense, and moved it around and across the perimeter in search of the optimal shot.On one occasion in the second half, Arcidiacono was trapped in the left corner, only to have the ball poked at by a defender. This allowed him to resume his dribble and drive to the hoop, where he laid it in as the shot clock expired.Near the end, Villanova’s press forced an errant inbound pass and a turnover. The Wildcats fans behind the bench rose up as one, and the noise was such that it almost felt like Philadelphia.KANSAS 79 MARYLAND 63 In its first major test of the tournament, Kansas showed why it was the No. 1 overall seed. Forward Perry Ellis, one of the best players in college basketball, scored a game-high 27 points. He shot 10 for 17 from the field and made all seven of his free throws.The senior Rasheed Sulaimon led Maryland with 18 points. The senior Jake Layman had 8 points and 4 blocks.A version of this article appears in print on March 25, 2016, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: Potent From Long Distances, Villanova Takes a Big Step .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.