AdvertisementSupported bySports BriefingThe United States’ ice hockey world championship campaign ended Thursday with a 2-0 quarterfinal loss to Finland in Cologne, Germany, after a record-equaling run of six straight victories for Coach Jeff Blashill’s young roster. Mikko Rantanen and Joonas Kemppainen scored as Finland booked its place in Saturday’s semifinals.Canada edged Germany, 2-1, to set up a semifinal showdown with Russia, which defeated the Czech Republic, 3-0, with goals from Dmitri Orlov, Nikita Kucherov and Artemi Panarin. Goals from Nicklas Backstrom, William Nylander and Alexander Edler gave Sweden a 3-1 win over Switzerland in Paris, setting up a meeting with Finland.Never known for haste, the World Anti-Doping Agency delivered two pieces of news that could strengthen its ability to hasten the end of the Russian doping scandal.In one move, the WADA foundation board pressed forward with a proposal to fast-track rules changes that would give it power to suspend noncompliant Olympic committees. That could prevent a repeat of last year, when the International Olympic Committee disregarded WADA’s recommendation to ban Russia from the Rio Games.And in the day’s big surprise, a WADA official said the pole vault champion Yelena Isinbayeva would be out as the chairwoman of Russia’s antidoping agency by the end of the month. Isinbayeva’s appointment has been criticized by WADA, track’s international federation and others.Rafael Nadal’s preparations for the French Open continued apace as he swept past Jack Sock, 6-3, 6-4, to ease into the Italian Open quarterfinals in Rome and extend his winning streak to 17 matches.The four-time champion Novak Djokovic is also safely through to the quarterfinals after beating Roberto Bautista Agut, 6-4, 6-4. Stan Wawrinka lost, 7-6 (1), 6-4, to John Isner, who served up 19 aces. In the women’s draw, Venus Williams defeated Johanna Konta, 6-1, 3-6, 6-1.SHARAPOVA GETS BIRMINGHAM WILD CARD Maria Sharapova was granted a wild card to play in the pre-Wimbledon tournament in Birmingham, England, two days after she was rejected by the French Open because of her doping ban.James Hahn birdied the final hole for a six-under-par 64 and a share of the first-round lead with Ricky Barnes in the Byron Nelson in Irving, Tex. Matt Kuchar, Jhonattan Vegas, Jason Kokrak and Cameron Tringale shot 66, and top-ranked Dustin Johnson topped the group at 67, a stroke ahead of Jason Day and Jordan Spieth.THOMPSON HOLDS ONE-SHOT EDGE Lexi Thompson had six birdies in a seven-hole stretch and finished with a six-under 65 to take the first-round lead in the Kingsmill Championship in Williamsburg, Va. Thompson had a one-stroke lead over Gerina Piller and Brittany Lincicome, her United States Solheim Cup teammates, and Angel Yin.FOUR TIED FOR FIRST IN CHAMPIONS MAJOR Scott McCarron eagled the par-5 18th hole for a seven-under 65 and a share of the first-round lead in the Regions Tradition, the first of the PGA Tour Champions’ five majors. Lee Janzen, Jeff Sluman and Miguel Ángel Jiménez joined McCarron atop the leader board in Birmingham, Ala.Toronto Blue Jays center fielder Kevin Pillar was suspended for two games after he yelled an anti-gay slur at a Braves pitcher. The Blue Jays suspended Pillar shortly after he apologized, saying he was “completely and utterly embarrassed” by his actions toward the pitcher, Jason Motte, during Atlanta’s 8-4 victory Wednesday night.BRAVES LOSE FREEMAN Atlanta first baseman Freddie Freeman, who is hitting .341 and was tied for the major league lead with 14 home runs, sustained a fractured left wrist when he was hit by a pitch Wednesday and is expected to miss about 10 weeks.RANGERS MAKE IT NINE IN A ROW Ryan Rua hit a tiebreaking three-run homer and the Texas Rangers stretched their majors-best winning streak to nine games with an 8-4 victory over Philadelphia.A WIN AND A HOME RUN Marcus Stroman threw five and two-thirds strong innings and hit the second homer by a pitcher in Toronto Blue Jays history in a 9-0 victory at Atlanta. The first such home run was by Mark Hendrickson in 2003.Maya Moore scored 12 points in the second half to lead a balanced Minnesota offense and help the Lynx beat the Liberty, 90-71, at Madison Square Garden. The Liberty (1-1) led, 45-43, before Minnesota scored 17 of the next 19 points.ALL-N.B.A. TEAM LeBron James of the Cavaliers, a four-time most valuable player, and James Harden of the Rockets, a top candidate this season, led the All-N.B.A. first team. James made the first team for the 11th time, matching a record set by Karl Malone and equaled by Kobe Bryant. Russell Westbrook of the Thunder, Kawhi Leonard of the Spurs and Anthony Davis of the Pelicans also made the team.The opening of the $2.6 billion football stadium under construction in Inglewood, Calif., has been pushed back one year to 2020 because of construction delays caused by Los Angeles’s uncommonly wet winter. A Los Angeles Rams spokesman confirmed the delay for the 70,000-seat stadium, which will be shared by the Rams and the Los Angeles Chargers.Advertisement