By ALLAN KREDAMARCH 24, 2016
Islanders center Frans Nielsen breathed a distinct sigh of relief after his team ended a four-game winless streak, its longest of the season, with a 3-1 home victory over Ottawa on Wednesday.Then he contemplated the road ahead for the Islanders, who are still battling for a playoff spot.Ten games remain, including six in the season’s final nine days. The schedule culminates with a makeup game on April 10 against the Philadelphia Flyers, one of the teams chasing the Islanders in the Eastern Conference standings.Entering Thursday’s games, the Islanders held the first wild-card spot, four points ahead of the Flyers and the Detroit Red Wings.“Hopefully we keep it together, but it’s going to be tough,” Nielsen said. “We’ve got to make sure to get rest where we can.”AdvertisementThe Islanders had Thursday off after the much-needed victory. They surely relished the rest, as the burden to make the most of their current opportunity is immense. For a franchise that has not won a postseason series since 1993 and is trying to make a splash in its first season in Brooklyn, the future most certainly is now.AdvertisementTwice in the past three seasons, the Islanders have reached the playoffs. And twice they were defeated in gripping and emotional first-round series. Nielsen said both experiences — and the grinding work required to simply reach the postseason — should prove beneficial in the weeks ahead for him and teammates like John Tavares, Kyle Okposo and Travis Hamonic.“We’ve come a long way, and I’ve learned a lot,” said Nielsen, 31, the longest-tenured Islander. “You definitely learn to play with pressure.”The Islanders have a two-game trip to Tampa Bay and Carolina on Friday and Saturday before returning home to play Carolina on Tuesday and Columbus on Thursday.Afterward, they have only two road games remaining: at Washington on April 5 and at the Rangers two days later. The Islanders have defeated the Rangers in all three of the games they have played this season.The Islanders have thrived at home, winning 22 of their first 35 contests in Brooklyn, with 48 home points overall. That success comes despite altered game-day routines. Since January, the Islanders have skated in the morning on Long Island before traveling to games in Brooklyn. Earlier in the season, they had tried morning skates at Barclays Center, but players ultimately did not like such long days away from home.“We’re starting to feel at home here with the whole routine and everything,” Nielsen said. “We have a lot of home games still coming up, so hopefully we can keep it up and get the points we need to get in.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Wednesday’s victory over Ottawa was notable for several reasons. It was only their second in eight contests (2-4-2) since the starting goaltender Jaroslav Halak went down with a lower-body injury on March 8. And it was the first time in that eight-game span in which they had a contest under control heading into the third period and held on to win.The victory provided another confidence boost for the rookie backup goalie Jean-Francois Berube. Berube, 24, who registered 13 playoff wins last spring to help lead the Manchester Monarchs to the American Hockey League championship, stopped 22 shots for his second N.H.L. win.Advertisement“We’re hungry,” said Berube, who was claimed off waivers from the Kings in October. “I think we played with a little bit of desperation. We were in a little bit of a slump, but we trust the group we have here. Everyone trusts each other.”The Islanders will need Berube and the de facto starter, Thomas Greiss, at their best down the stretch, especially since the team has been in an offensive funk, scoring only four goals in the four-game skid preceding the win over the Senators.Islanders Coach Jack Capuano has had three goaltenders on his roster in recent months. Halak contributed 18 wins before his injury. He recorded a career-best 38 victories last season, when the Islanders finished third in the Metropolitan Division with 101 points before losing to Washington in the first round in seven games.Greiss has played well, with 19 wins and a 2.29 goals-against average in his first season with the Islanders, but he has never started an N.H.L. playoff game. Berube’s play has been sparkling recently, giving Capuano confidence heading into the season’s final weeks.“When you have two guys that are battling, it’s all about healthy competition,” he said. “We have faith in both guys that if they get in there, they are going to help us do the job.”For many weeks, it appeared the Islanders were on course for a first-round meeting with the Rangers, whom they have not faced in the playoffs since 1994. But with the Pittsburgh Penguins surging recently, the Islanders could also find themselves starting the playoffs against Washington, which clinched the No. 1 seed in the East this week, Tampa Bay or Florida.That remains too far ahead to conjure for Tavares, the team’s captain, who leads the Islanders with 27 goals and 57 points.“You move on to Tampa Bay and start with that one,” he said.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.