By ROB HUGHESJUNE 10, 2016
LONDON —  If there is a dark horse outside of France, Germany or Spain to win the European Championship, Belgium is fancied to be that outside bet.But its team is an enigma. According to FIFA rankings, Belgium stands with Argentina as one of the top two teams in the world — which may tell us all we need to know about relating worth to statistics. What has Belgium or Argentina achieved over the last cycle of the World Cup, the European or the South American titles?And what must Germany or Spain do to achieve recognition for the trophies they won when the tournament pressure was on?Belgians have for some time referred to their current crop of players as the Golden Generation. There was no shortage of big clubs willing to spend lavishly for creative Belgian stars like Eden Hazard and Kevin De Bruyne, and strikers like Romelu Lukaku, Christian Benteke and Divock Origi, whose combined transfer fees totaled half a billion dollars.AdvertisementAll of those, and the goalkeeper Thibaut Courtois and defenders Vincent Kompany, Toby Alderweireld and Jan Vertonghen earn their fortunes in England’s Premier League.AdvertisementGood attributes for their clubs, no doubt. The conundrum is that when they go home, or when they go to major events for their national team, they haven’t yet jelled into the sum of their parts.That is Rule 1 in tournament soccer, and on Monday the Belgians must hit the ground running. They face Italy in Lyon, and while this is not by any means a special Italian era, any Azzurri team coached by Antonio Conte will show up with plenty of tournament savvy and determination.When the teams last met, Belgium won 3-1. That was a friendly match in Brussels back in November. Monday it will be down to business in Lyon.And in that arena, the Belgian coach, Marc Wilmots, must pit his wits against Conte’s. They are two obdurate men. But whereas Conte has shown his effectiveness in organizing Juventus to win three successive Serie A titles in Italy between 2012 and 2014 (and will move to England after this tournament to manage Chelsea), Wilmots has not had comparable coaching success.Indeed, he left soccer altogether for a time to represent the French-speaking center-right Mouvement Réformateur, or Reformist Movement, in the Senate. He soon returned from politics to the game that he once played as a big, forceful, scoring midfielder.For Belgium’s Red Devils, Wilmots scored 28 goals in 70 games. The jury is out on him as a coach. He took Belgium to the 2014 World Cup and narrowly beat Algeria, Russia, South Korea and the United States before losing, 1-0, to Argentina in the quarterfinals.Even Wilmots said later that his team would have to be more exciting, and play more to its strength, which lies in attack rather than with caution. The reformer hasn’t yet quite got that transition into place.AdvertisementHe is bold enough to pick youth, but with key defenders, notably Kompany, out of the Euro through injury, Wilmots lacks a convincing leader on the field.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.He gave that responsibility to Eden Hazard, who, by any assessment, is a talented individual. Gifted, and beautifully balanced when he runs at defenders from the left wing, Hazard is the enigma inside the enigma.He was Chelsea’s best player when it won the Premier League under José Mourinho the season before last. And Hazard was Chelsea’s worst player when the team, still coached by Mourinho, imploded the following season.Coincidentally, or not, Hazard was the player who lay injured on the ground and was treated by the team doctor, Eva Carneiro, right at the start of that second season. Carneiro did what doctors are supposed to do when someone is hurt; she rushed to Hazard.Mourinho jumped up and down with rage. He believed Hazard wasn’t injured and should have been left where he lay. The coach ranted at the doctor, and had her removed from all duties, leading to her eventually suing Mourinho and Chelsea.The case smoldered throughout the season. Mourinho was himself fired, and the case ended in an out-of-court settlement to the doctor from Chelsea. Mourinho, by then employed again as Manchester United’s manager, attended the tribunal but offered no apology.Why is this of significance to Belgium’s chances at the European Championship? Hazard was a symbol of Chelsea under Mourinho: One season he was so brilliant that his fellow professionals chose him as the player of the season. The next, he was accused by Mourinho of not defending well enough from his position on the wing; and Hazard appeared dulled by the hectoring he took from the manager, and disillusioned, perhaps, by the fallout from Mourinho’s dispute with Carneiro.Yet under Chelsea’s interim coach, the experienced Dutchman Guus Hiddink, Hazard regained some joy toward the end of the English season. Under Wilmots at the Belgians’ camp at Le Plan-Médoc near Bordeaux, France, the winger is scoring again and has been named captain and team spokesman.Wilmots is searching for a leader. The coach needs these players, some of whom he gave their chance for Belgium now almost four years ago. This, for the time being, is a quieter Wilmots than the one who set out to dictate the way his Golden Generation would play.AdvertisementNow, after losing three top defenders in the weeks before the tournament, Wilmots told reporters: “It’s sad for the boys, but that’s life. Even with all these injured players, I have a defense with Toby Alderweireld, Jason Denayer, Thomas Vermaelen and Jan Vertonghen. It’s not too bad after all.”Ahead of that defense, Belgium has to find a balance, a rhythm and a quicker way of moving the ball between midfield to the strikers than has been the case.Italy will be the first to test Belgium’s chances of being the dark horse.A version of this article appears in print on June 11, 2016, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.