AdvertisementSupported byBy Benjamin HoffmanDuring the second quarter of what would eventually be a humbling 30-point loss to the Cleveland Cavaliers in Game 3 of the N.B.A. finals, Stephen Curry of the Golden State Warriors, the first unanimous choice for most valuable player in N.B.A. history, found himself on the bench. He was not there to rest, or to recover from an injury, but simply because he was playing poorly and the team needed to try something else to compete.Warriors Coach Steve Kerr tried to cover for Curry after the game, saying he just had something he wanted to talk to Curry about, but Curry left no ambiguity as to the motivation for his benching, which was truly unusual for a player of his stature.“I would have done the same thing,” said Curry, who had 2 points and 3 fouls in the first half. “He was trying to get us some life and figure out a way to get me going.”Curry finished the game with an un-M.V.P.-like line of 19 points, 3 assists, 6 turnovers and 4 fouls. Other than a few brief moments in the second half, he barely made a dent against a relentless Cleveland defense.In a series in which LeBron James has nearly averaged a triple-double but was scrutinized after Game 2 for not taking over games more, Curry has yet to score 20 points in a game. He has had trouble hitting shots, trouble with fouls, trouble with turnovers and seemed positively human after a season in which he seemingly scored at will regardless of who was covering him or how far away he was from the basket.Kerr, who learned the power of brevity in his years with Coach Gregg Popovich of the San Antonio Spurs, summed up the performance by saying, “He didn’t play well.”In many ways, the struggles to make a dent in the finals go back to last season. Curry’s teams have won six of the nine games he has played in the finals over the last two seasons and, even with Wednesday’s loss, the Warriors appear to be in the driver’s seat for back-to-back titles with their two games to one lead. But Curry has yet to have a signature game. He has scored more than 30 points just once in the finals — a 37-point performance in Game 5 last season — and his two-year average of 22.7 points a game is more than 7 points a game lower than what he averaged per game this season.Curry acknowledged Cleveland’s effort, but personally took the blame for his performance in Game 3.“Unfortunately, it was all me,” Curry said. “They were playing aggressive defense, and they came out with a big punch, and I didn’t do anything about it or play my game. For me to do what I need to do to help my team, I have to play a hundred times better than I did.”Many say the Curry era has eclipsed the James era. It will be interesting to see if the pressure James endures begins to surround Curry, not only to win games and titles, but also to provide jaw-dropping performances rather than just well-fought games in which his team wins with depth and strategy.That impossible standard was again imposed on James when Phil Jackson, the team president of the Knicks, said Monday that it was James’s responsibility to get his team back into this series after bad losses in the first games of the series.Jackson made a reference to Michael Jordan leading the Chicago Bulls to a come-from-behind series victory over the Knicks in the 1993 Eastern Conference finals, saying the performance woke up something in Jordan.“You learned something about pulling the cape of Superman,” Jackson said. “It’s not a good idea. He was a man possessed after that. I think it’s going to take something for LeBron to step into that. Put his cape on and say, ‘I’m going to have to take over a lot of this series, doing the things beyond my level or my normal capacity.’”While James rejected the notion that he had to be like Jordan, or anyone else,, to help his team, he then went out and had a 32-point, 11-rebound, 6-assist game, throwing down several emphatic dunks, making several key shots and bringing an energy to his team that had been lacking since the Eastern Conference finals.Curry is capable of having a similar impact, as evidenced by his record-breaking 17-point overtime outburst in Game 4 of his team’s second-round series against Portland. After Wednesday’s game, he acknowledged that pressure was mounting for him to play to his capabilities heading into Friday.“There’s a sense of urgency knowing how big Game 4 is,” Curry said. “I need to be ready.”Advertisement