AdvertisementSupported byYankees 12, Angels 6By Seth BerkmanBefore Wednesday’s game against the Los Angeles Angels, Carlos Beltran was at his locker looking particularly trendy, wearing a hat made by a popular surfing company. Sitting with his hands folded, veins bulging from his biceps, Beltran was asked if, at 39, he felt old.“I come, I do my lifting, I work out, and I don’t feel right now like it hurts,” he said. “It feels like I’m enjoying what I’m doing.”Beltran’s once questionable knees have admirably withstood the weight of carrying the Yankees’ offense this season, including a power performance in the Yankees’ home victory Wednesday over the Angels, 12-6. The Yankees will continue to rely on his contributions heavily as they head into a vital stretch in the coming weeks before the Aug. 1 nonwaiver trade deadline.If the rest of the Yankees’ lineup is unable to match Beltran’s output, he could be an appealing asset for a team looking for an offensive upgrade.Before Wednesday, Beltran led the club in games played, runs, doubles, home runs, R.B.I. and slugging percentage and was tied with Starlin Castro for the team lead in hits.“I think he’s having an All-Star year,” Manager Joe Girardi said. “Without him, I don’t know where we would be at.”In the sixth inning, Beltran broke a 5-5 tie by lining a double to left field off reliever Jose Alvarez, scoring Jacoby Ellsbury. He added a two-run homer in the seventh inning, his third in three games and his fourth this month.Over all, Beltran has 16 home runs, a mark he did not reach last season until Sept. 19.“He’s been so big for this offense,” Girardi said. “Just big hit, after big hit, after big hit. Another huge night tonight for us. He’s solidified the third spot in the order and has done a great job.”Ellsbury and Brett Gardner each scored three runs, Chris Parmelee had two home runs, and the Yankees collected 17 hits to help rescue Nathan Eovaldi, who allowed five runs on 10 hits.“If the top of the lineup is capable of putting themselves in the basepaths, we’re going to give our team a great chance of winning ball games,” Beltran said.With Mark Teixeira on the disabled list and Alex Rodriguez and McCann experiencing prolonged slumps at times, Beltran has been the lone slugging veteran to consistently produce like the Yankees expected when they hedged against rebuilding by sticking with an aging lineup this season.Beltran’s career as a Yankee did not start glowingly. Elbow injuries shortened his first season with the team, in 2014. Before he signed with the Yankees, he already carried the onerous tag of having damaged knees. On Wednesday, Beltran said he had not iced his knees in five or six years and that they were no longer a problem for his performance.“I think he’s healthy,” Girardi said. “The first year he had multiple injuries and ended up having surgery at the end. I think he got off to a slow start probably because of that surgery. If you look at since like the middle of May, last June, he’s swung the bat extremely well.”Despite his credentials and his durability, Beltran is most likely not part of the Yankees’ long-term plans. Aside from age, his diminishing ability as an everyday outfielder pegs Beltran for a designated hitter role after this year. Rodriguez, who is signed for another year, currently inhabits that spot for the Yankees.Beltran said he would like to play two more years to accrue 20 full seasons at the major league level, preferably with a World Series contender. Before the game, he occasionally sounded resigned to the fact that he might play elsewhere next season, explaining that he was no longer surprised by the direction of the winds that guide the business of baseball but that he had not abandoned hope for this year.There are signs that Beltran is onto something. The offense is beginning to liven up. The Yankees have won three straight games, during which they have hit nine home runs. In six of their last seven games, the Yankees have scored five runs or more.After the game, Beltran was asked if he hoped the recent improved play by the Yankees would persuade the front office not to break up the roster and to give them a chance to prove that they can contend with their current pieces, him included.“I wish I could say yes,” Beltran said. “I want to say that I believe in what I’m seeing right now.”Advertisement