JULY 30, 2016
To the Sports Editor:Re “A Career Transition, Inspired by One of the N.F.L.’s Best,” July 25: I have always looked forward to William C. Rhoden’s columns for his being an advocate for the highest level of ethics and equity in sports, so while I truly honor his decision to venture into new initiatives, I will also miss him. I especially felt this loss today because I immediately looked forward to his response to Michael Jordan’s statement on the police killings of African-Americans and the shooting of police officers, and his donation of $1 million each to the International Association of Chiefs of Police’s Institute for Community-Police Relations and the N.A.A.C.P. Legal Defense Fund. In the past, Mr. Rhoden has been critical of Michael Jordan’s refusal to “become publicly involved in racial and political issues.”Michael L. ShawMahopac, N.Y.To the Sports Editor:Congratulations to William C. Rhoden for ending his illustrious career as a sportswriter at The Times while still at the top of his game. But his column, his unique voice, will be sorely missed. He brought to bear a critical, historical and social perspective and, in his own words, a refreshing “need to challenge and resist authority” — qualities missing in much of contemporary sports reporting. His greatest columns for The Times will be read in journalism classes for years to come.Ralph EngelmanBrooklynThe writer is a senior professor and chairman of journalism and communication studies at Long Island University.To the Sports Editor:Re “N.B.A. to Move All-Star Game in Protest Over Bathroom Law,” July 22: The N.B.A.’s decision to pull the 2017 All-Star game from Charlotte over North Carolina’s House Bill 2 is the latest attempt on the part of critics to decry the state’s bathroom bill. Despite pressure from the N.B.A. and like-minded corporations to compromise the directive, Gov. Pat McCrory has shown no evidence of capitulating to their demands, according to National Review.AdvertisementIn a letter to the commissioner, Representative Robert Pittenger asked why the N.B.A. has no scruples over selling tickets to games in China — a country noted for its dismal human-rights record — while protesting what it calls “discriminatory” laws in North Carolina. As he put it, “Is the N.B.A. implying China’s abhorrent violation of basic human rights is acceptable, but North Carolina saying men shouldn’t use the girls’ locker room is a bridge too far?”AdvertisementIf Charlotte were to lose $100 million in economic activity over the directive, as some would suggest, that is a small price to pay for upholding the moral integrity that is so sorely lacking in today’s upside-down world.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Brian StuckeyDenverTo the Sports Editor:The N.B.A. is to be congratulated for its decision to remove the All-Star game from North Carolina. Governor McCrory’s reaction, complaining of corporate interference in the right of municipalities to generate their own laws, is particularly ironic considering the extent to which his party is influenced by corporate money itself.The more important aspect of this issue, and one understandably avoided by many of those on the right, is the insistence that federalism is, in almost all respects, to be shunned in favor of local political activity.It is worthy to note that the ordinance the governor finds so objectionable is a city ordinance, propounded at the smallest level, and in no way affects other municipalities. While those on the right try to obscure it, they are attempting to do with state interference in Charlotte’s business what they find so objectionable on a nationwide level.Mark SchoferProvidence, R.I.To the Sports Editor:If the N.B.A. is genuinely concerned about human rights, it will be interesting to see which city’s “climate” it deems to be satisfactory. Is there a city with no racial discrimination, no violence, no poverty, where every citizen can access safe housing and quality education, where men and women are paid equal wages for equal work, where seniors and veterans enjoy affordable health care, and everyone has clean drinking water? Perhaps the real question is: Does the N.B.A. really care enough about human rights to find it?Joyce StigterMedicine Hat, AlbertaA version of this letter appears in print on July 31, 2016, on Page SP12 of the New York edition with the headline: Columnist’s Critical Voice Is Already Missed.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.