By MIKE VORKUNOVNOV. 6, 2016
Derrick Rose heaved his head up and rolled his eyes back, letting out a groan audible enough to demonstrate his disgust.It was one particular statistic that brought out his disdain, although on this afternoon, it could have been any one of many. In falling, 114-109, to the Utah Jazz on Sunday at Madison Square Garden, the Knicks found disarray.They had taken an early 13-point lead and let it dissolve. Their defense, as it has been for six games now, was a discombobulated combination, confused at times, lackluster at others. The Jazz shot 50.7 percent from the field, with most of the damage done in the second half. But more than anything, it was the Jazz’s 35 free throws — a symbol of the Knicks’ self-defeating ways — that left Rose frustrated.This was, after all the commotion, a game the Knicks thought should have been theirs for the taking, not a loss that dropped them to 2-4. The unity and optimism that filled the Knicks after a victory at Chicago on Friday were lost somewhere in the fourth quarter as Utah pulled away. The Knicks were left tracking back, answering for numerous mistakes and unable to explain their defeat.Advertisement“I don’t know,” Carmelo Anthony said. “It’s kind of hard to pinpoint at this point. This is a game we let slide and slip away from us. We gave this game away. Whatever was the cause of it, we let this one out of our hands.”AdvertisementIt would be hard to fault Anthony. He scored 28 points and grabbed nine rebounds. Kristaps Porzingis scored 28, too — 14 of them in the first quarter as the Knicks jumped to a double-digit lead not long after the noon tip-off. In fact, it would have been difficult to blame the offense or even one individual.The Knicks continued to score at a sufficient pace, hitting just over half of their 83 shots and showing the offensive fervor that has buoyed them after an opening-night blowout in Cleveland.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The problem for the Knicks was another teamwide defensive failing. They have yet to hold an opponent to fewer than 100 points in a game this season and continue to struggle against the pick-and-roll — a bread-and-butter play across the N.B.A.“That’s the way the game of basketball is being played these days; regardless of whether we want to admit to it or not, that’s the game of basketball,” Anthony said. “Everybody runs it. If you can figure out a way how to stop that, you think you can be successful.”This time, it was George Hill and Gordon Hayward who ran the Knicks until they were disoriented and their game plan was broken. The Knicks had hoped to force the Jazz’s secondary players into decision-making roles, but Hayward scored 28 points, and Hill added 23 points and 9 assists. Too often, the Jazz used their pick-and-roll to facilitate open shots and easy baskets at the rim.Jeff Hornacek, the Knicks’ coach, rued all the breakdowns as Utah hit 63.2 percent of its second-half shots.The Knicks were at their worst in the fourth quarter. They led by 2 at the start of the period, but Hornacek did not put a single starter on the court, and the Jazz scored 7 consecutive points before he called a timeout 1 minute 42 seconds into the quarter.AdvertisementThe Knicks did not recover, trailing the rest of the game as they made mistake after mistake. One led to a Hayward dunk, another to a Rodney Hood slam.“It was defense the entire game,” said Rose, who had 18 points and 8 assists. “We have to figure out what we want to do with the 1-3 and 1-4 pick-and-roll. It was multiple times where two guys went to one guy, or it was just miscommunication, and they made us pay for it.”It all seemed familiar, perhaps because it was difficult to tease apart one bad defensive effort from another. The Houston Rockets had turned the Knicks’ defense into mush last week, as the Cavaliers had in the opener.On Sunday, the Knicks were left droning on about poor communication once again, agreeing that their defense must improve.A version of this article appears in print on November 7, 2016, on Page D7 of the New York edition with the headline: Knicks’ Offense Hums Again, but Defense Remains Stuck in the Mud.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.