By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSMAY 20, 2017
Venus Williams is out of the Italian Open after being defeated Friday in the quarterfinals, 6-2, 3-6, 6-2, by Garbiñe Muguruza, the third seed and the defending French Open champion.Muguruza raced to a 4-0 lead against Williams, who was seeded ninth, and comfortably closed out the first set. The 36-year-old Williams rallied in the second, but Muguruza broke her three times in the final set to secure the win.Muguruza will next face No. 8 seed Elina Svitolina, who beat second-seeded Karolina Pliskova, 6-2, 7-6 (9).Nashville center Ryan Johansen will miss the rest of the Stanley Cup playoffs after emergency surgery on a left thigh injury, leaving the Predators without their top scorer heading into Game 5 of the Western Conference finals against the Anaheim Ducks on Saturday night.AdvertisementJohansen was injured during the Ducks’ overtime victory in Game 4, which evened the series. He leads the Predators with 13 points in 14 playoff games.AdvertisementNew England Patriots quarterback Tom Brady never received a concussion diagnosis during the 2016 season despite his wife’s recent comments, his agent, Don Yee, said in a statement obtained by NFL Network.Yee’s statement was a response to remarks by Brady’s wife, Gisele Bündchen, who said this week on “CBS This Morning” that Brady “had a concussion last year.”Yee’s statement came on the same day the British luxury car manufacturer Aston Martin announced that Brady had signed a multiyear endorsement deal to pitch a model that starts at $211,995. (REUTERS)BROWNS SIGN NO. 1 PICK Myles Garrett, a defensive end who was the No. 1 overall pick in last month’s draft, signed his four-year rookie contract with the Cleveland Browns. It included a $20.3 million guaranteed signing bonus.The University of Iowa will pay $6.5 million to settle discrimination lawsuits filed by the former athletic administrator Jane Meyer and her partner, the former women’s field hockey coach Tracey Griesbaum.Jurors this month found that Iowa officials discriminated against Meyer based on her gender and sexual orientation, retaliated against her for speaking out and paid her less than a male counterpart.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Jason Kokrak shot a bogey-free eight-under-par 62 for a five-stroke lead after two rounds at the Byron Nelson in Irving, Tex. The local favorite Jordan Spieth quadruple-bogeyed No. 16 and missed the cut for the first time at the tournament where he made his debut as a 16-year-old.Advertisement L.P.G.A. KINGSMILL CHAMPIONSHIP Lexi Thompson shot a bogey-free six-under 65 to stretch her lead to three strokes after the second round in Williamsburg, Va.(AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE)REGIONS TRADITION Fred Funk shot a seven-under 65 to take the second-round lead in Birmingham, Ala. Funk had a one-stroke lead over Scott Parel in the first of five PGA Tour Champions majors.The referee Bibiana Steinhaus has been promoted to the Bundesliga for next season and will be the first woman working games in Germany’s top division.Steinhaus, 38, refereed the 2011 Women’s World Cup final and the women’s final at the 2012 London Olympics, and she will work the Women’s Champions League final on June 1 in Cardiff, Wales.Aric Almirola has been advised he could miss up to three months of the Nascar season with a fractured vertebra.Almirola said he will heed his doctor’s warnings and not rush his way back to a racecar. He also said doctors warned him that further injury could lead to paralysis.Almirola sustained a compression fracture of his T5 vertebra after he crashed Saturday night at Kansas Speedway in Kansas City, Kan.In his Grand Tour debut, the Colombian rider Fernando Gaviria sprinted to his fourth stage victory at the Giro d’Italia.AdvertisementGaviria came from the back and around the right side of the sprinters to edge Sam Bennett and win the 13th stage. Jasper Stuyven was third at the end of the completely flat 104-mile route from Reggio Emilia to Tortona.The Dutch rider Tom Dumoulin retained the pink jersey as the overall leader. Dumoulin’s lead remained 2 minutes 23 seconds ahead of the 2014 winner Nairo Quintana.TOUR OF CALIFORNIA The English cyclist Jon Dibben won the race’s sixth stage, and New Zealand’s George Bennett roared past Rafal Majka to take the overall lead with one stage to go. Dibben covered the 15-mile time trial course around Big Bear Lake in 28 minutes 27 seconds.Liberty guard Brittany Boyd tore her left Achilles’ tendon, the team announced. A magnetic resonance imaging exam confirmed the injury that she sustained in a loss to Minnesota on Thursday night. She will have surgery Monday. The Liberty did not give a timeline for her return.A version of this article appears in print on May 20, 2017, on Page D4 of the New York edition with the headline: Tennis; Williams Falls to Muguruza in Italian Open.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.