By FILIP BONDYNOV. 6, 2016
HARRISON, N.J. — Yet another promising autumn ended in familiar, exasperating fashion for the Red Bulls, who were knocked out of the M.L.S. Eastern Conference semifinals Sunday after a second successive defeat, 2-1, to a supposedly inferior opponent that had dropped its last seven matches at the stadium in Harrison.The Impact captured the home-and-away series, 3-1, on aggregate score, following their 1-0 victory a week earlier in Montreal. The win at Red Bull Arena was fashioned with a staunch, organized defense that did not bend often, and by two well-struck countering goals by the Argentine midfielder Ignacio Piatti.The killer moment arrived in the 51st minute, when Piatti froze the young defender Chris Duvall with a quick cut to the left, then banged a high, left-footed rocket past goalkeeper Luis Robles for the first score.Robles, a top keeper in M.L.S., normally makes that save, and Red Bulls midfielder Sacha Kljestan normally converts the penalty kick he did not finish in the 21st minute. But there is never much normal about the playoffs for this franchise, so both events broke the wrong way for the Red Bulls.AdvertisementRobles said Piatti’s shot “knuckled” on its way into the net. It was the Impact’s first real scoring opportunity, and it meant that the Red Bulls would need at least three goals to advance because of the away-goals tiebreaker.Advertisement“I felt like we dominated every statistical category,” Coach Jesse Marsch said after the Red Bulls outshot Montreal, 17-7. “It’s a weird sport that way. I don’t know any other sport you can dominate so much and not be victorious. I felt good about our tactics, good about our approach. I’m gutted for my team, my staff, the organization and our fan base.”The Red Bulls have never won the M.L.S. Cup in their 21 seasons — making them the closest thing in this league to baseball’s Cubs, before Chicago finally found the right stuff. The Red Bulls entered this series on a 16-match unbeaten streak in league play that earned them the Eastern Conference crown, only to be eliminated decisively by a club that finished in fifth place and does not start its celebrity striker, Didier Drogba.Marsch’s high-press style has not fared well in his two tightly marked postseasons with the Red Bulls. Relentless attacking has failed to create enough goals against strong defensive teams, which simply absorb the pressure and lay in wait for deadly counters. Marsch insisted, however, that the club’s trademark style would not change.“We won’t re-examine that at all,” he said. “If we’re sharp around the ball, this series could have been handled fairly easily. This is who we are. It’s bigger than me, bigger than anybody. We all know we’re on the right path.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Red Bulls got one goal back to tie the game, 1-1, in the 77th minute. Bradley Wright-Phillips received a back pass from Daniel Royer and slotted a shot to the right past goalkeeper Evan Bush.That was not nearly enough. The final minutes of the match produced only frenzied desperation, filled with near misses and gasps from the disappointed crowd, announced at 24,314.Piatti guaranteed the victory in the 85th minute by finishing a two-on-one breakaway on a pass from Drogba, an 80th-minute substitute.Advertisement“If you want to see how an underdog team can win a game like that, just look at Montreal,” the Red Bulls’ Mike Grella said. “They were smart. They fouled. They slowed the game down. They did exactly what they had to do.”The Red Bulls parked in Montreal’s half of the field from the opening whistle, as expected, while the Impact employed eight men behind the ball in a well-constructed defensive shell. Eventually, the Red Bulls earned a penalty kick when Gonzalo Veron dashed for a ball in the box and was tripped by Bush.Kljestan stepped to the spot in the 21st minute and fired a waist-high bullet to Bush’s right. Bush guessed correctly, diving to deflect away an effort that should have been lower and closer to the post.“Unfortunately, I lifted it a little bit and made it easier for him to save it,” Kljestan said.If there was one player capable of solving Montreal’s catenaccio-style soccer, it was Kljestan, a remarkable playmaker and touch player who on Sunday was again named by Jurgen Klinsmann to the United States national team roster in advance of World Cup qualifiers. Kljestan was deemed so valuable in this match that Marsch stuck with 10 players on the field for more than 12 minutes while Kljestan tried to stem the bleeding from his nose in the 24th minute after a collision on a header.Kljestan played the rest of the match with a noticeably bent nose and nostrils filled with bloody cotton, hardly an ideal situation.“The blood wouldn’t stop,” Kljestan said. “It was running down my throat, and I didn’t know whether I could play again.”He did, but it was not nearly enough.An article on Monday about the Montreal Impact’s 2-1 victory over the Red Bulls in the second leg of their Major League Soccer Eastern Conference semifinal misstated the given name of the midfielder who scored both Montreal goals. He is Ignacio Piatti, not Ianacio.A version of this article appears in print on November 7, 2016, on Page D5 of the New York edition with the headline: Red Bulls Take Their Familiar Tumble From the Postseason.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.