

 Scott Cacciola
 

ON PRO BASKETBALL
APRIL 18, 2017
Russell Westbrook, a star guard for the Oklahoma City Thunder and one-man performance show, emerged from Tuesday’s practice wearing a Jordan jacket, earbuds and a vague smile.Along the baseline, a sea of reporters awaited his presence so they could ask questions about the Thunder’s first-round playoff game against the Houston Rockets on Wednesday night. But first, Westbrook wanted to take a few more set shots in flip-flops before he dribbled over to the waiting punditry.He cleared some space for himself. He does not like to be crowded.“We gonna keep everybody back,” he said. “Y’all just keep y’all distance. I can talk.”He took one hard dribble and lost control of the ball, which ricocheted off a reporter’s forehead, leaving his sunglasses askew.Advertisement“Whoa!” Westbrook said. “Oh, my bad. My fault. Accident.”Westbrook, who happens to be an amazing basketball player, is never boring. He can be combative and moody and fussy. He can be funny and insightful and witty. And he can be all those things in a span of 4 minutes 24 seconds, which he was on Tuesday afternoon during his obligatory session with the news media. (Full disclosure: He was mostly combative.)AdvertisementThe Thunder got blown out in Sunday’s series opener, and Westbrook played poorly. He shot 6 of 23 from the field, committed nine turnovers and spent an unpleasant evening in the company of the Rockets’ Patrick Beverley, who draped himself over Westbrook like a bathrobe. Westbrook said he had been watching film to prepare for Game 2. Had he studied Beverley at all?“I don’t watch the other team,” he said. “I just watch what I’m doing. I never worry about what other guys are doing, or what they’re doing. It doesn’t bother me. I’ve seen it all already.”But does it give you any added motivation to play against a guy who has been on the league’s all-defensive team?“Well, my opinion of all-defensive team is different from you guys,” Westbrook said. “You can check and find out and see what criteria goes into all-defensive team. I don’t really know what the criteria is, or what you consider all-defense. He’s a good defender for their team, but I don’t worry about nobody, how they’re defending. I can pretty much do what I want to do.”Fine, then what is your criteria for the all-defensive team?“I don’t know,” Westbrook said.Of course, you do.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I don’t,” he said. “How you gonna tell me what I know? I don’t have a criteria. I don’t put together the all-defensive team.”Should your teammate Andre Roberson be in the conversation?“Yep,” Westbrook said.For however long the Thunder’s playoff run lasts — and after Sunday’s result, it may not last long — Westbrook will continue to be the center of attention. As if anyone needs reminding, he assembled one of the great regular seasons in the history of the N.B.A. He coped with Kevin Durant's leaving the Thunder by averaging 31.6 points, 10.7 rebounds and 10.4 assists a game. He was the first player to average a triple-double in 55 years. He hauled the Thunder to 47 victories. And he is likely to win the Most Valuable Player Award.AdvertisementBut the Rockets are another challenge altogether. In Game 1, James Harden punished the Thunder’s bigger, slower defenders on pick-and-rolls, scoring 37 points in a 31-point win. The Thunder wanted to take away the 3-point line, so Harden drove for layups. The problem for the Thunder is that if they choose to protect the paint, Harden will gladly shoot over the top of them.The Rockets have more depth and more scoring power, and they are capable of creating more mismatches. Given the circumstances, it would be easy to discount the Thunder, except that Westbrook plays for them. Thunder center Steven Adams said that nothing about Westbrook’s approach or attitude had changed in the two days since Game 1.“He’s the same dude,” Adams said. “It’s the same stuff. It’s all basketball.”Speaking of which, before Game 1, Westbrook spoke at length about how the basketball was his “one friend” whenever he took the court. On Tuesday, he seemed miffed that some people — according to him, at least — had taken his words and used them to make him out to be some kind of loner.“I think y’all think it’s a joke,” Westbrook said. “This is a serious thing. This is something that’s important. I think y’all think, like, ‘Oh, you only have one friend? The basketball’s your only friend.’“All these guys are my brothers, my teammates. James is a friend of mine,” he said, referring to Harden. “There are other friends I have in the league.”He glanced at the ball that he was cradling in his hands.“But at the same time,” he said, “when I get on the floor, this is the most important thing for me, and just how I do what I need to do. So it’s actually not a joke. Just to make that known.”Westbrook does not often have two substandard games in a row, and it would be surprising if he did not create trouble for the Rockets on Wednesday. He tends to make his presence felt. He is the most disruptive force in the game, in the best way possible.On Tuesday, having cleared the air about his special relationship with the ball, Westbrook ceded the stage to Adams, who began to answer a question about his defense.“Steven!” Westbrook shouted from across the court. “Remember what I told you yesterday.”“Pardon?” Adams asked.AdvertisementWestbrook repeated himself. Adams paused.“Sorry,” Adams said. “I lost my train of thought.”A version of this article appears in print on April 19, 2017, on Page B8 of the New York edition with the headline: Triple Threat Suddenly Faces A Singular Task.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »