By JAMES WAGNERJULY 8, 2017
ST. LOUIS — It was a showdown on Friday between two of the better starting pitchers in the National League: Jacob deGrom of the Mets and Carlos Martinez of the St. Louis Cardinals. Martinez was selected to the All-Star Game, and deGrom, who was not, had a borderline case as a potential reserve.Baseball these days, however, seems to be more about power hitting and less about stout pitching, no matter how talented the man on the mound. This season’s home run rate is the highest of all time, though solid explanations for that increase are scarce.Whatever the reason, the ball was flying all over the place on a warm summer evening in the Mets’ 6-5 win at Busch Stadium.“I know the ball, there’s nothing wrong with it, it’s the same ball we’re always using,” said Mets Manager Terry Collins, alluding to speculation that a change in the balls had led to the home run spike. “But we gotta get the bats checked because there are some balls flying. I didn’t even think some of those balls were being hit and they were no-doubters.”AdvertisementBy the fifth inning, fans had been treated to six home run trots. Martinez allowed only two of them — to Jose Reyes and Jay Bruce — but his uneven command ultimately did him in. He walked three Mets and also allowed three doubles over five innings.AdvertisementDeGrom surrendered a career-high four home runs — thankfully for the Mets, they were all solo shots — and still eked out the win. More important, he gave up no walks, limiting the damage of the home runs, and he escaped jams with two double plays over seven innings.“The ace isn’t going to pitch like the ace every single time, but if he keeps you in the game, that’s huge,” Bruce said of deGrom.Two of the home runs deGrom allowed — to Paul DeJong in the third inning and to Dexter Fowler in the fourth — were on pitches over the heart of the plate. But the other two — to Randal Grichuk and Jedd Gyorko — were on balls thrown near the edges of the plate that both hitters somehow muscled into the stands.“A couple of those balls,” deGrom said, stopping for a long sigh, “I don’t know if they should’ve gone out, but whatever.”DeGrom said the scouting report showed that Grichuk performed poorly on high fastballs, but he hit out a 95-mile-per-hour fastball near his chest. “I honestly didn’t think he got all of that ball,” deGrom said.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.DeGrom had no theories about the sport’s increasing home run rate and acknowledged it was “interesting.” But Bruce, a consistent power hitter throughout his career, had some ideas.“I think it has a lot to do with the velocity of pitches and people trying to hit fly balls,” he said. “You can go on all different theories about the balls and what they’re made of, but I don’t have any proof.”AdvertisementDespite the long balls and the frustration on his face after each one, deGrom gave the Mets a chance to win and capped his odd first half of the season.As the rotation stumbled or fell to injury around deGrom, he made every start. But he, too, fluctuated between dominant and woeful, resulting in an E.R.A. of 3.65 entering the All-Star break.On Friday, deGrom’s just-good-enough pitching allowed Collins to play the matchups with the bullpen. It helped that the Mets had a lead thanks to Bruce and T. J. Rivera. Bruce’s solo home run, his 22nd of the season, broke a 4-4 tie in the fifth inning. Rivera’s run-scoring double two innings later gave the Mets a two-run lead.The Mets’ offense should receive a boost on Saturday, when outfielder Michael Conforto, the team’s lone representative in the All-Star Game, was expected to be activated from the disabled list. Conforto has been out since June 28 with a bruised left hand.Conforto played in a minor league rehabilitation game on Thursday with Class A St. Lucie. Collins said Conforto felt soreness in his hand in his final at-bat, but Conforto considered it a residual effect of returning to play.When he woke up on Friday, Conforto said, his hand “felt great.” He joined the Mets in St. Louis on Friday and took batting practice before the game. By returning this weekend, Conforto is hoping to prove he can play in Tuesday’s All-Star Game in Miami.“That would be a lot of fun,” he said. “It’s something I really want to do. And if I’m playing tomorrow and the next, and I feel good, that’s a real option. I’m planning on playing.”While waiting for Conforto’s return, the Mets had just enough firepower to earn a win on Friday. Bruce and Rivera gave the Mets wiggle room to withstand Jerry Blevins and Paul Sewald’s combining to allow a run in the eighth inning on a sacrifice fly by Gyorko.Addison Reed, the Mets’ closer, gave up a few hard-hit balls to the outfield in the ninth, within reach of center fielder Curtis Granderson. Those balls, however, would stay inside the stadium.AdvertisementINSIDE PITCHAhead of Friday evening’s deadline to sign players selected in the June draft, the Mets inked their first-round pick, the left-handed pitcher David Peterson, from the University of Oregon. He signed for a little less than $3 million, the slot value for his pick, 20th over all. He will begin his professional career at short-season Class A Brooklyn.A version of this article appears in print on July 8, 2017, on Page D3 of the New York edition with the headline: DeGrom Escapes Despite A Barrage of Home Runs.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.