AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressNUITS-SAINT-GEORGES, France — After a stage decided by millimeters and sprinters, it is time for some significant gaps to open between the leaders in the Tour de France.The race heads into the mountains this weekend, and Chris Froome, who holds the leader’s jersey, is looking forward to evaluating his challengers.“This weekend, we will see exactly where everyone’s at,” Froome said, explaining that the top 10 riders were still too close together for him to single out a primary rival.There are three climbs in the 116-mile Stage 8 from Dole on Saturday, which finishes at the Rousses ski station in the Jura Mountains, close to the border with Switzerland. Those climbs will serve as a warm-up for the tough Stage 9 in the Alps on Sunday, which has seven climbs, including three with the “hors catégorie” rating, which designates climbs with difficulty levels that are deemed beyond categorization.“The bigger obstacles will come on Sunday,” Froome said. “It should be a big weekend of racing. That’s what we spend all season training for.”Froome remained 12 seconds ahead of his Sky teammate Geraint Thomas and 14 seconds ahead of the Stage 5 winner, Fabio Aru.Dan Martin was fourth, 25 seconds behind, and Froome’s former teammate Richie Porte was fifth, 39 seconds back.Back down on the flats on Friday, Stage 7 was won by Marcel Kittel in a photo finish.Kittel made his move late — almost too late — and edged Edvald Boasson Hagen by a quarter of an inch to win his third stage of the race, and his second in two days. Michael Matthews finished third.Kittel seemed sure he won, holding up three fingers to celebrate his three stage wins.“It was super, super close,” Kittel said. “When there’s a photo finish, you have your doubts. I was lucky.”It was Kittel’s 12th career win at the Tour, tying him with Erik Zabel for the German record.Kittel clocked slightly more than five hours over the mostly flat 132-mile leg from Troyes in Champagne country to Nuits-Saint-Georges in the heart of the Burgundy winemaking region.Boasson Hagen took over the leadership duties at Team Dimension Data after Mark Cavendish left the race with a broken shoulder this week. The world champion Peter Sagan was disqualified from the Tour after causing Cavendish’s crash.The victory helped Kittel take the green points jersey from the French national champion, Arnaud Démare, who finished 11th.Kittel is aiming to wear green all the way to the finish in Paris on July 23. Sagan won the green jersey the past five Tours.The southeasterly route passed by the mustard capital of Dijon, and then concluded with a circuit through the picturesque vineyards of Burgundy. Froome said the stage was not as easy as it looked, under a searing sun. Froome said he drank nearly 15 bottles of water.“Every kilometer, you think about what can happen that could change the race,” Froome said. “If you turn left or right, or if there is wind. It was a day for staying in front.”Advertisement