By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSMAY 17, 2017
Lance McCullers paid tribute to Jose Fernandez and pitched like him, allowing no earned runs for the third start in a row, and the Houston Astros beat the Marlins, 3-0, on Wednesday afternoon in Miami to complete a three-game sweep.McCullers (4-1) wore cleats with Fernandez’s initials and uniform number. Their friendship began when they were high school pitchers in the Tampa area, before Fernandez became the Marlins’ ace and then died in a boating accident in September.McCullers limited Miami to three hits in six innings and lowered his E.R.A. to 2.65. He has allowed no earned runs in his past 20 ⅓ innings.The Astros (29-12) have the best record in the majors.AROUND THE MAJORS Clayton Kershaw took a share of the major league lead with his seventh win of the season, helping the Los Angeles Dodgers avoid a sweep with a 6-1 victory over the Giants in San Francisco.  Gerrit Cole held the Washington Nationals to three hits in seven innings, and the Pirates eased to a 6-1 win in Pittsburgh.  Tests on tissue removed from Pirates pitcher Jameson Taillon last week confirmed he has testicular cancer.AdvertisementIn a further blow to FIFA’s image under its president, Gianni Infantino, two more respected members of its governance oversight panel have left after the removal of the chairman last week. Those resigning were Navi Pillay, a former United Nations high commissioner for human rights, and the corporate human rights expert Ron Popper, FIFA said. Their move followed the exit of Miguel Maduro, a Portuguese lawyer and former government minister.AdvertisementJUVENTUS CAPTURES ITALIAN CUP Juventus, staying on track for a treble, secured the first title by winning the Italian Cup with an authoritative 2-0 victory over Lazio in Rome. Juventus can clinch the Serie A title this weekend, and it will face Real Madrid in the Champions League final next month.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.REAL MADRID TAKES LEAGUE LEAD Cristiano Ronaldo scored early in each half as Real Madrid won at Celta Vigo, 4-1, to retake the Spanish league lead from Barcelona and move within a point of its first league title in five years.MONACO CLINCHES FRENCH TITLE Monaco clinched its first French title since 2000, and its eighth over all, with a 2-0 win over St.-Étienne in Paris.Rafael Nadal hardly had to get his socks dirty to extend his winning streak to 16 matches: He advanced from his opening match at the Italian Open when Nicolás Almagro retired in the first set with an apparent injury. Nadal is aiming for an eighth title at the Foro Italico as he prepares for the French Open.Tom Brady played through a concussion last year on his way to a fifth Super Bowl title with the New England Patriots, said his wife, the model Gisele Bündchen. The injury, which was not reported by the team, left her worried about how long he should continue to play football, she said.Asked if she wanted Brady to retire, Bündchen expressed concern “as a wife” in an interview on “CBS This Morning.” “He had a concussion last year; he has concussions pretty much every,” she said before cutting herself off. “I mean, we don’t talk about it. But he does have concussions. I don’t really think it’s a healthy thing for anybody to go through.”A new federal lawsuit against Baylor University alleges that football players routinely recorded gang rapes and staged dog fights during hazing parties in a program that fostered sexual violence.A former Baylor volleyball player, identified as Jane Doe in the lawsuit, alleges that she was raped by four or more players after being taken from a party where she may have been drugged in 2012. Her lawsuit, filed Tuesday, says the players later burglarized her apartment and harassed her and her family until she left college the next year.AdvertisementMore than a dozen women have sued Baylor, alleging officials mishandled or ignored sexual assault allegations.A version of this article appears in print on May 18, 2017, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: Baseball; A Pitcher and the Astros Remain on a Roll.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.