By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSJULY 6, 2017
INDIANAPOLIS — Kevin Pritchard struggled to make the deal.Pritchard, the Indiana Pacers’ general manager, figured that dealing Paul George was ultimately the best way to protect his team.On Thursday, Pritchard finally made the blockbuster trade official by announcing that George, a four-time All-Star, was heading to Oklahoma City for Victor Oladipo and Domantas Sabonis.“It was difficult both on a personal and professional level,” Pritchard said in a statement issued by the team. “Everyone here knows what Paul meant to this franchise; he was both a tremendous human being as well as player here for seven years. We thank Paul and his family for their contributions to the Pacers and wish him well.”George essentially forced the move when word leaked that he intended to leave the team as a free agent next summer just before the N.B.A. draft.That disclosure put the Pacers in a bind: Build around George for one final run at an N.B.A. title, lose their star player and get nothing in return, or shop George for the best deal they could find with his public plans hurting his trade value. During last month’s draft, Pritchard called the news a “gut punch.” He has not spoken to reporters since then, but under N.B.A. rules, the deal could be announced Thursday.“We feel very strongly about the potential Victor and Domantas bring to our team and what they mean for the future of the franchise,” Pritchard said. “Both are highly competitive, highly skilled and both are winners. That is why both were lottery picks. That is why we sought them out to be part of this deal.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Oladipo could quickly become a fan favorite in what is now becoming a major rebuilding project.A former Indiana Hoosiers star, Oladipo was selected No. 2 over all by the Orlando Magic in the 2013 draft. He was on the league’s all-rookie first team that season and has averaged 15.9 points, 4.4 rebounds and 3.7 assists over his four-year career. He is expected to start next season in a backcourt that will also include Lance Stephenson and Darren Collison, who is expected to sign as a free agent.Indiana’s backcourt did become a little thinner Thursday when Pritchard waived the backup Monta Ellis and his $11 million salary. Ellis spent two seasons in Indiana but lost his starting job last season and had been suspended for the first five games of next season for violating the N.B.A.’s antidrug policy.The Pacers also are expected to lose the starting point guard Jeff Teague to Minnesota on a three-year deal worth $57 million. Teague averaged 15.3 points and a career-high 7.8 assists for Indiana last season.Sabonis made 66 starts in his rookie season and averaged 5.9 points and 3.6 rebounds after being chosen No. 11 in the 2016 draft. But none of the Pacers newcomers are expected to match George’s productivity individually, and the third-year center Myles Turner and Oladipo are expected to be the cornerstones of Indiana’s revamped team.A version of this article appears in print on July 7, 2017, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: Trading George, Pacers Begin Rebuilding.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.