By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSJAN. 8, 2017
SEATTLE — It was the most obvious question after Thomas Rawls and the Seattle Seahawks ran their way to another playoff victory.Where has that kind of running game been hiding for most of the season?“I really had a sense it was going to happen,” Seattle Coach Pete Carroll said wryly after the Seahawks’ 26-6 win over the Detroit Lions on Saturday night. “No, I didn’t. But I’m telling you, that’s the game we’ve been looking for.”Nothing has been more inconsistent for Seattle than its running game, which had been hampered by injuries, blocking issues and ineffectiveness in the first season after Marshawn Lynch’s retirement.In the final three games of the regular season, Seattle averaged 79 rushing yards per game and 2.9 per carry. That included a lackluster 87 yards in the finale against San Francisco, which had the N.F.L.’s worst rushing defense.AdvertisementThere was no hint that the Seahawks’ performance against the Lions was about to happen. Conventional wisdom said that quarterback Russell Wilson’s arm would have to drive the Seahawks to any playoff success.AdvertisementSo what changed on Saturday, when Rawls carried 27 times and set a team playoff record with 161 rushing yards?“Nothing magic,” Seattle right tackle Garry Gilliam said. “It was the same scheme that we’ve run all year. It was the same people running the same plays. It was a matter of locking in.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.For Rawls, that meant getting a significant number of carries early on. In the final seven games of the regular season, Rawls had more than 15 carries only once. By halftime against the Lions, he had 15 carries for 107 yards.The dominance on the ground also gave Seattle a big advantage in time of possession, with the Seahawks holding the ball for more than 36 minutes.“We just haven’t been able to get him enough opportunities,” Carroll said of Rawls. “You can see what happened as soon as he gets going and he gets feeling it, and he looks exactly like the guy that we saw last year.”For Seattle’s offensive line, that meant more straight-ahead blocking and pushing around a Detroit defensive front that finished the regular season ranked No. 18 in stopping the run.“I’m really fired up for the guys up front,” Carroll said. “They had a lot of garbage come their way, a lot of talk about them, and they’re really pumped up about what they did.”AdvertisementSeattle’s ability to sustain that success on the ground will be crucial in the divisional round against Atlanta on Saturday. Stopping the run has not been a strength for the Falcons, who allowed at least 100 rushing yards in five of their past six games.Atlanta did hold Seattle to 72 rushing yards in Week 6, although the Seahawks won, 26-24. Rawls was a spectator that day, recovering from a leg fracture, and Wilson was limited by a sprained ligament in his left knee. Christine Michael, now with Green Bay, led Seattle with 64 yards on 18 carries.After its playoff opener, Seattle truly knows what establishing a running game can do for the rest of the offense.“It opens up everything for us,” wide receiver Doug Baldwin said. “I’ve told you guys before that everything runs through our run game. When Thomas Rawls is doing that, they can’t help but put another safety in the box, and then that gives us one-on-one matchups on the outside.”A version of this article appears in print on January 9, 2017, on Page D2 of the New York edition with the headline: In Seahawks’ Metamorphosis, a Battering Run Game Emerges From Bruised Egos.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.