By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSMAY 15, 2017
Defenseman Colton Parayko scored twice, and center Nathan MacKinnon had three assists as Canada, the defending champion, beat Norway, 5-0, in Paris at the ice hockey world championship.Canada leads Group B with five wins from six matches, putting it 3 points ahead of the Czech Republic, the 2010 champion. Canada has scored 27 goals while conceding eight, with its only loss to third-place Switzerland.Russia is doing even better, posting its sixth straight win by beating Latvia, 5-0, in Cologne, Germany, to retain the top spot in Group A, ahead of the United States. The Russians have scored 32 goals and allowed five ahead of a showdown with the United States on Tuesday.John Terry scored in a 17th successive Premier League season as Chelsea, the newly crowned champion, beat Watford, 4-3, courtesy of a late strike from Cesc Fàbregas. Chelsea, in its return to Stamford Bridge, celebrated a 14th victory in 15 home games amid blue and silver streamers.AdvertisementIn his 716th appearance for Chelsea, and most likely his penultimate one at Stamford Bridge, Terry scored his 67th goal, in the 22nd minute. A 36-year-old defender also expected to play Sunday, he will leave Chelsea this summer after 22 years, and five league titles.AdvertisementFIRST STEP TOWARD A UNION Players from the National Women’s Soccer League whose salaries are not paid by a national federation have formed the N.W.S.L. Players Association, a first step toward creating a union.The move comes after the United States women’s national team agreed in early April on a new collective bargaining agreement with U.S. Soccer, the national federation. That deal includes salary provisions for the national team players in the N.W.S.L. The minimum salary for non-allocated players is $15,000.Short on sleep, the Houston Astros finally stirred in the sixth inning when Yuli Gurriel hit a grand slam to help beat the Marlins, 7-2, in Miami. The Astros arrived at their hotel at 5 a.m. after a doubleheader in New York against the Yankees, and were listless and hitless against Dan Straily until the fifth inning.INDIANS HOLD OFF RAYS Cleveland starter Carlos Carrasco left early with an injury, but five relievers kept the lead and helped the Indians hold off the Tampa Bay Rays, 8-7. Cleveland’s Lonnie Chisenhall had a three-run homer.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Angelique Kerber is back at No. 1, replacing Serena Williams atop the WTA rankings. Monday’s move up from No. 2 gives Kerber her third stay in the top spot, for a total of 26 weeks. Because of a quirk in the rankings from a slight shift in the tour calendar, Williams briefly returned to No. 1 last month even though she had not played a match since winning the Australian Open in January.The College Football Playoff is bringing a Super Bowl-style halftime show to the national championship game without bumping the marching bands.ESPN and the College Football Playoff said that a musical guest would perform at halftime of this season’s title game, in Atlanta on Jan. 8, and that the performance would be aired on the network.The halftime concert will be held in Centennial Olympic Park, near the new Mercedes-Benz Stadium. No artist has been booked, but ESPN is taking the lead on securing what it hopes will be an A-list performer with broad appeal.AdvertisementThe marching bands for each participating team will still perform in the stadium at halftime of the title game, and that performance will be aired on an ESPN channel to be determined as part of the network’s megacast. Fans without tickets to the game will be able to watch it and attend the concert in Centennial Park free of charge.CHIEFS QUARTERBACK ROBBED The authorities in Texas said the rookie Kansas City Chiefs quarterback Patrick Mahomes had escaped injury after being robbed. The Smith County Sheriff’s Office said Mahomes and three others were stepping from a vehicle on a driveway outside Tyler on Friday night when a man approached and gestured that he had a handgun in his waistband. Investigators say the man took property from the four and sped away.Deputies later arrested two suspects and recovered items taken during the holdup. Sgt. Darrell Coslin said that the robbery appeared random and that Mahomes, who played at Texas Tech, was not targeted.A version of this article appears in print on May 16, 2017, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: Hockey; Canada and Russia Post Shutouts.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.