By HOWARD MEGDALJAN. 6, 2017
LeBron James, playing for a Cleveland Cavaliers team well ahead of the pack in the N.B.A.’s Eastern Conference, blew once on his hand, then delivered a flawless free throw during warm-ups before Friday night’s game against the Nets.Players often say that practice cannot match game conditions, and this was never truer than in the case of James’s free-throw shooting at Barclays Center. That is because James’s shots, before a 116-108 victory over the Nets, occurred before the arrival of Bruce Reznick, 80, a retired lawyer from Brooklyn and a longtime Nets fan known as Mr. Whammy. Reznick was still en route to the arena via car service at the time with his wife, Judy, known as Mrs. Whammy.During the Nets’ games, Bruce Reznick stands a few feet in front of his seat behind the basket, jumps up and down and casts a spell on visiting team’s players to make them miss free throws.The antics between Reznick and James represent the longest-standing tradition in the relatively short history of James’s visits to Brooklyn. In 2015, James reportedly asked to have Reznick returned to his seat. The Cavaliers denied this, and James declined to comment at the time. Reznick called James a “crybaby,” and his exile was short-lived.AdvertisementEven after bringing a long-sought championship to Cleveland, James still did not have much to say about his Brooklyn foil.Advertisement“I have no idea what you’re talking about,” James said before Friday’s game. When provided with a description, he said, “That older guy. Yeah, I’ve got no rivalry with him. You’re trying to create a story there.”Reznick does not see it that way. And considering James shot 62.5 percent from the free-throw line in 2015-16 at Barclays Center, well below his mark of 73.1 percent that season, Mr. Whammy may have a point.“I consider myself not just the rival of LeBron James but of every opposing player who comes through Barclays Center,” Reznick said, posing for selfies with fans after having arrived for Friday’s game. Sure enough, the Cavs finished just 8 of 18 from the free-throw line whenever they shot them on Reznick’s end of the court.Reznick and James faced off with 5 minutes 19 seconds left in the first quarter. “I know you can miss! Look at me! Gotta miss!” Reznick shouted, waving his arms next to the basket and jumping as James’s first shot rimmed out.But James has plenty of other things on his agenda, including the continued building of the Cavaliers as they defend their title. They made quick work of the Nets Friday, building a sizable cushion with a 13-0 run just before halftime.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.By the third quarter, the Cavs extended their lead to 24 points. The Nets fought back to cut the lead to single digits in the fourth, but ultimately saw their record fall to 8-27, a mirror image of Cleveland’s 27-8.And the Cavs, it appears, are about to get even better. Kyle Korver is reportedly headed to Cleveland from the Atlanta Hawks, and although the trade has yet to happen, James and his teammates sounded as if they had already begun counting the baskets that are sure to follow when James, who is second in the league on 3-point assists, teams up with Korver, a career 42.9 percent shooter from that distance.AdvertisementWhen a reporter pointed out Korver’s accuracy, James said: “It’ll go higher than that. We’ll get him the ball. He’s on the court for a reason.”Korver would help cover the loss of J. R. Smith, who is recovering from an operation on his thumb. The rest of Cleveland’s problems are short term. Kyrie Irving missed three games with a tight hamstring but returned on Friday night. James battled the flu. And Kevin Love lost 10 pounds after a bout with food poisoning that left him considering a trip to the hospital at 5 a.m. on New Year’s Day.Love did not offer a timetable for returning to sea bass, the offending dish on a team flight, saying instead he would stick with “chicken soup and the BRAT diet,” referring to a banana, rice, applesauce and toast regimen that helps alleviate stomach ailments.While the Cavaliers continued their pursuit of Korver, who would add an All-Star to a team that few think can be caught in the Eastern Conference, the Nets and Coach Kenny Atkinson found themselves playing Cleveland on the second night of a back-to-back, part of a stretch that takes them to three cities between Thursday and Sunday.On top of the busy schedule, key players such as Jeremy Lin and Rondae Hollis-Jefferson were either missing or hampered by injury, further limiting an already thin roster.“I think we look at these situations like we’re going to compete,” Atkinson said before the game, “but we’re going to see if we can steal a couple things.”He added: “Whether it’s an out-of-timeout play, the type of defense they’re playing, I feel like you can always pick up something. Maybe it’s a little more coach-driven, because we’re watching a lot more tape than the players, but Caris LeVert having to defend LeBron tonight, what a great learning experience.”James finished with 36 points. But Levert, a rookie guard who finished with 19, was not going it alone. He had some help.“I wish LeBron James, and every player who comes in here, good luck, good health, except when they come to Barclays Center,” Reznick said. “But here, they have to miss the shots.”An article on Saturday about Bruce Reznick, the Nets’ fan known as Mr. Whammy who has an antagonistic relationship with Cleveland Cavaliers star LeBron James, misstated Reznick’s former profession. He was a lawyer, not a dentist.A version of this article appears in print on January 7, 2017, on Page D6 of the New York edition with the headline: Even With Mr. Whammy in Their Corner, Nets Are No Match for the Cavs.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.