By DAVID WHITEJAN. 8, 2017
Follow our live N.F.L. playoffs coverage here.The Giants leapt through an arctic Lambeau Field in the postseason nine years ago, on their way to a Super Bowl parade. The 1972 Dolphins won a playoff game in wind-chilled Pittsburgh on their path to a perfect season.Both the Giants and the Dolphins may want to channel their former selves in Sunday’s wild-card playoff games. Each team’s road to this year’s Super Bowl in Houston winds through freezing conditions (temperatures will peak in the midteens) and the city limits of a divisional champion.Precedent makes for a great pregame speech in the visiting locker room. Expect the Packers and the Steelers to offer in-game rebuttals on their home tundra.Here is a look at Sunday’s playoff games and who we think will win them. All times Eastern.1:05 p.m. Sunday.  Line: Steelers by 10AdvertisementOn Oct. 16, the Dolphins were 1-4, worst in the A.F.C. East. The Steelers were 4-1, kings of the A.F.C. North. They met in Miami, and the Dolphins won, in a game no one considered a postseason preview. But here they both are, together again in a playoff showdown.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Dolphins won Round 1 because running back Jay Ajayi gained 204 yards on 25 carries and scored two touchdowns. It helped that Miami quarterback Ryan Tannehill completed 24 of 32 passes for 252 yards, but he has been out with a sprained knee since Week 11. It is up to Tannehill’s replacement, Matt Moore, who is making the first postseason start of his nine-year career, to provide air cover for the running game.AdvertisementSteelers running back Le’Veon Bell missed the past two postseasons with knee injuries. Now, his ligaments are as healthy as his numbers. Bell rushed 110 times in the last four games of the regular season, for 569 yards, and he averaged 187 yards from scrimmage. Pittsburgh quarterback Ben Roethlisberger, who played with an injured knee in the first meeting with the Dolphins, has led the Steelers to seven consecutive victories.Defense tips the scoreboard in Pittsburgh’s favor. This season’s team is not the Steel Curtain of old, but it pinches up inside the 20-yard line — with the N.F.L.’s fourth-ranked red-zone defense.  Pick: Steelers4:40 p.m. Sunday.  Line: Packers by 4 ½Giants fans keep waiting for the return of the good Eli Manning, the quarterback who won two Super Bowl rings with wild-card teams — both of them after having successfully passed through Green Bay.Only one defense has allowed fewer points than the Giants’ this season. The Giants kept opposing teams to 10, 6 and 7 points in their last three victories. That was necessary because the Giants scored 19, 17 and 10 points in those games.The Giants need Manning to flip the playoff switch, especially if Packers quarterback Aaron Rodgers turns this game into a Lambeau Leap-a-thon. That is what happens when Rodgers has at least five seconds to find open receivers. Giants cornerbacks Janoris Jenkins and Dominique Rodgers-Cromartie cannot cover their men forever, not against one of the best ad-lib throwers in the league.Rodgers has not thrown in an interception in 245 consecutive passes, which helps explain how Green Bay won its final six games (three against playoff teams). The Packers have scored at least 30 points in each of the past four weeks to outpace the shortcomings of their own defense. Did we mention that they beat the Giants once already this season?  Pick: PackersBecause of an editing error, an article last Sunday about that day’s N.F.L. wild-card playoff games misidentified the home team for the game between the Pittsburgh Steelers and the Miami Dolphins on Oct. 16. It was Miami.Picks do not reflect the betting line. All times are Eastern.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.