By SETH BERKMANMARCH 25, 2016
A small storm began brewing this week in Cleveland. By Wednesday, it had gathered enough strength to cause concern in Los Angeles and Miami, as New York prepared for the brunt of its force Thursday, with effects expected to linger until Saturday, when the Cavaliers play the Knicks at Madison Square Garden.El Niño? Not quite. Just the annual downpour of scrutiny and rumors swirling around LeBron James as his ability to opt out of his contract approaches this summer.On Thursday night at Barclays Center, where the Cavaliers fell to the Nets, 104-95, James played down the criticisms he has recently faced, which include unfollowing the Cavaliers’ Twitter account and saying that he would take a pay cut to play on a team with his friends Carmelo Anthony, Dwyane Wade and Chris Paul.“I love leading these guys,” James said of the Cavaliers. “I really don’t get caught up in everything else because I don’t read much, I don’t listen to anything outside of what we need to do.”AdvertisementThe timing of James’s latest actions is peculiar. The Cavaliers have the best record in the Eastern Conference but are not favored to defeat Golden State or San Antonio in the N.B.A. finals, particularly with efforts like Thursday’s against the Nets, in which Cleveland missed 28 of 38 3-point attempts.AdvertisementJames acknowledged that the Cavaliers needed to get more “locked down” as the playoffs near, and he said that he grows frustrated when his teammates does not understand the opportunity they have in front of them.The latest commotion surrounding James began Monday, when his online supporters noticed that he no longer followed his team on Twitter. Cleveland fans, who saw him spurn the franchise in the summer of 2010, immediately became frantic.James did not do his best to soften their concerns. After the Cavaliers’ win over the Denver Nuggets that night, he redirected questions when given the opportunity to explain his social media actions.“They can do whatever they want on Twitter,” Cavaliers Coach Tyronn Lue said of his players on Thursday. “I don’t have a Twitter account. I don’t do any of that. My main focus is focused on winning games, getting this team better.”James later clarified that the act was part of his preparation for the playoffs. Last season, James abstained from social media during the postseason, branding his move “zero dark thirty-23.”If that interpretation alleviated Clevelanders’ worst fears, gusts picked up again Wednesday when a Bleacher Report article featured quotations from James, referring to his desire to play with Anthony, Wade and Paul. Anthony said that he would similarly take a reduced salary to create such a star-powered unit.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.A lineup featuring those four sounded particularly appealing Thursday. James opened the game 10 for 10 from the field, but the Cavaliers trailed by as many as 13 points. James’s first miss came after Timofey Mozgov collided with him during a put-back dunk attempt.After three quarters, the Cavaliers led, 83-80, with 30 points from James. But James was held scoreless during the fourth quarter, and the Cavaliers could not compensate, as they were outscored, 24-12, over the final 12 minutes.AdvertisementToward the end of the game, Nets fans began taunting Cavaliers players, saying James had disdain for his current teammates.James is perhaps growing tired of the renewed interest in his plans. Early Thursday, a short video surfaced online of James apparently mocking the media. Eating a banana, James turns to the camera and said in a condescending tone, “Are you going to slip on a banana peel out of Cleveland?”James’s fraternization with friends around the league is nothing new, but a recent interaction with Wade during halftime of the Cavaliers’ game last Saturday in Miami caught Lue’s attention. General Manager David Griffin also reportedly met with James on Wednesday.Before the game against the Nets, Lue did not want to address the conversation he had with James after Saturday’s game. But he told the local news media this week that he did not like James’s actions and that James had apologized.After Thursday’s game, James clarified what Lue said he expected of him going forward.“That’s everything,” James said.James’s teammates said the recent ire toward their franchise player had been overblown.“I laugh about it all the time,” said J. R. Smith, who also played with Anthony on the Nuggets and the Knicks. “I think it’s hilarious because everybody goes crazy, thinking that we’re beefing and whatnot. You go in the locker room and everyone’s laughing and joking. Like what is this for?”Moments later, Smith began playfully arguing with Kyrie Irving about who is the more skilled video gamer.After the game, Smith and Irving momentarily continued their banter. All seemed well between James and his teammates inside the locker room. The loss to the Nets (20-51), however, could be cause for concern.Because of an editing error, an earlier version of a picture caption with this article misidentified the team Brook Lopez plays for. It is the Nets, not the Knicks.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.