By KEN BELSONMARCH 23, 2016
BOCA RATON, Fla. —  Roger Goodell, the commissioner of the N.F.L., affirmed statements made by a top league executive who said that football-related head trauma was linked to brain disease.“The statements that were made by Jeff Miller and others is consistent with our position over the years,” Goodell said Wednesday at the conclusion of the league’s annual owners’ meetings.Goodell’s comments came less than two weeks after Miller, the league’s top medical and safety officer, told a congressional round table that there was “certainly” a link between head trauma received in football and chronic traumatic encephalopathy, a degenerative brain disease that has been found in dozens of former players.After years of denying any connection between football and C.T.E., the league has tiptoed around the issue as scientists have found more cases of players with the disease. Miller’s comments were the clearest acknowledgment yet by a league official of a link between the game and long-term brain disease.AdvertisementOwners were forced this week into the uncomfortable position of answering for Miller’s comments. Like Goodell, John Mara, a co-owner of the Giants, said Miller’s statements were not new because the league had provided financial support for research on the causes and scope of C.T.E.AdvertisementOther owners were more skeptical. Jerry Jones, the owner of the Dallas Cowboys, told reporters Tuesday that it was “absurd” to think there was a link between football and the disease.As the owners struggled for a response on the science of C.T.E., they passed several rule changes aimed at reducing the risk of injury in games.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Touchbacks on kickoffs will be moved to the 25-yard line, from the 20, to give teams an incentive not to run the ball out of the end zone, one of the most dangerous plays in the game. There is already some debate, however, on whether the new rule will tempt teams to kick the ball to, say, the 5-yard line and force a runback, which could actually increase the risk of injury.Players who receive two unsportsmanlike conduct penalties in a game will now be automatically ejected.Both rule changes will be reviewed after next season.“We think we have not been able to affect sportsmanship the way we think we need to,” said Rich McKay, the head of the league’s competition committee.The owners also outlawed the chop block and permanently moved the extra point to the 15-yard line.While the league made incremental changes to its on-field rules, Goodell said he would not dilute his disciplinary powers over off-field conduct anytime soon. His comment came in response to a report last week that said the league and the players’ union were closer to an agreement that would strip the commissioner of some of his powers to penalize players.“We are not close to an agreement by any stretch of the imagination” on changes to the commissioner’s powers to penalize players and hear their appeals of those penalties, Goodell said.AdvertisementAs evidence that little had changed, Goodell said he had no plans to return to the New England Patriots the draft picks he had taken from them as a penalty for the team’s role in deflating footballs used in the A.F.C. championship game in January 2015.Goodell said he was unaware of any settlement talks between the league and Patriots quarterback Tom Brady, who was suspended for four games for his role in the scandal. A district court judge overturned the suspension, but the league has appealed the decision.The owners voted in January to let the Rams return to Los Angeles, removing some of the drama that dominated recent league meetings. Goodell said the N.F.L. was working with the Chargers on a proposal to build a new stadium in downtown San Diego. He said he preferred that the Raiders remain in Oakland, Calif., even though the team is exploring the possibility of a move to Las Vegas.A version of this article appears in print on March 24, 2016, on Page B15 of the New York edition with the headline: Goodell Says Link to C.T.E. Isn’t New.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.