AdvertisementSupported byThe best-selling sports books in October 2016, according to the New York Times best-seller list.1. SHAKEN  by Tim Tebow (Waterbrook). The Heisman Trophy winner writes about overcoming obstacles.2. THE BOYS IN THE BOAT by Daniel James Brown (Penguin). The American rowers who pursued gold at the 1936 Berlin Olympics. Originally published in 2013.3. WHEN NOBODY WAS WATCHING by Carli Lloyd with Wayne Coffey (Houghton Mifflin Harcourt). How the champion soccer player turned her career around in 2003.4. A LIFE WELL PLAYED by Arnold Palmer (St. Martin’s). Stories of career and relationships by the great golfer, who died in September 2016.5. SHOE DOG by Phil Knight (Scribner). A memoir by the founder of Nike.6. QB by Steve Young with Jeff Benedict (Houghton Mifflin Harcourt). The memoir of football’s Super Bowl and Hall of Fame champion reveals what it takes to become an elite professional quarterback.7. 99 by Wayne Gretzky with Kirstie McLellan Day (Putnam). Memories of his celebrated career, by the professional hockey Hall of Fame legend.8. RUN FAST. EAT SLOW. by Shalane Flanagan and Elyse Kopecky (Rodale). Recipes for athletes created by an Olympic marathoner and a chef/nutrition coach.9. GUNSLINGER by Jeff Pearlman (Houghton Mifflin Harcourt). A biography of the champion quarterback Brett Favre.10. STRONG IS THE NEW BEAUTIFUL by Lindsey Vonn with Sarah Toland (Dey Street). Lessons in health, fitness and attitude, by the world champion skier and Olympic gold medalist.12. BARBARIAN DAYS by William Finnegan (Penguin). A Pulitzer Prize-winning surfing chronicle and memoir by a writer for The New Yorker that celebrates a lifelong obsession.Rankings reflect sales for October 2016. The sports titles ranked here are selected by the editors from among all adult nonfiction books in all print and electronic formats, as reported to the New York Times best-seller list for the previous month. The definition of sports is deliberately broad and inclusive, so as to reflect all manner of the outdoor sports world, varying from the professional leagues to personal athleticismAdvertisement