AdvertisementSupported byBy Billy WitzGleyber Torres, one of the Yankees’ top prospects, tore the ulnar collateral ligament in his left elbow and will have season-ending surgery, the team announced Monday.Torres, an infielder, will undergo Tommy John surgery, which is most commonly performed on pitchers. Strangely, Torres did not hurt his arm throwing — or hurt his throwing arm.He was injured Saturday while sliding headfirst into home plate while playing at Buffalo for Class AAA Scranton/Wilkes-Barre. Torres was trying to score from second base on a single to right field, and when the throw arrived home, the Buffalo catcher tagged Torres, who was reaching for the plate with his left hand.Torres grimaced in pain for a few moments before being helped off the field. He visited Monday with Christopher Ahmad, the Yankees’ team doctor, who made the diagnosis. The team said in its announcement that Torres was expected to be ready for spring training in 2018.Although most players who undergo Tommy John surgery are pitchers, the procedure is occasionally performed on position players, including Washington Nationals catcher Matt Wieters, the retired outfielder Carl Crawford and Kyle Higashioka, a catcher in the Yankees’ organization.The injury to Torres caps a miserable week for the Yankees, who have lost six in a row to fall into a tie for first place in the American League East with the Boston Red Sox. The Yankees have lost starting pitcher C. C. Sabathia (hamstring) for about six weeks, and reliever Adam Warren (shoulder), catcher Gary Sanchez (groin) and outfielder Aaron Hicks (heel) have all sustained injuries. Sanchez has returned, only to go hitless in five at-bats.Torres, 20, was the gem of last summer’s haul of prospects that the Yankees received when they traded a handful of veterans at the nonwaiver trading deadline. They received Torres from the Chicago Cubs as part of a package for Aroldis Chapman, the closer who helped the Cubs win their first World Series title in 108 years.After being named the most valuable player of the Arizona Fall League, Torres was impressive in spring training, hitting .448 (13 for 29) with six doubles, one triple, two home runs and nine runs batted in.Torres, who was at Class A when the Yankees acquired him, began this season at Class AA Trenton, where he hit .273 with five home runs and an .863 on-base-plus-slugging percentage, before advancing to Class AAA on May 22. Torres was hitting .309 with an .863 O.P.S. for Scranton/Wilkes-Barre, and it appeared possible that he would join the Yankees in September, when rosters expand from 25 to as many as 40 players.Torres, a shortstop by training who some in the organization say will eventually play second base or third, had been working at third base. That has led to speculation that third baseman Chase Headley could be moved to first to replace Chris Carter and Torres promoted to play third, or second if Starlin Castro is shifted to third.But General Manager Brian Cashman said last week that if the Yankees needed to add an infielder any time soon, it would be Tyler Wade, the shortstop at Scranton/Wilkes-Barre, who has experience playing second and third.Advertisement