AdvertisementSupported byBy Emma StoneyWELLINGTON, New Zealand — England has celebrated its first Six Nations Grand Slam in 13 years, but the challenge it faces in Australia in June will most likely be significantly sterner and should give its new coach, Eddie Jones, a clearer picture of where his team sits in rugby union’s global pecking order.Australia, a World Cup finalist last year, will surely pose a far greater threat to England in its three-test series than Scotland, Italy, Ireland, Wales or France did during the seven weeks of a largely mediocre Six Nations championship. England won all five of its matches to earn the Grand Slam. Much was written about the gulf in standards between Northern and Southern Hemisphere rugby when no teams from the north made the Rugby World Cup semifinals last October. The gulf will not have narrowed much after the Six Nations, but Australia knows it will face an England team much improved from the one it dismantled, 33-13, during the World Cup pool stages.England’s roster is not vastly different, but in every other regard it is poles apart from the World Cup team, which was weighed down by expectations, fear and preprogrammed attacking strategies.The England team that swept its European neighbors aside was firmly in the mold of Jones — a no-nonsense Australian not afraid to talk about winning and about making England the No. 1 team in the world.With so little time in the job, Jones has not made sweeping changes in the way England plays, although its backs are lining up closer to the advantage line — similar to the line of scrimmage in football — when on attack than they did at the World Cup.But Jones has had an immediate effect on the players’ mind-set and confidence, and he has given them a framework to meet their potential. Jones has emboldened his players to take charge and to play aggressive and attacking rugby.That was evident against France last weekend when, after a rough patch during the second half in which France pulled within a couple of points, England did not retreat into its shell and instead won, 31-21.“He’s the sort of guy where, if you’re going to go down, you’re going to go down swinging, so to speak,” said George Gregan, who was captain of Australia during Jones’s tenure as Wallabies coach from 2001 to 2005. “You go down playing the way you want to play.” Jones places high demands on his players, expecting hard work and total commitment to him and the team. But he also understands the value of down time and of players having a beer to celebrate their successes — something that rarely happened under the previous coach, Stuart Lancaster.Loose forward James Haskell, who has had four coaches during his international career with England, has described it as the “happiest time” he has had representing his country.Gregan, who was also coached by Jones at the Australian Super Rugby franchise the ACT Brumbies and, in the latter years of his career, at the Japanese club Suntory Sungoliath, said Jones was the master of creating a situation for players to thrive in but one that constantly challenged them.“His ability to create an environment to make players better and coaches and the whole group better, he’s the best I ever had in that regard,” Gregan said.“You can see all that happening with this English squad. He’ll look for them to improve themselves, not just through the coaching but individually taking responsibility to do it yourself. That’s very much his mantra as well.”That has never been more evident than with Chris Robshaw. Jones heavily criticized Robshaw at the World Cup and stripped him of the England captaincy, but Robshaw was one of England’s consistently best players during the Six Nations.Dylan Hartley, whose promotion to captain raised eyebrows because of his poor disciplinary record, has performed well in the role, while Billy Vunipola is another who has blossomed in his short time under Jones.But perhaps the find of the tournament has been the lock forward Maro Itoje, 21, who got his opportunity only because Joe Launchbury was injured. Itoje has been a standout, showing that Jones is not afraid to select talented young players who perform well at club level.Jones will continue his search for young talent before he names his squad to travel to Australia.“We need a few guys to come through to really push the envelope,” he told reporters after the victory in Paris. “We need them to come in, say, ‘This isn’t good enough’ and lift the level again. I’m looking for guys like a young Jonny Wilkinson.” Wilkinson kicked the winning drop goal during extra time in the Rugby World Cup final between Australia and England in 2003.Jones added: “The 2003 lot still talk about when Jonny came into training as a young kid and turned the Bunsen burner up. The whole level of training increased because he had no fear and wanted to be No. 1 in the world. I need to find a couple of those kids. We’ll work harder, work smarter and pick better players.”The English turnaround has Gregan expecting a tight series in June.“I’d like it to be 3-0 because I’m Australian, but I can see the matches going down to the wire just due to the improvement and the belief in that England team,” he said. “This has been a really important seven weeks for English rugby.”For all the bravado coming out of the Wales camp about claiming a first win against New Zealand since 1953, it did little in the Six Nations that will have New Zealand, the back-to-back world champions, too worried. The Welsh still have not developed a Plan B on attack when crashing the ball up the center of the field does not bring reward. Injury-ravaged Ireland had a difficult Six Nations, but it forced Coach Joe Schmidt to give new players test-match experience. Some of the injured players will be fit again in June for a tough trip to South Africa. Scotland showed that the improvement made at the World Cup was no fluke, but two tests in Japan will show whether the team remains on an upward curve.Italy and France, meanwhile, were awful in the Six Nations. Argentina is very likely to put both to the sword in June, while Canada and the United States will also like their chances against Italy.Advertisement