AdvertisementSupported byBy Marc TracyLOUISVILLE, Ky. — Darryl Reynolds is used to teammates asking where to find the best cheesesteak. It comes with the territory of playing basketball for Villanova, just a few miles down the Main Line from Philadelphia.“Being a guy from Philly,” he said, “I’m not going to say a place like Jim’s or Geno’s.” Those famous sandwich purveyors, which appear in every guidebook, are “like McDonald’s,” Reynolds said.“I say Ishkabibble’s,” he added, referring to a place on South Street.His teammate Kevin Rafferty, a walk-on senior from Malvern, Pa., a short drive west of the city, silently nodded as he sat beside Reynolds in the Villanova locker room Wednesday.Reynolds’s point, Rafferty knew, was that his teammates were not long-distance transplants who had never heard of Philadelphia’s most famous sandwich. They know enough to ask.Villanova, one of the prominent Philadelphia-area college basketball teams collectively known as the Big 5, has a roster composed almost exclusively of players from the Mid-Atlantic: Washington and its suburbs, Philadelphia and its suburbs, and New York City and its suburbs. The only exception, hailing from the suburbs of Chicago, is the freshman guard Jalen Brunson, but even he is not an outlier. Brunson — whose father played at another Big 5 school, Temple — spent part of his youth living in New Jersey.“We’re all East Coast guys, really,” the sophomore Phil Booth, of Baltimore, said.This is not the way college basketball typically works anymore. Like media deals and fan bases, the top echelon of the sport has been rigorously nationalized. Miami’s basketball team, which second-seeded Villanova will play Thursday night in the round of 16 here, features players from Las Vegas, Washington, Houston, Brooklyn, Philadelphia and Madrid. Top-ranked Kansas, which could await the Wildcats on Saturday if both teams advance, has only four players from Kansas, and three of them are walk-ons.Villanova’s roster, then, is something of a throwback.Jay Wright, Villanova’s coach since 2001, is a native of a northern Philadelphia suburb who played at nearby Bucknell and was an assistant at Villanova under Rollie Massimino. Wright’s wife lived in the same hall at Villanova as the mother of one of her husband’s starting guards, Ryan Arcidiacono.“Most good programs do a really good job recruiting their home base,” said Baker Dunleavy, Villanova’s associate head coach and a former Wildcats player. “We’re extreme.”Ja’Quan Newton, a Miami guard who comes from Philadelphia, said, “If you’re from the Northeast, that’s the school everybody wants to go to.”And in a college basketball landscape with about a dozen brand-name programs with highly paid coaches who jet around the country (frequently via private plane) chasing the top-ranked players, being able to dominate your backyard arguably carries its own competitive advantage. Call it the Moneyball approach to recruiting.“We get to know these kids really well” before they even commit to the school, Dunleavy said. As an example, he noted that two top Villanova players from Washington, Josh Hart and Kris Jenkins, had played on high school teams that participated in summer camps at the university.“We build relationships early,” Dunleavy said. “It allows us to concentrate on our region and spend time with kids we want.”It also helps, he said, that Villanova is situated in a densely populated region rich in basketball talent. Most of Villanova’s best players throughout the years, from Ed Pinckney (the Bronx) and Tim Thomas (Paterson, N.J.) to Randy Foye (Newark) and Kyle Lowry (Philadelphia), have been Northeasterners.He posited as a counterexample a program in Nebraska — perhaps Villanova’s conference rival Creighton — and said, “If you’re recruiting kids in Chicago, they can’t just jump in a car and come to Nebraska.”The geographical proximity is a selling point to players.“My parents come up to every game,” said Hart, a junior from Silver Spring, Md. “If I’m going through something, I can see my parents. My friends can drive up. My girlfriend was in Jersey; now she’s going to school in Maryland — she can come up.”The players’ physical proximity to home pays off in other ways. When Reynolds said, “It keeps guys close,” he was not only speaking figuratively.“When we have breaks, it feels like everyone gets to go back home,” he said. “Guys are going at most two hours away.”It also means things like cheesesteak recommendations and guided tours of New York when the team is in town for the Big East tournament. (Henry Lowe, a walk-on who attended the Dalton School, grew up a few blocks from the hotel where Villanova was encamped this year.)And it can produce a team good enough to spend several weeks at No. 1 this season, one that is now only two wins from the Final Four.“We’re trying to build it into a national school, but at this point it is mostly a Northeast school,” Dunleavy said.“The Northeast,” he added, “has been good to us.”Advertisement