By DAVID WALDSTEINMARCH 24, 2016
CHICAGO —  In an odd twist, Matt Thomas has a longer relationship with the Virginia men’s basketball coach, Tony Bennett, than he does with his coach at Iowa State, Steve Prohm.When Thomas was heavily recruited out of Onalaska High School in Wisconsin, his choice came down to Virginia or Iowa State, teams that will play each other Friday in the Midwest Regional.During the recruiting process, he developed a strong bond with Bennett, who said Thomas would have been a perfect fit for the Cavaliers, now a No. 1 seed.“I really wanted Matt,” said Bennett, who played at the University of Wisconsin-Green Bay. “He’s a terrific player, represented all that we try to get in student-athletes at Virginia, just the character, his competitiveness, his completeness as a player.”AdvertisementThomas, a 6-foot-5 junior guard, said he felt the Wisconsin connection with Bennett and liked his entire staff. But he chose Iowa State because it was closer to home. He said he wanted his family and friends to be able to travel to Ames, Iowa, to watch him play.AdvertisementBeing close to family was no small consideration. It meant everything to Thomas.“My mom raised me and my older brother and younger sister by herself,” he said Thursday after practice at United Center. “So we have a really close family, and I’m really close to my mom.”Thomas said his father, Greg W. Thomas, had been overwhelmed by substance abuse. Divorced from Thomas’s mother, Martha, he committed suicide on Sept. 1, 2005, at age 45. At the time, Thomas was 11, too young to fully grasp what had happened.Today, Thomas is painfully aware that he may have a hereditary vulnerability to addiction. In June 2014, after his freshman season at Iowa State, he was arrested and charged with driving under the influence of alcohol. He pleaded guilty, was placed on probation and was suspended by Fred Hoiberg, then his coach, for three games the next season, one of which was an exhibition.Hoiberg said he had been impressed with the way Thomas handled himself after the arrest.“I’m not proud of the D.U.I.,” Thomas said, “but everything that’s happened to me has made me into who I am today.”The embarrassing and frightening experience served as a stark reminder that Thomas needed to confront his family history and be more vigilant.Speaking of his father, Thomas said: “Similar to my D.U.I., he actually had an alcohol and drug abuse problem and he took his life. So it was a tough time for me. I was only in fifth grade, so I didn’t totally understand that whole situation and what was going on. I just knew that I lost my father. Looking back at it now, understanding what he was going through and having my issue and similar thing with alcohol, I’ve really grown up from that and become a different person.”Thomas said the most difficult part of his arrest was calling his mother the next day from Ames. They both broke down in tears on the phone. Since then, Thomas has taken classes on substance abuse and has connected with Chris Herren, the former Fresno State and N.B.A. player whose life was nearly destroyed by drug addiction. Herren has written a book, “Basketball Junkie: A Memoir,” about his illness and speaks publicly about it.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“We text sometimes,” Thomas said. “I’m not really close with him, but I admire him. That’s the best public speaker I’ve ever heard.”AdvertisementAfter Thomas’s disappointing sophomore season, Hoiberg left to coach the Chicago Bulls. (The fourth-seeded Cyclones visited Hoiberg and the Bulls at their shootaround on Wednesday and watched their loss to the Knicks that night.)When Prohm took over as the coach at Iowa State, Thomas’s minutes per game more than doubled, to 33.5 this season from 15.3. He is scoring 10.9 points a game and is shooting 43.3 percent from behind the 3-point line. The season before, he shot 33 percent from the arc.Bennett lauded Thomas’s improvement.“I always pulled for him,” Bennett said. “I hoped that he would have ended up at Virginia but have seen him really improve, and then obviously watching film and seeing how he’s become a heck of a player, I certainly respect that.”But Thomas says he has improved in areas far more important than shooting percentage and minutes played.He knows he made a mistake in 2014, and he has not shied from discussing it in the hope that it can help him and others, too.“Last off-season I spoke to a couple of high schools and middle schools about alcohol abuse,” Thomas said. “I shared my situation and talked about how I got through it and where I am today. That is something I would definitely like to do in the future, to educate the youth and talk about how serious it can get.”A version of this article appears in print on March 25, 2016, on Page B15 of the New York edition with the headline: Iowa State Guard Reunites With Fan: Virginia’s Coach .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.