AdvertisementSupported byHours after The New York Times published an article on Thursday that examined deep flaws in the N.F.L.’s early concussion research and the league’s ties to the tobacco industry, the league responded with a statement disputing various aspects of the article.The statement said the article was “contradicted by clear facts” and that The Times “published pages of innuendo and speculation.”Data obtained by The Times revealed that more than 100 diagnosed concussions were not included in the studies that formed the backbone of the league’s early stance on the issue. The research was held up by the league as evidence that brain injuries did not cause long-term problems for players.■ The N.F.L. statement said, “The Times claims that the concussion studies funded in part by N.F.L. Charities purposely relied on faulty and incomplete concussion data.” Our article did not claim that.■ The N.F.L. statement said, “The studies never claimed to be based on every concussion that was reported or that occurred.” The studies and peer-review statements did, in fact, claim that.■ The N.F.L. statement said, “The story claims that the League relied on legal advice from Lorillard and the Tobacco Institute.” Our article did not claim that.■ The N.F.L. statement said, “In fact, the league has never participated – either through its counsel of over 50 years, Covington & Burling, or otherwise – in any joint lobbying efforts with the Tobacco Institute.” Our article did not claim that.■ The N.F.L. statement said, “Moreover, the fact that not all concussions were reported is consistent with the fact that reporting was strongly encouraged by the league but not mandated, as documents provided to The Times showed.” At least one of the papers said it was, in fact, mandated.■ The N.F.L. statement said, “The Times insinuates that the N.F.L. hired Dorothy Mitchell, an associate at the law firm Covington & Burling, because of her experience in tobacco litigation.” Our article did not say how or why she was hired.Advertisement