AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressFreddie Roach’s tilted neck and the slight tremor of his hands were obvious to the onlookers at Mendez Gym as he walked through the ropes and into the center of the ring,Roach, a 56-year-old Hall of Fame boxing trainer and a former boxer, picked up his pink and blue mitts and started pad work with Zou Shiming, a 35-year-old Chinese Olympian. As Zou’s fists hit the pads, Roach’s Parkinson’s symptoms came to a noticeable halt.“Again, again, again,” Roach called out, catching every punch that Zou threw his way.In Roach’s 24-hour-a-day fight against Parkinson’s, boxing is his comfort zone, he says. It was Muhammad Ali’s, too.Ali died Friday at age 74 in Arizona after a long battle with Parkinson’s disease, which Roach has been living with since he was 27. The trainer — famous for his work with Manny Pacquiao — has no plans to slow down. He’s preparing Zou, who has won two Olympic gold medals and a bronze, for his American debut on the undercard of the fight between Roman Martinez and Vasyl Lomachenko on HBO Saturday night.About 10 to 15 years ago, Roach said, Ali and his daughter visited Roach’s gym, Wild Card Boxing Club in Los Angeles, completely unannounced. The two men discussed boxing and the medical treatment they were taking to reduce the symptoms of Parkinson’s.“We got to know him pretty well,” Roach said, smiling as he recalled the memory. “He played jokes, he did magic, he hit the heavy bag and the best thing for me was when he started hitting the heavy bag, his tremors went away and he had no problems at all and it was like when — I have Parkinson’s also — and when I get in the ring and get on the mitts with the fighters and so forth, all my symptoms kind of go away, so our comfort zone was similar.”Roach was diagnosed years after Ali received his diagnosis in 1984 at the age of 42.Parkinson’s is a chronic and progressive movement disorder of the nervous system. Nearly one million people in the United States are living with the disease and there is no cure at present. But there are treatment options for managing its symptoms.Many doctors believe it can be caused by repeated head trauma, and both Roach and Ali took many punches during their fighting careers.Roach said that Parkinson’s got harder to deal with as people with the disease got older. He is younger than most of the people who have the disease, so he feels that he can deal with it better than most, he said. He has an alarm system that reminds him four times a day to take his medicine.When Ali visited Roach, they spoke about their treatment.“We talked a little bit about the medication at that time,” Roach said. “He was having trouble with the dopamine. It’s very hard to take. It makes you very sick. It’s really hard to get used to and sometimes you’d rather not take it and deal with the tremors just on your own because the medication doesn’t make you feel so well, so we hit on that a little bit back then.“But that was quite a while ago,” Roach continued, “and the medications are getting better and they’re a lot more knowledge about Parkinson’s than ever. I think that there will be a cure soon.”When Roach was fighting, his trainer was Eddie Futch, who had also trained Joe Frazier, one of Ali’s biggest rivals.Back then, Roach did not think Ali was the best fighter in the world. Now, he does.“He was a friendly, happy, and just real nice guy,” Roach said. “I really got to know him in those four hours.”Advertisement