By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSAUG. 9, 2017
Real Madrid eased to a 2-1 victory over Manchester United to win the Super Cup on Tuesday, with goals in each half from Casemiro and Isco. Cristiano Ronaldo watched most of the end-to-end action from the bench while his teammates outclassed United on a hot night in Skopje, Macedonia.Casemiro, a Brazilian, hit the bar with a header and fired a shot over the top before scoring in the 24th minute. He slid in for a left-foot finish, served up by Dani Carvajal. Isco extended the lead for Zinedine Zidane’s European champions with a cool shot in the 52nd, after Gareth Bale helped him run through United’s defense.Making amends for an earlier miss, United’s new striker Romelu Lukaku made it 2-1 in the 62nd, beating goalkeeper Keylor Navas after Navas had blocked a powerful shot from Nemanja Matic.“Key to winning this game was two things we do well,” Zidane said. “We hold and control well, and we finish our chances at the right moment.” He added: “The second half was not great, but the first half was spectacular. We have talented players who want to win every challenge.”AdvertisementThe Super Cup matches the previous season’s Champions League winners against the Europa League holders.AdvertisementChris Sale allowed two hits in eight innings and struck out 13, and the visiting Boston Red Sox beat the Tampa Bay Rays, 2-0, for their seventh straight victory.Sale (14-4) reached double digits in strikeouts for the 15th time this season, the first time that’s been done since Randy Johnson in 2002. The win pushed Boston’s American League East lead over the Yankees to four games.Dustin Pedroia, back in the Boston lineup as a designated hitter after a stint on the disabled list with left knee inflammation, scored the first run on a fielder’s choice in the fourth. A bad throw by Austin Pruitt (6-3) prevented a possible inning-ending double play on Rafael Devers’ chopper to the mound.INDIANS RALLY IN NINTH Yan Gomes hit a three-run homer with two outs in the ninth inning off closer Greg Holland as the Cleveland Indians rallied for four runs in their last at-bat for Corey Kluber and beat the visiting Colorado Rockies, 4-1.STANTON HITS 38TH HOMER IN VICTORY Giancarlo Stanton hit his career-high and major league-leading 38th home run and drove in three runs as the Miami Marlins beat the Nationals, 7-3, in Washington.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.UMPIRE WEST IS SUSPENDED Joe West, the major leagues’ senior umpire, has been suspended for three days without pay for comments he made about Texas third baseman Adrian Beltre.In a USA Today report published June 20 timed to coincide with the umpire’s 5,000th regular-season game, West said “it’s got to be Adrian Beltre” when asked who was the biggest complainer in the major leagues.AdvertisementMARINERS TO BE WITHOUT HERNANDEZ In the midst of the A.L. wild-card chase, the Seattle Mariners will be without starter Felix Hernandez for three to four weeks because of bursitis in his right shoulder.Jay Cutler, the Miami Dolphins’ new quarterback practiced for the first time since December, marking the start of his comeback from a brief retirement. When the workout ended, the 34-year-old Cutler said he had no second thoughts about deciding to renew his working relationship with Coach Adam Gase and return for another season.“It felt right,” Cutler said. “Going into work and getting here and going through the motions of the practice, it felt good.”Cutler, who parted with the Chicago Bears in March, agreed to delay his fledgling network TV career when he signed a $10 million, one-year contract with Miami. He’s expected to start in place of Ryan Tannehill, who is out with a knee injury likely to sideline him for the season.The lawyer for Tiger Woods said Woods will not attend his arraignment on a driving under the influence charge. Under court rules, Woods’s lawyer can enter a not guilty plea on his behalf Wednesday. Any other plea would require Woods’s attendance.CREAMER ADDED TO SOLHEIM CUP TEAM Paula Creamer will replace Jessica Korda, who has a forearm injury, on the United States team at next week’s Solheim Cup in West Des Moines, Iowa.Tina Charles scored 26 points and the Liberty overcame Erica Wheeler’s 33 points for an 81-76 victory over the visiting Indiana Fever. Shavonte Zellous added 16 points for the Liberty (13-12).Sam Querrey overcame a sluggish start to defeat the Frenchman Vincent Millot, 4-6, 7-6 (4), 7-5, in a first-round match at the Rogers Cup in Montreal.  (REUTERS)BOUCHARD LOSES IN STRAIGHT SETS The midseason nose dive of the Canadian Eugenie Bouchard continued as she was swept aside, 6-3, 6-4, by the Croatian qualifier Donna Vekic despite having home advantage and the backing of an excited crowd in a first-round clash at the Rogers Cup in Toronto.(REUTERS)AdvertisementThe former N.H.L. forward and coach Eddie Olczyk has colon cancer. Olczyk, who turns 51 on Aug. 16, had surgery last week. Olczyk is a color analyst for Blackhawks games and nationally for NBC.A version of this article appears in print on August 9, 2017, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: Soccer; Real Madrid Overpowers Manchester United.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.