AdvertisementSupported byBy Sam BordenPARIS — The second big continental soccer championship of the summer kicks off Friday, and while the Copa América features World Cup winners in Brazil and Argentina, the European championship offers even more: Germany, Italy, Spain, France and England, not to mention a host of new faces and its own gallery of star players.Who is playing and how does it work?Well, France, obviously. And locals certainly remember that the last time Les Bleus hosted a major soccer event — the 1998 World Cup — they won it. Traditional powers like Germany (the defending World Cup champion) and Spain (which claimed the last two Euros) are here, too. England, the Czech Republic and Portugal are among the other qualifying group winners in the field. And there are newcomers: Iceland, Northern Ireland, Wales, Albania and Slovakia are making their debut at the 24-team tournament. One notable absence? The Netherlands, which finished third at the 2014 World Cup but then — surprisingly, unless you’re a longtime Dutch fan — failed to qualify for this year’s expanded Euros.How do teams qualify?Qualifying for Euro 2016 was an arduous process, with 53 nations competing for the 23 spots alongside the host over about 14 months. Once the field was set, the teams were broken into six groups of four. Each team will play the other three in its group once. The top two teams in each group, as well as the four best third-place teams, will advance to the round of 16, making every match vital in the complicated math that will determine the four lucky also-rans who will get thrown a lifeline for the knockout round. The final will be on July 10 at Stade de France, the national stadium near Paris.How do I watch?ESPN will televise every game live in the United States on its networks (ESPN, ESPN2, ESPN Deportes). The broadcast windows will be familiar to American audiences accustomed to watching European league games — 9 a.m. Eastern time, noon and 3 p.m., for the most part — and thus troublesome for companies trying to get their employees to focus on their work.Are there security concerns?In a word: yes. France has been in a government-declared state of emergency since the Paris terrorist attacks in November, and that status will be extended through the duration of the tournament. The police presence at stadiums, fan zones and in the 10 host cities is expected to be staggering, and officials have said that more than 100,000 police officers, soldiers and private security officers will be at work during the tournament. “Such a unique event in exceptional circumstances requires extra security measures,” said the interior minister, Bernard Cazeneuve.French officials have been adamant that all precautions are being taken, including simulations of potential attacks in each host city, although the authorities were criticized after a test match for the new security procedures — the recent French Cup final at the Stade de France — was chaotic. Fans were able to smuggle dangerous objects, including flares, smoke bombs and firecrackers, into the stadium, and inefficient security screens left packs of fans crushed into dangerous masses of people outside the entry points. Cazeneuve, after acknowledging that the event went poorly, vowed that the errors would be fixed.Who will win?It is hard to pick against Germany, whose team is so loaded — with Manuel Neuer, Thomas Müller, Mesut Özil and Toni Kroos, among many others — that Coach Joachim Löw won’t be troubled by having to leave out the talented (but injury-plagued) Marco Reus. France, with home-country advantage and stars like Paul Pogba and Antoine Griezmann, is right alongside the Germans — and even ahead of them — in many odds tables.England has a long history of disappointment in major tournaments but brings several exciting young players to the Euros, including forward Marcus Rashford, Manchester United’s teenage sensation, and forward Harry Kane, who scored a Premier League-leading 25 goals for Tottenham this season. (Jamie Vardy, who finished second to Kane in the scoring race, arrived in France on Monday amid reports he was considering leaving Leicester City, which he led to an improbable league title, for Arsenal.)Other teams with strong chances include Belgium, which has the creative Eden Hazard, and Spain, which flopped at the World Cup two years ago but still arrives with a loaded roster.If you are looking for the proverbial dark horse, you could do worse than Austria: Ranked 11th in the world, the Austrians have a slew of top players (including Bayern Munich’s David Alaba and Leicester’s Christian Fuchs), as well as a stable starting lineup and tactical approach. In a group with Hungary, Portugal and Iceland, Austria will be hoping to make the quarterfinals, at a minimum.Is there a mascot?Is there a mascot? Come on. Of course there is. He’s an animated, cheery young boy wearing soccer cleats and a cape. His name is Super Victor.Will Michel Platini be involved?Well, not in any official capacity. Platini, the suspended president of UEFA, the governing body overseeing European soccer, is technically allowed to attend matches, but only as a paying customer and not in any sort of V.I.P. area. Platini, who was suspended from soccer activities along with the former FIFA president Sepp Blatter over corruption allegations, has previously referred to the Euros in his home country as “my child.” Platini’s former secretary general at UEFA, Gianni Infantino, is expected to attend the tournament in his new job: president of FIFA.Everyone’s a favorite ■ “I believe Portugal can get to the final and win, and so do the players.” — Portugal Manager Fernando Santos, who took Greece to the quarterfinals of the 2012 Euros and to the round of 16 at the 2014 World Cup.■ “When it comes to set pieces, Poland might be even better than Bayern Munich.” — Robert Lewandowski, the captain of Poland’s national team and a star forward for Bayern Munich. Poland will play Northern Ireland, Germany and Ukraine in the group stage.■ “This time Italy are not favorites, but we will find the trigger to do something that will surprise everyone.” – Gianluigi Buffon, Italy’s longtime goalkeeper, on whether the Azzurri, the runners-up to Spain in 2012, are an underdog this year.Advertisement