By SCOTT CACCIOLAAPRIL 16, 2017
HOUSTON — As he made his way to the Rockets’ bench late in the third quarter, Patrick Beverley paused just long enough to slap hands with another decent defender: J. J. Watt, the All-Pro defensive end for the N.F.L.’s Houston Texans. Watt, who was sitting courtside, appreciated what he was seeing during Sunday’s first-round playoff game, and he let Beverley know it.Led by Beverley, a 6-foot-1 guard who terrorized the Oklahoma City Thunder at both ends of the court, the Rockets ran to a 118-87 victory in Game 1 of what promises to be a high-octane series, headlined by the top two candidates for the N.B.A.’s Most Valuable Player Award: the Rockets’ James Harden and the Thunder’s Russell Westbrook.But it was a member of the supporting cast who emerged to make a big difference in Sunday’s opener. In addition to his considerable duties defending Westbrook, Beverley collected 21 points and 10 rebounds while shooting 8 of 13 from the field. Harden was no slouch, finishing with 37 points, 9 assists and 7 rebounds.Westbrook, who became the first player in 55 years to average a triple-double during the regular season, struggled against the Rockets. He had 22 points, 11 rebounds and 7 assists, but he was as sharp as a butter knife, shooting 6 of 23.Harden, a do-everything point guard, was defended for long stretches by Andre Roberson, a 6-7 forward and one of the most versatile defenders in the league. Harden missed six of his first seven field-goal attempts. But he seemed to treat the situation as little more than an annoyance, as a problem that he would eventually solve.He wound up shooting 13 of 28 and got ample help from Beverley, who gave the Rockets an early spark. He hit two 3-pointers before poking the ball free from Westbrook and racing away for a layup. Neither team could gain much separation, though. The Rockets led by 59-54 at halftime.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Their lead swelled in the third quarter. Beverley made back-to-back 3-pointers to put the Rockets ahead by 73-62. He also absorbed a bone-rattling collision with the Thunder’s Steven Adams, who threw his full weight into a screen near midcourt. It only seemed to motivate Beverley that much more.The Thunder wore orange uniforms for the series opener. The Rockets treated them like traffic cones as the night wore on.A version of this article appears in print on April 17, 2017, on Page D6 of the New York edition.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.