AdvertisementSupported byYankees 6, Blue Jays 3By Seth BerkmanThere has been no scientific study to prove that the extra cuts taken in the Home Run Derby can sap the power from a slugger’s swing; like the aversion to stepping on the first-base line, it exists more as baseball superstition.But during the past few weeks, some of the game’s top power hitters have chosen to rest instead of competing in the event, which will be held in Miami next Monday, the day before the All-Star Game. Even as Yankees outfielder Aaron Judge climbed to the top of the leaderboard in home runs in the majors, he kept mum on his possible participation.The suspense ended before the Yankees’ game against the Toronto Blue Jays on Monday when it was announced that Judge and catcher Gary Sanchez, who were named All-Stars on Sunday for the first time, would indeed enter the contest. That surely is a boon to the 30,000-plus fans expected at Marlins Park for the Home Run Derby and viewers who will watch the exhibition on television.Against the Blue Jays, Judge and Sanchez were unable to produce any homers at Yankee Stadium. Instead, each scored two runs in a more workmanlike manner to support Masahiro Tanaka — reaching base on three singles and a double — and providing the first four runs in a 6-3 Yankees win.Tanaka appears to have fully rebounded after pitching woefully during the first two and a half months this season. In seven innings Monday, he struck out eight, allowing one run on five hits.Tanaka is 2-0 with a 1.29 E.R.A. in his past three starts.“When you put three of them together that are very similar, where his stuff is outstanding, you feel a lot better about where he’s at,” Manager Joe Girardi said.The Blue Jays did not put two players on base at the same time until the seventh inning, when Ezequiel Carrera scored on a one-out single by Darwin Barney. Tanaka responded by getting the next two batters to ground out to the mound; after fielding a sharp comebacker off the bat of Luke Maile, Tanaka fired to first base and then let out a yell as he ended the inning.The Yankees had spotted Tanaka a 2-0 lead in the first inning when Blue Jays starter Marcus Stroman hit Chase Headley with the bases loaded, bringing in Judge, and followed by walking Jacoby Ellsbury to bring home Sanchez.Judge and Sanchez later scored in the eighth on a double by Headley.It capped a day that began with a special news conference for Judge and Sanchez, in which they discussed their first All-Star nods and fielded several questions about whether they were worried about overworking themselves in the Home Run Derby.“We’re not really worried about it affecting our swings for the second half,” Judge said. “We’re not going to try to go out there and change anything.“For me, I’m just taking it as another B.P.,” he added, referring to batting practice. “We’ve got two days after the All-Star Game to rest.”Girardi also dispelled the notion that injuries were a concern because of the Home Run Derby, although it would have been understandable if he were worried about his players experiencing fatigue, given the length of the Yankees’ disabled list.General Manager Brian Cashman said one of those players on the D.L., first baseman Greg Bird, might be sent for exploratory surgery to determine the cause of lingering pain in his right ankle. Bird, who has been on the disabled list since May 2, did not believe that step was necessary.“You don’t want to have surgery,” Bird said, adding: “Any time you can avoid that, you want to avoid it, especially if it can be avoided. So I think there’s a time where it’s necessary, but when you still don’t have a solid answer of what’s the problem, then how are you going to say surgery’s a good answer?”While Bird’s return date remains uncertain, Girardi will welcome back C. C. Sabathia to the rotation Tuesday. Sabathia has been on the D.L. since June 14 with a left hamstring strain.“Being able to get back in three weeks is a big deal,” Sabathia said.One activity Sabathia will not take part in is watching Judge prepare for the Home Run Derby. Less than three weeks shy of his 37th birthday, Sabathia said he is too old to shag fly balls in batting practice, as pitchers normally do. Because of that, he has never seen Judge in the cage.However, Sabathia said that he will tune in to watch Judge next Monday.“I won’t watch the game,” Sabathia said. “I’ll watch the Derby.”Advertisement