AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressPITTSBURGH — Max Browne spent four years at Southern California competing for the starting quarterback job, with mixed results at best. Next season, he will get one last shot 2,500 miles away.Sure, it is not quite the way he expected his college career to go. Yet Browne was hardly complaining while standing inside the University of Pittsburgh complex on Friday. He will spend the next year working on his master’s degree in customer insights and trying to win with Coach Pat Narduzzi and the Panthers.There are worse fates. A lot worse.“I know I can play at a high level,” Browne, 21, said.After two seasons backing up Cody Kessler at U.S.C., Browne finally earned the shot he had waited for by rising to the top of the depth chart in August.His stay there did not last long. After a brutal three-game stretch that included games against No. 1 Alabama and Stanford, Browne lost his grasp on the starting job. Coach Clay Helton gave the ball to the freshman Sam Darnold, who would rally the Trojans to a victory over Penn State in the Rose Bowl at the same time Browne was headed across the country to begin the next chapter of his life.“It was a tough first three games,” said Browne, who completed 58 of 93 passes for 507 yards and two touchdowns, with two interceptions, in 2016. “Played some great opponents. But that’s the product of S.C. in general. You’ve always got someone behind you. Went out there, did what I felt I could. Things didn’t work out. It is what it is. Happy to be here.”Narduzzi is happy to have him because the senior Nate Peterman — a graduate transfer himself — is moving on after helping the Panthers to consecutive 8-5 seasons. Peterman’s success acclimating so quickly was one of the many selling points for Browne, who made just one campus visit while exploring his options. A few days with Narduzzi and the coaching staff was all he needed.“It seemed like a perfect fit,” Browne said. “I wanted to pull the trigger right after.”Instead, Browne waited a bit, quietly moving out of his apartment after the Trojans granted him his release and returning briefly to his hometown in Sammamish, Wash., a suburb of Seattle. His only moments of trepidation in between committing to the Panthers and arriving were last month, when the Pittsburgh offensive coordinator Matt Canada took the same job at Louisiana State“I had to do my due diligence,” Browne said. “There was a couple of calls involved.”The Panthers will also lose Peterman, the record-setting running back James Conner and key pieces from one of the nation’s best offensive lines. But they will return several playmakers, including wide receiver Quadree Henderson, who is also an all-American returner, and the 6-foot-3 wide receiver Jester Weah.Browne already has one fan in the city: Pittsburgh Steelers tight end Xavier Grimble. The two were at U.S.C. together in 2013, and they reunited during Browne’s visit to the city during the fall.“He’s got good pocket presence,” Grimble said Friday. “He can sit in the pocket and make the big throw.”It is getting on the field enough to showcase that talent that has been the issue.“Feel like I’ve been a hardworking kid, dedicated kid,” Browne said. “When things don’t work your way, just want to fuel the fire.”Advertisement