By TIM ROHANMARCH 23, 2016
DUNEDIN, Fla. —  Alex Rodriguez and Bartolo Colon, the elder statesmen of their teams, chatted and joked about sticking together Tuesday before the Yankees played the Mets.So Colon, a few months shy of his 43rd birthday, was surprised to learn Wednesday that Rodriguez had said he planned to retire after the 2017 season, when he will be 42. Later in the day, Rodriguez seemed to retreat a little from that stance.Colon said he had no plans, for now, to retire.“I’m not worried about it,” Colon said through an interpreter. “I take it year by year, so we’ll see what happens with me.”Questions about Colon’s future arose in spring training after he had posted a 10.03 E.R.A. over his first three outings, but he pitched a gem Wednesday, throwing six scoreless innings and striking out six batters in the Mets’ 3-1 loss to the Toronto Blue Jays.AdvertisementAfter Colon pitched 1942/3 innings with a 4.16 E.R.A. last season, the Mets gave him a one-year, $7.25 million deal, figuring he could offer them depth. At the beginning of the season, he may be used as the fifth starter.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.After Zack Wheeler returns, Colon could come out of the bullpen or be a spot starter. As a way to keep their starters healthy, the Mets plan to use a sixth starter at times this season.“They’ll do with me whatever they want to do with me,” Colon said. “I trust them. I just want to help the team out.”AdvertisementAsked if he would continue playing if it meant pitching exclusively out of the bullpen, Colon said, “God willing, as long as I stay healthy, yes, I would be open to that.”A version of this article appears in print on March 24, 2016, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: As Rodriguez Talks Retirement, Colon Takes Different Approach .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.