AdvertisementSupported byOn BaseballBy Tyler KepnerThere has never been another career quite like the twisting, twisted epoch of Alex Rodriguez — which will end, it seems, after the 2017 season. The news seemed somewhat obvious already, since Rodriguez will be 42 that July, but other careers have lasted longer.Pete Rose, the career hits leader, played until he was 45. Barry Bonds, the career home runs leader, played until he was 43. Rodriguez, now a designated hitter for the Yankees, fits in well with those two for the overwhelming competitive greed that fueled his greatness and led to his demise.Rose gambled away his legacy. Bonds ruined his with his ties to performance-enhancing drugs. The backdrop for both sad sagas was arrogance, a misguided belief that they could get away with it because they were bigger than the game. At his worst, Rodriguez — who has counted both as friends — listened to the same dark angels.Simply condemning Rodriguez, though, is far too simple. He made some inexplicably horrible decisions. Chronically insecure, he trusted and fell under the spell of the wrong people far too often. But he has been endlessly fascinating, impossible to ignore from his first day in professional baseball, in 1993, until his last, most likely in 2017.Rodriguez, of course, did not bind himself to any decision when he told ESPN’s Andrew Marchand on Wednesday: “I won’t play after next year. I’ve really enjoyed my time. For me, it is time for me to go home and be Dad.”Within hours, Rodriguez was waffling on that stance. He has been so well managed since his yearlong drug suspension that it was startling to see Rodriguez slip and say something unscripted. You expected something more polished for a retirement announcement.But Rodriguez probably meant what he told Marchand. His social media posts suggest that he is a devoted father to his two daughters, and there is not much left to accomplish in his career. A World Series ring, Most Valuable Player Awards, Gold Gloves, a batting title, a 40/40 season, 3,000 hits, 600 homers, and contracts totaling more than $400 million through 2017? Nobody else has collected all that in one career.There is, of course, Bonds’s career home run record, which no longer seems unrealistic. Rodriguez has 687 home runs, 75 shy of Bonds’s record total of 762. With two more seasons like last year, when Rodriguez hit 33 homers, the record would be tantalizingly close. Wouldn’t he be motivated by the chance to stand alone atop the home run list?“If you would’ve asked me that five years ago, I would’ve said yes,” Kevin Long, who coached Rodriguez for seven years with the Yankees, told Mets reporters in Dunedin, Fla. “Knowing him now, he’s at peace with himself and his life, and he’s in a very good place. I think he’s fine with it. I don’t think he’s chasing any records. I think he’s very content to finish out his career, and finish out the best he can.”Rodriguez once stood out as the clean hope for the home run record, a premise promoted by many in the news media (including The New York Times) before the first revelation of Rodriguez’s steroid use in 2009. That punctured his image forever, but he led the Yankees to a championship that fall. The steroid issue would always hound him, but he could at least keep it buried deep in his past.Then he was caught again and cost himself a full season after an unseemly legal battle with Major League Baseball and the Yankees. The discipline Rodriguez has displayed to avoid silly controversies — and, apparently, to avoid further steroid use — has been remarkable, maybe even admirable.There is no way to really trust his supposed transformation since he already fooled us all once. But many people have come around to him, finally, and Rodriguez seems humbled by their support.“I get treated better today than before,” Rodriguez told ESPN. “That is hard to believe, and it is hard to comprehend sometimes, but I’m grateful for it.”With two more years of good will, Rodriguez’s pursuit of Bonds’s record could have been fun for a lot of Yankees fans, even if its historical meaning would have been dulled by his past misdeeds. But it is foolish to assume an easy path to the 76 homers he would need to break the mark.Rodriguez looked strong for four months last season, after his full year off. But he wheezed to the finish, hitting .187 from Aug. 1 through the Yankees’ wild-card loss. Performing at an elite level will continue to be an even greater challenge as he ages.No player in baseball has hit 76 homers from his age-40 season (as 2016 will be considered for Rodriguez) through the end of his career. The closest is Carlton Fisk, with 72, followed by Darrell Evans (67), Bonds and Dave Winfield (59), and Raul Ibanez (53).Rodriguez may understand what Mike Mussina did when he chose to retire in 2008 with 270 career wins. Mussina had just earned 20, but he knew that that kind of season was a happy outlier and that he would probably need three more years to reach 300. Mussina had no desire to pitch that long, so he went home for good.Rodriguez does not seem like the retiring type. Rose and Bonds played as long as they could, and deep down, Rodriguez has always been like them, for better or worse. The thinking here is that his initial statement Wednesday will hold true. Either way, Rodriguez’s career — rollicking and ridiculous, sublime and suspect — will never be matched.Tim Rohan contributed reporting.Advertisement