AdvertisementSupported byCavaliers 120, Warriors 90 | Golden State leads the series, 2-1By Scott CacciolaCLEVELAND — Stephen Curry of the Golden State Warriors was dribbling the ball in one of his comfortable spots, which tends to be pretty much anywhere on the court. But on this occasion, he was stationed outside the 3-point line and searching for space against an unfamiliar defender.Tristan Thompson, a 6-foot-10 center for the Cleveland Cavaliers, had switched onto Curry and was refusing to go away, batting at the ball with his saucepan hands. Curry kept dribbling and dribbling, searching and searching, until finally he bounced the ball off his sneaker and out of bounds.The Cavaliers returned home to Quicken Loans Arena on Wednesday night for Game 3 of the N.B.A. finals, and everything about their approach changed in a 120-90 victory that rekindled the drama in a series that had been one-sided through the first two games.Gone were the Cavaliers’ defensive lapses. Gone were their careless possessions. Gone, too, was the Warriors’ dominance, along with their sure path to consecutive championships. Golden State still has a two-games-to-one series lead heading into Game 4 here on Friday night, but the Cavaliers — with each ferocious dunk and every high-arcing 3-pointer — stifled the Warriors’ air of invincibility.“We weren’t ready to play,” Warriors Coach Steve Kerr said. “Obviously, they just punched us right in the mouth, right in the beginning.”Kyrie Irving finished with 30 points and 8 assists for the Cavaliers, who went small in the absence of Kevin Love, their starting power forward, who was sidelined with a concussion. It worked out for them. LeBron James collected 32 points and 11 rebounds, and J. R. Smith, invisible through the first two games, emerged from obscurity to score 20 points.Love may be available for Game 4, but the Cavaliers won by 30 without him. So the obvious question: How would Lue potentially use him?“Do I have to tell you?” Lue asked. “I’m not going to tell you.”Curry scuffled his way to 19 points while shooting 6 of 13 from the field, including 3 of 9 from the 3-point line. Klay Thompson, his backcourt companion, scored just 10 points and was 1 of 7 from beyond the arc. Through the first three games of the series, Curry and Thompson have been eerily quiet, combining to score 84 points — total.Their teammates had been good enough to carry the Warriors to two carefree wins in Oakland. But the dynamic of the series has changed now.“If you let your guard down and the other team is angry,” Kerr said, “you can see this kind of turnaround.”The Cavaliers knew what was at stake before the game started. Just three teams in N.B.A. history have come back from a two-games-to-none series deficit to win the finals: the 1968-69 Boston Celtics, the 1976-77 Portland Trail Blazers and the 2005-6 Miami Heat. And forget about going down three games to none — no team has ever climbed out of such depths.So when James assessed Game 3 as both “must win” and “do or die,” he was not exaggerating.Kerr anticipated that the Cavaliers, buoyed by the support of their home crowd, might get off to a hot start. Sure enough, the Cavaliers ran out to a 9-0 lead. Richard Jefferson, who started in place of Love, capped the early spurt with a 3-pointer, which James celebrated by stalking to midcourt like a drum major as the crowd worked itself into a lather. Kerr called for a timeout. He talked to his players. He tried to look calm. It did little good.Even when the Cavaliers were getting walloped in the first two games, Lue continued to press his players to push the pace — even against the Warriors, who actually try to seduce opponents into rushing their possessions. But the Cavaliers are at their best when they play fast, and they heeded Lue’s message at start of Game 3.“They came out and played like a team with a sense of desperation,” the Warriors’ Draymond Green said. “And we came out and played like everything was peaches and cream.”Nobody played with more urgency than Irving, who ran the court as if a pack of Rottweilers was chasing him. He scored 16 points in the first quarter, shooting 7 of 9 from the field. The Cavaliers led by as many as 20, and the Warriors looked frazzled.Curry picked up two early fouls, and Thompson retreated to the locker room with a thigh bruise after he was kneed by the Cavaliers’ Timofey Mozgov. (“Seemed kind of dirty to me,” Thompson said.) That Mozgov was even playing — in the first quarter, no less — was a product of Love’s absence and Lue’s scrambled rotations.Sparked by their reserves, the Warriors rallied at the start of the second quarter. Thompson also re-entered and briefly discovered his rhythm, making a 3-pointer before driving for a layup that cut the Cavaliers’ lead to 7. Curry, though, continued to struggle. At one point, Kerr pulled him from the game. At halftime, Curry had more fouls (three) than points (2).“I would’ve done the same thing,” Curry said. “He’s trying to get some life and figure out a way to get me going. And it was a short talk, but it’ll carry over to Game 4, for sure.”All things considered, it was something of a minor miracle that the Warriors trailed by only 51-43 at the break. But the Cavaliers refused to cave at the start of the third quarter. Smith kept swishing 3-pointers, and James kept going straight at the rim, his thunderous dunk extending the lead back to 20.“I just think it’s two words: physicality and aggressiveness,” Lue said. “We talked about effort the last two days.”Smith, who shot 5 of 10 from 3-point range, was asked about his confidence. He said he felt the same as usual.“Honestly, I turn that side of my brain off,” he said.In opting to start Jefferson, Lue cited his ability to move without the basketball “when we get stagnant.” And make no mistake, Cleveland had shown a weakness for stagnant offense through the first two games of the series, averaging 83 points while shooting 36.8 percent from the field and 27.3 percent from 3-point range.Kerr anticipated challenges against the Cavaliers’ smaller lineup.“They’re really going to spread us out,” he said before the game, “and it should give them more driving lanes and more room for LeBron to operate.”Knowing what to expect from the Cavaliers was one thing. Stopping them proved to be another issue altogether.Advertisement