By SCOTT CACCIOLAJUNE 8, 2016
CLEVELAND — Kevin Love, the starting forward for the Cleveland Cavaliers, was ruled out of Game 3 of the N.B.A. finals on Wednesday night because of a concussion, the team announced.Love, whose team entered the game trailing the Golden State Warriors by two games to none in the best-of-seven series, sustained the injury late in the first half of Game 2 on Sunday when he was inadvertently elbowed by the Warriors’ Harrison Barnes. Love returned to the game before experiencing dizziness and heading to the locker room.Love was placed in the league’s concussion protocol, and he spent Tuesday and Wednesday being evaluated by Dr. Alfred Cianflocco, the Cavaliers’ team physician, who was in consultation with Dr. Jeffrey Kutcher, the director of the N.B.A.’s concussion program. It is up to the Cavaliers, and not the league, to clear Love before he can return to the court.“We know Kevin wants to play,” Cavaliers Coach Tyronn Lue said before the game. “He’s eager to play. He’s frustrated that he’s not able to play. But that’s the protocol and that’s how we’re trying to protect our players nowadays in the N.B.A. That’s just what it is. So someone else has to step up right now.”AdvertisementLue said that Richard Jefferson would start in place of Love. Jefferson had 12 points and 5 rebounds in Game 2.Advertisement“Just like his physicality,” Lue said of Jefferson, adding that he “moves well without the basketball when we get stagnant.”It has not been the most pleasant postseason for Love, who was expected to bolster the Cavaliers’ championship hopes after he missed the team’s trip to the finals last year with an injured shoulder. Instead, over the course of the playoffs, he has averaged 16.5 points and 9.4 rebounds while shooting just 38.9 percent from the field.A version of this article appears in print on June 9, 2016, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Love Participates In a Shootaround But Sits Out Game 3.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.