AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressStephen Curry on Monday withdrew from consideration for the United States men’s basketball roster for the Rio Olympics, leaving the team without the N.B.A.’s most valuable player.In a statement, Curry said he had decided to pull out because of “several factors, including recent ankle and knee injuries.”He did not say what the other factors were. Several athletes have expressed concerns about the water situation in Rio de Janeiro and the Zika virus.Curry will be the highest-profile absence for the United States team, a two-time defending gold medalist that was already without the N.B.A. All-Stars Chris Paul and Anthony Davis.Curry, a Golden State Warriors guard, has won two world titles with the Americans, and he was a starter when they won the 2014 Basketball World Cup. He had spoken of wanting a chance to win Olympic gold, but a recent sprain in his right knee, which caused him to miss six games this N.B.A. postseason, at least partly influenced his decision.“My previous experiences with U.S.A. Basketball have been incredibly rewarding, educational and enjoyable, which made this an extremely difficult decision for me and my family,” Curry said.He added, “I believe this is the best decision for me at this stage of my career.”Curry said he had spoken with his family, the Warriors and his representatives and had recently informed the U.S.A. Basketball chairman, Jerry Colangelo, that he would not go to Brazil.“Obviously we are disappointed that Steph will not be available this summer, but we understand these situations arise,” Colangelo said.Curry’s decision to withdraw was first reported by The San Jose Mercury News.The Americans have a list of 31 players in their roster pool for this summer and plan to name their 12-man roster later this month.Curry, the first N.B.A. player to be voted a unanimous M.V.P. and the league’s leading scorer, certainly would have been on it. He started all nine games for the Americans in 2014, averaging 10.7 points, and his U.S.A. Basketball experience dates to when he played for the under-19 team that won a silver medal in 2007.He could have been the team’s biggest star in Rio, with Kobe Bryant retired and LeBron James still uncommitted.But Curry decided it was more important that he rest after a demanding regular season in which the Warriors set an N.B.A. regular-season record with 73 victories and a postseason run that has included ankle and elbow injuries on top of the sprained knee.“It’s an incredible honor to represent your country and wear U.S.A. on your chest, but my primary basketball-related objective this summer needs to focus on my body and getting ready for the 2016-17 N.B.A. season,” Curry said.The Warriors, who have a 2-0 lead over Cleveland in the N.B.A. finals, could still have a strong presence at the Olympics. Klay Thompson, Draymond Green, Andre Iguodala and Harrison Barnes remain candidates for the American team while Andrew Bogut (Australia), Anderson Varejao and Leandro Barbosa (Brazil), and Festus Ezeli (Nigeria) are on the rosters of their countries.Paul, who has won two golds with the Americans, had already opted not to play this time, and his fellow point guards John Wall of Washington and Mike Conley of Memphis are coming off injuries. The Americans still have Oklahoma City’s Russell Westbrook, Cleveland’s Kyrie Irving and Portland’s Damian Lillard as possibilities at the position.But Curry would most likely have started ahead of them or alongside one in the United States backcourt, as he did as the shooting guard next to Irving in 2014. He made 43.8 percent of his attempts then from the shorter international 3-point arc, and the Americans will probably miss his shooting against the zone defenses they face.Colangelo said he had been in contact with Curry since his injuries and was aware that the decision to withdraw was possible.“Steph has always represented his country in an exemplary manner, and we are sorry that he won’t be able to be with us this summer,” Colangelo said.Curry will also miss the chance to play for the Americans in his home arena: The United States will play China in an exhibition game at Oracle Arena in July.Advertisement