By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSNOV. 4, 2016
BATON ROUGE, La. — Publicly, Louisiana State running back Leonard Fournette has been largely silent about the perceived score he and the No. 15 Tigers have to settle with top-ranked Alabama.Fournette, who scored three touchdowns of 59 yards or longer in his previous game, was nowhere to be seen during designated times for news media interviews this week. But when the cameras and microphones were gone, Fournette apparently had plenty to say to his teammates about facing a Crimson Tide team that held him to 31 yards on 19 carries last year in defeating the Tigers for the fifth straight time.“He’s probably the most motivated guy on the team,” L.S.U.’s interim coach, Ed Orgeron, said this week. “He has spoken to the team and will speak to the team again.”Orgeron added that Fournette’s desire “to have success against Alabama is as high as any other player I’ve seen.”AdvertisementThe Tigers’ confidence is surging as they aim to end the skid against the Crimson Tide during a Saturday night home game. L.S.U. (5-2, 3-1 Southeastern Conference) has won three straight — each by 17 points or more — since Orgeron took over after Les Miles was fired in late September.Advertisement“This is obviously one of the biggest games of the year — always is,” Alabama Coach Nick Saban said, adding that L.S.U. is “probably as good a team as we’ve played all year, especially the way they’re playing now.”Regardless of how Alabama (8-0, 5-0) ruined Fournette’s Heisman Trophy candidacy by bottling him up in Tuscaloosa last year, Saban noted that Fournette, a 6-foot-1, 235-pound junior, is “probably one of the most dynamic running backs that has played in college football for a while — and is playing extremely well right now.”Tigers tight end Colin Jeter described the latest edition of Alabama-L.S.U. this way: “It’s going to be a juggernaut battle and basically a street-fight game.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Because of a nagging left ankle injury, Fournette has played only once since Orgeron took over. But that was an impressive performance against Mississippi two weeks ago, when Fournette vaulted himself back into Heisman consideration by setting an L.S.U. single-game rushing record with 284 yards. He did so on 16 carries for an average of 17.8 yards.“He’s just a genetic freak, and certainly great to have him on your team,” Jeter said. “He brings that power to the game and brings confidence to all of us.”Fournette will be going up against an Alabama defense that is ranked fourth nationally in yards allowed (275 per game). The Tide have forced 16 turnovers in eight games — eight fumble recoveries and eight interceptions — and have made 64 tackles for losses, with 32 sacks.Orgeron said Alabama fields “obviously the best defense we’ve seen — might be one of the best defenses in college football history.”AdvertisementL.S.U. has allowed only eight touchdowns this season, and no more than two in a single game. Saban expressed admiration for how Dave Aranda, L.S.U.’s first-year defensive coordinator, has harnessed his talent.“Everybody doing their job and being sound and disciplined in what they do is what makes them really good, because they have really good players,” Saban said, adding that L.S.U. “is a really, really quality defensive team.”The composure of Jalen Hurts, Alabama’s freshman quarterback, promises to be a key component of the game. Hurts has made some mistakes in previous road games, but he has bounced back. Now he will enter L.S.U.’s formidable stadium, known as Death Valley, for the first time. Hurts has accounted for eight touchdowns rushing and passing in three SEC road games, while topping 100 rushing yards twice.Alabama will be playing its first game since safety-punt returner Eddie Jackson was lost for the season to a broken leg. It was a big loss for the Tide, since Jackson had already scored on two punt returns and an interception return. Cornerback Minkah Fitzpatrick has been working at the safety spot, although Saban has not publicly declared him as the fill-in starter. Xavian Marks has returned a punt for a touchdown, while Trevon Diggs and Calvin Ridley have both taken turns fielding punts.As always, Saban’s return to Baton Rouge is an underlying but compelling story line. Saban won a national title as L.S.U.’s coach during the 2003 season before jumping to the N.F.L. for two frustrating seasons in 2004. After returning to the college ranks for the Alabama job in 2007, Saban is 7-3 vs. L.S.U., and he has won four national titles with the Tide.A version of this article appears in print on November 5, 2016, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: L.S.U. Aims to End Skid Against Alabama.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.