

      By TALYA MINSBERG and 
    
KERRI MACDONALD

NOV. 4, 2016

On Sunday, a cannon blast will signal the start of a 26.2-mile journey for 50,000 runners aiming to complete the New York City Marathon. But getting to the start line is an accomplishment in itself. Thousands of runners from around the world train for road races year-round, logging hundreds of miles to conquer goals big and small.  We asked runners to show us their perspective on their road to raceday. Ashley Gilbertson (@ashgilbertson), a photographer based in New York, captured the image to the right under the Williamsburg Bridge in Brooklyn as part of a series of photographs he takes while running. A selection of the submissions we received are below, and you can view more on Instagram under the hashtag #MyRunLooksLike. Captions have been edited for length and clarity. “Morning miles cut short. Garmin didn’t work, meter said my blood sugar was low (it wasn’t), ate a bunch of sugar, went high, meter stopped working, cut run short because I didn’t know. Major technology fail. Mother Nature wins.” Tricia Scott (@triciarunsnyc) “I often run on Randalls Island to soak up some nature and get away from Manhattan crowds. You never know what weird things you might see. Cirque du Soleil happens to have its Kurios show there right now, and some of its displays are out in the open, along my regular running paths. I imagine these mannequins as my practice marathon day cheering section. That one on the left is perfectly positioned for high-fives.” Katherine Fink (@katherinefink) “The beachside Mosque of the Divinity is about a mile into my run. Dakar has a huge exercise culture, and people are always on the stairs finding new ways to challenge themselves. I once saw a guy hopping up the steps backward, on one foot. I just run up and down and am on my way.” Dionne Searcey (@dionnesearcey) “This picture is taken in the Panathenaic Stadium, also called Kallimarmaro, in Athens. I live in the neighborhood, and this is where I go for my run, normally at dusk or first thing in the morning.” Loulou d’Aki (@dakiloulou) “Running in Amman is a challenge in its own right, from navigating nonexistent, crumbling sidewalks to going around herds of goats unexpectedly in your path, to dodging traffic, to the occasional catcalls or stares from male gawkers who have presumably never seen a woman running before. Training for the marathon is a whole other thing, and it’s been a challenge to find enough miles of street that are safe enough to run in, without doing the same monotonous loop again and again. But sights like this, taken down the street from my apartment, give me an extra push to run a little harder.” “This picture was taken on the Ohio and Erie Canal Towpath Trail in the area of the Stark/Summit County border. I am a relatively new runner (only two years), and I run almost exclusively on the towpath between Navarre and Clinton in Ohio. It is peaceful and quiet while providing the distance needed for my marathon training.” Bob Argent (@theksurvt) “The boardwalk on Jones Beach is one of the ideal locations to run on Long Island during quiet fall evenings. The full moon can give the energy you need when slowing down while running, or you can set your music to match the incredible view while enjoying the night.” Gokhan Okkan (@gokhanokkan) “This was one of my first runs after running my first half-marathon, and one of the first really crisp, clear fall days. I love running in the park in fall because it’s my equivalent of having a backyard. I’d just started going around the loop, when the light hitting that tree in the distance made me stop. There was another runner in the distance cooling off. I was struck by how this one tree was ablaze with color, but the trees closer to me had still yet to turn.” Malia Griggs (@maliagriggs) “It starts to feel a little bit more like home when you find a good place to run.” Lauren Talley (@laurenmarieet) “We live in a small, outdoor-focused mountain community in the Canadian Rockies called Fernie in British Columbia,” wrote Harshan Ramadass, who is pictured. “I like to hit the trails with my 3-year-old in a stroller and my wife.”  Pruthvi Harshan (@colourme_fernie) “This was in Liberty State Park in Jersey City. I run there often!” Nour Daoud (@nourachanful) “Run early enough that the light is still creepy. This is actually my second marathon, though it’s my first time running N.Y.C. It’s always been a dream of mine, and it’s a nice cap on what’s been a crazy year of turning 30, getting engaged and defending my dissertation.” Shoshana Goldberg (@nyc2nc) “This is the end of one of my favorite 10- to 20-mile training routes. On days like these, races don’t seem like a major victory to me. For me, running is about learning to enjoy the present moment and being inspired by the beauty of my surroundings.” “I live in Vitória, Espírito Santo, Brazil, where the picture was taken. This is my favorite running route … there are many trees and beaches along the way through the neighborhood. I am 42 years old and started to run five years ago. I’m planning to run a marathon next year. Maybe in New York! Who knows.” Cláudia G. A. Santos (@cchefer) Advertisement