AdvertisementSupported byYankees 9, Cardinals 3By Wallace MatthewsBrooklyn Dodgers fans lit candles in churches in 1952 to help Gil Hodges through a horrendous batting slump during the World Series. But Brooklyn is known as the Borough of Churches, and the area in which Yankee Stadium resides is better known for the Bronx Cheer.No one was lighting candles for Greg Bird as he flailed his way through a 1-for-26 slump to start the 2017 season. Rather, it seemed that some tough love was being applied to Bird, the 24-year-old heir apparent to Mark Teixeira as the Yankees’ everyday first baseman.“All my teammates are really supportive, but there’s no feel-sorry-for-Greg thing going on in here,” Bird said before the Yankees’ game against the St. Louis Cardinals at Yankee Stadium on Sunday night. “We’re all men in here, and we all know what we have to do.”After the string of futile at-bats, which had his average at .038, Bird did what he needed to do, and more, in Sunday’s game, a 9-3 victory for the Yankees. Batting for the first time against Adam Wainwright, a pitcher who lives off his nasty curveball, Bird jumped on the first pitch he saw — a 90-mile-per-hour fastball — and crushed it deep into the right-field bleachers, giving the Yankees a 3-1 lead in the second inning.How did the homer feel? “The way it’s supposed to feel,” Bird said, with a grin that was part exhilaration, part relief. “It felt good. I felt like myself again.”After a sizzling spring training in which he led the Yankees in batting average (.451) and on-base-plus-slugging percentage (1.64) and led every other American League player in home runs, with eight, Bird looked like a completely different hitter once the games turned real.He doubled in his third at-bat of the Yankees’ second game — and then went hitless in his next 20 at-bats, striking out 12 times. Manager Joe Girardi said he had seen good signs in Bird on Saturday, when, after striking out in his first two at-bats, he drew a walk and then grounded out on a hard-hit ball in his final at-bat.“I think at-bats like that help you relax a little bit,” Girardi said. “It’s kind of like, O.K., I found my swing again, and I can breathe a little bit now.”Bird also got a little breathing room as a result of a disputed call just before his first at-bat. A long fly ball to right by Aaron Judge glanced off a fan’s glove in the bleachers and landed on the field, apparently in play. Judge stopped at third, but the Yankees argued that the play should have been a home run. They lost the argument — Judge had to settle for a run-scoring triple — but Bird then crushed the next pitch for his first major league home run since Oct. 1, 2015.“Happiness, relief, whatever you want to call it,” Bird said. “It’s just good to be able to contribute again.”Bird was not done. He followed the home run with a double in the fourth inning, a walk in the sixth and a single in the Yankees’ five-run eighth. As a result of his three-hit night — the first of his career — Bird’s batting average soared 100 points, to .138.“It’s interesting,” he said. “Things change fast in this game, sometimes from pitch to pitch.”The Yankees also got a solo home run from Aaron Hicks and seven strong innings from starter Michael Pineda to complete a sweep of the Cardinals and extend their winning streak to seven games.They have done that without the starting shortstop Didi Gregorius, who started the season on the disabled list with a shoulder strain he sustained while playing in the World Baseball Classic, and without the slugging catcher Gary Sanchez, who strained a biceps on April 8. And they had been doing it virtually without any contribution from Bird, who hit 11 home runs and drove in 31 runs in 157 at-bats as a rookie in the second half of 2015.“There’s a little bit of a track record there,” Girardi said before the game. “So I believe in this kid. I believe he’s going to hit. If I didn’t believe in him I wouldn’t put him out there.”Bird’s rookie-season numbers suggested the potential of about 40 homers and 120 R.B.I. over the course of a full season. But a torn labrum in his right shoulder, requiring surgery, kept Bird out for the 2016 season and created some doubt in the organization that he would be able to slide seamlessly back into the role that was set out for him when Teixeira retired at the end of last year.“Well, I think he’s frustrated, but I mean, who wouldn’t be?” Girardi said. “Especially as hot as he was in spring training, I think he probably thought he’d get off to a good start. Frankly, I was somewhat shocked in spring training how locked in he was, considering he really had missed a whole year.”Bird’s early-season struggles seemed to affirm another bit of old-school baseball wisdom, the one about never believing anything you see in March or September. But Bird shrugged off any suggestion that the game had become more difficult for him once the calendar flipped from March to April.“At every level I’ve ever played, the game’s always been the same,” he said. “And I’ve always been able to hit.”Advertisement