By SCOTT CACCIOLAJULY 3, 2017
Kevin Durant, just weeks removed from leading Golden State to an N.B.A. championship in his first season with the Warriors, gave the team another helping hand on Monday when he agreed to a pay cut in his new contract.Durant, an eight-time All-Star, was expected to sign a two-year deal that will pay him about $25 million next season, according to multiple news media reports. After earning about $26.5 million last season, Durant was eligible for a new contract that could have paid him as much as $34.5 million next season.But he agreed to take less money to make room for his teammates Andre Iguodala and Shaun Livingston, who negotiated new deals with the Warriors over the weekend. With the team expected to blow past the N.B.A.’s $99 million salary cap for next season, Durant’s contract will lessen the luxury tax burden for the Warriors’ ownership group.Stephen Curry, a two-time Most Valuable Player, also hammered out a new deal with the Warriors last week that will be worth $201 million over five years.AdvertisementESPN was the first to report the details of Durant’s new contract, which includes a player option for the second year.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The deal will almost certainly raise new questions for the players’ union, which has a new collective bargaining agreement with the league but generally does not want to see its star players taking pay cuts. No less an eminence than the Cleveland Cavaliers’ LeBron James, a member of the union’s executive committee, weighed in on the subject over the weekend, arguing that Curry, even with his new contract, was underpaid given the ever-increasing value of N.B.A. franchises.“So tell me again why there’s a cap on how much a player should get?” James wrote on his Twitter account. “Don’t answer that. Steph should be getting 400M this summer 5 yrs.”AdvertisementDurant, 28, was a force for the Warriors in the playoffs, averaging 28.5 points, 7.9 rebounds and 4.3 assists a game while shooting 55.6 percent from the field. He was named the finals’ most valuable player after the Warriors defeated the Cavaliers, four games to one, in the best-of-seven series.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.