AdvertisementSupported byBy Billy WitzHOUSTON — After leaving Dustin Fowler behind in a Chicago hospital bed and seeing Tyler Clippard off to his grandmother’s funeral, the rest of the bleary-eyed and beaten-down Yankees could be excused if they arrived here wondering what could possibly go wrong next.Fowler’s gruesome, season-ending knee injury, which came in the first inning of his major league debut, was the latest and most severe of their recent run of maladies, a list seemingly outpaced only by the losses — 12 in their past 16 games. Next up was a three-game road series against the Houston Astros, the best team in the major leagues.On Friday, the Yankees were feeling the full force of the grind of the baseball season.The previous night, they endured a nearly three-hour rain delay, then packed up after a 4-3 loss to the Chicago White Sox and reached their hotels in Houston at 6 a.m., making it surprising that more players did not have a cup of coffee sitting in their lockers, as third baseman Chase Headley did.“It’s a challenge to be your best and not think about all the other stuff and let it get in the way,” Headley said. “Good teams are able to find a way by it. There’s no denying — from the injuries to the tough losses to the travel — all those things add up, but you’ve got to do your best to look past it and keep your head on the goal.”That goal, of course, is still in front of the Yankees. The four-game lead in the American League East that they held on June 12 has evaporated, but they began Friday just one game behind the Boston Red Sox and three ahead of the third-place Tampa Bay Rays as their long June drew to a close.To date, most of the Yankees’ starting lineup is, or has been, on the disabled list: catcher Gary Sanchez, first baseman Greg Bird, second baseman Starlin Castro, shortstop Didi Gregorius, designated hitter Matt Holliday and center fielder Jacoby Ellsbury. (So, too, have fourth outfielder Aaron Hicks, starting pitcher C. C. Sabathia and relievers Aroldis Chapman and Adam Warren.)Two more starters might well have gone on the disabled list: left fielder Brett Gardner survived a nasty full-speed collision with Tampa Bay first baseman Rickie Weeks Jr. in early April, and Headley recently needed an epidural to relieve pain in his back.That leaves just one Yankee starter who has remained in one piece: Aaron Judge.That is fortunate for the team, since he has been the one carrying the Yankees, hitting .331, with 27 home runs and 62 runs batted in — all three of those marks leading the American League.“This is a microcosm of life, and you have to move on,” Manager Joe Girardi said when asked before Friday’s game if he wondered when the bad luck and bad results might stem. “Do our hearts not go out to a Clippard and a Fowler? Yes. Absolutely. And a Tyler Austin who was here a couple days and hurts — but we have a job to do and a responsibility.”Still, the Yankees took time shortly after they arrived at the ballpark on Friday to gather in the trainer’s room, where they had a FaceTime conversation with Fowler, who was scheduled to be released from the hospital later Friday night.“There’s not a whole lot you can say,” Headley said. “You just want to make sure he doesn’t feel like he’s alone. I can’t recall anything in the game being more cruel than that, this happening in the first inning of his first game. It makes you sick to your stomach. We were just telling him to keep his head up.”The injury hit Tyler Wade particularly hard. He had played together with Fowler for four years in the minor leagues and had been his roommate.“We’re as close as you can get,” said Wade, who made his own debut Tuesday.Fowler was injured after colliding with an unpadded electrical box along the right-field line when he tried to catch a foul ball in the first inning. He is expected to recover in time for spring training.“Everything is as good as it can be right now,” Fowler told The New York Post on Friday in an interview from his hospital bed. He added, “It ruptured, but they were able to put it back in place and there wasn’t any issues, so they said it’s going to be a pretty positive recovery.”Severe patellar tendon injuries are common in football and basketball — sports that require cutting and planting that put additional stress on knees — but they happen only occasionally in baseball. Los Angeles Angels pitcher Garrett Richards tore his patellar tendon when he planted his right leg covering first base in 2014. He underwent surgery and returned the next season. Colorado Rockies outfielder Carlos Gonzalez also had surgery to repair his patellar tendon, but his injury was a chronic one.Despite the seeming cavalcade of injuries, many teams have had it far worse than the Yankees, according to the injury-tracking website ManGamesLost.com. Through last Saturday, the Yankees rank 27th in games lost to injuries (190) — far behind Tampa Bay (752), the Los Angeles Dodgers (714) and the Seattle Mariners (666). The Yankees are 18th in lost wins above replacement (1.42), well beyond the Mariners (5.23), the Toronto Blue Jays (5.22) and the Los Angeles Angels (4.41).“It’s been tough, but I think we know if we can weather the storm right now and get guys healthy and back, we have a lot of faith in the guys that are coming up, too,” said Warren, who is close to returning from the disabled list. “It definitely helps keep morale up that we haven’t played great the last several weeks, but we’re right there in it.”Advertisement