AdvertisementSupported byYankees 6, Mets 3By Tim RohanTAMPA, Fla. — When Steven Matz exited after another disappointing spring training start, and later when he met with reporters, he did not show any sign of emotion. Dan Warthen, the Mets’ pitching coach, had talked to him about taking a cue from Matt Harvey and Jacob deGrom and maintaining his composure and exuding calmness. Tuesday’s game made it harder than usual, though, as Matz surrendered five runs in the second inning to the Yankees, who went on to win, 6-3. With this outing, his fourth of spring training, Matz’s E.R.A. climbed to 8.31, but he maintained that his arm, and everything else, felt fine. “I don’t worry about the stats,” Manager Terry Collins said. “But the next time out, we’ve got to see — we’re starting to get tuned up.”Matz made nine starts last year, including three in the playoffs, so it is easy to forget that he is still technically a rookie. Collins said Matz still had to work on holding runners and making “better pitches in key situations.” “That’s first and foremost the most important thing to work on in spring training — command of your stuff,” Collins said. “Your arm strength will come as you go along. We just got to get him to slow down a little bit and use his pitches, and he’ll be fine.”Matz could take some comfort in finishing his start with two perfect innings, and his four-inning outing may have looked bad only because he was facing Luis Severino of the Yankees. The two are at somewhat similar spots in their careers after brief stints in the majors last year. But while Matz was overshadowed in the Mets’ young-gun rotation, Severino stood out on the Yankees for being their one exciting young starter.On Tuesday, Severino struck out five batters and held the Mets scoreless for four innings, but both batters he allowed to reach base in the fifth scored after he left the game. It was one thing to fault during his otherwise dominant spring training, which has made an impression on the Yankees.“You forget how young he is when he’s out there,” Yankees Manager Joe Girardi said before the game, a sentiment the Mets hope to be echoing someday soon in regard to Matz. “You think that he’s pretty wise and mature and has a plan and knows what he wants to do.” INSIDE PITCHAfter fouling a pitch off his leg and being examined by the team’s trainer, Mets outfielder YOENIS CESPEDES hit a ground-rule double to right field, driving in a run. He finished the game with three hits in four at-bats, raising his spring batting average to .419. “I’m getting closer to where I want to be,” he said through an interpreter.Advertisement