By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSAUG. 4, 2017
Neymar has become the most expensive player in soccer history after completing his blockbuster transfer to Paris St.-Germain from Barcelona on Thursday for 222 million euros ($262 million).P.S.G. triggered the release clause in the forward’s Barcelona contract, which was more than double the previous transfer record set a year ago when Manchester United paid €105 million (then $116 million) for Paul Pogba. P.S.G. said in a statement that Neymar, 25, had signed a five-year contract, until June 2022.In his four seasons in Spain, Neymar scored 105 goals as Barcelona won the Champions League, the Club World Cup, two Spanish league titles and the Copa del Rey three times. Neymar is escaping the shadow of the five-time world player of the year, Lionel Messi, at Barcelona, and will become the biggest star in the French league in a team without the success to match his former club.AUSTRALIA WINS TOURNAMENT OF NATIONS Australia won the inaugural Tournament of Nations, beating Brazil, 6-1, to claim the four-team round-robin women’s soccer event in Carson, Calif.AdvertisementWOMEN’S EURO FINAL IS SET The Netherlands beat England, 3-0, to advance to the final of the Women’s European Championship on home soil, where it will meet Denmark, which beat Austria in a penalty shootout after a 0-0 draw.Advertisement(REUTERS)The former heavyweight world champion Wladimir Klitschko announced his immediate retirement from boxing. The decision ends an era when the Klitschko name alone could guarantee one of the biggest fights of the year. At their peak, Klitschko and his brother Vitali held all of the major heavyweight titles between them.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Klitschko, who retired with a 64-5 record, lost his titles to Tyson Fury in 2015 and failed to regain the W.B.A. and I.B.F belts in April, when Anthony Joshua beat him by an 11th-round technical knockout.Miami Dolphins quarterback Ryan Tannehill reinjured his left knee in practice when it buckled as he scrambled and fell without being hit. He underwent a magnetic resonance imaging exam, but results were not definitive regarding the extent of the injury. Tannehill missed last season’s final four games, including a playoff loss at Pittsburgh, after spraining two ligaments in the same knee.HALL OF FAME GAME With no stars and few starters on the field, the Dallas Cowboys edged the Arizona Cardinals, 20-18, in Canton, Ohio. The Dallas rookie Sam Irwin-Hill made field goals of 23 and 43 yards, the latter providing the winning points in the fourth quarter. The opening half featured a handful of big plays, with Arizona’s third-string quarterback, Blaine Gabbert, consistently finding open receivers down the middle.Paul Goldschmidt broke a tie in the ninth inning with his third long homer of the game, and the Arizona Diamondbacks pulled out a rain-delayed 10-8 victory over the Cubs in Chicago.AROUND THE MAJORS Rafael Devers hit a three-run homer, and Rick Porcello ended a four-game losing streak with his first win since June as the Red Sox beat the Chicago White Sox, 9-5, in Boston.  Keon Broxton drove in the go-ahead run and saved a run with a leaping catch, Matt Garza made a strong start in his return from the disabled list, and the Brewers beat the St. Louis Cardinals, 2-1, in Milwaukee.Andy Murray, the top-ranked men’s player, and Marin Cilic withdrew from the Rogers Cup as injuries continued to take a toll on the Canadian hardcourt event. Their withdrawal comes on the heels of the announcement by the United States Open champion Stan Wawrinka that he would not play in the men’s event in Montreal because of a knee injury. Maria Sharapova withdrew from the Rogers Cup women’s draw in Toronto with a sore left arm, putting her participation in the United States Open in doubt. (REUTERS)TEENAGER ADVANCES The 17-year-old Canadian Bianca Andreescu became the first WTA player born in the 21st century to defeat a top-20 rival by defeating France’s 13th-ranked Kristina Mladenovic, 6-2, 6-3, in the Citi Open quarterfinals in Washington.  (AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE)A version of this article appears in print on August 4, 2017, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: Soccer; Neymar’s Transfer to P.S.G. Is Completed.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.