By SETH BERKMANJUNE 6, 2016
There has been a new tradition introduced at Yankee Stadium this season, in which the building’s lights flash like strobes after each Yankees home run.For six innings Monday night, the Yankees’ play made the ballpark felt dull and listless, like a lecture hall. The offense could not solve Los Angeles Angels starter Matt Shoemaker, and there was little to celebrate.But in the seventh inning, the bats began to stir, setting off several spastic displays of light like an electronic dance music concert, and the Yankees came back to defeat the Angels, 5-2.Brian McCann and Starlin Castro hit back-to-back home runs in the seventh inning, and Carlos Beltran clubbed the deciding three-run homer in the eighth. All three Yankees home runs came with two outs.Advertisement“It’s kind of what we imagined when we put it together,” Yankees Manager Joe Girardi said of his lineup. “There’s power in this offense that hasn’t come out the way that it’s capable of, but tonight’s kind of a reminder of what they can do, and they can do it quickly.”AdvertisementThat missing power has led to a rare feeling of anxiety surrounding the club for much of the season.Few parties around baseball, in all likelihood, are mourning the current state of the Yankees, other than their fans. But a sympathetic opponent could be found in the visitors’ dugout Monday night in the Angels.Girardi and Angels Manager Mike Scioscia were major league catchers for a combined 28 years. They are the two longest-tenured managers in the American League, and their clubs rank first and third in major league wins since 2002, when the Angels last won the World Series.This year, the managers have instead shared only frustration amid their teams’ subpar results and strings of multiple injuries that have ravaged both their rosters. They entered Monday with identical 26-30 records, and it was the first time since August 1992 that the Yankees and the Angels had met this late in a season with both teams’ records under .500. The 2009 American League Championship Series, which the Angels lost to the Yankees in a hard-fought six games, it was not.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.For a majority of the game, the Yankees looked lifeless. They did not put their first runner in scoring position until Jacoby Ellsbury doubled with two outs in the sixth inning.Masahiro Tanaka threw seven solid innings, allowing only two runs. But for the fourth straight start, he lacked the ability to close out at-bats with two strikes. Tanaka finished with three strikeouts and has only 13 during his past four outings.“I thought he battled his butt off,” Girardi said of Tanaka. “I didn’t think he had his great split tonight. I didn’t think he had his real good slider, but he found a way to get it done.”As Tanaka pitched valiantly, he was still outdueled by Shoemaker in the first six innings. From the third inning to the fifth, all of the Yankees’ outs came by strikeout or groundout. The fourth inning was particularly disheartening for the Yankees, when Brett Gardner, Beltran and Alex Rodriguez, the 2, 3 and 4 hitters, were sat down on seven pitches.Advertisement“Shoemaker was pitching a great game,” Beltran said. “There’s no doubt that he was dominating us.”In the sixth, however, the Yankees began hitting fly balls against Shoemaker. Though they weren’t scoring, it was a meaningful sign for the Yankees that every so often a pitch was being left higher in the zone. After Shoemaker quickly recorded two outs in the seventh, McCann socked a solo home run over the right-field fence. Two pitches later, Castro deposited a changeup over the left-field wall, erasing the Angels’ 2-0 advantage.With two outs in the eighth, Ellsbury singled, followed by a base hit from Gardner that chased Shoemaker, who was relieved by Jose Alvarez. In the next at-bat, Beltran lifted Alvarez’s second pitch, a two-seam fastball, over the right-field wall, just out of the reach of right fielder Kole Calhoun, giving the Yankees a three-run lead.After the game, Girardi was asked where the Yankees would be without Beltran, who now has 14 home runs. “Ooh, in pretty bad shape,” Girardi said. “We’d be a lot of games down under .500. But another big hit from him.”INSIDE PITCHJOE GIRARDI said that the goal is to have MARK TEIXEIRA “baseball-ready” in three weeks and able to play in a game, which would most likely occur on a rehab assignment. Teixeira is on the disabled list with a right knee articular cartilage tear. The Yankees hope that rest and treatment can prevent surgery.A version of this article appears in print on June 7, 2016, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Yankees’ Bats Begin to Smoke, Setting Off a Light Show.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.