AdvertisementSupported bySports BriefingBy The Associated PressChristian Vazquez hit a three-run homer with two outs in the bottom of the ninth inning as the Boston Red Sox pulled off the final rally of a wild game Tuesday night, beating the Cleveland Indians, 12-10, despite an astonishing catch by Cleveland center fielder Austin Jackson.In the fifth inning, Jackson robbed Hanley Ramirez of a leadoff homer with a leaping grab in the right-center triangle at Fenway Park. Jackson reached way above the wall and tumbled head over heels into the Red Sox bullpen, steadying himself by holding onto the fence with his right arm. Following a soft landing, Jackson stood up and showed umpires he indeed had the ball, to the amazement of players on both sides.A replay review confirmed Jackson had held on for the catch.Cleveland, which tied the game on Fancisco Lindor’s leadoff homer in the top of the ninth and went ahead on a wild pitch, blew the lead for the third and last time in the bottom of the ninth in a game the Indians led, 5-0, after two innings.VOLQUEZ TO HAVE TOMMY JOHN SURGERY The Miami Marlins right-hander Edinson Volquez will undergo Tommy John surgery for the second time Friday, ending his season and potentially his career. Recovery typically takes 12 months, and Volquez is 34, making his return problematic.Volquez has been sidelined since July 17 because of a left knee injury, and the elbow problem surfaced during his rehabilitation, said Michael Hill, the Marlins’ president for baseball operations. A magnetic resonance imaging exam disclosed a torn ulnar collateral ligament.Volquez, the opening day starter, went 4-8 with a 4.19 earned run average in 17 starts and threw the only no-hitter in the majors this year. He’s under contract for $13 million next season. He underwent Tommy John surgery in 2009 while with the Cincinnati Reds.SCHERZER LEAVES EARLY WITH NECK SPASM  Max Scherzer hit his first career homer to help build a six-run lead, but he pitched only one inning before departing with a neck spasm, and the Marlins rallied to beat the Washington Nationals, 7-6, in Miami. Scherzer had slept funny, and he left the game as a precaution, the Nationals said.The Marlins took the lead with a four-run fifth inning. Marcell Ozuna hit a three-run homer off Matt Albers (5-2), and Derek Dietrich’s R.B.I. triple put Miami ahead, 7-6. Six pitchers combined to blank Washington over the final seven and two-thirds innings.PEDROIA ON 10-DAY DISABLED LIST Red Sox second baseman Dustin Pedroia has been placed on the 10-day disabled list with inflammation in his left knee. Pedroia, who leads the Red Sox with a .307 batting average, is on the D.L. for the second time this season. He missed nine games in early June with a sprained left wrist.AFTERMATH OF WHITE SOX COLLISION The top prospect Yoan Moncada said he expected to be out two or three days for the Chicago White Sox after bruising his right knee in a frightening collision with outfielder Willy Garcia on Monday. Garcia was put on the seven-day disabled list because of a concussion.The Giants have decided to give Aldrick Rosas some competition for the place-kicking job, signing the 13-year veteran Mike Nugent to raise the pressure on the 22-year-old Rosas, who has never kicked in a regular-season N.F.L. game. Nugent was released by the Bengals in December after missing six field goals and six extra points. This will be a return to the area for Nugent, who was drafted by the Jets in 2005.CHANCELLOR SIGNS EXTENSION WITH SEAHAWKS Kam Chancellor, the Seattle Seahawks’ starting strong safety, was optimistic he would have a new contract before the start of the regular season. A day after saying as much, he signed a three-year extension that will keep him with the only club he has played for through the 2020 season.Chancellor’s new deal is worth up to $36 million, with $25 million guaranteed. Two years ago, he was a training camp holdout because he was unhappy with his contract.TACKLE CLADY CALLS IT A CAREER Ryan Clady, the talented and towering tackle whose nine-year N.F.L. career was checkered with injuries, is retiring from football.“I’m excited about what life holds for me going forward,” Clady wrote on Twitter, where he thanked the Denver Broncos and the owner Pat Bowlen for bringing him to an organization where he was “blessed to experience eight great years, four Pro Bowls and a world championship.”Kayla McBride scored a career-high 31 points and the San Antonio Stars closed on a 22-4 run to beat the visiting Liberty, 93-81. San Antonio (4-21) trailed, 77-71, with 6 minutes 48 seconds left, but the Stars held the Liberty scoreless for the final 3:25. Bria Hartley scored 15 of her 17 points in the first half for the Liberty (12-11).Top-seeded Simona Halep defeated Sloane Stephens, 7-6 (3), 6-0, in her opening match at the Citi Open in Washington. On the men’s side, eighth-seeded Jack Sock beat Marius Copil, 7-6 (2), 7-6 (6), in a match that was delayed more than three hours by rain.The suspended president of the Spanish football federation, his son and another official left a Madrid prison a day after being granted bail. Ángel María Villar, his son Gorka Villar, and the suspended federation vice president Juan Padron left the Soto de Real prison. They had spent 12 days behind its walls since a court sent them there while investigators continued their probe into alleged corruption.Advertisement