By FILIP BONDYNOV. 4, 2016
PURCHASE, N.Y. — Patrick Vieira, once a master of angles on the soccer field, deflected a barrage of second-guesses as he stood on the sideline after practice Wednesday.One reporter asked, Why had Vieira, New York City F.C.’s rookie coach, switched goalkeepers for the Major League Soccer playoffs? Another: Why had he not started the experienced midfielder Frank Lampard? Why did he pull his top scorer, David Villa, with the score tied? Why was Villa, a 23-goal scorer this season, taking corner kicks instead of stationing himself in front of the net to finish them?Vieira smiled through the inquisition, declining to host a symposium on either his lineup or his tactics.“If you lose, everything is wrong,” Vieira said later, in his office on the SUNY Purchase College campus, where his team trains. “Your decision is wrong. The way you want to play is wrong. Everything is wrong.Advertisement“People only remember the last game. And my job is not to do the same thing as the people.”Vieira was on a hot, uncomfortable seat this past week after New York City F.C. lost last Sunday at Toronto, 2-0, in the first leg of its M.L.S. conference semifinal series. The defeat means his team faces a daunting task in the return leg Sunday at Yankee Stadium: It needs to win by at least two goals in the home-and-home, total-goals series. Giving up even a single away goal to Toronto in regulation might well prove fatal, too, because N.Y.C.F.C. would then require four to advance.If elimination is the club’s fate, it will be a great disappointment to the second-year team and to Vieira, its first-year coach. Vieira, 40, had been a bold/curious/intriguing pick to coach N.Y.C.F.C. last winter. While he was a respected, pedigreed player who had won the World Cup with France and three Premier League titles with Arsenal, he had never coached a professional first team.AdvertisementHis only coaching experience, in fact, had been a few seasons with Manchester City’s reserve team. Yet suddenly he was leading a high-profile franchise in a league with a reputation for byzantine roster and salary rules and a track record of burning through foreign coaches who could not adapt to them.Still, after a 7-0 defeat in May that at least one of his stars described as “a disaster,” Vieira’s first season has been largely successful. N.Y.C.F.C. finished second behind the Red Bulls in the Eastern Conference to earn its first playoff berth, and it became far more adept on the attack. Villa finished second in league scoring with 23 goals, Lampard added a dozen more and the young forward Jack Harrison made a strong case to be named the M.L.S. rookie of the year.Vieira’s team still sputters and clunks occasionally on defense — on set pieces in particular, and as it did by yielding both goals during the final 10 minutes in Toronto. (N.Y.C.F.C. gave up 57 goals in 34 matches this season, just one fewer than it allowed in 2015, when the club finished eighth.) Still, after watching the game film from last weekend three times, Vieira stood by each of his decisions against Toronto, and he refused to place a disproportionate share of the blame on his frequently leaky back line.“When we talk about goals, we always talk about the personnel in the back, but that’s not the problem,” he said. “The problem is the collective, the protection for the back four, the work from the people up front. We score a lot of goals by building up from the back, creating more space for the strikers. For the defending side, if we do our work in front of the back four, it would be more easy for them.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“As a team, we didn’t defend well. We have to improve for next year.”For now, Vieira is still concerned with this year, and with figuring out his lineup for Sunday based on experience, health and form. His decisions in the first leg were surprising. He started goalkeeper Eirik Johansen over the veteran Josh Saunders, who had played in 33 games. Despite electing to rest midfielder Andrea Pirlo (calf), he chose not to start Lampard, who insisted he had been “raring to go” for more than a week after a recent injury of his own. Vieira also removed Villa in the 78th minute while the game was scoreless.A published report Monday said “livid” players had held a gripe session over Vieira’s decisions, but players and team officials vehemently denied such an event had taken place. “It’s nonsense, been made up,” Lampard said. “Any discord is because we lost.”AdvertisementLampard, however, did hint that he would like to see the team’s three highest-paid stars — himself, Pirlo and Villa — back on the field together Sunday. “In big games, big players more often than not will make the difference,” he said.And even as a first-year coach, Vieira is smart enough to understand how his celebrated stars might find it hard to accept a lesser role. He, too, carried a celebrated, championship-winning résumé to the final stops of his playing days. He recalled being benched by José Mourinho at Inter Milan and by Roberto Mancini at Manchester City near the end of his career.“I wasn’t playing and it was difficult, really hard,” Vieira said. “As a player, you always think that you’re the best. It’s even more difficult for big players who never used to be on the bench. I don’t expect them to agree with my decision. But I expect them to respect my decision.”He added: “I never complained. I never disrespected the manager or any of my teammates. I never started any sort of negativity around the team. I have to deal with it, because it’s a professional world. The manager can’t please everybody, and the manager is not there to please one or two players. And sometimes, the manager gets it wrong, or he gets it right. But it’s a decision.”A version of this article appears in print on November 6, 2016, on Page SP4 of the New York edition with the headline: Questioning Himself? Wrong.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.