By JAMES WAGNERAPRIL 15, 2017
MIAMI — Jacob deGrom made his best start of the season on Saturday night against the Miami Marlins. And then Fernando Salas came in for him and spoiled it.DeGrom struck out 13, tying a career high, in seven innings, and the Mets had a two-run lead when Manager Terry Collins pulled him after 97 pitches.Salas, who had not been scored upon in his previous seven outings this season, came on and got two outs before surrendering a game-tying, two-run homer to Christian Yelich and a go-ahead home run to Giancarlo Stanton as the Mets lost, 5-4.Collins said he chose to call on Salas to safeguard the health of deGrom, who had elbow nerve surgery in September.Advertisement“We’ve made a commitment to take care of these guys and make sure we don’t overdo it,” Collins said. “It’s easy to second-guess.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.DeGrom, who had nine strikeouts combined in his first two starts of the season, gave up back-to-back home runs to Justin Bour and Marcell Ozuna on low off-speed pitches in the second inning. Other than that, he dominated the Marlins with strong command and knee-buckling breaking balls.Neil Walker had a run-scoring double in the first. But then the Mets went hitless against Marlins starter Adam Conley until the seventh, when Walker led off with a bunt for a base hit. Curtis Granderson followed with a triple to tie the game. Pinch-hitter Michael Conforto drove in Granderson with a sacrifice fly to give the Mets a 3-2 lead.AdvertisementIn the next inning, Asdrubal Cabrera added a home run that made the score 4-2. And then Salas, so successful to start the season, gave the game away.A version of this article appears in print on April 16, 2017, on Page SP3 of the New York edition with the headline: Bullpen Wastes a Sparkling Performance by deGrom.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.