By JAMES WAGNERAPRIL 15, 2017
MIAMI — After Monday’s game in Philadelphia, Mets Manager Terry Collins stopped Jose Reyes in the hallway before entering the clubhouse. Reyes had just gone 0 for 4, dropping his batting average to .037. The next night, his struggles would have him out of his customary leadoff spot and instead hitting seventh in the lineup.But in that brief moment, Collins chose levity. He told Reyes that he had the stadium security out looking for the real version of him.By the time Collins talked to reporters a few minutes later, he had sought reinforcements. “I’ve got the F.B.I. out looking for the real Jose Reyes right now,” he said. “He’s being held somewhere.”When he heard Collins’s joke, Reyes chuckled. Although he is a proud player — as a four-time All-Star with a .289 career batting average entering this season and the 2011 National League batting title under his belt, he has reason to be — he can have a little fun at his own expense.Advertisement“It’s O.K., man,” Reyes said about Collins’s comments. “I laughed.”Five days later, the Mets coaching staff was still conducting its search-and-rescue mission, even though Reyes had perhaps left a trail of bread crumbs pointing to his whereabouts. He has notched three hits and drawn three walks since his hallway encounter with Collins — raising his batting average to .093 — but he is still off to the worst start of his career.AdvertisementReyes was 4 for 43 after Saturday night’s 5-4 loss to the Miami Marlins. And even though the sample size is minuscule, the miserable start has bothered Reyes.“It’s frustrating,” he said in Spanish before Saturday’s game. “I’m a leadoff hitter, and if I’m not getting on base, I’m not helping my team and doing my job. But at the same time, I haven’t lowered my head. I’m trying to do my best.”For the past week, Collins has repeated a refrain about Reyes: He looks like an overly aggressive swinger chasing pitches outside the strike zone, perhaps because he is too eager to create offense atop the lineup.“Right now, I’ve got to get Jose going,” Collins said Friday. “He’s my main focus, to get him back on a roll, because I think if he hits at the top of our lineup, we can be different and a lot more dangerous.”The Mets are a fly-ball, home-run-hitting team. Six of their eight regular position players have posted multiple 20-home-run seasons in their careers. And while Reyes, 33, is not as fast as he once was, he is still the team’s most dangerous base-stealing threat — a valuable asset to have in the event of a power failure.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“He’s too big a piece of the team and too big a piece of something we don’t have, which is somebody who can create runs without hitting a homer,” Collins said.Reyes has started slowly in the past. In 2010, he went 6 for 40 (.150) but finished with a .282 average. Last summer, when he signed with the Mets after being released by the Colorado Rockies following a domestic-violence suspension, Reyes went 9 for 40 (.225) to start his season.AdvertisementBut after he returned in August from a stint on the disabled list, along with Yoenis Cespedes and Asdrubal Cabrera, the Mets’ offense took off. Beginning on Aug. 19, when all three players were back in the lineup, the team averaged 5.2 runs per game and went 27-14, a strong enough finish to earn an N.L. wild-card spot.Reyes finished the season with a .267 average in 60 games and displayed more power than expected, hitting eight home runs.But the Mets do not need Reyes to smash the ball over the fence. They just need him to calm down at the plate.Reyes has watched a lot of video in the past week with the Mets’ hitting coaches, Kevin Long and Pat Roessler, to figure out what has gone wrong.Reyes, a switch-hitter, said he had noticed he had been stuck in between pitches — too late on fastballs and too early on breaking balls.“We’ve been working hard on that,” he said. “That’s what I can control — working hard every day on getting better.”Before Saturday’s game, Collins said he believed Reyes had shown some progress during the past few days. Reyes had been less jumpy and had displayed a slower, calmer setup in his swing mechanics.Collins moved Reyes back atop the lineup on Saturday night because he was 3 for 5 in his career against Marlins starter Adam Conley. Reyes went 0 for 2, with a walk, against Conley and finished 0 for 3.But even though Collins had seen small improvements, he was not ready to declare that Reyes was back where he should be, safe and sound.Advertisement“There’s still an A.P.B. out,” Collins said.A version of this article appears in print on April 16, 2017, on Page SP3 of the New York edition with the headline: Mets’ Leadoff Hitter Technically Is Not Missing, but His Bat Has Vanished.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.