By JOHN CLARKEAPRIL 15, 2017
ISLAMORADA, Fla. — Nobody knows for certain why someone would steal the cremated remains of a Florida Keys fly-fishing legend from a pickup truck parked outside a restaurant earlier this year.Capt. Bill Curtis had no spurned lovers, lifelong enemies, obsessed fans or angry family members, according to friends, family and the police.Yet shortly after 5 p.m. under rainy skies in late January, a man wearing a black hoodie broke a window of a Chevy Silverado parked outside a Flanigan’s restaurant in Miami’s Coconut Grove neighborhood, according to surveillance video.The thief ignored a laptop computer, a $400 pair of sunglasses and valuable camera gear. Instead, he snatched the box of ashes from beneath a stack of books, and sped off in a black pickup truck.AdvertisementThat was the last time anyone saw what is left of Curtis, who invented the poling platform for skiffs and the Bimini twist knot, spotted fish for Jimmy Buffett and Ted Williams, and inspired characters in the novel “Ninety-Two in the Shade.”Advertisement“It’s like losing my father twice,” Nancy Curtis Bacon said about her father, who died Oct. 24 at 91.Bacon said her father wanted his ashes spread at Curtis Point, the seaward reach of Old Rhodes Key in Biscayne Bay that bears his name. She was planning to hold a memorial service there when the weather cleared. She never got the chance.Curtis was one of the fathers of saltwater fly-fishing. He valued the respect and admiration from his fellow guides and would laugh each time he caught sight of them peeping at him through binoculars, studying his skills and trying to figure out his next big move.In 1975, he invented the poling platform, which is above the engine at the stern and used to stand on and propel a skiff boat across flats and sight fish. Fellow guides initially made fun of Curtis, saying the platform looked like a fish-cleaning table. He would laugh and say it was a shade to keep his engine cool. The platforms are now standard equipment on fishing skiffs.He created the Bimini twist and the Curtis connection knots, which are known for their strength and now commonly used by anglers. He designed and developed the first mass-produced flats boat. Some say he established sport fishing’s grand slam: catching bonefish, permit and tarpon in one day.Besides Buffett and Williams, Curtis befriended writers, like Jim Harrison, Carl Hiaasen and Thomas McGuane, for whom he was the inspiration for the fictional Florida Keys fishing guides in “Ninety-Two in the Shade,” published in 1973.Stu Apte, a member of the Fishing Hall of Fame who holds 44 world records, guided Curtis to the first bonefish he ever caught in Biscayne Bay, in 1949. The two first met at Captain Mack’s tackle shop in Miami one year earlier and formed a successful team — alternating between poling and sighting while the other fished.AdvertisementThey won numerous tournament trophies and earned widespread notoriety in fishing circles. They even had some degree of fame: Apte said it was Ernest Hemingway who first recognized him on the docks in Cuba, not the other way around. The writer had known Apte from newspaper reports on American fishing tournaments, invited him aboard his boat, called Pilar, and taught him how to make mojitos. Curtis lost one eye in a stick fight when he was 4, “but he could see fish better than most people could with two,” Apte said recently, sitting on the rooftop deck of the Cheeca Lodge here.When Florida denied Curtis a fishing guide license because of his limited sight, Apte wrote his congressman.“If Bill Curtis is good enough to serve this country as an aerial photographer piloting F-7s over North Africa during World War II for the U.S. Army Air Corps,” Apte said, “then he is certainly good enough for a fishing guide license.”The state issued Curtis a license with the caveat that he not guide at night.The days of fly-fishing on the Florida Keys flats from the 1950s to the 1970s were cutthroat, with turf wars among the guides.At that time, Apte said, words could quickly escalate to threats involving two-by-fours and revolvers. He remembered being stranded with Curtis in the Everglades after someone sabotaged his boat.Apte acknowledged, “Some people didn’t like Bill.”McGuane met Curtis on a narrow channel near Key West when Curtis cut him off and swamped his boat with water.“I tracked him down and we almost came to blows,” McGuane said. “We exchanged some words and got it worked out and became friends after that. I think he had a lot of those kinds of encounters.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Pat Ford, a photographer and angler, said Curtis was “a crotchety old fart” back when they started fishing together, in 1975, and “he just got worse.”Advertisement“He was a tough old bat,” Ford added. “But he was a magical guy.”Curtis spent a lot of time in his banana-yellow skiff called the Grasshopper, chasing anglers off Curtis Point.McGuane called him “the vibrational center of that fishery.”“It makes me either nostalgic or sad,” he said. “Now you have guides holding up a permit fish with their hat on backward wearing board shorts and giving gang signs.”The puzzling theft of Curtis’s ashes is worthy of a Hiaasen novel, so it should come as no surprise that the two men were close.They met in the early 1970s. Hiaasen was just learning how to fish, and Curtis was widely known.“He was the emperor of Biscayne Bay,” Hiaasen said in a telephone interview. “He was like our Willie Mays.”After a day of fishing, Curtis would sometimes invite Hiaasen and his friend Bob Branham, now a successful fishing guide, for drinks. The young men would sit and absorb the knowledge acquired from years on the water.“The only way to get knowledge was to hang out in the joints after these guys were on the water all day,” Hiaasen said, adding: “You had to stay on the edges of the conversation. You could learn so much — phases of the moon, tide changes, wind shifts.”Hiaasen and Curtis grew close enough to trade fishing hot spots over the radio in code while on the water.Advertisement“He knew that body of water better than any human being,” Hiaasen said. “It was just legendary the way he found fish. He was a fish hog. He knew where they would be. He was a tough customer and crusty dude with rough edges, but we loved him. He was the prototypical tough and surly fishing guide.”Hiaasen remembered Curtis as creative and resourceful. Curtis once told him to use a fly made from the cardboard lid of a Quaker Oats box with legs tied on to resemble a crab. Hiaasen laughed, cast and landed his first permit.He also called Curtis extremely territorial.“On the flats, you definitely didn’t want to get in his way,” Hiaasen said. “You didn’t want to be in his range. He had pioneered that sort of fishing, and he expected some deference. He expected people to clear out when he showed up.”Theories on the theft vary. Some say it was a rushed smash-and-grab or part of an organized crime ring. Others laugh it off as a premeditated plan.“That’s either an act of profound stupidity or they were trying to steal the ashes,” Hiaasen said.Hiaasen said he thought the culprit was an illiterate criminal, because the box containing the urn was clearly labeled with the name of the funeral home.“I think you are talking about someone who is not a reader — a garden-variety nitwit,” he said. “Or possibly it was a junkie who stole it and ran off and opened the box and sat there in an alley snorting Bill’s ashes. That’s not how Bill would want to go.”He added: “Part of me wants to think that it was somebody who would be honored to have the urn with Bill’s ashes, like Tom Brady’s jersey, but I suspect it was some certifiable moron who reached in and thought it was a jewelry box and ran.”AdvertisementMcGuane imagines the theft as a carefully planned and desperate act of self-improvement.“My theory is that it was a poor fisherman who knew what it was and thought that by sprinkling it on his Wheaties that someday he would be a better angler,” he said.Curtis’s family thinks it could be something more sinister. There have been at least four thefts from vehicles parked at that Flanigan’s since 2015, according to police records. Calls to the restaurant chain’s corporate headquarters were not returned.The police would not speculate on the theft, which would be a misdemeanor, but confirmed that the investigation was open and active. The value of the missing ashes is $200. There are no suspects or leads.“We searched every Dumpster and ditch after he was stolen,” said George Bacon, Curtis’s son-in-law. “I loved him. He was an incredible man. But I know karma. Can you imagine the bad karma coming at those clowns? That brings me a smile.”The final chapter of Curtis’s life may never be known. One thing for certain, Hiaasen said, is how Curtis would have responded to the theft of his ashes.With two words: “That figures.”A version of this article appears in print on April 16, 2017, on Page SP8 of the New York edition with the headline: The Ashes That Got Away.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »