AdvertisementSupported byBy James WagnerMIAMI — Juan Lagares, the Mets’ defensive-minded backup outfielder, returned from his oblique injury on Thursday, which a week ago would most likely have meant that Michael Conforto would have been sent to Class AAA Las Vegas to play every day.Instead, the Mets cleared room for Lagares by optioning Paul Sewald, the extra reliever they have been using for about a week. Conforto, after a strong showing in limited playing time, remained with the Mets in his role as a bench player.“It’s hard because I’m a development kind of guy,” said Mets Manager Terry Collins, a former minor league director and coach. “That’s where my background is. But right now, I’m a winning kind of a guy.”On Thursday, so was Conforto. Entering as a pinch-hitter in the eighth inning, he delivered a game-tying double that kept the Mets alive in a 9-8, 16-inning win over the Miami Marlins.The timely hit speaks to the complex situation that the Mets face regarding Conforto, a 2014 first-round pick who hit two home runs in the 2015 World Series: Should they play him every day at Las Vegas or play him less frequently in the major leagues, where his development could be slower?“It’s tough for me to say which would be better for me,” Conforto said, “because I really believe the best thing for my development is going to be to play against the best in the world, to play at this level and consistently face these guys.“Playing every day, yeah, that’s definitely going to be a positive for me,” he continued. “But if I’m down there and just tearing it up, maybe some of that benefit goes to waste a little bit. I think this is where I need to be, and I’m excited to be here.”Conforto, 24, struggled last year, but he started growing comfortable in the role of bench player as he was shuttled between Las Vegas and the Mets late in the season.In the off-season, he worked to get into better shape to handle center field, and to improve his swing and his approach at the plate after recording a .220 average, .725 on-base plus slugging percentage, 12 home runs and 89 strikeouts in 109 games with the Mets in 2016.He showed progress in spring training, so when Brandon Nimmo sustained hamstring and hand injuries and Lagares hurt his oblique, Conforto made the opening day roster as a backup outfielder.Collins used Conforto as a pinch-hitter and in the past week started him in center field twice to rest Curtis Granderson. Conforto hit a home run in each start and was 4 for 10 with two walks over all entering Thursday’s game.“The one thing he has done is show us that he can handle the role off the bench,” Collins said. “That’s been a big factor.”Conforto knew he could go to the minor leagues when Lagares returned. “But I was pretty confident with the way I was playing, with the way my at-bats have been and the way things were going that I’d still be here,” he said.The Mets might not be in this situation if Conforto had not struggled last season. After trading for Jay Bruce on Aug. 1 to help a sluggish and injured offense, they picked up Bruce’s $13 million team option for 2017 in the off-season.If Conforto had played well, he would most likely be starting in the outfield, and Bruce would be elsewhere.Instead, Bruce remained as insurance and Yoenis Cespedes re-signed with the Mets. They have been two of the team’s best hitters this season, and although Granderson was 6 for 28 entering Thursday, he hit 30 home runs last year for the fourth time.“Those other guys have huge track records going for them,” Collins said, then added about Conforto: “We’ll try the best we can to try and keep him sharp, and hope nobody gets hurt. But if they do, we’ve certainly got a quality backup.”Despite his place on the bench, Conforto remains a significant piece of the Mets’ future plans. Bruce and Granderson will be free agents after this season, so playing time should not be an issue for Conforto next year.For now, Conforto’s chances will come in spurts. Collins said he hoped to give his veteran starters a day off every 10 games or so, which meant that Conforto might get another start this weekend in place of Bruce or Cespedes. Lagares may start on Friday in the cavernous outfield of Marlins Park.In a perfect world, would Conforto be playing every day? Collins brushed off the hypothetical.“This is the perfect world,” Collins said. “He’s dangerous off the bench.”Advertisement