AdvertisementSupported byYankees 4, Cardinals 3By Billy WitzWhen it comes to the Yankees’ bullpen, Manager Joe Girardi is steadfast in adhering to his rules. Foremost among them is that, in all but the rarest cases, he will not use the same relief pitcher three days in a row.Exceptions are usually reserved for September, when playoff berths can hang in the balance.But on this Friday night in mid-April, Girardi could not help himself. The St. Louis Cardinals were in town and he had Aroldis Chapman in the bullpen.If there is a sure thing in baseball, it is Chapman when he faces the Cardinals.They have not scored a run against him in more than five years. Entering the game, the Cardinals had gone more than two years without getting a hit against Chapman, their old N.L. Central nemesis from his time with the Cincinnati Reds and the Chicago Cubs.So, despite Chapman’s having pitched the previous two days against the Tampa Bay Rays, Girardi summoned his closer with the Yankees holding on to a precarious lead in the ninth inning.Chapman was not impervious — he allowed a two-out walk and a two-strike double to the pinch-hitter Jose Martinez, ending a streak of 34 hitless at-bats against the Cardinals. But Chapman induced a ground ball from his former Cubs teammate Dexter Fowler to seal a 4-3 victory.Before Martinez, first baseman Matt Carpenter had the Cardinals’ last hit off Chapman, on April 10, 2015. “It’s nothing we think about, but if you want to look at the other side of it, you go up there thinking, ‘O.K., we’re really due,’” Carpenter said.The Cardinals still have not scored against him since Sept. 2, 2011. Since then, the Cardinals have seven hits, nine walks and 51 strikeouts in 97 at-bats against Chapman.“Those are some pretty ridiculous numbers there,” Yankees reliever Dellin Betances said.Chapman finished what had been a bounce-back performance by starter Masahiro Tanaka, who was backed by home runs by Starlin Castro and Austin Romine. It was the fifth consecutive win for the Yankees, four of which have been comebacks.This was also a rare visit to the Bronx for the Cardinals, who are here for the first time since 2003, when their catcher in the series finale was Girardi.Now Girardi is in charge of a Yankees bullpen that has been superb this season, despite having endured some shaky moments. Like Chapman, Betances and Tyler Clippard faced some tense situations on Friday.When Clippard came on in the seventh, after Tanaka allowed a run-scoring double to Randal Grichuk, he retired Kolten Wong on a fly ball to center that was shallow enough that Jhonny Peralta had to hold at third.Fowler, who had homered for the Cubs to lead off Game 7 of last season’s World Series, followed with a deep fly ball to right, which silenced the crowd until Aaron Judge ran it down near the scoreboard on the right-center-field wall.“I hit it well,” Fowler said. “Unfortunately, I hit it to the wrong part of the field.”In the eighth, Betances fought his control as much as he did the Cardinals. He had to rally from a 3-0 count to strike out Carpenter, who had given the Cardinals an early lead with a two-run homer.Then, after walking Stephen Piscotty, Betances bounced back from a 2-0 count to strike out a dangerous power threat in Matt Adams to end the inning.“Sometimes I feel like, mechanically, I tend to rush from time to time,” Betances said. “So I just try to self talk and stay back and make pitches. I think that’s what gets me back in sync. I felt a little out of whack, but I was able to make pitches.”For much of his career, Chapman had not had to worry about making pitches. He just reared back and fired his fastball, which regularly resides north of 100 miles per hour and is by a wide margin the consistently fastest in baseball.It is part of the allure, with flames fanning around the Yankee Stadium scoreboard ribbon when he enters and fans gawking at the radar gun readings. It is also why the Yankees — after dealing him to the Cubs at the trade deadline last year — lured him back with a five-year, $86 million contract, the richest deal ever for a relief pitcher.But Chapman, after working on his changeup and slider in spring training, said he has gained confidence in those pitches. And it is evident the way he is flashing them frequently. He did not throw a first-pitch fastball to the five hitters he faced Friday night.“It’s hard enough already,” said Betances, who has been impressed by Chapman’s changeup when they play catch. “He’s throwing over 100 every single pitch, so guys are going to gear up to try to get on time with the fastball, and now he’s mixing in off-speed. I feel bad for the hitters, to be honest. It’s not fair.”Martinez, who hit his double into the left-field corner off a fastball from Chapman, agreed.“I was trying to get mentally ready for the fastball in the cage,” he said. “I mean, with a guy like that you’re just trying to hit the fastball and then he threw me a slider for a strike. If he’s going to mix his pitches, it’s going to be tough, that’s for sure.”If there is a bright side for the Cardinals, it is that they may not see him for a while. Chapman, who threw nine pitches on Wednesday and 20 on Thursday, delivered 22 on Friday.He pitched in back-to-back-to-back games just once last season, so it seems a certainty that he will not pitch Saturday. Then there is only Sunday night.The Cardinals will most likely not see Chapman again for a long time, unless it is in the World Series. For them, it will not be a moment too soon.Advertisement