By FILIP BONDYAPRIL 15, 2017
The Rangers produced two more high-energy games last week on the road, which should come as no surprise to anyone following that hockey team’s odd performance pattern this season. Now there may be trouble, however, because the Rangers’ first-round playoff series against the Montreal Canadiens is moving from an electric atmosphere inside Bell Centre to an arena where it is far too easy to hear the puck drop during a third-period face-off.That would be Madison Square Garden, where the Rangers compiled the worst regular-season home record among the playoff teams, becoming one of only two N.H.L. clubs to gain fewer points at home than on the road. It is the site where the Rangers play host to the Canadiens on Sunday in Game 3 of their first-round series, which is tied at one game apiece, hoping to reverse a malaise infecting both the gladiators and their audience.Ask Coach Alain Vigneault or his players about this problem, and they will hold to the politically correct line that the Garden crowd is just fine and can still inspire great moments. Vigneault says these regular-season tendencies don’t matter because “you’re playing against the same team every night and it’s a different mind-set.” The fans, however, are more likely to tell tales on themselves, acknowledging that the self-proclaimed World’s Most Famous Arena has become a place of diminishing returns and decibels.While noise levels can reach impressive levels on occasion, they are rarely sustained. Some complain that the configuration of the refurbished place — including bridges and moat — has dampened sound and wrecked a sense of community. Others say that higher ticket prices have changed the crowd’s demographics, replacing traditional “blue seaters” with a more silent army of blue suits.Advertisement“The real fans have been pushed out by the corporate types, very much so,” said Mike Bergin of the Flushing section of Queens, waiting outside the Garden last Sunday to spot some of his favorite Rangers. “The crowd used to be much louder.”Existential questions abound: If die-hard fans traditionally demand credit for motivating home teams to greater heights, should they be blamed for consistent failure? Are Rangers fans the most ineffective supporters in the league?AdvertisementNo scientist has ever studied the statistical correlation between noise inside an arena and the success of the home team. But there are clearly more stirring buildings in which to watch a hockey game these days than the Garden. It is rarely cited on anybody’s list of intimidating arenas, and on at least one occasion was publicly mocked by an opposing coach.During a playoff series in 2011, Bruce Boudreau of the Washington Capitals questioned the reputation of New York’s hockey fans.“They can say what they want, but it’s not that loud in there,” Boudreau said.Boudreau’s gibe managed to awaken the Garden crowd, at least temporarily. At the next game, Rangers fans serenaded him loudly with “Can you hear us?” Still, even then, the noise levels did not approach the sound at Verizon Center in Washington during that series.The acoustics may be challenged, but the seats have been filled again this season. Perhaps the problem is there are not enough of them. The Rangers, who eked out a winning record at home, played to 100 percent capacity, averaging 18,020 fans. Yet that  ranked only 17th among the 30 teams in the league because of the Garden’s physical limitations. By comparison, Chicago averaged 21,751 and Montreal drew 21,288 in buildings considered among the loudest in the N.H.L.The Rangers were the best road team in the league, going 27-12-2, and clearly they enjoy playing in joints that are jumping, no matter where. Before the playoff series started, their captain, Ryan McDonagh, confirmed that he gets a rush of adrenaline every time he skates onto the ice at Bell Centre.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“It’s a fun place to play,” he said of the Montreal arena. “It’s loud, energetic, and you can feed off the crowd, even if it’s on the road.”AdvertisementSurely, it cannot just be the Garden atmosphere, or lack thereof, that has sabotaged the Rangers, causing them to drop eight straight home games late in the season. After all, they have performed much better at home in recent seasons. The Rangers have endured injuries, scheduling difficulties and plain old bad luck — as when Sidney Crosby’s shot bounced off the back of Henrik Lundqvist’s head and into the goal early in a shootout defeat on March 31.Kevin Kohl, a fan from Denville, N.J., offered yet another theory: Opponents come into the Garden and want to show off for what is quite often a national or international television audience.“If the Rangers are first or last, it doesn’t matter,” Kohl said. “The other teams are pumped to play here, play more physical hockey. The Rangers got off to a fast start in October and November, but the hockey was different. Then the other teams tightened up their defenses, and all the scoring dried up.”So did the noise.“The bridges have changed things, changed the sound,” Kohl said.One sound remains stubbornly, comfortably the same: the rhythmic whistle that pierces all background murmuring and heralds a traditional chant about the former Islanders defenseman Denis Potvin. It is the one reminder of a ruder, more raucous time in the Garden’s history.A time when playing at home was not a disadvantage for the home team.A version of this article appears in print on April 16, 2017, on Page SP4 of the New York edition with the headline: Rangers’ Next Challenge Is to Match the Decibels.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.