By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSJULY 2, 2017
OLYMPIA FIELDS, Ill. — Danielle Kang birdied the final hole to win the Women’s P.G.A. Championship on Sunday for her first L.P.G.A. Tour title, edging the 19-year-old defending champion, Brooke Henderson of Canada.Kang bogeyed the tricky par-3 17th, and Henderson closed with two birdies to move into a tie for the lead, coming up just short on a 30-foot eagle putt on the par-5 18th. But Kang responded with two solid shots to get to the green in two, then two-putted for the victory.“I just told myself it was my week; it was my day,” Kang said.It was a second consecutive thrilling finish in this tournament, the second L.P.G.A. major of the season. Henderson beat Lydia Ko in a playoff last year at Sahalee in Washington State.Kang, 24, trailed Henderson and Chella Choi by one after she bogeyed the par-4 10th at Olympia Fields. But Kang moved in front with four straight birdies on the 11th through 14th holes, getting hot with her putter at the right time.AdvertisementKang also made a clutch 21-foot par putt at 16 on her way to a three-under 68 and the winner’s check, $525,000. Henderson closed with a 66 to finish a stroke back, and Choi, who was tied with Kang for the lead coming into the day, was third at 10 under after a 71.Kang’s previous best finish in a major was a tie for 14th in the 2012 United States Women’s Open.Henderson made a strong bid for a second straight title in the event, jumping up the leaderboard with three birdies on her first seven holes. But she had nine straight pars in the middle of the round.“I kind of had a mix of really good putts that had a chance to go in,” Henderson said, “and some that maybe I would have liked to give a better opportunity for.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mi Hyang Lee (67), Amy Yang (68) and Sei Young Kim (68) tied for fourth at nine under, and Lexi Thompson (69) and Inbee Park (68) were another two strokes back.Kang said some sage advice from her brother, Alex, had set the tone for her breakout performance.Feeling overwhelmed after her last practice round on the tree-lined Olympia Fields course near Chicago, Kang called her brother for help with a game plan. Alex Kang, who plays on the Web.com Tour, told her to “just blast it down.”Advertisement“Alex is the one that I called to map out the golf course,” Kang said. “He’s one of the people that I lean on for everything.”Guided by that simple strategy, Kang posted four rounds in the 60s. Kang, a two-time United States Women’s Amateur champion, had just five bogeys, all in the final two rounds.Thompson looked ready to make a charge, beginning with three birdies and no bogeys on her front nine, but she sputtered down the stretch.Thompson contended for the first major title of the year, but was penalized for a rule violation and lost to So Yeon Ryu in a playoff in the ANA Inspiration. The top-ranked Ryu shot a 72 in the final round at Olympia Fields and tied for 14th.“The back nine, I think I honestly got really tired,” Thompson said. “I don’t really know what hit me. Over all, the whole week, I played very well. Just missed a few putts that I needed to make, and kind of my wedges let me down a little bit.”An earlier version of this article misstated Danielle Kang’s final-round score at the Women’s P.G.A. Championship relative to par. She shot three under, not four under.A version of this article appears in print on July 3, 2017, on Page D4 of the New York edition with the headline: Major Is Winner’s First Victory on the Tour.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.