AdvertisementSupported byMets 4, Nationals 2By James WagnerWASHINGTON — As if this Mets year of disappointment and misery had not brought enough lows, the team lost starter Steven Matz and outfielder Michael Conforto to season-ending injuries this week. And on Friday, Yoenis Cespedes re-entered the long list of the infirm with a leg injury that put the rest of his season in jeopardy.Cespedes pulled up lame after rounding third base in the first inning of Friday’s 4-2 win over the Washington Nationals. He hobbled off the field, unable to put full weight on his right leg.Mets General Manager Sandy Alderson said Cespedes would head to the disabled list with a right hamstring strain, noting that it was similar in severity and location to the left hamstring strain that cost Cespedes six weeks earlier in the season.“I wouldn’t necessarily expect it to be as long, but we don’t have much time the rest of the season,” Alderson said. “I’m very disappointed, but that’s what we have.”Cespedes’s leg injury merely continued a parade of ailments that, coupled with poor performances on the field, have wrecked the team’s playoff hopes and raised questions about the Mets’ handling of injuries.Jacob deGrom, the only one of the Mets’ seven starters who has not spent time on the disabled list this season, has been the lone standout. He proved it yet again on Friday, allowing one run and striking out 10 over seven and two-thirds innings, even with a sore right foot.Cespedes had been heating up recently after a slow return offensively from his previous leg injury. He walked in his first plate appearance on Friday, but the trip around the bases hurt him. Running, a basic requirement in baseball, has sometimes been a risky proposition for Cespedes this season.“When I felt the best I had all season, it happened again,” he said.Cespedes has a history of leg problems, and this season has done little to change that. Cespedes, who is in the first year of his $110 million contract, spent the off-season trying to better prepare his legs to avoid injury, yet he sustained one in the first month of the season.While Cespedes was in Florida recovering from his injury, the Mets told him he needed to alter his conditioning to add more pregame stretching, running and water consumption, all of which were lacking. They hoped that would help prevent injury, yet another one occurred on Friday.This is at least the fourth time Cespedes has been on the disabled list for a leg injury since he first reached the major leagues in 2012. (And that does not include other games missed for leg injury flare-ups.)Cespedes said he hoped to return this season, but would not if he was not 100 percent. He admitted he has been thinking about what alterations he will make to his training program to avoid more leg injuries.He said that does not mean he will stop his off-season workouts with Mike Barwis, who oversees the Mets’ strength and conditioning program, but “what I’ll do is change part of the training.”Advertisement