AdvertisementSupported byBy Christopher ClareyNext year is the obvious moment for celebrating the arrival of open-era tennis.It will be 50 years since professionals were allowed to rejoin amateurs at the major tournaments, a change that removed a level of hypocrisy from the ranks of amateurs, many of whom had long received under-the-table payments. And it allowed all the world’s best players to compete for the most prestigious titles in 1968.But Wimbledon, a grassy place that likes its history and ceremony, is reaching a 50-year milestone this year as well.Open tennis at Wimbledon began in the summer of 1968. But the groundwork was laid a year earlier, when Herman David, the strong-minded chairman of the All England Club, invited Rod Laver, Ken Rosewall and six other professionals to play a tournament in August on the same Wimbledon lawns where then-amateur John Newcombe won the men’s singles title in July.“It is amazing where 50 years has gone to — time just floats away,” Laver, now 78, said by telephone last week from his home in Carlsbad, Calif., before flying to London to take part in a 50th anniversary reunion at Wimbledon.The Wimbledon championship was held from Aug. 25 to 28, 1967, with the final on the Monday of a bank holiday weekend. First prize was $8,400, a record sum back then. But the potential rewards were much greater.“In the whole scope of world tennis these days, a small event with eight players wouldn’t seem to be very important,” Rosewall, now 82, said by telephone from Sydney, Australia, last week. “But it was rather an enlightening little tournament that the All England Club decided to put on, and I think it was a big step in getting open tennis in the following year.”The professional championship drew live coverage on the British Broadcasting Corporation, which had begun broadcasting in color earlier that year, and drew big crowds on its final three days, changing hearts and minds about where the game needed to go.“We were just a small part of a big decision being made by Wimbledon,” Laver said. “But we eight players were proud of being part of this beginning. None of us felt, maybe six months prior to Herman David approaching us, that we were going to have open tennis the next year. It was just amazing we’d gone all this way with amateur tennis officials not wanting the pros to break into the amateur game. They must be rolling over in their graves thinking what sort of dumb decisions we made back then. Look at what the game is now.”Even in 1967, it was quite a lineup: Laver, Rosewall, Pancho Gonzales, Lew Hoad, Fred Stolle, Andrés Gimeno, Butch Buchholz and Dennis Ralston.Not everyone was in his prime. Gonzales, the feisty and powerful American star, was 39. Hoad, a dynamic Australian, was 32 and carrying some extra weight despite a race-the-clock effort to get into shape for what he knew could be a crucial moment for the sport.But both men still find their way onto many short lists of the greatest players of all time, and their duel on opening day was one of the highlights of the tournament.“Neither was fit, but both had enormous pride in their reputations as the outstanding players of their generation,” wrote Jenny Hoad, Lew Hoad’s wife, in her autobiography, “My Life With Lew.”Hoad and Gonzales are the only two of those who played in the event who are no longer alive: Hoad died in 1994 at age 59; Gonzales in 1995, at 67.Hoad had won the Wimbledon title in 1956 and 1957 before turning professional. Gonzales would never win it. He reached the fourth round in 1949 in his only appearance as an amateur, but he would no doubt have had an excellent chance to win at Wimbledon if the International Lawn Tennis Federation had not voted against open tennis by a narrow margin in 1960, leading to another eight years of delay.Gonzales won the first set in a hurry, but Hoad shook off the rust and won the next two sets and the match, 3-6, 11-9, 8-6. (Matches until the final were all best of three sets.) Hoad finished off the victory with a lob that landed on the baseline, and Gonzales knocked the ball he had been saving for a second serve out of the stadium.“That memory is pretty vivid,” Laver said. “All the players watched each other, but that was something special: the two best players in the world in their eras out there playing on the Center Court at Wimbledon. They didn’t play much on grass at that stage, but they were so aware of grass-court tennis and how to play it properly.” Hoad, spent by the effort, lost to Rosewall the next day in the semifinals, 6-2, 6-3.Laver, who defeated Gimeno by 6-3, 6-4 in the other semifinal, had not been back to the All England Club since winning Wimbledon in 1962, when he completed the first of his two Grand Slams.“For five years I hadn’t been anywhere near Wimbledon, because it was not at a time slot that we could even be there as spectators,” Laver said. “A lot of people felt the pros were not up to the amateur standard, and of course we knew differently.”Laver went on to win the title, defeating his career-long rival Rosewall — 6-2, 6-2, 12-10 — in a best-of-five final that drew a crowd of 12,000. It was much more entertaining than Newcombe’s 6-3, 6-1, 6-1 destruction of Wilhelm Bungert in the official Wimbledon final in July.The point had been made, as David Gray, then the tennis correspondent for The Guardian in Britain, made clear as he summed up the tournament: “Having grown used to margarine, it was good to be reminded of the taste of butter.”Advertisement