AdvertisementSupported byBy Billy WitzHOUSTON — It was only four years ago that Dellin Betances was the starry-eyed belle of the All-Star Game ball, a rookie who could not believe he was standing alongside Derek Jeter, Robinson Cano and Mike Trout.In another week, when he heads to Miami for this season’s All-Star Game, Betances, 29, will be the Yankees’ old man.He will be leading the way for a large contingent of teammates. Five Yankees were chosen Sunday night for the American League team: outfielder Aaron Judge, catcher Gary Sanchez, second baseman Starlin Castro and pitchers Luis Severino and Betances. Shortstop Didi Gregorius might join them, if he can win the fan voting for the final spot. The voting ends Thursday.It is the biggest delegation the Yankees have sent since 2011, and none of the players are older than Betances, burnishing the sheen on the Yankees’ youthful retooling.The All-Star selections provided a welcome distraction from how the Yankees are playing at the moment, as they continued to stumble toward the break with an 8-1 loss to the Houston Astros.The defeat was the 14th in 19 games for the Yankees, who held a four-game lead in the American League East when the slide began and now find themselves three games behind the Boston Red Sox. This is the furthest the Yankees have been from first place since they lost four of their first five games of the season.The Yankees have endured excruciating defeats during their skid, but this was not one of them. Marwin Gonzalez and Yuli Gurriel clubbed two-run homers as the Astros sprinted to an eight-run lead, and three pitchers held the Yankees to just two hits until the eighth inning.The Yankees’ recent struggles have been in every facet of the game. There have been bullpen meltdowns, iffy starting pitching, offensive lulls, shaky defense — and that was before Brett Gardner was thrown out after rounding first for the final out on Saturday.If there was a play on Sunday that epitomized the Yankees of late, it came in the seventh inning when reliever Domingo German uncorked a wild pitch. The ball ricocheted back to catcher Gary Sanchez, but his eager throw to second base sailed into center field, allowing the 40-year-old Carlos Beltran to amble to third.“We’re in a frustrating part of our year,” Manager Joe Girardi said. “I think this week is really important at home for us to go and get things turned around and win games that we’re supposed to.”To that end, the Yankees will get at least some reinforcements as the All-Star break nears. C. C. Sabathia, who has missed three weeks with a hamstring injury, is expected to get the start on Tuesday, the day that reliever Adam Warren, who has been out with a sore shoulder, is expected to be activated. Castro, who has a hamstring injury, could return at the end of the week, but Matt Holliday is doubtful to return before the break. Aaron Hicks is most likely out until the end of the month.Severino, who was not informed he had made the All-Star team until after the game, had departed with a lead in his past three starts only to have the bullpen turn them into losses. He could make no such complaint this time. The Astros, who lead the majors in slugging percentage, tagged Severino for six doubles and Gonzalez’s homer, which put them ahead in the second.Being selected as All-Stars was particularly affirming for Severino and Judge, who both entered spring training fighting for spots on the roster. Judge, who led the American League in votes, became the youngest player to lead the league in voting since Ken Griffey Jr. in 1994.“You’ve got the perfect word for it: surreal,” said Judge, who will be the first Yankee to start since Jeter in 2014. “It’s just a blessing. It’s just an incredible experience.”Judge said he would decide in the next few days whether to participate in the Home Run Derby the night before the All-Star Game. Sanchez is also weighing an invitation.“That would be cool if me and Gary were both in it, competing against each other,” Judge said. “A little healthy competition.”INSIDE PITCHThe Yankees signed five international players on Sunday, the first day players who have turned 16 can sign, according to Baseball America. They include three of the publication’s top 30 prospects: outfielder Everson Pereira of Venezuela, shortstop Roberto Chirinos of Venezuela and outfielder Anthony Garcia of the Dominican Republic. Teams cannot announce the signings until players pass physicals. The Yankees also announced that they had sent the minor league pitcher Matt Wotherspoon to Baltimore in exchange for international bonus pool money.Advertisement