By DHIREN MAHIBANJAN. 4, 2017
TORONTO — When Colin Fraser arrived at Canada’s training camp before the 2005 world junior hockey championship, he was not sure how other players would receive him.Playing with the Western Hockey League’s Red Deer Rebels, he had become known as a hard-nosed player willing to fight anyone.Fraser, 19 at the time, was able to find a role and make the Canadian roster despite his reputation on the ice. He ended up winning a gold medal.“It’s weird,” Fraser said. “It’s good, too, in a sense that maybe there’s a certain player that you don’t like — especially in my case, ’cause I’m pretty sure everyone hated me — but then they get to know me, and they’re like, ‘Oh this guy’s not such a bad guy.’Advertisement“Personalities on the ice are different than off the ice, too. It’s fun to get that team camaraderie together for that month or three weeks.”AdvertisementAfter 359 N.H.L. games and three Stanley Cup championships, Fraser, now retired, still maintains the friendships he formed over 10 years ago at the junior tournament.“When you see a guy, even though it was only a week or 10 days, you know you have that bond of winning a championship and playing with the elite players,” he said. “That camaraderie, even though you’re competitors, you’re still friends for sure.”As in most national team situations, that bond sometimes has to overcome club-team rivalries and playoff bitterness.This year’s Canadian team, which defeated Sweden, 5-2, in the tournament semifinals in Montreal on Wednesday night, comprises players from 17 clubs spread across the Western Hockey League, the Ontario Hockey League, the Quebec Major Junior Hockey League and American colleges.The Canadian defenseman Thomas Chabot, an Ottawa Senators prospect, and forward Pierre-Luc Dubois, a 2016 first-round draft pick of the Columbus Blue Jackets, developed bad blood during last season’s Quebec league playoffs.Chabot’s St. John Sea Dogs defeated Dubois’s Cape Breton Screaming Eagles in seven games in a quarterfinal matchup. During the series, Chabot took a knee-on-knee hit from Dubois — something both now laugh about.“It’s part of the game,” Chabot said. “We all want to win. Each player in that room wants to win. Even though we were playing against each other, we just put that aside. There’s things that happen in playoffs, it’s part of the game — and now we’re teammates, we’re enjoying it, and we’re trying to represent our country as best we can.”AdvertisementNine members of the United States team play for Boston College or its rival Boston University. The two programs, which play in the N.C.A.A.’s Hockey East conference, have yet to meet in regular-season play, but they will not have to wait long.Eight days after Thursday’s gold medal game at the world juniors, the Terriers and the Eagles will begin a home-and-home series. Kieffer Bellows, a forward at Boston University, acknowledged that it would be tough to put aside friendships formed over the past two weeks.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I guess we’ll see what happens when it happens,” he said. “If the hit is there, obviously, as soon I put on that B.U. sweater, the whole mind-set is everything B.U., but while we’re here, it’s all U.S.A. Hockey.”Fraser said that two weeks after winning the gold medal in 2005, his Canadian teammates Dion Phaneuf and Andrew Ladd fought following the opening face-off of a W.H.L. game.Bellows, the son of the former N.H.L. player Brian Bellows, said the family-like bond and lifelong friendships formed among teammates at the world juniors because of the time of year when the 11-day tournament takes place.“Being with each other on Christmas, it’s a time when you’re supposed to be around your family, but this is your second family, all these guys on this team — all 23 brothers, the coaching staff, the trainers, everyone throughout the whole organization,” Bellows said.He added: “You’re willing to get down and take a puck to the face; you’re willing to take a crosscheck to the back in front of the net to help these guys win. That’s what really helps team chemistry, and that’s really what creates a team family.”The Americans, among the favorites entering the tournament, defeated Russia, 4-3, in a shootout Wednesday to advance to the final against Canada. The United States has two gold medals and two bronzes in the past seven tournaments. Canada has one gold, two silvers and a bronze in that span.The Canadian defenseman Kale Clague, a 2016 second-round pick of the Los Angeles Kings, said the bonds formed because each member of the team entered the tournament with a similar mind-set.Advertisement“It takes a special player,” he said. “That’s one of our mottos coming into this thing: to be special. It does take a special person and player. You go from being your top player on your club team, and you come here, that might not be the case. Egos out the door.”Because of an editing error, an article on Thursday about team camaraderie at the world junior hockey championship misidentified, in some editions, the location of the semifinal game between Canada and Sweden. It was in Montreal, not in Toronto.A version of this article appears in print on January 5, 2017, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: At World Juniors, Team Camaraderie Overcomes Club Rivalries.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.