
TV Sports By                     
 RICHARD SANDOMIR
 
OCT. 6, 2016
The Fox Sports announcer Joe Buck lost his voice five years ago and blamed it on a virus that had attacked a nerve in his left vocal cord. He told this story to me and others. It was quite believable. But it was a lie. He didn’t really have a virus.He got hair plugs. Let me explain.In his coming autobiography, “Lucky Bastard,” and in an interview posted on Sports Illustrated’s website, Buck admitted that, since he was 24, his fear of losing his hair led him to undergo a series of hair transplants. “I was worried that if I lost my hair, I would lose my job,” he wrote. So Buck found time between some football and baseball seasons to get hair plugs.Some people vacation. Others get their hair harvested.In all, he said, he has had eight transplants. He told almost nobody about this obsession. Actors who get cosmetic surgery rarely confess, either. So, he never said, “Welcome to Game 1 of the World Series. He’s Tim McCarver. And I’m Joe Buck, and I’m doing everything possible not to lose my hair.” He just moved along, trying to preserve his head of hair. But when he awakened from anesthesia after his eighth surgery, he was without the voice that calls M.L.B. and N.F.L. games.How did he travel the considerable intellectual distance from adding hair to losing his voice? The best answer he has received is that a cuff used to protect him during the procedure shifted and pressed on his laryngeal nerve.AdvertisementWhen I researched my own bald odyssey for a memoir, “Bald Like Me,” I sat in on the latest of many hair-plug surgeries of a man named Barry. He had had a major transplant that had given him a head full of curls. But he regularly returned for plugs to insert into any tiny new vacancies on his scalp. “He has a head full of hair,” his surgeon said. “But still he complains.”AdvertisementRobert Bernstein, a hair-transplant surgeon in Manhattan, said Thursday that he does not give in to addicts’ cravings for more plugs.“We see a lot of them, but we shouldn’t be responding to them,” he said. “You want to treat them with medication but do surgery in broad brush strokes.” He said that men should not have more than three procedures over a long period of time.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.A friend who had plugs decades ago said, “I didn’t feel a thing, and as they promised, within two weeks, new hair was coming in.”I suppose that whatever Buck does with his follicles is his business. It’s his hair, whether it’s removed from the back of his head or inserted into the front. At least it is natural. No weaves or toupees; just a little bloody.Still, as a pro-baldist, I am dismayed at almost any tale of ego-driven hair replacement. Early baldness made me angry. But my book, maturity and my wife eventually helped me accept the state of my hair. And in 2003, I shaved what little remained of my side hairs (which were fine — like Larry Fine’s) after Charles Barkley told me, “What you’ve got ain’t working for you.”If only Buck had spoken to Barkley or the many other bald men in sports before getting hooked on plugs.He could have turned to Michael Jordan, the shaved-headed trailblazer. Several of Buck’s colleagues at Fox, including Terry Bradshaw and Jay Glazer, are successful without hairlines. But Buck’s account made it sound like he wanted to age like the overhaired Jimmy Johnson and Howie Long.AdvertisementTNT’s program “Inside the NBA” features an all-bald trio of analysts: Barkley, Kenny Smith and Shaquille O’Neal. The smooth-headed Dan Shulman is ESPN’s No. 1 baseball voice. He succeeded one of the great baldies, Jon Miller. And at “Monday Night Football,” ESPN did not seem to mind letting the play-by-play job go this season from one bald dude, Mike Tirico, to another, Sean McDonough.I called the very bald Dick Vitale on Thursday. In 2008, with his voice diminished to nearly a whisper, the ESPN college basketball analyst had surgery to remove lesions from his vocal cords. “No hair transplants here!” he said cheerfully from Florida. “I still have my chrome dome. I love waking up every morning and not having to make sure every strand is in place.”If Buck is finished with transplants, we might see him lose some of what is left on his head in the coming years.Let it go, Joe. Fox won’t fire you. It has, after all, kept Homer Simpson employed since 1989.A version of this article appears in print on October 7, 2016, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: Facing the Truth Is the First Step. Now Set Your Locks Free.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »