By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSJULY 31, 2017
The Washington left-hander Gio Gonzalez lost his no-hit bid in the ninth inning when Dee Gordon led off with a clean single, and the Nationals beat the Marlins, 1-0, Monday night in Miami.Gonzalez (9-5) was pulled after Gordon hit a soft liner the opposite way to left-center field. He threw 106 pitches. Gonzalez, who grew up in nearby Hialeah, walked three, hit a batter and struck out five.Sean Doolittle relieved and got the National League home run leader, Giancarlo Stanton, to ground into a double play. After Christian Yelich beat out an infield single, Marcell Ozuna popped out, giving Doolittle his fourth save since he was from Oakland and seventh this season.Jose Urena (9-5) matched zeros with Gonzalez until the sixth, when Bryce Harper’s R.B.I. single put the Nationals ahead. Urena allowed just three hits in eight innings.AdvertisementFISTER PITCHES RED SOX PAST INDIANS Doug Fister took a shutout into the eighth inning, the rookie Rafael Devers went 4 for 4 and drove in a run, and the Red Sox beat the Cleveland Indians, 6-2, in Boston. Mookie Betts stopped his mini-slump by driving in three runs with two singles, and Eduardo Nunez added three hits and two R.B.I. for the Red Sox, who won for the third time in nine games.AdvertisementORIOLES EDGE ROYALS IN NINTH Craig Gentry singled home the winning run with two outs in the ninth inning in Baltimore, and the Orioles cooled off the Kansas City Royals, 2-1.TOP PROSPECT INJURIES KNEE The White Sox prospect Yoan Moncada hurt his right knee in a frightening collision with right fielder Willy Garcia in the sixth inning of Chicago’s game against Toronto. Moncada and Garcia were chasing Darwin Barney’s bases-loaded blooper into shallow right field when Moncada, the second baseman, kneed a sliding Garcia in the head. The ball trickled out of Garcia’s glove for a three-run double.X-rays on Moncada, who is widely regarded as one of baseball’s top prospects, were negative, and the team says he is day to day with a bruised right knee. Garcia has a head contusion and will be evaluated again Tuesday morning.The Olympic 800-meter champion and world-record holder David Rudisha withdrew from the world championships after straining a thigh muscle in a training session in Kenya.Rudisha, the double world and Olympic champion, said a magnetic resonance imaging scan on his right leg showed that the injury would not heal in time for the championships, which open at London’s 2012 Olympic Stadium on Friday.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Rudisha, 28, was set to return to the scene of his greatest triumph, when he won Olympic gold and broke his world record in the 800 in a breathtaking wire-to-wire victory at the 2012 London Games. Rudisha’s time of 1 minute 40.91 seconds was the first time anyone had gone under 1:41.Rudisha retained his Olympic title at the Rio de Janeiro Games last year and also claimed world championships gold in 2011 and 2015.AdvertisementI.A.A.F. NOT READY TO LIFT RUSSIA BAN The International Association of Athletics Federations is not ready to lift Russia’s suspension from track and field competitions as the country fails to fully accept the findings of an investigation into its state-sponsored doping scheme.The meeting of I.A.A.F. member associations in London on Thursday will be asked to maintain the ban on Russia that was imposed in 2015 after the World Anti-Doping Agency investigator Richard McLaren exposed how failed drug tests were covered up. The only Russians competing at the world championships are those cleared to compete as neutrals after the I.A.A.F., track and field’s governing body, assessed their history of drug testing.Jacksonville Jaguars left tackle Branden Albert abruptly retired, ending his N.F.L. career after nine seasons and two Pro Bowls. Albert called it quits following three training camp practices and a brief discussion with Coach Doug Marrone.Albert is the fifth N.F.L. player to retire in the past week, following New England defensive end Rob Ninkovich, Baltimore offensive lineman John Urschel, New England receiver Andrew Hawkins and Denver safety David Bruton Jr.The Jaguars acquired the 32-year-old Albert in a trade with the Miami Dolphins in March, giving up a seventh-round draft pick in 2018 that Jacksonville now gets back because Albert will not have been on the 53-man roster for at least three regular-season games.RAIDERS ROOKIE WON’T FACE CHARGES A grand jury in Cleveland has decided not to charge the Oakland Raiders rookie Gareon Conley with any crimes after a rape investigation.Conley is a defensive back who starred at Ohio State. He was accused by a 23-year-old woman of sexually assaulting her in a Cleveland hotel room April 9. Conley’s lawyer says the sex was consensual.Manchester United signed midfielder Nemanja Matic from Chelsea on a three-year contract. Matic, a 28-year-old Serb, rejoins his former manager José Mourinho after playing a key role when Mourinho guided Chelsea to the Premier League title in the 2014-15 season. Neither club gave financial details of the deal, which was reportedly for 40 million pounds ($52.8 million).Matic established himself as a crucial player for Chelsea after rejoining the club in 2014 from Benfica. However, Chelsea’s signing of Tiemoue Bakayoko from Monaco meant the Blues were willing to let Matic move on.A version of this article appears in print on August 1, 2017, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: Baseball; Nationals’ Gonzalez Loses No-Hitter in Ninth.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.