AdvertisementSupported byFlyers 4, Islanders 1By Allan KredaThe Islanders surely needed a home-ice lift after a rough three-game trip that dropped them into a wild-card position. They have been strong at home all season, with 21 of their 38 wins at Barclays Center.But on a night when the captain John Tavares played his 500th career game, and with a chance to put some real distance between themselves and the only team with a bona fide chance of knocking them out of a playoff spot, the Islanders fell flat in a dispiriting 4-1 loss to the surging Philadelphia Flyers.It was the first regulation defeat at home for the Islanders since Jan. 25 against Detroit, and it narrowed their lead over the Flyers to 3 points. Both teams have 11 games to go, including a rematch April 10 at Barclays Center in the regular-season finale. The Islanders, with 85 points, still lead the Red Wings by 2 points with a game in hand. Both teams hold wild-card spots ahead of the Flyers, who have 82 points.“It’s obviously been a tough stretch,” said Tavares, who has three goals in his last 13 games. “It starts with myself. I have to elevate my game to where it needs to be.”Flyers defenseman Brandon Manning scored the go-ahead goal at 13 minutes 1 second of the second period, rifling a shot past Islanders goaltender Thomas Greiss. It was the first goal of Manning’s N.H.L. career.Steve Mason made 23 saves as the Flyers improved to 9-2-1 in their last 12 games. The Islanders extended their losing streak to a season-high four, and they are 1-4-2 since defeating Pittsburgh at home on March 8.Islanders Coach Jack Capuano supported his captain but leveled harsh criticism at several other Islanders without citing names.“With every leader, sometimes you try to do too much because they want to win so badly and they want to help their teammates achieve the goal that they want to achieve,” Capuano said. “At the end of the day, he’s trying to lead our team. He’s doing the best he can right now, but the supporting staff, our other guys — it’s nonexistent right now.”The Flyers’ Nick Cousins opened the scoring, tapping in a pass from Jakub Voracek at 2:24 of the second.Kyle Okposo tied the score when he nudged the puck past Mason at 3:54.But Manning, whose penalty had expired seconds earlier, took a pass from the Flyers’ zone and skated down the left wing before shooting the puck over the left shoulder of Greiss, now starting for the Islanders since Jaroslav Halak is out with a lower-body injury. The former Islanders defensemen Andrew MacDonald and Mark Streit assisted.The Flyers extended the lead to 3-1 on a goal by Sam Gagner at 4:22 of the third. Claude Giroux added an empty-net goal to complete the scoring at 19:33.Tavares is likely to be feeling the weight of his role as the clock winds down on his seventh N.H.L. season.The top overall pick in the 2009 draft by the Islanders, he has yet to advance past the first round of the playoffs, as the Islanders lost to Pittsburgh in 2013 and to Washington last April.“We’ve just got to keep sticking with it and believe in what we’re doing,” said Tavares, who leads the Islanders with 26 goals and has 200 in his career. “You’ve got to use your teammates and trust your group. Certainly we have a lot of talented players.”The Islanders have been in the thick of the Metropolitan Division for much of the season, mostly battling the Rangers for second while the Washington Capitals have maintained a commanding lead. The Islanders trail the Rangers by 5 points with two games in hand.But the Penguins have won six straight to vault past the Islanders, who made only 1 point on their three-game trip to Pittsburgh, Nashville and Dallas.Now their stress will only increase, beginning with Wednesday’s home game against Ottawa.GROWING PAINS AT BARCLAYS Before Monday’s game, Brett Yormark, Barclays Center’s chief executive, spoke of the inevitable growing pains the franchise had worked through in its first season in a venue other than Nassau Coliseum.“We understand that progress takes time,” he said. “Nothing happens overnight.”Yormark added that making the playoffs would be crucial to making this initial year a success.“We need give our fans a taste,” he said, “to build for next season.”Perhaps as solace, the Islanders are 21-9-4 at home, and seven of their remaining 11 games are at Barclays Center.PREDATORS 5, KINGS 2 Ryan Johansen had a goal and two assists to lead Nashville past visiting Los Angeles. The Predators have won three of their last four. (AP)Advertisement