By DAVID POLLAKJUNE 6, 2016
SAN JOSE, Calif. — Evgeni Malkin rediscovered his scoring touch, and the Pittsburgh Penguins are one victory away from winning their second Stanley Cup championship in eight years.The Penguins defeated the San Jose Sharks, 3-1, on Monday night to take a three-games-to-one lead in the best-of-seven finals, a series in which the Penguins have never trailed in regulation. The victory gave Pittsburgh a split in the two games played in San Jose, which reached the Cup finals for the first time in the franchise’s 24-year history. The series could end as early as Game 5 on Thursday night in Pittsburgh.“You’ve just got to understand that it’s going to take our best and we’re going to see their absolute best,” Sidney Crosby said of the possibility of clinching the title in Game 5. “In saying that, you can’t get caught looking ahead of things. We’ve had a great approach all playoff long — all season long — in making sure we’re staying in the moment here.”Malkin had an assist on Pittsburgh’s first goal, by defenseman Ian Cole, and scored to stake Pittsburgh to a 2-0 lead in the second period. The fourth-line forward Eric Fehr closed out the scoring late in the third. Melker Karlsson was the only Shark to score against the rookie goaltender Matthew Murray, who made 23 saves.AdvertisementMalkin, the veteran Russian forward who had 15 points in 17 games over the first three rounds of the playoffs, had been held without a point in the first three games of the series. Still, Pittsburgh Coach Mike Sullivan remained confident that Malkin would be a factor in the series.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I thought he was really good, not only because he got on the scoresheet,” Sullivan said after Monday’s win. “Obviously, that’s great for him and it’s great for us. But I thought his overall game was really good. He played at both ends of the rink and when he plays that way, he’s so hard to defend. It seems like the puck follows him around.”The only time the Sharks have held a lead in the series was when the rookie forward Joonas Donskoi scored at 12 minutes 18 seconds of overtime on Saturday night.Advertisement“I think when you have the lead, you can play differently,” Sharks Coach Peter DeBoer said. “You feel a lot more comfortable getting in a four-line rhythm, putting your guys out there, trusting them. There’s not that pressure that we have to create a scoring chance or score a goal.”On Monday, the Penguins took advantage of a San Jose line change and got on the board first when Cole buried the rebound of a shot by Phil Kessel at 7:36 of the first period. It was Cole’s first goal of the postseason, with Malkin getting the secondary assist.It took only 2:37 of the second for Malkin to register his second point. It came on a Pittsburgh power play that had been unsuccessful in seven attempts during the San Jose series. Parking himself to the left of Sharks goalie Martin Jones, Malkin easily redirected a shot by Kessel into the San Jose net nine seconds after Karlsson went to the penalty box for interference.Malkin said he was not changing his game a lot, calling it a simple game of going to the net, staying in close and playing around the net.“My goal is like Phil, give me empty net,” Malkin said.The Sharks, who were missing the injured forward Tomas Hertl for a second game, once again struggled to get a shot on net against a Pittsburgh team that had been playing them tightly all series.San Jose did not register a shot in the second period until 9:20, and at that point DeBoer was ready to shuffle his lines in hope of generating an offensive spark. The reconstructed lines did come out flying in the third, as Murray was forced to make difficult saves early on shots by Karlsson, Patrick Marleau and Joe Pavelski.San Jose finally broke through at 8:07 when a shot by defenseman Brenden Dillon found its way to Karlsson, who scored on a 17-foot wrist shot while falling to his knees.After Fehr scored with 2:02 left in the game, DeBoer pulled Jones in favor of an extra attacker, but Murray was not challenged.AdvertisementWhile the Sharks had closed to within one game of Pittsburgh on Saturday, San Jose was far behind the Penguins in most statistical areas through the first three games. The Penguins were outshooting San Jose, 113 to 74, had won 52 percent of the face-offs and had blocked 73 shots to 54 by the Sharks. San Jose had outhit Pittsburgh, 126 to 89, but that reflected the fact that the Penguins had puck control most of each game more than anything else.Sharks defenseman Paul Martin said it had been difficult to constantly play from behind, but that the team had not given up.“You have to stay positive,” Martin said. “We have a lot of good leadership in this room, a lot of character guys who have been through a lot. We really believe in the group we have here, and then everyone’s capable of chipping in.”A version of this article appears in print on June 7, 2016, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: Unleashed Malkin Puts Penguins on Verge of Title.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.