By TYLER KEPNERJUNE 6, 2016
PITTSBURGH — The Mets had news on center fielder Juan Lagares on Monday. Whether it was good or bad was hard to tell.Lagares, a former Gold Glove Award winner who is hitting .306 against left-handed pitchers, made a detour on the Mets’ trip, flying from Miami to New York for tests on his left thumb. Magnetic resonance imaging revealed a partial ligament tear, which sounded ominous.But the Mets decided to keep Lagares on the active roster and bring him to PNC Park for this week’s series against the Pirates.Manager Terry Collins said Lagares could wear an oversized base-running glove and be available as a pinch-runner but would need to be ready to hit and field in about three or four days to avoid the disabled list.Advertisement“There’s a good chance he’ll be able to play with it,” said John Ricco, the Mets’ assistant general manager, “but we won’t know until some of the swelling gets out of there and he gets a chance to see how it feels.”AdvertisementLagares will probably tape the thumb and wear a splint, Ricco said, but even if he can grip a bat and handle the glove, he could be diminished.The Mets seem to understand that.“If he’s able to play, you’ve got to treat him as if he’s 100 percent, even if you know he probably won’t be,” Collins said. “He’s got to do what he does best — face left-handed pitching and play center field. If he can do that, we’re O.K.”Yoenis Cespedes was ready to start in center field on Monday after telling Collins he felt fine. Cespedes did not start over the weekend in Miami because of right hip soreness.MATZ-NIESE MATCHUP IS PUT OFF After waiting about an hour and a half on Monday night — just long enough for fans to cheer the Penguins’ first goal in Game 4 of the Stanley Cup finals, which played on the scoreboard — the Mets and the Pirates were rained out at PNC Park.No makeup date was immediately announced, although the teams have mutual days off on June 13 and Aug. 8.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The scheduled pitching matchup for Monday — the Mets’ Steven Matz against the former Met Jon Niese — will now take place on Tuesday. Jacob deGrom will face Pittsburgh’s Francisco Liriano on Wednesday.D’ARNAUD AT D.H. IN REHAB STINT Catcher Travis d’Arnaud began his rehabilitation assignment on Sunday, going 1 for 5 as the designated hitter for Class A St. Lucie. D’Arnaud, who has missed six weeks with a rotator cuff strain, has been playing catch from 150 feet but has not thrown with full exertion.AdvertisementA rehab assignment has a maximum of 20 days, and the Mets expect d’Arnaud to be catching in about a week.In the meantime, they are giving the veteran Rene Rivera more time as the starting catcher. Terry Collins said Rivera had done “a great job throwing guys out,” making him a good fit for the games against the Pirates, who run more than most teams.The same reasoning might apply this weekend against the Milwaukee Brewers, who led the majors in steals through Sunday.Rivera has caught 43 percent of potential base stealers, compared with 28 percent by Kevin Plawecki.Rivera has also seemed to work well with the Mets’ pitchers, who had a 1.86 E.R.A. with him through Sunday.Pitchers had a 3.61 E.R.A. when working with Plawecki.A RETURN HOME FOR WALKER  For second baseman Neil Walker, the Mets’ visit to Pittsburgh is a return to his hometown, where he played his first seven seasons.Walker, who was traded to the Mets last December for Jon Niese, stayed at his home north of Pittsburgh and got a ride to the ballpark on Monday from Pirates pitcher Gerrit Cole, a former teammate.“I’m certainly pulling for them,” Walker said of the Pirates, “but maybe not these three days this week.”The Pirates chose Walker with the 11th overall pick in the 2004 draft, and statistically, he ranks as one of the best first-round choices in their history.According to the Baseball-Reference website, the Pirates have drafted only four players in the first round with more career wins above replacement than Walker: outfielder Barry Bonds (drafted in 1985), catcher Jason Kendall (1992), outfielder Andrew McCutchen (2005) and third baseman Richie Hebner (1966).A version of this article appears in print on June 7, 2016, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Lagares, With Tear in Thumb, Avoids D.L.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.