By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSAUG. 7, 2016
After repeated frustration on the sport’s biggest stage, Katinka Hosszu of Hungary crushed the world record in the women’s 400-meter individual medley Saturday night to capture gold for the first Olympic medal of her career.Hosszu, known as the Iron Lady for her grueling schedule, led all the way and touched in 4 minutes 26.36 seconds, eclipsing the record of 4:28.43 held by Ye Shiwen of China.Hosszu had time to turn toward the scoreboard and savor her triumph before Maya DiRado of the United States touched in 4:31.15 to win silver.This triumph was especially sweet for Hosszu, who had captured nine medals — including five golds — at the world championships but never won an Olympic medal. She defiantly pumped her chest before breaking into a huge smile.AdvertisementAlso Saturday, Australia won the women’s 4x100-meter freestyle relay in a world-record 3:30.65 to beat an American squad anchored by Katie Ledecky. Simone Manuel and Abbey Weitzeil put the United States ahead at the midway point, but Bronte Campbell and Cate Campbell were simply too strong on the final two legs.AdvertisementMack Horton of Australia won gold in the men’s 400-meter freestyle, holding off Sun Yang of China, the defending Olympic champion. Michael Phelps won in 2004 and 2008, but he dropped the event from his program.  (AP)South Korea, an archery powerhouse, put on quite the display in the men’s team final, placing 15 of its 18 arrows in the top scoring ring to knock off the United States, 6-0.The clinic put on by Kim Woojin, Ku Bonchan and Lee Seungyun was so impressive that the American archer Jake Kaminski went over to the South Korean squad after the match and simply bowed.“We just got outclassed,” Kaminski said. “A match like that has never been shot before. That would’ve been a world record if world records still existed in this format. We shot well and just got beat.”  (AP)When Andrew Bogut, the No. 1 overall pick in the 2005 N.B.A. draft, tumbled to the floor with a hyperextended knee in Game 5 of the N.B.A. finals in June, no one really expected him to recover in time for the Olympics.On Saturday, Bogut scored 18 points, catching six alley-oop passes as Australia beat France, 87-66, in Group A. He had extra motivation to return after missing the 2012 London Games with an ankle injury.  (AP)U.S. ROUTS CHINA Kevin Durant scored 25 points as the United States routed China, 119-62. DeMarcus Cousins added 17 points for the United States, which is a heavy favorite to win its third straight gold.  (AP)Sam Manchester will guide you through the 2016 summer Olympics in Rio de Janeiro.Hey. It’s Sam from the NYT Sports desk. I’m at the Olympics in Rio (so you don’t have to be :)). Grab a limited spot and I’ll text you updates, answer your questions and share the behind-the-scenes stuff nobody else gets.Thanks! Talk to you soon.Greg Van Avermaet’s persistence finally paid dividends as he became the first Olympic road race champion from cycling-mad Belgium since 1952.AdvertisementAfter a career of near misses, Van Avermaet seized his chance to become a national hero when Vincenzo Nibali of Italy crashed while in the lead. Van Avermaet then edged out Jakob Fuglsang of Denmark in a thrilling finish.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Van Avermaet was third in the Tour of Flanders and the Paris-Roubaix race last year and was robbed of victory in the San Sebastián Classic when he was involved in an accident with a television motorbike while leading.  (REUTERS)The French gymnast Samir Ait Said sustained a horrific double leg fracture during qualifying for the vault, causing shocked rivals to question the scoring system that pushes competitors to try increasingly dangerous moves.Ait Said fell to the mat in agony, clutching the back of his knee and the lower part of his leg.“I don’t like this new system,” said Fabien Hambüchen of Germany, a silver medalist on the horizontal bar at the 2012 Games. “I’m the guy who still loves the 10.0. It was a simple system. It was more flexible for everyone. The new system is pushing people and making it dangerous.”(AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE)Hoang Xuan Vinh ended Vietnam’s six-decade wait for an Olympic gold medal, falling into the arms of his coaches after his nearly perfect final shot in the men’s 10-meter air pistol. Hoang, a 41-year-old military officer, beat Felipe Almeida Wu, Brazil’s first shooting medalist since 1920.(AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE)AN UPSET PUTIN CAN BE PROUD OF Beslan Mudranov of Russia, the 18th-ranked judoka, defeated Yeldos Smetov of Kazakhstan to become Russia’s first gold medalist of the Rio Games. Despite the Russian doping scandal, the country’s entire judo team was allowed to compete. President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia is the honorary president of the International Judo Federation and holds a black belt.  (AP)THE PERFECT VENUE For the first time since Sydney in 2000, beach volleyball returned to an actual beach. The defending champion Kerri Walsh Jennings and her new partner, April Ross, easily won their opening match with a 21-14, 21-13 victory over Australia that took just 35 minutes.  (AP)AN EARLY EXIT Venus Williams lost to Kirsten Flipkens of Belgium in the first round of women’s tennis, the earliest exit in her record five Olympic singles tournaments.  (AP)AdvertisementFriday’s opening ceremony on NBC attracted an average of 26.5 million viewers, a steep drop from the 40.7 million who watched the similar event at the London Games four years ago. The telecast was shown on a one-hour delay.The 35 percent drop suggested that some people might have been watching on mobile devices and computers.Greg Hughes, an NBC Sports spokesman, said: “To compare TV viewership to a similar event four years ago is not going to be apples to apples. It’s going to be an apples to oranges comparison.” He said that when NBC combines time-shifted and online streaming, “We hope to be in the area we expected.”Two years ago, the opening ceremony of the Winter Games from Sochi, Russia, attracted 31.7 million viewers.RICHARD SANDOMIRA version of this article appears in print on August 7, 2016, on Page SP6 of the New York edition with the headline: With Seconds to Spare, a Medley Record Is Set.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.