AdvertisementSupported bySoccerBy John DuerdenSEOUL, South Korea — The Chinese Super League has grabbed most of the headlines in Asian soccer lately with its high-profile signings, but a recent deal has Japan’s J.League confident it will stay a league to watch over the coming years.On July 20, the J.League signed a 10-year deal worth 210 billion yen, or $2.05 billion, with the British-based media company Perform Group for the digital rights for its matches within Japan. Starting next year, Perform will stream matches from the top three tiers of Japanese soccer through its online platform, DAZN. The J.League’s chairman, Mitsuru Murai, believes that the deal with Perform could be a turning point for Japanese soccer.“I think that we are now in the second group of leagues after the first group, which includes the English Premier League and the Bundesliga in terms of revenue,” Murai said by email. “We still need to make a great effort to make the J.League more attractive and brand the league for international fans.” For a league that has been unable to match the financial muscle of its Chinese rival, the deal comes at the right time.After the Japanese league started in 1993, it turned to Brazilian stars like Zico and Dunga to entrench itself in the hearts and minds of fans at home and overseas. These days, however, the big names in Asia go to the Chinese Super League, which spent over $300 million on foreign signings in the last winter transfer window, more than any league in the world. In June, Shanghai S.I.P.G. paid around $61 million to sign the Brazilian player Hulk. That followed several high-priced deals during the January transfer window, including Jackson Martínez of Colombia heading to Guangzhou Evergrande and the Brazilians Ramires and Alex Teixeira signing with Jiangsu Suning. Each of the three cost more than $30 million. The last high-profile foreign player to sign with a J.League club was Diego Forlán. The Uruguayan star joined Cerezo Osaka in 2014, but he could not prevent the club from being relegated to the second division.“The Chinese Super League looks like the early stage of J.League,” said Yahiro Kazama, the head coach of Kawasaki Frontale. “Japan football is in a transitional period, but now we have a great chance to rethink how we can increase the value of the J.League together. We will develop the level and quality of football, and that will help us attract more fans.”While there are stipulations in the deal that require the league to invest in stadiums and other soccer infrastructure in Japan, it is expected that Japanese clubs will receive considerable funds starting in 2017 to invest in players. The chief executive of the Perform Group, Simon Denyer, said that the deal could have a major effect on the J.League’s future. “As always when paying for sports rights, you want the amount to be the right one, you want the teams to improve,” Denyer said. “There is, of course, money going to the teams that should help them to retain players and then invest in talent.”The new deal should help Japanese clubs compete with Chinese teams in the transfer market.“We have not decided yet how we will distribute the money to the clubs,” Murai said. “It is obvious though that it’s good for the clubs to increase their budget and invest in great players and coaches. We expect an exciting transfer market.”The surge in high-profile signings has paid off in China, at least at the ticket windows. The average attendance in the Chinese Super League climbed from almost 19,000 a game in 2014 to over 22,000 in 2015, and it is expected to top 25,000 in 2016. In the J.League, attendance peaked at just over 19,000 per game in 2010, and it has dropped since then, to just under 18,000 per game in 2015. The J.League has exported more young talent to Europe than any other Asian league, with the biggest names being Shinji Kagawa and Shinji Okazaki, who both played with German clubs before winning titles in the English Premier League. While that may help strengthen Japan’s national team as the players face top-tier competition, some critics suggest that it also weakens the domestic clubs. Gary White, coach of second-tier Chinese team Shanghai Shenxin, has spent considerable time in Japan studying for the Japan Football Association's top coaching qualification, and he believes that the level of imported foreign players has fallen in Japan.“For the J.League to excel, they need to improve the quality of foreign players and coaches they are bringing in,” White said. “They should also work harder at trying to keep their best talent at home for longer.”It is not just high-profile players that Chinese clubs are signing, but former World Cup-winning coaches like Marcello Lippi of Italy and Luiz Felipe Scolari of Brazil. Chinese teams are now performing better than their Japanese counterparts in the Asian Champions League, the top club competition in the region. Japan has not had a finalist since 2008, but Guangzhou Evergrande has won two of the past three titles. This season, there are two Chinese clubs in the final eight of the competition, and none from the J.League.For White, China has become the new hotbed in Asian soccer, and the benefits of the increase in spending can be seen as the league grows stronger. “Technically, the J.League is still at the top in Asia, but Chinese teams are closing the gap rapidly,” White said. “Off the field, there is a lot more excitement in China and a lot more exposure to the massive signings and foreign coaches.” Should that happen in Japan, too, then the Perform Group is confident that demand to watch the J.League will rise. “The headline number is obviously a huge amount and the biggest we have ever paid,” Denyer said. “But it is a big market with over 100 million people, and while it will take time to get the money back, we will get a significant number of subscribers, which is why we have a 10-year deal. That is good for the J.League, too.”Advertisement