By JAMES WAGNERNOV. 2, 2016
CLEVELAND — The Indians’ unraveling that eventually forced a decisive Game 7 against the Chicago Cubs began in the first inning on Tuesday at Progressive Field. Addison Russell lifted what appeared to be a harmless fly ball to the right side of the outfield for the final out of the inning. But given some of the adventures the Indians’ outfield has endured in this series, the play was anything but routine.Lonnie Chisenhall, a solid right fielder, went for the ball. So did Tyler Naquin, a rookie center fielder. But neither one caught it.The Cubs were leading, 1-0, and when the ball fell in two more Chicago runners scored — including Ben Zobrist, who collided with, and ran through, Indians catcher Roberto Perez in a play at the plate.The postgame answers revealed — as if confirmation were needed — that the Indians were not on the same page at a critical moment.Advertisement“As Lonnie was kind of pulling off, Naquin was yelling: ‘It’s yours. You got it,’” Indians Manager Terry Francona said.Advertisement“We definitely called for it,” Naquin said. “Both.”“Nobody said anything,” Chisenhall said later.The Indians eventually fell to the Cubs, 9-3, and the World Series will be decided on Wednesday. Russell hit a grand slam off Indians reliever Dan Otero to put the game out of reach in the third, but the first-inning miscue undermined the home team by forcing starter Josh Tomlin to throw more pitches. He was chased from the game in that fateful third inning.“It was frustrating,” Indians second baseman Jason Kipnis said. “You never want to start a game off like that down three right away.”During the regular season and through the first two rounds of the playoffs, the Indians played strong defense. Depending on the defensive metric, the Indians were either the fifth- or sixth-best fielding team in the regular season.But one of the areas in which the Indians were average or slightly below it was in the outfield. In Game 2 of the Series, Chisenhall had some odd plays in right field that led to Cubs runs.The Cubs, on the other hand, saved their season with a Game 5 win on Sunday that featured strong defensive plays. More solid glove work continued in Game 6 on Tuesday.Russell drove in six runs, tying a Series record, and flashed his elite defense at shortstop. Jason Heyward’s bat remained dormant, but he made a difficult running catch in the fourth inning and showed off his strong arm by throwing out Perez at second base in the ninth.Advertisement“We’re used to making good defensive plays,” Cubs Manager Joe Maddon said. “We’re also capable of making good defensive plays.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But the Indians failed to make the routine play in a key instance. When Russell hit his fly ball to right field in the first inning, Chisenhall ran hard. As Naquin neared him, Chisenhall looked at his teammate and slowed down. Then Chisenhall turned his head back to peek at Naquin.“I should have continued my route,” Chisenhall said. “I kind of felt him coming. I pulled up. I should have kept going.”Francona said it was Naquin’s ball and that, as the center fielder, he should have taken charge. Naquin said he did not hear Chisenhall because of the loud crowd of 38,116 people.“One of those deals you wish you could take back,” Naquin said. “In the moment, me being the center fielder, I need to take charge on that, not rely on that. That’s my mistake.”Chisenhall added: “The playoffs have been like that. We just haven’t had an in-between ball yet, and it was unfortunate that happened tonight.”After the ball landed between them, Naquin grabbed it and fired it in to the infield. Kipnis made the relay throw, a low-bouncing ball that was difficult for Perez to field as he tried to tag out Zobrist. Because of that, Kipnis was charged with an error — but not the outfielders who let the ball drop.“It was a bad bounce,” Perez said in Spanish. “I wasn’t expecting that contact from Zobrist. What can I say? It’s a do-or-die play at home plate.”After the play, left fielder Coco Crisp, Chisenhall and Naquin talked and agreed to use hand signals to make sure they were all clear on fly balls. Later in the game, when a fly ball was again hit into that trouble zone, Chisenhall caught it, and Naquin slid in behind him as insurance.Advertisement“You can’t let another drop,” Chisenhall said. “You risk a collision to make sure you catch the ball.”After the game, for understandable reasons, Naquin and Chisenhall were both eager to move on to another subject.“We just gotta win the game,” Chisenhall said of Wednesday’s Game 7. “People remember that.”An earlier version of this article described incorrectly the situation when Cubs right fielder Jason Heyward, who had made a difficult catch in the fourth inning, threw out the Indians’ Roberto Perez at second base. It was in the ninth inning, not “three innings later.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.