By MIKE VORKUNOVNOV. 2, 2016
Carmelo Anthony sat on the Knicks’ bench, sifting through another drubbing — a second consecutive double-digit loss on a second consecutive day — and addressed the frustration bubbling out. He soothed himself by once again taking the long-term view and by telling himself that it will get better for these Knicks.That may ultimately prove true, but at this stage of the nascent season, just four games in, the Knicks are already riddled with questions and problems. They were brought out into the open once again Wednesday night when the Houston Rockets waxed the Knicks, 118-99, at Madison Square Garden.The defeat dropped the Knicks to 1-3 in a start that has given Coach Jeff Hornacek a quick immersion into the crucible of New York.Already, Hornacek has faced scrutiny about the offense — the triangle and its chief proponent, the team president Phil Jackson, continue to provide plenty of palace intrigue at the Garden — but the defense has been even more troubling. The Knicks have allowed no fewer than 102 points in a game and were often scrambling against Houston, unable to contain James Harden or close out on the perimeter.AdvertisementHarden, who finished with 30 points, 15 assists and 6 rebounds, was moved to point guard before the season and given the reins to the Rockets’ offense. His mastery of the role was apparent against the Knicks: He left them constantly making wrong choices as he slithered through them running the pick-and-roll.Advertisement“It’s almost like we let James do whatever he wanted,” Hornacek said.But Harden’s dominance was not the sole cause of the Knicks’ problems. Houston played at a breakneck pace, leaving the Knicks playing catch-up. They fell behind by 10 in the first quarter and by 20 right before halftime, bringing on a chorus of boos from the crowd. The loudest ovation came when the video board showed highlights of Game 7 of the World Series.The Knicks struggled with the basics, as well as with the intricacies of their defense. Hornacek lamented that the scouting report the coaching staff had worked up was not followed. There were also breakdowns that made the Knicks look less like a cohesive unit than five individuals.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“It’s nothing but defense,” said Derrick Rose, the newly imported point guard. “If we don’t come out and play defense, we’re going to keep getting smacked like this.”Hornacek tried lineups with Maurice Ndour as his nominal center. In the third quarter, it was up to Ron Baker, an undrafted free agent who had missed two games because of an ankle injury, to guard Harden. Hornacek started Kristaps Porzingis and Joakim Noah and had the Knicks play at times without either of them.Despite the tinkering, nothing worked. The performance only backed up Rose’s critique of the team.With several marquee names playing together for the first time, Rose had recognized a team searching for an identity. In Chicago, he had played on grinding squads that were among the fiercest in the N.B.A. That is the type of mentality he hopes the Knicks can eventually find.“I’ve been on teams where we’re building a culture here — we’re trying to bring a defensive culture here,” he said. “Trying to make something last and establish something. It takes time.”At this point, however, that type of play is obviously lacking.“We’re far away from that,” Rose said.AdvertisementThe Knicks face other problems, as well. On Tuesday, at Detroit, Hornacek kept Porzingis on the bench for most of the fourth quarter rather than risk ruining the Knicks’ defensive tenacity. Noah came out of Wednesday’s game just 4 minutes 33 seconds into the first quarter, despite no apparent injury, and he has played more than 22 minutes in a game just once so far. Hornacek has said that his players’ conditioning could be better.It has all made for messy and uncoordinated play. Entering Wednesday, only two Eastern Conference teams had scored fewer points per game than the Knicks, and only three had allowed more. Then the Rockets blew them away.It left the Knicks trying to spin away the indignity. They must develop better habits, Noah said.Anthony, for his part, maintained that the mistakes in the losses to the Pistons and the Rockets were not true reflections of the team. The Knicks must lay a foundation even as another season begins off-track.“I do honestly believe we’ll pick it up,” Anthony said. “I know guys understand that we have to pick it up. We can’t keep saying it’s going to get better, get better — we got to make it better.”A version of this article appears in print on November 3, 2016, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: Knicks, Lacking Coordination, Fall Again.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.