By BILLY WITZNOV. 2, 2016
CLEVELAND — The Chicago Cubs, who have endured 108 years without a championship, and the Cleveland Indians, who have waited a mere 68, are nothing if not patient.So what’s one more day?All those decades of disappointment and heartbreak will be washed away for one of these franchises on Wednesday night as the 112th World Series culminates in a Game 7. The Cubs ensured there would be a winner-take-all game by routing the Indians on Tuesday night, riding a grand slam and six R.B.I. by Addison Russell to a 9-3 victory.The Cubs will send Kyle Hendricks to the mound as they try to become the first team to rally from a three-games-to-one deficit since Kansas City beat St. Louis in 1985, and the first to do so on the road since Pittsburgh won at Baltimore in 1979.But they will have to beat the Indians’ ace, Corey Kluber, who has dominated them twice in this Series, allowing just one run in 12 innings while striking out 15.AdvertisementThe winner will relish what will surely be viewed as a transformative victory in either city. The loser will be left with another chapter of anguish — perhaps the cruelest one in a history of them.“If you’re a fan of baseball, this is the best outcome you could possibly hope for in a World Series anyone’s been alive for,” Cubs first baseman Anthony Rizzo said. “A couple of years ago it went Game 7, but the Indians not winning since ’48 and us not winning since 1908 — it’s going to be good. History’s going to be written tomorrow, one way or another, and we’ll be a part of it forever.”AdvertisementHistory — or anything else — did not appear to weigh on the Cubs on Tuesday. They looked more relaxed than they had over the weekend at Wrigley Field, where they lost two of three despite holding the best home record in baseball this season.Perhaps it was escaping the suffocating crowds, or perhaps it was because Manager Joe Maddon had allowed his players to stay at home on Monday to enjoy Halloween with their families before flying into Cleveland at night. About half the team boarded the plane in costume.The crowd had barely settled in on Tuesday when Kris Bryant, with two outs and the count at 0-2, blasted a curveball over the left-field wall that not only unsettled starter Josh Tomlin, but the rest of the Indians as well.The Indians lacked poise from start to finish. Center fielder Tyler Naquin and right fielder Lonnie Chisenhall allowed Russell’s fly ball to right drop between them, letting two more runs score in the first inning. In the ninth, Roberto Perez, after driving in a run, got thrown out trying to take second when the Indians were down by six runs.“You don’t expect balls like that to drop in this late in the year,” said Rajai Davis, who platoons in center field with Naquin. “That’s the kind of thing that happens in spring training.”It was a particularly tough night for Naquin, a leading rookie of the year candidate who emerged when the Indians lost Michael Brantley for almost the entire season. Naquin struck out twice, including with the bases loaded to end the fourth, ending a rare chance for the Indians to crawl back into the game.Advertisement“It’s one of those deals that you wish you could take back,” said Naquin, who added that he had wanted to atone at the plate.Tomlin, who was brilliant in four and two-thirds shutout innings in Game 4 and had a 1.76 E.R.A. in his first three playoff starts, was not the same pitcher on Tuesday. It may have been owing to fatigue from pitching on three days’ rest or the Cubs seeing him a second time — an opportunity Boston and Toronto did not have in the previous playoff series.With all the curveballs the Indians have thrown at the Cubs, Bryant said it was important not to chase the ones on the outer half of the plate.“Force them in the zone and don’t go chasing for them,” said Bryant, who has homered in back-to-back games after starting the World Series 1 for 14. “I felt like these last two games we’ve done that, but tomorrow Kluber has one of the best curveballs in the game and hopefully we make that adjustment.”Kyle Schwarber, who was back in the Cubs’ lineup at designated hitter and batting second, walked to lead off the third. After Chisenhall and Naquin nearly had another collision before Chisenhall caught Bryant’s fly ball, Rizzo and Ben Zobrist singled to load the bases.Indians Manager Terry Francona summoned Dan Otero, who fell behind Russell, 2-0. His next pitch landed 434 feet away, deep into the seats beyond left-center field.“The key to that at-bat was to not swing at the first two pitches,” said Maddon, who had acknowledged that some of his young players were overanxious. “That’s what we’ve been talking about the whole time. I mean, if you get overeager right there, you’re going to put that sinker in play, it’s a ground ball to third base, inning over, none of this happens.”The Indians had gone to a three-man rotation out of necessity after losing two of their starters, Carlos Carrasco and Danny Salazar, to injuries late in the season. (Salazar returned for the World Series and pitched in relief on Tuesday.)Advertisement“I don’t think this was the plan at all, but when you lose two of your starting pitchers, you have to adjust,” the Indians’ pitching coach, Mickey Callaway, said recently. “When your back is against the wall, you do special things.”The linchpin of the plan was Kluber, the 2014 Cy Young Award winner. On Wednesday he is set to pitch on short rest for the third time in the playoffs.It is fitting that the Indians will turn to Kluber, and that he will take the ball at home. Kluber was the winning pitcher in the All-Star Game, which gave the Indians home-field advantage for the Series. The Indians could also take solace in forcing Cubs closer Aroldis Chapman, who threw 42 pitches on Sunday, to throw another 20 on Tuesday.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Although Chapman said he would be ready to pitch on Wednesday, Maddon expressed some doubt. Jon Lester and John Lackey will buttress what has been a shaky bullpen beyond Chapman.“We’re going to have an expensive bullpen tomorrow,” Cubs catcher David Ross said. “There is going to be high-priced talent down there.”After the game, the visiting team’s clubhouse had an energetic vibe that the Cubs seemed to believe could carry them through one more night.“The history of the situation — look, it’s been 108 years since this organization’s won,” Zobrist said. “So if we’re going to come back and win, down 3-1, then what better way to do it? Historically.”The Indians’ clubhouse was more somber. But if they lack momentum, they are well set with their pitching. Behind Kluber will be a rested Andrew Miller, who has not pitched since Saturday, as well as closer Cody Allen and setup man Bryan Shaw, who will have had two days’ rest.“When you’re growing up, this is every kid’s dream,” Miller said. “How many times have we all pretended we’re in Game 7 of the World Series, and here we are.”A version of this article appears in print on November 2, 2016, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: After an Eternity, One Day More.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.