By JAMES WAGNERNOV. 3, 2016
CLEVELAND — Just before Game 7 of the World Series resumed in the top of the 10th inning following a 17-minute rain delay, Chicago Cubs reliever Mike Montgomery turned to his fellow reliever, Carl Edwards Jr., with a prediction.“Me and you are gong to be a big part of this,” Montgomery recalled. “We’re going to win this game.’’Jumping up and down in glee from the bullpen, Montgomery then watched the Cubs take an 8-6 lead over Cleveland in the top of the 10th. And he then watched Edwards enter in the bottom of the inning, hoping he would notch the final three outs of a championship, knowing he would enter himself should Edwards at all stumble.Edwards, who goes by the nickname The String Bean Slinger because of his skinny frame and powerful right arm, retired the first two batters. But with one out to go to end a 108-year championship drought, the moment got to the 25-year-old rookie.AdvertisementHe walked Brandon Guyer and then surrendered a run-scoring single to Rajai Davis, who had produced the dramatic game-tying, two-run homer in the eighth off the Cubs’ closer, Aroldis Chapman.AdvertisementSo Edwards, a pitcher who was going to be the most unlikely of heroes, now needed to be rescued.On came the 27-year-old Montgomery, a left-hander whom the Cubs acquired in a July trade with the Seattle Mariners. Cubs Manager Joe Maddon liked the matchup of Montgomery versus the Indians’ pinch-hitter Michael Martinez, a switch hitter. Cubs catcher Miguel Montero told Montgomery to follow his lead for the final out of the 8-7 win.“I think I was going to throw a curveball every pitch,” Montgomery said.Montgomery threw two looping curveballs, the first one taken for a strike and the second one beat into the ground by Martinez toward third baseman Kris Bryant, who threw to first for the out — a moment that will be replayed by Cubs fans in Chicago and across the country for decades.After the game, a relieved and happy Edwards answered questions from reporters in front of the shower because the clubhouse itself was a loud mess of champagne and beer. He acknowledged that the situation in the game, the emotion of it, had ambushed him with just one out to go.“It kind of got away from me,’’ he said.Meanwhile, Montgomery, with a beer in hand, hugged teammates in the training room. And inside the clubhouse, Chapman, who had been unable to protect a three-run load and could have ended up with that failure hanging over him for the rest of his career, tried to duck when a teammate sprayed him with champagne.Earlier, of course, Chapman had nothing to celebrate. The Cubs leaned heavily on him in the World Series, using him unlike they had in the past. With the team facing elimination in Game 5 on Sunday, Chapman notched a career-high two and two-thirds innings on 42 pitches to preserve a 3-2 win.Then, in a 9-3 win in Game 6 on Tuesday, Maddon called on Chapman for four more outs, which required 20 pitches. But called on for a four-out save in Game 7, Chapman dramatically faltered.He entered the game to relieve Jon Lester with two outs, one runner on base and a comfortable 6-3 lead.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I felt really confident because he felt great going into tonight,” Maddon said of Chapman.But Guyer smashed a double to make it 6-4. In a tough battle against Davis, Chapman then surrendered the game-tying blast on a 97-mile per hour fastball. Although Chapman’s triple-digit velocity was slightly down in Game 7, the pitch was low in the strike zone. Choking up on the bat, Davis dug it out and hit it down the left field line.Advertisement“I had thrown a lot,” Chapman said of the drop in velocity.But he said he had no issue with the intense workload in the final games of the Series.Step into the crowd outside Wrigley Field in the bottom of the 10th inning, moments before the Cubs’ World Series win.“I worked what was necessary and the job they gave me to do,” he said.Chapman finally notched the inning’s final out and returned for the bottom of the ninth. Although he did not allow a base runner this time, he looked tired and threw more sliders than usual.After the inning ended, Chapman walked off the mound having thrown 35 pitches to get four outs, bringing his total since Sunday to 97. His night was over, the score was tied, and in the dugout, Chapman was emotional, even tearful.“He was very distraught,” Maddon said. “But I give him credit for hanging in that next inning and doing what he did, and that permitted us to win.”During the rain delay after the ninth, teammates tried to boost Chapman’s morale. For a reliever with a reputation for a particular desire about when and how much to pitch, Chapman’s willingness to carry a heavier load in the World Series did not go unnoticed by teammates.Edwards said he told Chapman, “Hey man, we got your back.” Montgomery said he knew the Cubs were going to win the game when he saw the support lent to Chapman in the clubhouse during the rain delay.“We know he’s given his heart and soul to this team,” Montgomery said. “We wanted to pick him up.”And in the end, they did. “It was a dream come true,” Edwards said. “I didn’t expect to get in but when they called my number all I could say was, ‘This is it. This is my moment. I’m either going to be a hero or be a villain.’ ”And a hero, even if for just two-thirds of an inning, is what he ended up being, with some help.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.