
On Baseball By                     
 TYLER KEPNER
 
NOV. 3, 2016
CLEVELAND — As the clubhouse cleared out early Wednesday morning, after the Chicago Cubs had forced Game 7 of this rollicking World Series with the Cleveland Indians, Ben Zobrist was asked if he had dreamed of a chance like this.Zobrist is 35 and has played 11 seasons in the major leagues. He had won and lost a World Series before joining the Cubs as a free agent in the off-season. As his mind flashed back to his childhood, he could not pretend that he expected any of it.“No,” Zobrist said, laughing softly. “I wasn’t that guy. I mean, I never even thought about playing professionally. I didn’t think that was a possibility for a little kid from Illinois. I just wanted to play the game and win. I was competitive, but I never thought that I would be in a situation like this.”Yet how many other little kids from Illinois did? Thousands, millions? How many have wondered, over the last 108 years, what it might be like to stand in the batter’s box in Game 7 of the World Series, with the score tied in the 10th inning, and drive in the winning run for the Cubs?AdvertisementEarly Thursday morning at Progressive Field, Zobrist lived it. His one-out, opposite-field double off Bryan Shaw stayed fair down the third base line, driving home Albert Almora Jr. and putting the Cubs ahead for good in an 8-7 victory that clinched the World Series.Advertisement“It was like a heavyweight fight, man, just blow for blow, everybody playing their hearts out,” said Zobrist, who hit .357 and was named the most valuable player. “The Indians never gave up, either, and I can’t believe we’re finally standing, after 108 years, finally able to hoist the trophy.”The franchise waited all that time, but Zobrist has now won a championship two years in a row. He was the second baseman for Kansas City last fall, slapping doubles all over Kauffman Stadium and Citi Field to help the Royals beat the Mets in the World Series.In the afterglow of that title, Zobrist and his wife, Julianna, named their newborn daughter Blaise Royal. The Mets tried to sign him as a free agent, and the Washington Nationals and San Francisco Giants also showed interest. All of those teams would reach the playoffs, and the offers were comparable. But the Zobrists chose the Cubs, with a four-year, $56 million deal.“His family is from a couple of hours south; mine’s from a couple of hours to the west, and this elusive championship — 108 years!” Julianna Zobrist said after Game 7, explaining their decision in the hallway outside the Cubs’ clubhouse.“My husband is so incredibly goal-driven, and so to walk into a team that’s been defined as the lovable losers, and to have that challenge of redefining that, pushing the reset button in Chicago, and now we’re a winning city — I mean, it changes everything.”For the Cubs, Zobrist was the ideal fit. He arrived in the majors under Manager Joe Maddon in Tampa Bay and helped the Rays reach the 2008 World Series. He made the All-Star team the next season, when he started at every defensive position except pitcher and catcher.In his first World Series, against Philadelphia, Zobrist came to bat as a pinch-hitter with one out and one on in the bottom of the ninth inning of the final game. With the tying run in scoring position, Zobrist lined out to right. One out later, the Rays were eliminated.AdvertisementThis time, Zobrist delivered. After a passionate speech by Jason Heyward in a players-only meeting during a 17-minute rain delay, Kyle Schwarber led off the 10th with a single, shaking his fist toward the Cubs’ dugout. Almora pinch ran and took second on a deep fly to center by Kris Bryant. After an intentional walk to Anthony Rizzo, Zobrist stepped in.“The guy’s an unbelievable hitter, and an unbelievable player in general,” Almora said. “When I was on second and he was hitting, I didn’t even think about him hitting a fly ball. I knew once he hit it, I was gonna score no matter what.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.While Almora and the Cubs felt confident, another emotion seized Julianna Zobrist: panic. Blaise had started crying during the rain delay, so Julianna took her downstairs to a room for players’ families to feed her. Julianna expected the delay to last a half-hour.“All of a sudden I see that Schwarber’s up to bat,” she said. “And I’m like, ‘Oh my word, I’m about to miss my husband!’ And so I give my baby to my friend and then run upstairs, through the tunnel, through the concourse, barefoot, with my six-inch heels in my hand, and my socks, and I ran up to the top of the steps.”By the time she got to section 150, in the lower bowl just to the right of the plate, her husband was coming to bat. Julianna stood in the aisle and watched the scene unfold.Ben Zobrist said he expected a cutter from Shaw and was hoping for one over the plate. Shaw threw him five cutters in a row and Zobrist took the first three, falling behind, 1-2. He fouled off another, then got the pitch in the spot he wanted.“I was just battling, grinding up there,” Zobrist said. “Fortunately that last one he left over the plate and up to where I could just slap it down the line, and that’s all I was trying to do.”Almora charged around third, putting the Cubs ahead by 7-6. Later, Maddon would praise Zobrist for the way he works an at-bat. He also cited the example Zobrist sets, at 35, with the work he does after games to be ready for the next day.“He’s just a different cat,” Maddon said. “Everybody would like to have one of those on their team. We’re very fortunate to have him. He probably exemplifies exactly how we want to play the game.”Nobody has played a game quite like this one. Even after Zobrist’s hit, there were two more runs — the first on a single by Miguel Montero, and the last in the bottom of the 10th, on a single by Rajai Davis, whose homer off Aroldis Chapman had tied the game in the eighth.AdvertisementBut the Cubs — yes, really, the Cubs – came through in the end, when Mike Montgomery got Michael Martinez on a tapper to third. Zobrist romped in from left field to join the fray near the mound, a little kid from Eureka, Ill., who made dreams come true.A version of this article appears in print on November 3, 2016, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: A Mighty Roar.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »