By TYLER KEPNERAPRIL 13, 2017
CHICAGO — The cruelty of the schedule was clear to the Los Angeles Dodgers. Their new second baseman, Logan Forsythe, noticed at spring training that his teammates were buzzing about it. Of all teams, they would be the guests when the Chicago Cubs raised their World Series championship flag at Wrigley Field. The Dodgers’ season had ended here last fall when the Cubs stormed past them on their way to glory.“It’s good for a team to talk about it,” Forsythe said. “It leaves a bad taste in your mouth, and it’s good to see that. You see guys feel bad, and it’s like: You don’t like it, but that’s pretty sweet. That’s where we want to be.”Not all of the Dodgers cared. Infielder Enrique Hernandez saw the schedule and said he had thought only of the weather. Clayton Kershaw, the sublime left-hander, said that as long as his team didn’t win the title, he didn’t really care who did. Those two did not watch the Cubs’ ceremony on a frigid and rainy Monday night, but some did, like outfielder Andrew Toles, who dropped a fly ball here in the final game of the National League Championship Series.“It’s a salty feeling,” Toles said. “Just the fact that they beat us, and it could have been us. I just want to win, just to see what it’s like. That feeling they got, I want to have that same feeling.”AdvertisementThe Cubs drew out their coronation this week, waiting until Wednesday to present their World Series rings in another round of on-field catharsis. A few minutes later, Toles jolted them back to reality, smashing a leadoff homer to send the Dodgers on their way to a 2-0 victory.AdvertisementAfter falling, 4-0, on Thursday and losing the three-game series, the Dodgers returned home with a 5-5 record but a sense that things could be different this fall.“They’re still the reigning champions,” Manager Dave Roberts said, “but I think that we’ve closed the gap.”The Dodgers won their fourth N.L. West title in a row last season but have not reached the World Series since 1988. Their major winter moves were re-signing closer Kenley Jansen, third baseman Justin Turner and starter Rich Hill for a combined $192 million.Forsythe arrived in a trade with Tampa Bay for a pitching prospect, and outfielder Franklin Gutierrez and reliever Sergio Romo signed as free agents. Otherwise, these are mostly the same Dodgers, back for another try.“I think on paper you could say that we are better, for sure,” Kershaw said. “We’ve just got to go prove it now. We’ve got a lot of guys back. Really we’re the same team with guys healthy, and the addition of Forsythe and Gutierrez and Romo.”Hill is not healthy at the moment; he is on the disabled list with a blister problem that cost him almost two months last season. But Kershaw, the game’s best pitcher, is healthy, and so are starters Brandon McCarthy and Hyun-Jin Ryu. McCarthy, who is 2-0, made just nine starts last season, and Ryu made one.Kershaw made 21, and most were dazzling; he had a career-low 1.69 E.R.A., with more than 15 strikeouts for every walk. But a herniated disk in Kershaw’s back cost him nearly 11 weeks, the longest absence of his career.Advertisement“Every time I do get to pitch now, in the back of my head I’m a little bit more grateful, knowing it’s not just a given that I’m going to be out there every fifth day,” Kershaw said. “I’m thankful for that, but my mind-set hasn’t changed. One of these days I’ll maybe not fail and win a World Series.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Kershaw smiled as he said it. He had some highlights last October — a save to clinch the division series in Washington, then seven shutout innings here in Game 2 of the N.L.C.S. But the Cubs battered him in their Game 6 clincher, and a championship eluded him again.That pursuit defines the Dodgers, who are in the midst of the longest stretch in franchise history without a World Series appearance. They know their season can be considered a success only if they break through when it matters most — a fact that obscures how well they have played to annually have the chance.“You could definitely have a tendency to be impatient with it and just try to hurry up and get to October,” Kershaw said. “But baseball’s a sport where it’s a big accomplishment to make it to the postseason. It’s a long season, and you can’t take for granted that you’re going to be there. The good thing is we have a lot of experience in here, and a lot of guys that embrace the grind.”Three of the Dodgers’ best hitters — Adrian Gonzalez, Joc Pederson and Corey Seager — are left-handed, making the lineup vulnerable to left-handed pitchers. But Roberts has a deep and versatile roster, and two of the minors’ best prospects are waiting at Class AAA Oklahoma City.One, the 20-year-old left-hander Julio Urias, made 16 starts in the majors last season, including one in the N.L.C.S. The other, the 21-year-old outfielder and first baseman Cody Bellinger, was ranked as baseball’s No. 7 overall prospect by Baseball America. He was 10 for 24 with a homer in his first six minor league games this season.“He’s an incredibly talented player who has been young for his level throughout, which he’s handled as well as you could possibly ask,” said Andrew Friedman, the Dodgers’ president of baseball operations. “His aptitude is great, his work ethic is great, so I’m confident we’ll get him to the point where he can help us. Exactly when that is, I don’t know.”The Dodgers have steadily welcomed high-impact young players to the roster lately, with Pederson, Seager and Urias. They have found undervalued regulars like Turner and catcher Yasmani Grandal, re-signed homegrown stars like Kershaw and Jansen and changed managers seamlessly, with Roberts earning widespread acclaim last season in his first year replacing Don Mattingly.Only one thing is missing, and the Dodgers know what it is. Their trip this week was just another powerful reminder.A version of this article appears in print on April 14, 2017, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: Dodgers Get a Reminder of What They’re Missing.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.