By KEVIN DRAPERDEC. 20, 2017
David Eaton, a top executive with the NFL Network, resigned a little more than a week after the league-owned sports channel came under fire for tolerating a hostile work environment for female employees.Last week, Eaton got swept up in the controversy after news media reports surfaced about his history of engaging in sexually explicit conversations on Twitter.“Last night David Eaton tendered his resignation from NFL Media effective immediately,” the network said in a statement Wednesday.Eaton’s Twitter history and resignation were first reported by Deadspin. He was the vice president and executive editor of NFL Media, in charge of news operations at both the television channel and NFL.com.AdvertisementAccording to screen shots of his account reviewed by The New York Times, over a period of several years Eaton engaged in sexually explicit conversations with accounts that belonged to adult-film actresses, as well as accounts in which users identified themselves as prostitutes and paid escorts. Among the more than 1,000 Twitter accounts Eaton followed were dozens of similar accounts, as well as those of N.F.L. teams, reporters he supervised and airlines.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Eaton, 53, was hired by the NFL Network in 2011 from ABC News, where he had been a bureau chief.Last week, the NFL Network suspended the analysts Marshall Faulk, Ike Taylor and Heath Evans, pending an investigation into claims of sexual harassment and assault made by a former wardrobe stylist for the network, Jami Cantor. The day after the suspensions, Eaton’s Twitter account was deleted.The N.F.L. is also dealing with the fallout from allegations that Carolina Panthers owner Jerry Richardson had sexually harassed employees and made racially charged statements. On Sunday Richardson announced he would sell the team after the season, and the league said an investigation into his conduct would continue.AdvertisementEaton did not return phone calls seeking comment.Follow Kevin Draper on Twitter: @kevinmdraper.A version of this article appears in print on December 21, 2017, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Pro Football; Executive of NFL Network Resigns.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.