By JAMES WAGNERAPRIL 14, 2017
MIAMI — Travis d’Arnaud jogged leisurely around the bases. After more than five hours of catching wore on his body, he whacked a go-ahead home run in the 16th inning of a zany, bleary-eyed 9-8 win over the Miami Marlins. He dropped his head as he moved.His legs had been so sore from crouching behind the plate that, from the 10th inning on, he said, he sometimes needed help walking down the dugout steps. While his Mets teammates danced around the dugout and cheered after what would turn out to be the winning blast, no one begrudged d’Arnaud’s slow trot.“The emotions of the home run helped lift my legs a little bit,” d’Arnaud said after the game. His face looked drained, as though he had sweat out a few pounds during the marathon contest that ended at 12:50 on Friday morning.The Mets’ victory counts the same as any other, but it took so much more than normal to accomplish. The five-hour, 38-minute game featured 509 combined pitches thrown, 43 combined players, including 17 pitchers, 119 at-bats and 29 hits.AdvertisementFor the Mets, it meant all seven of their relievers appeared in the game after starter Robert Gsellman, who was charged with all eight runs, exited with two outs in the fifth inning. The bullpen combined for 11⅓ scoreless innings, none bigger than the final two by Hansel Robles.AdvertisementFernando Salas (two innings), Addison Reed (two innings), Josh Smoker (a career-high three innings) and Robles (two innings) did the night’s heavy lifting. But Robles risked, perhaps, the most.“You just have to dig into places you didn’t know you could dig into,” Smoker said. “That was the first time I’ve gone three innings in a long time, but I actually felt pretty good.”Robles had taken the mound the previous three games and thrown 36 combined pitches. As the bullpen slowly thinned every few innings, Robles knew he was the last option left before Mets Manager Terry Collins would have to resort to wacky options.“We needed a pitcher,” Robles said. “I felt good. I needed a day, but I felt good. I decided to pitch.”Robles sent a message to the Mets’ dugout from the bullpen that he was volunteering to pitch a fourth day in a row. Collins did not want to use Robles until the phone call.If Robles hadn’t volunteered, Collins said backup catcher Rene Rivera, who was at first base, was next to take the mound. Zack Wheeler, a Mets starting pitcher, would have then taken Rivera’s spot at first base.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I salute him,” Collins said of Robles.This is what was forgotten by the end of the game: d’Arnaud’s bases-loaded triple in the second inning that highlighted a career-high four-hit game; the Mets’ fifth-inning stumbles on the mound; Yoenis Cespedes’s two-homer game; another shot by Wilmer Flores off a left-handed pitcher; Jay Bruce saving a run in the fifth with a strong throw home from right field; Cespedes ruled out at home on a replay challenge by the Marlins in the seventh; and Michael Conforto’s pinch-hit, game-tying R.B.I. double in the eighth that made this late-night affair possible.This is how weird things got in the wee hours: Jacob deGrom, the Mets’ scheduled starter on Saturday, pinch-hit in the 15th inning, and the Marlins’ originally scheduled starter for Friday, Adam Conley, pitched the 16th and gave up the home run to d’Arnaud.AdvertisementIn the 15th inning, Robles worked around a single by Miguel Rojas. With the lead, he walked Christian Yelich to start the 16th inning. But he then got a lineout, a strikeout and a visit to the mound by pitching coach Dan Warthen. Marcell Ozuna, who hit a grand slam in the game’s first inning, was up.The Mets considered walking Ozuna to face the next batter, Conley. Warthen told Robles to pump breaking balls to Ozuna.Ozuna skied the first pitch he saw — Robles’s 34th pitch of the night — to the warning track in center field. Juan Lagares caught the ball for the game’s final out, and Robles smacked the ground with both hands.“I knew it wasn’t going out because he didn’t hit it well,” Robles said. “There was a little scare but, thank God, nothing.”Robles said he was never worried about his arm dealing with four straight days of work. He trains hard and runs daily so that his body can handle this. He said he could pitch six days in a row, if his arm felt strong.“I always feel good,” he said.After the final out, the Mets converged around the infield to high five like usual after a win. But those who played the entire game jogged gingerly. D’Arnaud walked ever so slowly to the mound.“We’re 7-3, and a five-game winning streak,” he said afterward. “It’s huge for us to start like this. It’s been fun.”D’Arnaud said that, once he was done speaking with reporters, he planned to eat again to put more fuel into his body and, most of all, to sleep. So he could rest his weary legs.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.