By VICTOR MATHERAPRIL 14, 2017
Aaron Hernandez, the former New England Patriots tight end, was found not guilty of a drive-by shooting in Boston in 2012.He was also acquitted on Friday of witness intimidation at Suffolk Superior Court in Boston. The jury had been deliberating since April 7.Hernandez was convicted of the unlawful carrying of a .38-caliber revolver. He was sentenced to four to five years in prison for that offense.Mr. Hernandez, 27, is already serving a life sentence without the possibility of parole from a 2015 first-degree murder conviction in the killing of Odin Lloyd, who was dating the sister of Mr. Hernandez’s fiancée, Shayanna Jenkins. He has appealed that verdict. Mr. Hernandez’s motive in that case, prosecutors said, was that Mr. Lloyd spoke with people Mr. Hernandez did not like at a bar in Boston.AdvertisementIn the case that just concluded, Mr. Hernandez was accused of killing Daniel de Abreu and Safiro Furtado. Prosecutors said the killings were prompted by one of the men bumping into Mr. Hernandez at a nightclub.AdvertisementDefense lawyers said a former friend of Mr. Hernandez’s, Alexander Bradley, had committed the crime. Mr. Bradley testified for the prosecution in the case.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Bradley testified that two hours after the incident, in which a drink was spilled, Mr. Hernandez fired at the men in their car.The witness intimidation charge stemmed from the shooting of Mr. Bradley seven months later; prosecutors said Mr. Hernandez was trying to prevent him from testifying.Chicago Bears wide receiver Deonte Thompson, a former teammate of Mr. Hernandez’s at the University of Florida, also testified at the trial about the friendship of Mr. Hernandez and Mr. Bradley.Mr. Hernandez’s lawyer, Jose Baez, is known for having secured an acquittal in 2011 for Casey Anthony, who was accused of killing her 2-year-old daughter, Caylee.Mr. Hernandez grew up in a tough neighborhood in Bristol, Conn., and was a fourth-round draft pick after college. He played three years in the N.F.L., catching 175 passes for 18 touchdowns. He signed a $40 million contract extension in 2012 to continue playing for the Patriots.A version of this article appears in print on April 15, 2017, on Page D4 of the New York edition with the headline: Hernandez Is Acquitted of Double Murder.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.