By TYLER KEPNERAPRIL 13, 2017
CHICAGO — The Chicago Cubs were baseball’s biggest story last season, winning their first World Series title in more than a century, and now they have the banner and the rings to prove it. What the 2016 champions do not have — at least not yet — is a presence at the sport’s Hall of Fame in Cooperstown, N.Y.Officials from the Hall of Fame, who usually collect equipment used in a World Series immediately after the final game, are still seeking items to display from the Cubs. In a statement on Wednesday, the Hall of Fame said it hoped to unveil an exhibit before Memorial Day that would focus on the Cubs’ World Series history — but without much help from the 2016 team.“A request made to the Cubs for a loan of several player artifacts at the conclusion of the World Series has as of yet gone unfulfilled,” the Hall said in a statement. “Should the request be granted, World Series artifacts representing players will be included in the exhibit for Cubs fans everywhere to enjoy and appreciate.”Jon Shestakofsky, the vice president for communications and education at the Hall of Fame, said that Major League Baseball had donated two artifacts from Game 7: the first-pitch ball and the second-base bag used in the ninth and 10th innings.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“We’re hopeful there are player artifacts that will end up here in Cooperstown,” Shestakofsky said. “If that happens, they would only enhance the really cool exhibit we’re going to be opening up shortly. I know there are conversations and we’re still hopeful they’ll be supportive.”AdvertisementJust days after the 2015 World Series, the champion Kansas City Royals announced the donations of several items to Cooperstown, including Eric Hosmer’s jersey, Lorenzo Cain’s spikes, Salvador Perez’s glove and Wade Davis’s cap. A showcase was in place well before opening day. From the Cubs, though, there is nothing comparable.Advertisement“Every club’s different, and we understand that,” Shestakofsky said. “There are 30 different clubs, and there are going to be some different ways of going about things.”A Cubs spokesman said that the team’s archivist was still in the process of donating items to the Hall and was expected to send items from the World Series.Ben Zobrist, the most valuable player in the 2016 Series, said Monday that he had offered to loan his bat when the Hall of Fame asked for it but that the Hall of Fame had declined that offer. Kris Bryant, the National League’s most valuable player, hit home runs in Games 5 and 6 of the Series and had an assist on the last out of Game 7. He said he did not remember specifically what the Hall had asked for but believed he would be sending something.First baseman Anthony Rizzo, who caught Bryant’s throw from third to end Game 7, initially said that he planned to keep the ball for himself, but he instead presented it to the Cubs owner Tom Ricketts at the team’s World Series parade. Paul Konerko of the White Sox did the same thing with the final ball from the his team’s championship, giving it to the White Sox owner Jerry Reinsdorf at that team’s parade in 2005.A version of this article appears in print on April 14, 2017, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: Cubs Fans Waited 108 Years, but Cooperstown Is Still Waiting for Anything.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.