By DOUG BONJOURAPRIL 13, 2017
It was well past bedtime at Avon Old Farms, a prestigious all-boys boarding school with Cotswolds-style buildings seemingly straight out of a Harry Potter book, but the night was still young for Cam Atkinson. A promising hockey prospect from 90 minutes down the road in the Riverside section of Greenwich, Conn., Atkinson knew the trick to unlocking one of the back doors to the on-campus rink, where anywhere from five to 15 students often congregated after curfew for a pickup game on the dimly lit ice.“We used to sneak in and skate around all the time,” his older brother, Tommy, said. “It was a no-no, but it’s one of those things that they turned a blind eye to.”The players usually had to wait until close to midnight, after the teachers went to bed. By then, inside the rink, Tommy said, “you could see, but it was pretty dark.”On the nights they were lucky, they would play for close to an hour. On the nights they weren’t, their coach would hear about it.Advertisement“I’d get a call from the locksman saying, ‘All these kids are over here skating,’” said the coach, John Gardner, who just wrapped up his 42nd year behind the Winged Beavers’ bench. “It’s like a couple bear sightings we’ll have over here. ‘Oh, there’s a bear. Oh, we’ve got another now.’ ”AdvertisementA single phone call was sufficient to slow down the teenage Atkinson, but slowing the older, wiser version requires significantly more work.The Columbus Blue Jackets’ surprising rise from relative obscurity to one of the N.H.L.’s top teams has been marked by a standout season from Atkinson, now 27, who finished the regular season tied for eighth in the N.H.L. with 35 goals. Atkinson netted a franchise-record nine game-winning goals — one shy of Anaheim’s Rickard Rakell for the league lead — and tied Rick Nash for the most multigoal games in one season in club history, with seven.Owners of a franchise-record 50 victories and 108 points, the Blue Jackets opened their first-round playoff series against the Penguins on Wednesday with a 3-1 loss in Pittsburgh. Columbus, which entered the N.H.L. as an expansion team in 2000, failed to advance past the opening round in its two previous trips to the playoffs in 2009 and 2014.Atkinson’s breakout campaign, highlighted by his first All-Star Game appearance, is another rebuke for the critics who said the 5-foot-8 speedster was too small to strike it big. He led N.C.A.A. Division I with 30 goals as a sophomore while playing alongside Tommy during Boston College’s run to the national championship in 2010, and was a Hobey Baker finalist as a junior. But he endured what seemed like an endless wait during the 2008 draft, going in the sixth round with pick No. 157 to Columbus.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I’ve always been the smallest guy at every level, and everyone’s always said I’d never make it to the next level,” Atkinson said Saturday after a 4-2 loss to the Philadelphia Flyers. “Some people take that and get scared, but I take it as motivation to prove people wrong.“It’s the same old things: ‘I’m too small, I’m not strong enough, blah, blah, blah,’ ” he continued. “All the usual stuff.”Atkinson overcame more than just a bias to get to where he is now. He broke his tibia and fibula during a tournament in Marlborough, Mass., when he was 15. The first doctor who saw him told him that his hockey career was probably over. Refusing to accept that grim prognosis, his father, Tom, who was also Atkinson’s coach at the time, demanded that his son’s leg be put in a splint.AdvertisementAtkinson was taken to a doctor in Connecticut the next morning for a second opinion, and eventually had a rod and two pins surgically inserted into his leg. Not long after, Atkinson was back on the ice.“That was a big turning point,” said Tommy, his brother.If there was a low point this year, it might have come during that trip to Philadelphia last weekend, which ended with Atkinson riding the bench. He played only three shifts during the third period — and logged just 13 minutes 33 seconds of ice time in all — after a giveaway that created a two-on-one scoring chance for the Flyers. After the Blue Jackets’ sixth straight loss, Coach John Tortorella was his usual, brutally honest self in assessing Atkinson’s performance.“The way Cam was playing at the time, it wasn’t helping him” to play, Tortorella said. “I’m trying to save him.”The message was heard loud and clear. The next day, back alongside linemates Brandon Dubinsky and Boone Jenner, Atkinson sent the Blue Jackets into the playoffs on a high note with a slump-busting, short-handed goal — just his second tally in the last 12 games — in a 3-2 victory over the Maple Leafs.“It feels good playing the right way going into the playoffs — just to get my mojo back and confidence with and without the puck,” Atkinson said. “It feels good.”A few of Atkinson’s biggest fans will be watching the playoffs closely. His mother, Ellen, said the family holds “hysterical” group texting sessions during each game. No. 13 will obviously have to wait awhile to read them.“Before the games, we’ll lay off,” his brother said. “If he doesn’t score, we’ll tell him he’s holding the stick too tight.“You’ve got to loosen up a bit. You can’t be too serious. It will hold you back.”A version of this article appears in print on April 14, 2017, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: Too Small? Atkinson Answers With Goals.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.