By WALLACE MATTHEWSAPRIL 13, 2017
In the hierarchy of things unlikely to happen in a Yankees game, it is hard to determine which would rank higher: Luis Severino winning as a starting pitcher, or Aaron Hicks hitting two home runs. Neither had happened in quite a while.Severino, a prized prospect when he was called up at the trade deadline in 2015, was unable to win a single game as a starter last year, in 11 attempts. And Hicks, signed as a backup outfielder before the 2016 season, had not hit two home runs in a game for nearly four years, and last season rarely hit two in a week.Each delivered a surprise on Thursday night. Severino pitched seven brilliant innings of two-run, 11-strikeout ball for his first victory as a starter since Sept. 27, 2015. And Hicks made that win possible by hitting two homers — one from each side of the plate — for the first time since May 13, 2013, when he was with the Minnesota Twins.The unlikely accomplishments resulted in a 3-2 victory over the Tampa Bay Rays, completing a three-game series sweep, extending the Yankees’ winning streak to four games and nudging their 2017 record (5-4) above the .500 mark for the first time.AdvertisementFor Severino, it was a return to the kind of form he showed as a rookie, when he went 5-3 with a 2.89 E.R.A. in 11 second-half starts, convincing many in the organization that he would be not only a successful major league starter, but possibly an ace.AdvertisementAnd for Hicks, it was a rare opportunity to show the Yankees that he belongs in their lineup more than just occasionally. Having lost the competition for the starting right-field job to Aaron Judge despite a solid spring training, Hicks was playing only because Brett Gardner had the night off after having been involved in a painful baseline collision on Wednesday. But Hicks made a strong case for more playing time.“There’s a ton of upside and potential with Sevvy,” Manager Joe Girardi said. “And tonight he showed us what he’s capable of doing.”After his impressive 2015 debut, Severino had a disappointing 2016, going 0-8 with an 8.50 E.R.A. in 11 starts, in which opposing hitters raked him for a .337 batting average. He showed some improvement in his first start of the season last Friday in Baltimore, but had to settle for a no-decision after allowing a three-run homer to Manny Machado in a 6-5 loss.Severino’s continued struggles as a starter rekindled speculation that the Yankees might be forced to move him into the bullpen, where he was much more effective last season.“I thought about that, you know,” he said. “But I decided I just want to contribute to the Yankees to win games. If they need me as a reliever, I just wanted to do my job and try to get outs.”But all along, Girardi and General Manager Brian Cashman have insisted they have no doubt that Severino’s future is in their starting rotation. “That gives me a lot of confidence,” Severino said. “I know they trust me to be a starter.”The Severino who confounded the Rays certainly justified the Yankees’ belief that he would develop into a top-line starter. The 11 strikeouts were a career high, and he struck out five of the last seven batters he faced.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“That shows that as long as he stays within himself and doesn’t overthrow,” Girardi said, “his stuff doesn’t fall off.”AdvertisementHowever, because the Yankees’ offense sputtered for the first six innings, stranding the bases loaded in the third, stranding runners at second and third in the fourth and wasting a leadoff double in the sixth, it appeared he would get no better than a no-decision this time, too. After Hicks gave the Yankees a 1-0 first-inning lead with a home run to right, Severino allowed a second-inning run on an R.B.I. single, and a solo homer to Peter Bourjos in the fifth to give the Rays a 2-1 lead. At 104 pitches, it was obvious Severino would not be back in the game after retiring the Rays in order in the seventh.Enter Hicks, who did not hit his first homer of 2016 until May 6 and struggled to get his batting average above .200 until mid-August. Batting right-handed against the left-handed reliever Xavier Cedeno, Hicks jumped all over a 1-1 changeup and launched it into the left-field seats with Jacoby Ellsbury on base to give the Yankees a 3-2 lead.It was a satisfying blow for Hicks, who, despite hitting a respectable .268 with three home runs in spring training, lost the starting job to the power-hitting rookie Aaron Judge, who matched him for homers while hitting .333.“I saw the disappointment in his face,” Girardi said of telling Hicks he would once again be a backup. “It wasn’t easy for him. But I give him a lot of credit because he turned the page really quickly, and that’s not always easy to do.”Hicks admitted it was frustrating initially. “Of course, when you get disappointed like that, it took me a couple of days to get over it,” he said. “But we’re a team, we’re teammates now.”Hicks found out he was starting this afternoon when Girardi decided Gardner could benefit from a day off after colliding with Rickie Weeks on the first-base line in Wednesday’s game.“I knew what my role is here,” said Hicks, who raised his average to .313 on Thursday. “Just come in and be ready to play when they call me.”With Gardner not seriously injured and likely to play Friday, Hicks knows he will probably find himself back on the bench.“I mean, I’m just going to be ready to play,” he said. “Whatever happens tomorrow is tomorrow.”A version of this article appears in print on April 14, 2017, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: Dominant Severino and a Suddenly Powerful Hicks Pace the Yankees.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.