By SETH BERKMANJULY 2, 2017
The Yankees, who lead the American League wild-card race, had three homegrown prospects named to the All-Star Game for the first time on Sunday, and their five total selections tied for most in the majors.As the Yankees have sprinted into contention during the first half of the season, Aaron Judge, Gary Sanchez and Luis Severino have performed like franchise cornerstones, the kind of players that are expected to be in the Bronx for many years to come. But next week, they will temporarily trade in their pinstripes for fluorescent South-Beach-inspired uniforms at Marlins Park in Miami on July 11.Judge, the Yankees’ 6-foot-7, 282-pound slugger, who leads the major leagues with 27 homers, could leave a lasting impression, particularly if he participates in the Home Run Derby the day before the game.In his first full season in the majors, Judge, 25, also leads the American League with 62 R.B.I. and has the A.L.’s second-best batting average at .327. He is one of six starters on the American League squad who are first-time All-Stars.AdvertisementSanchez, who ended last season with 20 home runs in August and September, has continued to emerge as one of the A.L.’s top catchers. Sanchez, 24, has 13 home runs and 40 R.B.I. in 51 games.AdvertisementSeverino had a disappointing showing in 2016, when he went 0-8 as a starter and was demoted to the minors. But this season he has shown marked improvement, going 5-4 with a 3.52 E.R.A. and 114 strikeouts.Second baseman Starlin Castro earned a spot in the All-Star game for the fourth time and his first with the Yankees, and reliever Dellin Betances was picked for a fourth straight season. Shortstop Didi Gregorius is a candidate for a final roster spot picked through online voting at MLB.com, which ends on Thursday.The Mets had only one player named to the National League All-Star team on Sunday — Michael Conforto, who was selected for the first time.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But whether Conforto will be able to take the field in Miami is another matter. He is on the 10-day disabled list with a bruised left hand and is eligible to return Saturday, three days before the game.After Sunday’s game against the Philadelphia Phillies at Citi Field, Conforto said he had been eating breakfast when Manager Terry Collins pulled him aside with the news.“I figured it was something about my rehab or whatever,” Conforto said. “I was like, ‘O.K.,’ and he was like, ‘You made the All-Star team, by the way.’ He congratulated me and said I earned it.”Also voted in for the first time in the American League along with Judge were outfielder George Springer and shortstop Carlos Correa of the Houston Astros; first baseman Justin Smoak of the Toronto Blue Jays; third baseman Jose Ramirez of the Cleveland Indians; and designated hitter Corey Dickerson of the Tampa Bay Rays.Outfielder Mike Trout of the Los Angeles Angels, catcher Salvador Perez of the Kansas City Royals and Astros second baseman Jose Altuve are the other A.L. starters.In the National League, Zack Cozart of the Cincinnati Reds will make his debut starting at shortstop. Also starting for the N.L. in the infield are third baseman Nolan Arenado of the Colorado Rockies, and two Washington Nationals:first baseman Ryan Zimmerman and second baseman Daniel Murphy. Their Washington teammate Bryce Harper led all players in votes. Harper will be joined in the outfield by Colorado’s Charlie Blackmon and Marcell Ozuna of the Miami Marlins. Buster Posey of the San Francisco Giants is the starting catcher.AdvertisementThe Astros, the Indians and the Nationals tied the Yankees with five selections.Wallace Matthews contributed to this report.A version of this article appears in print on July 3, 2017, on Page D2 of the New York edition with the headline: Judge Leads Yankees Youngsters to the All-Star Game.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.