By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSJULY 1, 2017
OLYMPIA FIELDS, Ill. — Danielle Kang is getting a lot of high-profile support as she seeks her first major championship: a text message from Wayne Gretzky on Saturday morning, a call from Caitlyn Jenner on Friday, and texts from Hollis Stacy, a four-time major winner.Kang, a 24-year-old American, and Chella Choi, a 26-year-old from South Korea, shared the lead on Saturday after the third round of the Women’s P.G.A. Championship. Kang won the United States Women’s Amateur in 2010 and 2011, but she has never won on the L.P.G.A. Tour.While several of the L.P.G.A.’s biggest stars challenged for the lead, it was Kang and Choi on top after a challenging day at an increasingly difficult Olympia Fields. Choi hit 11 of 14 fairways on her way to a bogey-free 67. Kang birdied the par-5 18th for a 68, joining Choi at 10 under heading into Sunday’s final round. Their closest challenger, Jiyai Shin, sat two strokes behind after a 64, the best round of the day.“I’ve been working on my game every day to get better,” Kang said. “Like I said previously, all I could do is work on my game and hope that every day, just chip away at your game and it gets better every day and that’s where it’s getting at.”AdvertisementKang went into the third round tied for the lead with Sei Young Kim, who finished Saturday four strokes back.Advertisement“It would be incredible to be called a major champion,” Kang said, “especially out on this tour.”Kang said she got to know Gretzky and Jenner at the Sherwood Country Club in Thousand Oaks, Calif.Choi’s father, Ji Yeon Choi, was her caddie again. He had given up the job after her only L.P.G.A. Tour victory, in the 2015 Marathon Classic. But her play suffered, so he took her bag back.Choi said her mother had told him: “Go help Chella. Why are you staying here?”Having her father with her, she said, restored her confidence.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I feel very good right now,” Choi said. “My shot and my putting, very good for the last couple weeks.”Behind Shin, who had third place to herself, was the defending champion Brooke Henderson, another stroke back after a 69, and Amy Yang and Sei Young Kim were tied for fifth at six under.Lexi Thompson (69), the world No. 1 So Yeon Ryu (71) and Michelle Wie (70) were in a group at five under. Thompson contended for the first major title of the year but was penalized for a rules violation at the ANA Inspiration and lost to Ryu in a playoff.“I was swinging it well all day,” Thompson said. “It was just all a matter of the putts going in. I felt like I stroked it a lot better today. But I hit it very solid, so a lot of positives to take from today into tomorrow.”Shin, a former world No. 1 and two-time major champion, took off after a birdie on No. 9. She played the back nine in five-under 30.This is a rare American tournament for Shin, a straight-hitting South Korean player who left the L.P.G.A. Tour two years ago, moving to Japan to be closer to her family.Advertisement“I think I’m pretty lucky, because I started a little bit early in the morning,” she said. “I started early in the morning. That’s why easy to make a few birdies.”A version of this article appears in print on July 2, 2017, on Page SP4 of the New York edition with the headline: Two Lesser Lights Lead Women’s P.G.A.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.