By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSJUNE 30, 2017
IBIUNA, Brazil — A prospect with a 94-mile-an-hour fastball gets a lot of attention, no matter where he is pitching — even when that prospect is a diminutive 16-year-old from a country with little baseball tradition.Eric Pardinho’s blazing fastball has brought scouts to this city 50 miles west of São Paulo in soccer-mad Brazil. Pardinho, a 5-foot-8 right-hander, could get a lot more attention starting Sunday, when Major League Baseball teams can begin signing international players. Pardinho is No. 5 on MLB.com’s list of 30 world prospects to watch.Pretty impressive for someone who was introduced to baseball almost by accident.“I am only here because at 6 years of age I was playing paddleball on the beach and my uncle thought my control could be good for baseball back in Bastos,” he said.Bastos is a small town outside of São Paulo with a sizable Japanese population. The Japanese began bringing their love of baseball and sushi to Brazil in the early 1900s.AdvertisementPardinho, whose mother’s parents are Japanese, started gaining attention last year when he struck out 12 in a win over the powerhouse Dominican Republic at the Under-16 Pan Am Games. In September, he got two outs against Pakistan — both strikeouts — in a qualifier for the World Baseball Classic, a 10-0 win in New York City.AdvertisementThe young Brazilian’s changeup and slider have also earned praise from local coaches, who already see him as a potential national star when baseball returns to the Olympics in 2020 at Tokyo. At the moment, Brazil has only one player in the majors, Cleveland Indians catcher Yan Gomes.Since January, more and more visitors have come to watch Pardinho work out at a new training center sponsored by Major League Baseball in Ibiuna, another city influenced by Japanese immigrants.Pardinho is eager to sign with a team and move to the United States. “There is a lot that I will only learn when I go,” Pardinho said.He said his height should not be an issue, though his family members still hope that he will grow more in the next year.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Some time ago there was an issue with shorter players, but now there are teams that don’t care,” he said. “It matters more that I have a safe fastball and two more good options, including a curveball that I control well.”Other major league hopefuls agree: Facing Pardinho is a huge challenge.“Pardinho’s curveball is amazing, he is more than fast,” said third baseman Victor Coutinho, also 16. “His height doesn’t matter because his arm can do wonders.”Heitor Tokar, who is also a pitcher, practices with Pardinho every day and believes in his friend’s future in the sport.“Pardinho doesn’t feel any difference when he throws against players taller than him, he destroys them all,” Tokar said.AdvertisementPardinho’s coach, Mitsuyoshi Sato, knows his player is headed for bigger challenges, and protects his arm. Sato pitches him no more than two innings at weekend tournaments.Pardinho’s father, Evandro, makes the hour-plus drive from Bastos to check on his son, and Sato makes sure Pardinho is a priority for training center medics. Pardinho has the support of an orthopedist, a physiotherapist and a fitness trainer. He also has a technical trainer.“He still has to improve physically and mentally,” Sato said. “I don’t want him to do too many fastballs now because I worry about a possible injury. No arm is prepared to pitch that fast, much less the arm of a kid.”Pardinho thinks that if he has success, he could change baseball in Brazil.“If I do well, maybe more and more Brazilians, not only those of Japanese heritage, will think of playing on a diamond, too,” he said.A version of this article appears in print on July 1, 2017, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: In Soccer-Mad Nation, a Top Pitching Prospect.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.