By FILIP BONDYJUNE 30, 2017
It wasn’t quite 8 a.m., but a group of official scorers, baseball analysts and fans were settled into a small meeting room on Thursday at the Grand Hyatt in Manhattan to debate the real reason the Boston Red Sox blew Game 6 of the 1986 World Series to the Mets.No, it wasn’t Bill Buckner, who allowed Mookie Wilson’s grounder to scoot through his legs for the winning run. Too obvious. Buckner was off the hook. This argument focused on Bob Stanley, the Boston pitcher who threw the wild pitch that allowed the tying run to score right before Buckner’s misplay, and on Rich Gedman, the catcher who could have blocked that pitch and might well have been charged with a passed ball.“Gedman’s the goat,” insisted Stew Thornley, baseball author and official scorer at Minnesota Twins games. “He moves a little over there. He should have had that ball.”The discussion was part of a four-day New York convention for the Society for American Baseball Research, known as SABR, a proud nerd-a-thon of historians, club officials and just plain-old baseball freaks with an obsessive love of the sport. Grown men and women — mostly men, actually — paraded in and around the hotel near Grand Central Terminal, sporting their favorite teams’ caps and jerseys.AdvertisementThink Comic-Con, only with gray hair and a slightly stooped posture. Club chapters are named after old-timers like Ted Williams and Lefty O’Doul. The soft strains of Frank Sinatra songs played in the background between programs, a dead giveaway about the demographics.AdvertisementSABR, now based in the Walter Cronkite School of Journalism and Mass Communication at Arizona State, was founded in 1971 at the Baseball Hall of Fame in Cooperstown, N.Y., by L. Robert Davids and 15 other baseball researchers. The current group of officials, including Marc Appleman, the chief executive, gave it a far more public presence starting about seven years ago, employing the internet to publish findings and stories. The society now has 71 chapters, including one in Nepal.The organization is hoping to attract a younger set through scholarships and an emphasis on sabermetrics — a natural offshoot of the STEM curriculum in many schools — including an annual analytics convention in Arizona. Bill James, the king of sabermetrics, spoke at the last conference, in March. But even as the group’s influence has grown through publications and social media, its membership has plateaued at around 5,800. Like baseball itself, SABR is having trouble gaining a foothold among the impatient 18-to-30 crowd.“The aging aspect has an effect on our numbers,” said Vince Gennaro, the organization’s president. “We’ve finally gotten our membership under the average age of 60 years old, which is a significant accomplishment.”Meanwhile, the organization plays to its strength. It has posted hundreds of biographies of well-known and obscure baseball figures, each about 2,000 to 4,000 words long, all neatly cataloged on its website. It also publishes a regular journal, The National Pastime.“The key thing we did was say anyone can write about anyone who’s important to you,” said Mark Armour, who headed the biography project for 15 years. “You can write about your grandfather, who played only four games in the majors, or about Mickey Mantle. It’s up to you.”No topic is too large or small for discourse at the current gathering, which has a packed agenda. In one ballroom on Thursday, Jean Afterman, assistant general manager for the Yankees, offered insight into how General Manager Brian Cashman makes personnel decisions. In another, the analyst Chuck Hildebrandt gave strong statistical evidence that batters and pitchers moving from the American League to the National League fare better than those changing in the other direction.“The American League is a stronger, tougher, better league than the National League,” Hildebrandt said, backing this hypothesis with interleague results (a .551 winning percentage for the American League over 13 seasons) and eliciting passionate reactions from a divided crowd.“This is a real problem,” Hildebrandt said. “The cause of this imbalance needs to be addressed. This can’t go on.”AdvertisementThere was a liberal arts segment as well. Anthony Salazar, an expert on Latino baseball, offered a presentation titled, “The Integration of Baseball Cards and Chicano Pop Art.” The samples he exhibited drew some appreciation from the audience, and a few blank stares.The convention will carry on through Saturday with no shortage of topics or debate. Thornley, the official scorer, explained that baseball is a sport made for such scholarly examination.“It’s a lot easier to analyze than, say, football, which has so many moving parts,” he said. “You aren’t overwhelmed.”Still, baseball is not always simple. Thornley dissected the scoring rules of baseball and asked head-scratching questions of his audience. For example, if a reliever replaced a starting pitcher with a runner on first, and then that runner was called out after being struck by a batted ball, and the batter was granted first base, then whose earned run average would be affected if this new runner scored?Answer: The new runner is the reliever’s responsibility, not the starter’s, since the batter reached first on a play that was scored a single, not a force out.On it went like this, for hours at a time, in a handful of hotel ballrooms.“We could have done four more days,” Appleman said.Next year’s convention is tentatively set for Pittsburgh, an announcement that came as some relief to attendees who were not entirely happy about having to take the No. 7 train to Citi Field for a Mets game on Friday night. The comfortable confines of a hotel lobby or a friendly ballpark grandstand are apparently more to their liking than the unknowns of New York City mass transit.Appleman was asked if he would classify himself, and this whole SABR bunch, as a society of nerds.“Yes, but we try to say it in a friendly, smiley way,” he replied.A version of this article appears in print on July 1, 2017, on Page D1 of the New York edition with the headline: Statistical Imbalance: Membership Lacks Youth.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.