AdvertisementSupported byAnalysisBy Zach SchonbrunCinderella almost looked like a Lumberjack.Or a Ram. Or a Blue Raider.Instead, those upstarts with lower seeds, lower profiles, and representing smaller conferences, largely hit a wall Sunday in the N.C.A.A. men’s basketball tournament, where almost all of the top seeds again prevailed.They did so thanks in large part to upperclassmen — yes, really, upperclassmen — a provincial notion in college basketball these days. While last year could have been dubbed the Year of the Freshman (as Kentucky and Duke, among others, owed their deep tournament runs to the play of teenage prodigies), this year’s top teams have relied on players with a few more years of experience to prolong their seasons.Oklahoma’s Buddy Hield, Villanova’s Ryan Arcidiacono, Notre Dame’s Zach Auguste, and Syracuse’s Michael Gbinije, all seniors, fueled their teams to big wins early Sunday.Alex Caruso and Danuel House, senior guards for No. 3-seeded Texas A&M, helped the Aggies pull off a near-miracle in Oklahoma City, storming back from 12 points down in only 35 seconds to take No. 11-seeded Northern Iowa into overtime. Texas A&M eventually won, 92-88, in double overtime.And Bronson Koenig, a junior for Wisconsin, etched his name into Badger lore with a fadeaway, corner pocket, buzzer-beating 3-pointer that dashed second-seeded Xavier’s season, 66-63, and propelled the No. 7-seeded Badgers on to the round of 16.All told, the higher seeds won all but one game Sunday, after taking six of the eight games Saturday. For the first time since 2012, all four of the No. 1 seeds will play in the round of 16. And of the top 16 teams ranked in the Associated Press’s final regular-season poll, nine will represent the last 16 teams remaining in the tournament. An unpredictable season has suddenly begun looking somewhat predictable.That said, there could not have been many in Oklahoma City expecting Texas A&M to rally back from its double-digit deficit. Plenty of fans had already left the arena.But Northern Iowa, struggling to inbound, committed four consecutive turnovers. The final one, by Wes Washpun, wound up in the hands of Admon Gilder whose layup tied the score with 1.9 seconds remaining in regulation.House scored all 22 of his points in the second half or overtime. After making only six field goals the entire first half, the Aggies made six in the final 35 seconds of regulation.Happening simultaneously, in St. Louis, Xavier’s Edmond Sumner was called for a charge with 4.3 seconds to go and the East Region game against Wisconsin all tied up. After moving the ball across halfcourt with two seconds remaining, Badgers Coach Greg Gard called timeout to set up a play.It was a savvy call: the subsequent play call got the ball to Koenig, who gained enough separation from Remy Abell in the corner to get the shot off.“I tried to channel my inner Steph Curry,” Koenig said.Wisconsin gets to travel to Philadelphia where it will meet No. 6-seeded Notre Dame, which had one of the toughest tests of the day. They had to fend off Stephen F. Austin, a scrappy team out of the Southland Conference, led by the do-it-all senior Thomas Walkup, whose thick beard bore striking resemblance to the program’s ax-wielding mascot.The Irish appeared worn out by No. 14-seeded Stephen F. Austin’s incessant defensive pressure. They had no answer for Walkup (21 points, 5 assists, 5 rebounds, 1 blocked shot). But after Notre Dame’s Demetrius Jackson missed on a drive to the hoop with six seconds remaining, the Irish’s big men, Zach Auguste and Rex Pflueger, somehow kept the ball in the air.Eventually, it was Pflueger’s fingertips that pushed the ball off the backboard and through the net with 1.6 seconds remaining — his only points of the game. Notre Dame held on to win, 76-75.The Lumberjacks’ heart and soul was Walkup, who had not shaved since November and played the game with a similar sense of abandon.After scoring 33 points (including 19 of 20 free throws) in the Lumberjacks’ ugly win over the Mountaineers, Walkup struggled with foul trouble early in Sunday’s game. But he still managed to seem everywhere at once — tiptoeing along the baseline for circus layups, diving after loose balls, dishing to teammates in transition. He was quickly endearing himself to college basketball fans nationwide.But his time as Cinderella ended.So did the charmed run of Middle Tennessee State, a No. 15 seed that stunned Michigan State — a title hopeful — with a win on Friday in the Midwest Region. But the Blue Raiders could not solve Syracuse’s 2-3 zone Sunday in St. Louis, shooting just 29.7 percent from the field.The 10th-seeded Orange, led by Gbinije (23 points), became the second double-digit seed to reach the round of 16. As it happens, they will meet Gonzaga, a No. 11 seed, in Chicago.Oklahoma had a tougher time with No. 10-seeded Virginia Commonwealth. But a late surge by Hield — who scored 19 of his 36 points in the final eight minutes — carried the No. 2-seeded Sooners past the Rams, 85-81.The West Region’s top seed, Oregon, also faced drama in the final minutes in Spokane, Wash., but its defense intensified and No. 8-seeded St. Joseph’s wilted down the stretch, 69-64.No. 5-seeded Maryland also outlasted No. 13-seeded Hawaii, thanks to 24 points and 11 rebounds combined from the seniors Jake Layman and Rasheed Sulaimon.Earlier in Brooklyn on Sunday, No. 2-seeded Villanova was propelled by a blend of guilt, embarrassment and 3-pointer efficiency, exorcising seven years of frustration with a full-on assault of Iowa, a No. 7 seed, leading at one point by as much as 34.The Wildcats had not reached the second weekend of the tournament since 2009, despite earning some very high seeds in their last six attempts. They were not going to let another year go by.The final score Sunday, 87-68, did not do justice to the variegated onslaught the Wildcats unleashed on the Hawkeyes, connecting on 7 of 12 3-pointers and shooting 60.6 percent from the field in the first half to cruise.“When I shook hands with Fran, I just said, ‘Hey, I’m sorry,’” Villanova Coach Jay Wright said, referring to Iowa Coach Frank McCaffrey. “We haven’t played a first half like that in a long time.”Advertisement