AdvertisementSupported byWisconsin 66, Xavier 63 | East RegionBy Marc TracyST. LOUIS — Four Wisconsin players ran in a circle as if around an invisible maypole on Sunday night. A fifth, the freshman Ethan Happ, prepared to pass the ball inbounds from near halfcourt. There were exactly two seconds left.The players flared out in different directions. Later, they would say that Happ had been instructed to find either forward Nigel Hayes or guard Bronson Koenig. Somehow, Koenig — the guard who 12 seconds earlier had hit a contested 3-pointer to tie it up with Xavier — broke free and received the pass near Happ, along the right side of the court. He took one dribble toward the corner, set his feet and put up the shot.Did it go in? In this N.C.A.A. tournament — which, as its opening weekend drew to a close, had already seen more than its share of upsets and buzzer-beaters — the only answer was a worldly “Of course it went in.”Seventh-seeded Wisconsin (22-12) upset second-seeded Xavier (28-6), 66-63, to reach the round of 16. The Badgers will face sixth-seeded Notre Dame on Friday in Philadelphia.“I knew it was good,” Xavier Coach Chris Mack said. “I mean, in terms of beating the buzzer. Been around this game long enough, and I knew it was good.”The stars of the game were Koenig, of course — he scored 20, making six 3-pointers and two foul shots — and Happ, a big man who managed 18 points on 7-for-10 shooting despite early foul trouble.On Xavier’s side, guard Remy Abell and forward Jalen Reynolds each had 13. Reynolds contributed nine rebounds.The biggest play that will not show up in the stat sheet came from Wisconsin’s Zak Showalter, a junior, who drew a charge from the Xavier freshman Edmond Sumner with four seconds left. Sumner likes to drive to his right, Showalter explained later in a matter-of-fact tone.Kansas, North Carolina, Virginia and Oregon are the top seeds in the N.C.A.A. men’s basketball tournament.“I wasn’t too worried about getting the call,” he said, adding of a referee, He had to make a call, and I was hoping he’d make the right one.”Wisconsin then passed the ball inbounds from behind its own baseline, and the crowd — conditioned by several other dramatic last-second plays from this tournament, such as Northern Iowa’s halfcourt game-winner over Texas on Friday night — held its collective breath.Instead came a whistle.Another whistle. If Wisconsin’s previous game, a 47-43 victory in a slugfest against Pittsburgh here Friday night, might have been considered ugly because of the physical style of play, Sunday’s game was jittery because the referees seemed determined to let no physical contact go unnoticed. Thirty-three fouls were assessed in the game.But this whistle was not for a foul; it was Wisconsin calling a timeout from the sideline, gambling that it could get a better look with a half-court inbounds pass with two seconds left than with Koenig streaking down the floor.The Wisconsin junior Nigel Hayes continued to struggle with shooting, going 2 for 10 from the field and 0 for 5 from deep, yet he insisted afterward that he had played a good game — not only on defense, but as a leader.“There’s more than one way to contribute to a team,” he said.He and Koenig were the only two starters left from last year’s team, which beat previously undefeated Kentucky in the N.C.A.A. semifinals before losing to Duke in the championship game.The year since has been rocky. In December, with the team at 7-5, Coach Bo Ryan abruptly retired after 14 seasons at Wisconsin’s helm and many more as a head coach. His longtime assistant, Greg Gard, was handed the job on an interim basis (it was made permanent this month). In mid-January, Wisconsin was 9-9 over all and 1-4 in Big Ten play. Into February, Wisconsin was not even considered a bubble team; it was seen as destined to miss the N.C.A.A. tournament for the first time in 17 years.“We improved,” the assistant Gary Close said after the game. “We’re a shell of what we were two or three months ago, on both ends of the court.”Though Thursday and Friday featured several significant upsets, the world turned markedly right side up in the tournament on Saturday and Sunday, with several favorites — including Duke, Kansas and North Carolina — advancing to the round of 16. There are just two teams below Wisconsin on the men’s basketball selection committee’s rankings, where the Badgers were ranked 26th.Though this year’s appearance on the tournament’s second weekend is much less expected than those of the last two years, Showalter summed it up: “Seven seed’s not too much of a Cinderella story.”Advertisement