By PETER MAYMARCH 20, 2016
DURHAM, N.H. —  As she savored the moment — an unexpected joy, if one was to believe the N.C.A.A. seeding committee — Amanda Kessel had one overriding thought: This was why she had come back.When she had last played a full season for the University of Minnesota, in 2012-13, Kessel was universally recognized as the best player in women’s college hockey, winning the sport’s equivalent of the Heisman Trophy and leading her team to a 41-0-0 season and a national title. Then came a scheduled break for the Sochi Olympics and an unscheduled break to deal with lingering postconcussion syndrome. She went almost two years without playing before she was given medical clearance to return.She returned for the final six weeks of the 2015-16 season and then put her superstar stamp on the N.C.A.A. tournament, scoring what proved to be the winning goal on Sunday in Minnesota’s 3-1 victory over previously undefeated Boston College in the championship game of the Frozen Four. Kessel also had three goals in Minnesota’s 6-2 first-round victory over Princeton and one in the 3-2 semifinal victory over Wisconsin.The Gophers won the N.C.A.A. title for the second straight year, the fourth time in five years and the sixth time over all. They have been to the title game in each of the last five seasons, losing two years ago to Clarkson.AdvertisementKessel, who has been a part of three N.C.A.A. championship teams, said that a minute into Minnesota’s celebration on Sunday, she had almost broken out laughing, thinking about how far she had come.Advertisement“These are games you don’t get back,” she said. “I guess I thought I’d be more emotional going out, but I was almost laughing to myself.”She then paused and added: “I never could have imagined this happening. I’m just so grateful. I’m still waiting to wake up.”Minnesota Coach Brad Frost called the championship feeling “surreal,” which is also an apt description for the return of one of the top players in the history of women’s college hockey. Frost and Kessel spoke in August, when Kessel returned to campus, ostensibly only to study. But she started skating as a way to deal with her medical condition, and one thing led to another.“You see her on the ice, and you think that it’d be nice” if she were to return, Frost said. “But I felt like it was an extreme long shot. I tried not to think about it.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.By December, Kessel was practicing with the team, and, Frost said, “you could see the light in her eyes — she was back to who she was.”Kessel made her return on Feb. 5. An already powerful program was rejoined by one of the greats of the game just in time for the late-season push.“It was kind of like getting a slugger at the trade deadline,” Frost said.But even with Kessel, the Gophers arrived at the Frozen Four as the No. 3 seed. A semifinal date with No. 2 Wisconsin, which was responsible for three of Minnesota’s four losses during the season, ended in overtime, with Sarah Potomak, the Frozen Four most outstanding player, scoring the game winner. Kessel scored the goal that sent the game into overtime.No. 1-seeded Boston College was an even more daunting task. The Eagles were undefeated and threatening to match the 41-0 record Minnesota had compiled three years earlier. The Eagles averaged more than five goals a game as they rolled to a 40-0 record.Advertisement“I will say this: We didn’t talk once about ending their perfect season,” Frost said. “All we talked about was winning the national championship game.”Potomak, a freshman, opened the scoring 13 seconds into the game, taking a pass from Hannah Brandt, who had beaten B.C. defender Megan Keller to the puck. That score held — thanks in part to sensational goaltending by Minnesota’s Amanda Leveille — until Kessel converted a slap shot that caromed in off the right post 8 minutes 31 seconds into the third period.B.C. had rallied from a 2-0 hole in its semifinal overtime victory over Clarkson but was unable to do so again 48 hours later. Minnesota’s Kelly Pannek made the score 3-0 with 6:48 to play after Keller misfired on a clearing pass.The Eagles avoided a shutout with 5:53 to play on a goal by Makenna Newkirk.A version of this article appears in print on March 21, 2016, on Page D4 of the New York edition with the headline: Minnesota Star Tops Off Return With a National Title.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.