By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSMARCH 20, 2016
DALLAS —  Kari Lehtonen made 27 saves in Dallas’s first shutout since December, and the Stars beat the Islanders, 3-0, on Saturday night to maintain their hold on sole possession of first place in the Western Conference.Lehtonen earned his second shutout of the season and the 34th of his career. Cody Eakin, Patrick Eaves and Ales Hemsky scored for a depleted Dallas offense.Tyler Seguin, who has 33 goals for the Stars, is expected to miss the rest of the regular season after having surgery on Friday to repair a partly torn right Achilles’ tendon. Eakin stepped up with his 15th goal in the second period and Eaves with his eighth on a third-period breakaway. Hemsky scored his 12th into an empty net with 2 minutes 54 seconds remaining.Dallas has 95 points — 4 ahead of both Los Angeles and St. Louis, who each played later Saturday — with nine games left.AdvertisementThomas Greiss made 33 saves for the Islanders, who dropped to fourth place in the Metropolitan Division. The Islanders are still in position for the Eastern Conference’s first wild card, with 85 points and 12 games remaining.AdvertisementThe Islanders’ offense continued to struggle. In the last seven games, they are 2-3-2 with a total of 12 goals.“There’s no puck luck for our hockey team right now,” Islanders Coach Jack Capuano said.The Stars outshot the Islanders by 11-10 in a scoreless first period, and Dallas had better scoring chances.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Greiss stopped Antoine Roussel’s in-close backhand shot four minutes into the game and gloved John Klingberg’s wrist shot on the first power play. With about 11 minutes elapsed, Stephen Jones sent a shot from the right point off the left goal post.Near the middle of the second period, each team had good chances.Hemsky faked a defenseman out of the way, but then Hemsky’s short shot went wide right. For the Islanders, Anders Lee deflected a shot by Ryan Strome with his stick. The puck went behind Lehtonen but rolled off to the left of the net.Eakin scored at 13:07 on a two-on-one break with Jamie Benn. Instead of passing to Benn on the left, Eakin lifted a wrist shot from the right face-off circle over Greiss’s right shoulder.In the third period, Eaves took away the puck at Dallas’s blue line and skated in alone on Greiss. Eaves’s first shot went into the goalie’s pads, but he knocked in the rebound.Hemsky scored from the neutral zone with 2:54 left in the game to make it 3-0.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.