By ROB HUGHESMARCH 20, 2016
LONDON — As Leicester City continues to win matches in England, it continues to defy gravity even further afield. The Foxes cannot be caught in the Premier League so long as they win games, as Leicester did, 1-0, at Crystal Palace.The victories are getting tighter. But right now — with 31 games played after Saturday’s win and just seven remaining — Leicester is closing in on a place in next season’s Champions League. The only clubs in Europe with more points in their domestic leagues are Barcelona, Atlético Madrid, Paris St.-Germain and Bayern Munich.Members of the Thai family that saved Leicester financially five years ago are in evidence now, and beaming at every performance, home and away. And why wouldn’t they be?As the City Foxes outwit the chasing pack each week, so we search for something new to say about the virtues. It is a different coach, Claudio Ranieri, but the same main players in the team that escaped relegation by a whisker one year ago.AdvertisementSaturday’s only goal was a product of the same two men who have been scoring all season long. This time Jamie Vardy, the team’s leading scorer, made the pass that led to Riyad Mahrez’s volleying the shot that beat Palace.AdvertisementBut the fact that it is getting tighter, and that the Foxes are having to prove their defensive resilience, throws up new heroes, new contenders for men of the season in their respective positions.N’Golo Kanté, the tenacious ball winner in midfield, has been called up for the France national team. Danny Drinkwater, who was once let go by Manchester United as an apprentice, has worked his way into the England squad for next week’s friendly games.And as opponents try to find Leicester’s weak spots, the defense quietly, industriously refuses to be overrun. This, perhaps, is Ranieri’s forte, because what Italians do not know about defending is not worth knowing.The heart of it is, again, the same individuals who were struggling a year ago. Wes Morgan, the captain, and Robert Huth, the big German, are pillars of defiance at central defense — big men, immovable, if at times immobile.Morgan, 32, has won nothing very much in his career before now. “You can sense the end is near,” he keeps saying whenever the TV microphones are put in front of him. “But we have to avoid the hype and remain in focus, take it game by game.”Behind the Morgans and the Huths, Leicester’s defense has been unyielding. Its goal has not been breached in 12 of the 31 games so far, and as opposing forwards try to break through, the last line of resistance is Kasper Schmeichel.The name, the big physique and the blond hair give him away.Yes, Kasper is the son of Peter Schmeichel, who won the English league five times with Manchester United, won every trophy there is at club level, and won the 1992 European Championship as Denmark’s goalkeeper.AdvertisementBeing the son of a famous player is a privilege, and an inevitable burden. Max Verstappen, the teenage wonder of Formula One motor racing, carries it because his dad, Jos Verstappen, was a racecar driver.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Peyton Manning carried the family name and tradition, rather well, at the Super Bowl recently.Jordi Cruyff, the son of Johan, and Edinho, the son of Pelé, lived with it and suffered the inevitable comparisons. And Nina Carberry, a big race winner at the Cheltenham National Hunt Festival last week, is every bit as daring and cavalier on horseback as her famous father and her brothers have been.It comes with the territory, being the offspring of a famous anything leads to the “good, but not as good as your father” line.Kasper Schmeichel, a polite and settled 29-year-old father of two, has worked his way through a decade of seeking to be his own man. Sure, he is carrying on a family tradition. Yes, at the moment it’s going just fine, as it has to do while Leicester has just nicked games, winning four of its last five Premier league matches 1-0.The family name helps and hinders in roughly equal measure. Obviously Schmeichel’s dad can pass on tips, not just on how to handle the ball but also how to handle the pressure of going for a title. But the father cannot shield the ball, or the criticism, for the son.Suffice to say that Crystal Palace, with two of the fastest wingers in the Premier League, tried 31 crosses from wide positions against Leicester. If the heads of Morgan and Huth didn’t get to them, the hands of Schmeichel had to — and if there was the odd punch, even a mistimed one from the keeper, you bet he had to endure calls from the crowd that his “dad would have caught those!”Time blurs the memories. Peter Schmeichel, hugely imposing as he could be, wasn’t always flawless.However, if Leicester wins the league this season, some smart alec will surely tell him, “Just another four to go to match your father then, Kasper.”Last week, a teenager was thrust into Arsenal’s lineup at Barcelona, and 62 hours later started his first Premier League game, away at Everton.Alex Iwobi fit right in with the Arsenal style. He moved intuitively between midfield and offense. His linkup play and passing were mature for his years.AdvertisementIwobi was involved in a marvelous buildup to the opening goal, struck by Danny Welbeck. Iwobi then made an astute run onto a 40-yard pass from Héctor Bellerín to slot home the second goal, in a 2-0 win.Iwobi has a famous relative, too. His uncle, Jay-Jay Okocha, was Nigeria’s finest player. Cue the comparisons for Arsenal’s new Gunner.One wonders what kind of a legacy awaits Thiago and Mateo, the young sons of a certain Lionel Messi in 15 or so years from now?A version of this article appears in print on March 21, 2016, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.