By TIM ROHANMARCH 20, 2016
SPOKANE, Wash. —  The Hawaii guards had been harassing Maryland guard Melo Trimble all game long, pressing him, bumping him, chasing him. The Rainbow Warriors had set the tone with their aggressive play, getting in the Terrapins’ faces, trying to intimidate the higher seed, and it seemed to be working, as Maryland missed its first 15 3-point attempts.The score was tied midway through the second half when Maryland established its authority on three consecutive plays. Diamond Stone broke free for an alley-oop dunk, Jake Layman raced open for a fast-break dunk, and Trimble finally found himself alone at the top of the key. He drilled a 3-pointer, the Terrapins’ first of the game, and smiled in relief.“Once that shot went down,” Rasheed Sulaimon said, “that got everybody loose.”No. 5-seeded Maryland, which had trouble this season with spunky teams, held off 13th-seeded Hawaii, 73-60, to advance to the round of 16. The Terrapins built their confidence a bit, which will help because their next game is against Kansas, the tournament’s top overall seed.After the Terrapins narrowly escaped against South Dakota State in the first round, they acknowledged that at points this season, they had been guilty of being overconfident and not taking some opponents seriously. Ranked No. 3 in the preseason polls and armed with several N.B.A. prospects, Maryland had a relatively disappointing season because, as Layman put it, they “got caught up in where we were and thinking that we should beat everybody by 20.”AdvertisementHawaii, coming off a convincing upset over No. 4-seeded California, grabbed Maryland’s attention early, pressing its guards full-court. Trimble looked exasperated each time he had to shake a defender simply to receive an inbounds pass. Disrupting the Terrapins’ rhythm affected their shooting, especially from 3-point range.AdvertisementThat only egged on the Rainbow Warriors’ cheering section. Their fans waved ti leaves for good luck, shouted chants that echoed throughout the arena and brandished the state flag. One fan’s sign read, “Cinderella wears,” with a pair of flip-flops attached.For a while, Hawaii hung with Maryland, on that pure aggressiveness, even though Maryland was the taller and more athletic team. Mike Thomas, a 6-foot-7 Hawaii forward, got creative finding holes and making several layups around the Terrapins’ frontcourt, which featured three players 6 feet 9 inches or taller. Thomas finished with 19 points and 11 rebounds.“We were nervous,” said Maryland Coach Mark Turgeon, whose team led by only 1 at halftime.Trimble, though, had learned to counter by embracing Hawaii’s pressure, drawing the attention of extra defenders and dishing the ball to Stone, the talented freshman forward. Stone slipped free for dunks, hit a smooth jump hook and made a reverse layup with his offhand. Once Stone started establishing himself, Trimble found more space to work.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Trimble kept attacking the paint, and it usually resulted in either a layup or a trip to the free-throw line. When the Terrapins went on that 7-point run midway through the second quarter, they were following Trimble’s lead. Maryland relaxed, and a few minutes later, when Robert Carter converted a 3-point play, extending the lead to 12, Trimble did a dance.“I might have to give him some pointers on how to dance, too,” Sulaimon said. “That was atrocious to watch.”Hawaii eventually looked tired, trying to out-hustle Maryland’s athleticism. The Rainbow Warriors shot 33 percent from the field, including only 21 percent from 3-point range. Stefan Jankovic, the sweet-shooting Big West conference player of the year, missed 12 of his 17 shots.As a last-ditch effort, trailing by 10 with about four minutes remaining, Hawaii deployed a more urgent full-court press. Trimble and Sulaimon, the senior guard, handled the ball mostly from then on, and they combined to make all 10 of their free throws down the stretch.Trimble finished with 24 points and made 13 of his 14 free throws. After Hawaii fouled Sulaimon once in the backcourt, when the game was essentially out of reach, he put his arm around Trimble and told him he was trying to get him the ball.“I ain’t even care,” Trimble told him, “we’re going to the Sweet 16.”A version of this article appears in print on March 21, 2016, on Page D2 of the New York edition with the headline: Maryland’s First 3-Pointer, on 16th Try, Goes a Long Way .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.