
On Soccer By                     
 ANDREW KEH
 
JUNE 4, 2016
SANTA CLARA, Calif. — Shortly after watching what had appeared to be a disheartening defeat to Colombia in the opening game of the Copa América, United States Coach Jurgen Klinsmann was an exemplar of serenity.He sat in a packed room late Friday at Levi’s Stadium for his postgame news conference and insisted that he was “absolutely O.K.” with the team’s play and that, besides the 2-0 score, the two sides had been “totally even.”His players had asserted themselves well against a top team, he said repeatedly. He seemed content to claim a moral victory. In his eyes, a sunny road was ahead.“It’s absolutely no problem now going forward,” Klinsmann said about the team’s two remaining group stage games. “Say we play Costa Rica to get 3 points, and we play Paraguay to get 3 points, we’re in the quarterfinal.”AdvertisementThat may be so. Colombia entered the game ranked No. 3 in FIFA’s world rankings, featuring players on the rosters of some of the world’s top clubs. Costa Rica (No. 23) and Paraguay (No. 44) represent opponents that the United States (No. 31), playing on home soil, should reasonably beat.AdvertisementYet for all the calm that Klinsmann projected, it was obvious that there were ways the team could improve, and certain problems to shore up.Michael Bradley, the team’s serious-minded captain, was less effusive about his team’s performance. Bradley does not seem to actively enjoy speaking to reporters after games, but he has a naturally reflective disposition — compared with his coach, who tends to default to familiar, cheerful talking points — and cannot help providing clear-eyed analysis of match results.He spoke about the difficulty the game had presented and the way the Colombians had imposed their philosophy on the field. He talked about the unfortunate hole the team had dug for itself in the tournament. He did not delve into specific criticisms, but he made it clear that improvement was needed.“We needed to be a little sharper, a little better, a little more ruthless to be able to make something for ourselves,” Bradley said.To the casual observer, various problems were apparent.On offense, there was never a feeling that the American attackers had any capacity to weave threatening moves toward the Colombia goal. Their formation scrunched up in undisciplined ways at inopportune times, flattening and narrowing when it more likely needed to expand to enfeeble the compact Colombia defensive structure.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.That Klinsmann did not make any substitutions at halftime — leaving the group on the field unchanged until he inserted Christian Pulisic and Darlington Nagbe after 66 minutes — seemed to allow the problem to fester and become more glaring.On defense, the team appeared to lack a consistent way to pressure the Colombian players while they built their passing moves from their half. It was clear that Colombia, after taking the early lead, would be happy to sit back inside its end, yet the Americans did little to exploit that positioning on the field.Advertisement“In the next day or so, we’ll certainly look and see how we can improve going forward,” Bradley said. “It hurts to go down so early in a big game, early on in a tournament. You don’t want to put yourself behind the eight ball right away.”There were positives to take away, too. The defense, in its own half, did an admirable job of bottling up Colombia’s effervescent attacking players. Klinsmann called the back line outstanding.Clint Dempsey, who had a mixed game from the center forward position, nevertheless provided the team’s best scoring chances, including a first-half shot that swerved just outside the left post and a second-half free kick that required a flying save from David Ospina, the Colombia goalkeeper.After the game, Dempsey seemed to dwell on the penalty kick that was awarded to Colombia just before halftime, when DeAndre Yedlin inadvertently handled the ball with his back turned to the play. This was the moment that changed the game, Dempsey said.Asked if it felt as if the team had missed an opportunity to take the game from Colombia, Dempsey said: “Yeah, I mean, but what do you do when you have that penalty called against you, in your home country? We’re used to getting those types of calls, even if it’s kind of close.”In truth, the United States may not enjoy a signficiant home-field advantage — from referees or the crowds — in the tournament. The crowd on Friday seemed to include a majority of Colombia fans, many of whom rocked with joy watching the straightforward victory.But Klinsmann brushed aside any worry that his team would not have sufficient support on home soil and praised the atmosphere in Santa Clara.“It was beautiful to see all the yellow jerseys and all the U.S. jerseys,” Klinsmann said. “I hope they enjoyed the evening.”It was another nice sentiment from a coach who spent the night curiously unperturbed.A version of this article appears in print on June 5, 2016, on Page SP14 of the New York edition with the headline: U.S. Coach Brushes Off a Loss.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »