
Extra Bases By                     
 TYLER KEPNER
 
JUNE 4, 2016
Sometime this Thursday, probably in the early part of the first round of the annual baseball draft, a major league team will welcome Corey Ray. He will begin his journey in professional baseball, like so many others, lured by the challenge of the one-on-one battles within a team sport.“My best against the pitcher’s best,” said Ray, a junior outfielder for the University of Louisville. “It’s intriguing to me: the competition, the cat-and-mouse game, the way you have to think, the technique of hitting and trying to be better than the pitcher.”Baseball has always appealed to Ray for those reasons — but also, at first, as a novelty. When he was growing up on Chicago’s South Side, he said, baseball was an afterthought for most children. He liked doing something different.Baseball has struggled to attract African-Americans, like Ray, to the game. Only 8 percent of the players on opening day rosters were African-American. The figure has been stagnant for a few years now, sharply down from a high of 19 percent in 1986.AdvertisementThe absence is also felt in positions of authority. There are only two black managers (Dusty Baker of the Washington Nationals and Dave Roberts of the Los Angeles Dodgers) and two top baseball operations executives (Michael Hill of the Miami Marlins and Kenny Williams of the Chicago White Sox) in the game.AdvertisementTony Reagins, the former Los Angeles Angels general manager, is now a senior vice president for Major League Baseball in charge of youth programs. Reagins, who is black, said M.L.B. had poured millions of dollars into initiatives designed to increase participation in a sport that is increasingly expensive for amateurs.Reagins said the league would host a two-week training camp for top 13- to 16-year-old prospects from low-income backgrounds at the Dodgertown complex in Vero Beach, Fla., next month. Former major leaguers will serve as instructors, and the league will assume all expenses. Reagins also said that casual play — from children as young as 5 years old — had risen since last year.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“It’s not going to be done overnight, but if we continue to make dents, this is a five-year plan,” Reagins said. “One is participation — we’ve stopped the decline and we’ve started to trend up. Second would be diversity, where we get the number of African-Americans in the big leagues up to the numbers of the late ’80s and early ’90s. And third would be development, in terms of giving every kid an opportunity to play our game if he chooses to.”Ray is a success story, a product of the White Sox Amateur City Elite program that began in 2007 and has sent 122 players to college. He said he benefited from instructors who had played professionally, including the former major leaguer Lou Collier and Kevin Coe, a former Cubs minor leaguer who works as director of youth initiatives for the White Sox.“They picked up our tab and everything that came with it — their facilities, 24/7,” Ray said. “I’m a gym rat, I love to hit in the cage, and they never told me no. There was always somewhere for me to hit and get better at the game.”M.L.B. was encouraged by the increased diversity in last year’s draft, when 25 percent of first-round choices (nine of 36) were African-American. The league said it was the highest percentage of African-Americans in the first round since 1992.“It’ll be exciting to see Corey get drafted,” said the Mets’ Curtis Granderson, a Chicago native who has worked out with Ray the last two off-seasons. “Hopefully, the recognition will be put out there that hey, this is an avenue that you can accomplish.”AdvertisementRay, who was hitting .325 with 15 homers and 42 stolen bases through 60 games this season, said he was eager to start his career. He wants to be an example for a sport that needs many more like him to grow the way it once did.“The draft is just a milestone to a bigger goal: to get to the big leagues as fast as I can and stay in the big leagues as long as I can, but also to help,” Ray said. “The higher I go, the better the outlet for me to help back home and in inner cities around the country. That’s my big goal. It’s just the beginning.”The Yankees crave star power and pay well for it. But the first round of All-Star voting results, released last week, shows that fans do not find much exciting about the Yankees’ hitters.In balloting that is often as much about popularity as performance, the Yankees’ lack of widespread appeal was startling. They had nobody ranked among the top five vote-getters at first base, second base, shortstop, third base or designated hitter, and nobody among the top 10 outfielders.Just one Yankee ranked in the top five at any position: Brian McCann, who was second among catchers but more than 775,000 votes behind Kansas City’s Salvador Perez.The Royals, the defending World Series champions, dominated the early voting, as they did last year. Their first baseman, Eric Hosmer, has three Gold Glove awards and a jersey that hangs in the Hall of Fame, although he has never been an All-Star. He leads in the voting at first, and could always make it as a reserve if Detroit’s Miguel Cabrera passes him.“Definitely hoping Ned puts me on the team this year,” Hosmer said a few weeks ago, referring to Royals Manager Ned Yost. “But that’s honestly not the stuff we’re worrying about, especially with the way we’re playing. We need to find a way to win some games.”The Royals have done that since falling under .500 in mid-May. A recent 13-3 stretch has put them back in first place in the American League Central despite serious injuries to Alex Gordon and Mike Moustakas, who collided while chasing a foul ball on May 22. Gordon fractured his right wrist and will be out at least until late June, and Moustakas tore his anterior cruciate ligament in his right knee. He had season-ending surgery on Thursday.Julio Urias, the heralded 19-year-old rookie left-hander for the Los Angeles Dodgers, wore No. 78 in his major league debut at Citi Field last Friday. After a brief demotion to the minors, Urias returned and started at Wrigley Field on Thursday — and his uniform number had dropped by 71 digits.AdvertisementUrias now wears No. 7, fitting for a pitcher who goes by @theteenager7 on Twitter, but odd for his position. Urias is the latest to defy the custom of pitchers almost always wearing double-digit numbers. Toronto’s Marcus Stroman (No. 6) and St. Louis’ Mike Leake (No. 8) are among those in single digits now, and Tampa Bay’s Blake Snell wore No. 4 in a cameo this April.“I thought it would be interesting,” Snell said after arriving at Yankee Stadium before his debut. “I knew pitchers don’t do that, but it’s always been my favorite number. It’s always something I wanted and I said, ‘Why not?’”Just to be sure, Snell consulted with the veteran starter Matt Moore for his thoughts. Moore, who wears No. 55, told him to do what makes him happy.“It makes me feel good,” Snell said.Traditional or not, it was hard to argue with that logic.A version of this article appears in print on June 5, 2016, on Page SP3 of the New York edition with the headline: A Success Story Awaits the Draft.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »