AdvertisementSupported byBy Ben RothenbergPARIS — Three times, Felix Auger Aliassime was one point from claiming the boys’ singles title at the French Open on Sunday. But with a budding career well ahead of schedule, Auger Aliassime will have to wait just a little bit longer for a victory on the biggest stages of the sport.At 15 years 10 months, Auger Aliassime would have been the youngest boys’ champion at Roland Garros. But this day belonged to 17-year-old Geoffrey Blancaneaux of France, who saved three match points to win the final, 1-6, 6-3, 8-6, to the delight of the raucous French fans who poured into Court 1 just before the men’s final.Auger Aliassime, who raced through the first set, 6-1, in only 24 minutes, initially took the marathon defeat hard, throwing his rackets onto the ground as the crowd chanted and sang “La Marseillaise” for Blancaneaux.Yannick Noah, the French Davis Cup captain and last Frenchman to have won a major singles title, when he won here in 1983, watched the match from the second row and cheered for Blancaneaux, but he leapt onto the court to comfort Auger Aliassime upon seeing his distress.The scene drew different reactions from the crowd, depending on which angle they had on Noah, who in his haste was blissfully oblivious to his beltless trousers sliding further and further down as he spoke to Auger Aliassime.“I’m thankful for what he did,” Auger Aliassime said of Noah in an interview on TSN. “It’s really motivating to have such a legend talk to you afterwards.”Auger Aliassime said he was quickly able to put his disappointment in perspective.“I thought about it, and I know I have a lot of time in front of me,” he said. “But, yeah, it was tough. It’s still tough to take the loss after getting so close, that’s for sure.”Auger Aliassime has achieved many milestones. He became the youngest player to win a match at an ATP Challenger Tour event last July when he won two rounds in Granby, Canada. He subsequently became the youngest to be ranked in the ATP top 800. (His current ranking is 619th.)At 6 feet 2 and visibly strong, Auger Aliassime said he did not feel overmatched by the adults he faced on the lower rungs of the tour.“I always knew in the back of my mind that if I did the work and stayed passionate and motivated, one day it would come,” he said. “And it hasn’t come yet, but I know I’m getting closer every day that I put the work in. Since I’ve got my first points last year, my first wins in the Challenger, I knew that someday I could maintain a constant level in the pro tour.”He does have obstacles other professionals lack, however. Before he returns to Europe for Wimbledon, Auger Aliassime will head home to Montreal to take final exams to complete his sophomore year of high school.“That’s my life, that’s how it is,” he said. “Every time I’m in Montreal I have school. Of course I don’t have a normal 15-year-old’s life. But with the years we kind of get used to it, and I’m happy with what I do, so I don’t feel like I make any sacrifices. It’s my passion.”Auger Aliassime lives and trains in Montreal, where he was born in 2000 to a Québécois mother, Marie Auger, and Togolese father, Sam Aliassime. His father is a tennis coach, and Felix began to play the game when he was 4, alongside his older sister, Malika.With success coming quickly at each tier he has tried, Auger Aliassime has enticed agents and sponsors — dozens swarmed to his second-round match at the United States Open last year against the American Tommy Paul — although he has yet to turn professional.“I take it as motivation,” he said of the attention. “These people expect a lot from me, and I expect a lot from me. That’s what keeps me hungry to win more and have more success.”In the girls’ final, Rebeka Masarova, 16, of Switzerland defeated Amanda Anisimova, 14, of Freehold, N.J., 7-5, 7-5.Advertisement