AdvertisementSupported byBy Dave CaldwellLONG POND, Pa. — A black golf cart with mag wheels rolled to a stop Friday afternoon and was promptly surrounded by three dozen stock car fans who had waited in a drizzle. A driver in a red and yellow fire suit hopped out and signed autographs while on the move.The driver, Dale Earnhardt Jr., has become accustomed to fanfare. He is 41, in his 18th season in Nascar’s top series, and Sunday’s 400-mile race at Pocono Raceway will be his 591st.Of the 40 drivers expected to start Sunday’s race, only Tony Stewart, 45, who plans to retire after this season, has participated in more races at Pocono than Earnhardt, who has been in 32 races at Pocono and has won twice, both in 2014. Matt Kenseth has also been in 32 races there.With Jeff Gordon retiring after last season and Stewart about to leave, Earnhardt is becoming the sport’s elder statesman. His hair and beard are still reddish-brown, but he has acquired crow’s feet outside his eyes. He said he listened to alternative rock during breaks in a recent tire test — but it was from the 1990s. He sounds as if he has been around awhile.When asked Friday if he felt a sense of urgency because he has struggled lately, Earnhardt said: “No, I’m not feeling any anxiety. At 41 years old, you kind of get over that stuff. I’m not going to worry about it. I spent the first 18 years worrying myself to death.”Earnhardt enters Sunday’s race in 13th place in the standings, 116 points behind the leader, Kevin Harvick. Sixteen drivers will qualify for the 10-race Chase for the Sprint Cup playoff, and any driver who wins a race gets in.But Earnhardt has not won this season, and as low-key as he tries to be, that eats at him.Sunday’s race at Pocono, the peculiar two-and-a-half-mile tri-oval called the Tricky Triangle, will be the 14th race of the season, with only 12 left after that to complete the Chase field.Further, Earnhardt has not run well since finishing second in back-to-back races at Fort Worth and Bristol, Tenn., in April, finishing outside the top 10 in his last five points races.After running poorly, then crashing in a race May 15 at Dover, Del., he said on Dirty Mo Radio, his web channel: “We’ve got a problem, Houston. It’s time to start understanding how severe this situation is and really get to owning it.”But he softened before qualifying eighth for the race Friday. He said of the Chase: “I think we are a good enough team to make it whether we get a win or not. That is not a guarantee; I just feel confident that we will get in. A win would be what we expect — not just to lock ourselves in the Chase; we just expect to win. We’ve got a couple of years now of multiple-win seasons, and we expect to go and win races.”He won seven of 72 races in the last two seasons combined, his best sustained stretch since he won six races in 2004, his fifth full season. Between 2009 and 2013, he won only one race, at Michigan on June 17, 2012, so 2014 and 2015 were a renaissance. He is a 13-time winner of Nascar’s Most Popular Driver Award, voted upon by fans. No other active driver has won once.Earnhardt drives a powerful Chevrolet owned by Rick Hendrick, Gordon’s former boss, but Earnhardt has spun his wheels too much recently in his latest attempt for his first championship. His father, Dale Earnhardt Sr., won seven series championships.There is a hot, new, young second-generation driver in the series, William Clyde Elliott II, known as Chase, the 20-year-old son of the former champion Bill Elliott. Driving a Hendrick-owned Chevrolet with No. 24 — Gordon’s old number — Elliott has nine top-10 finishes in 13 races. Earnhardt has five.“To have a shot, you’ve got to be a consistent contender to win races,” Elliott said Friday of winning a championship. “And I think we have a little bit of work to do to be amongst those consistent contenders that have the ability each week. Those are the guys you’re going to have to beat when it comes this fall.”A former teammate of Earnhardt’s, Martin Truex Jr., has emerged as a sentimental choice to win a championship. Truex, who is driving for a one-car team, dominated the Coca-Cola 600 last weekend in Charlotte, N.C., leading 392 of 400 laps in victory.The 35-year-old Truex is seventh in the standings and is now assured of participating in the Chase. He said Friday that he could take chances that were unavailable to a driver who was not in the Chase.“You never want to just do something silly and throw away a chance at a good finish, but I think there’ll be opportunities for us to gamble, to do things maybe we wouldn’t do if we were worried about points,” Truex said. “So, yeah, I mean it’s from here till the Chase starts, it’s really all about wins and it’s not about points. If we can gamble and have a better opportunity to win, I’m sure we’ll probably take it.”Meanwhile, Earnhardt grinds away. He said Friday that he and his crew chief, Greg Ives, had a good relationship and that his team worked hard. But he shows up early at his team’s hauler, just in case he wants to bounce an idea off someone — or vice versa. He sounds as if he does not want to take anything for granted.“We will just continue to communicate as much as we can until we start to see the speed coming in the car,” he said. “I’m not too worried about it, to be honest with you, but I don’t want to feel like I’m not accountable, not available. I’m there, but I want him to know that I’m plugged in: Whatever you need from me, tell me what you need from me.”Then he walked outside, signed a few more autographs on the move, hopped back into the golf cart with mag wheels and hustled back to the garages.Advertisement