By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSNOV. 2, 2016
Tobias Harris scored 25 points and Marcus Morris added 22 on Tuesday night to lift the Detroit Pistons to a 102-89 victory at home over the Knicks.The Pistons have won three in a row — all by double digits — since dropping their season opener. They closed out this game with an impressive defensive stretch, holding the Knicks to 10 points in the fourth quarter.Carmelo Anthony scored 24 points for the Knicks, and Derrick Rose added 19.Kentavious Caldwell-Pope scored 19 points for Detroit, and Andre Drummond had 9 points and 13 rebounds.CAVALIERS STAY UNBEATEN Kyrie Irving scored a season-high 32 points, and Cleveland remained undefeated, beating the visiting Houston Rockets, 128-120. Kevin Love scored 24 points, and LeBron James had 19 points and 13 rebounds. The Cavaliers are 4-0 for the first time in 16 years. James Harden scored a season-high 41 points and had 15 assists for Houston.AdvertisementSPURS SUFFER FIRST LOSS George Hill had 22 points and the visiting Utah Jazz made 15 3-pointers, handing San Antonio its first loss of the season, 106-91. Rodney Hood had 19 points, Trey Lyles 15 and Shelvin Mack 14 for Utah. Kawhi Leonard led the Spurs with 30 points, and LaMarcus Aldridge added 21.AdvertisementPACERS RALLY PAST LAKERS Paul George scored 30 points, including Indiana’s final 12 of the game to rally the Pacers to a 115-108 victory at home over Los Angeles. The Lakers trailed by as many as 16 points, but they rallied and had their final lead at 108-107 before George put it away.ALLEN ENDS N.B.A. CAREER Ray Allen announced his retirement from the N.B.A., ending a career in which he made more 3-pointers than any player in league history and won championships with the Boston Celtics and the Miami Heat. Allen last played with the Heat in 2014. He had since entertained notions of coming back, but then announced his decision about stepping away in a post published on The Players’ Tribune, the website started by Derek Jeter.Henrik Lundqvist made a season-high 35 saves for his 60th career shutout to lead the Rangers to a 5-0 win over visiting St. Louis.Jimmy Vesey had a goal and two assists, and Dan Girardi, Rick Nash, Mats Zuccarello and Kevin Hayes also scored for the Rangers, who have won seven of their first 10 games.Jake Allen started in goal for St. Louis and allowed four goals on 20 shots until he was replaced by Carter Hutton after Zuccarello made the score 4-0 with 7 minutes 5 seconds remaining in the second period. Hutton stopped eight of the nine shots he faced.LIGHTNING CRUSH ISLANDERS Nikita Kucherov had two goals and two assists, Ben Bishop made 26 saves, and visiting Tampa Bay beat the Islanders, 6-1. Steven Stamkos, Brian Boyle, J. T. Brown, and Valtteri Filppula also scored. Dennis Seidenberg scored for the Islanders, giving them goals by defensemen in six straight games.MAPLE LEAFS EDGE OILERS Nazem Kadri scored his second goal of the game in overtime, lifting Toronto over visiting Edmonton, 3-2. Connor McDavid and Auston Matthews were scoreless in the first matchup of the last two No. 1 overall picks.AdvertisementReceiver Corey Davis caught 12 passes for 272 yards, a Mid-American Conference record, and three touchdowns to help No. 17 Western Michigan rout host Ball State, 52-20.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Broncos (9-0, 5-0) won their 11th straight game, the longest streak in school history. The previous record of 10 had stood since 1941.Broncos quarterback Zach Terrell went 23 of 34 for 367 yards, with Davis getting open all night and making the big plays look routine.Ball State (4-5, 1-4) played without its injured starting quarterback, Riley Neal.Fourth-seeded Milos Raonic hit 17 aces as he beat the Spaniard Pablo Carreño Busta, 7-6 (5), 6-4, to reach the third round of the Paris Masters.Seventh-seeded Tomas Berdych avoided another early exit by beating João Sousa, 6-3, 3-6, 7-5, to reach the third round as well.There were also second-round wins for 12th-seeded Richard Gasquet of France and No. 14 Grigor Dimitrov of Bulgaria.Four teams, including the five-time winner Bayern Munich, claimed early places in the Champions League knockout rounds.Bayern and Atlético Madrid both advanced from Group D, while Arsenal and Paris St.-Germain booked their tickets from Group A to the round of 16.AdvertisementBayern forward Robert Lewandowski scored twice in a comeback 2-1 win at P.S.V. Eindhoven, while Atlético’s Antoine Griezmann scored in stoppage time to clinch a 2-1 win at home against the Russian newcomer Rostov.Arsenal took an adventurous route in Bulgaria, trailing Ludogorets Razgrad by two early goals before a goal by Mesut Ozil in the 88th minute gave the Gunners a 3-2 win.P.S.G. dominated at Basel, but it needed a volley in the 90th minute by defender Thomas Meunier to seal a 2-1 win.Washington Redskins left tackle Trent Williams was suspended four games for violating the N.F.L.’s substance abuse policy.It was his second four-game suspension and his first since 2011. He tested positive for marijuana multiple times over the summer of 2011 and served the suspension that season.Williams will miss games against the Minnesota Vikings, the Green Bay Packers, the Dallas Cowboys and the Arizona Cardinals. He will be eligible to return to the team on Dec. 5.HARVIN PLANS TO RETURN TO BILLS Percy Harvin is preparing to come out of retirement to rejoin the Buffalo Bills and reinforce their injury-depleted group of receivers. Harvin’s agent announced his intentions on Tuesday morning. Harvin met with team officials at the Bills’ offices, and his signing is dependent on him passing a physical.A version of this article appears in print on November 2, 2016, on Page B16 of the New York edition with the headline: Knicks Sputter in Fourth and Fall to the Pistons.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.