
On Baseball By                     
 TYLER KEPNER
 
NOV. 2, 2016
CLEVELAND — It is easy to imagine a World Series rematch, someday soon, of the Chicago Cubs and the Cleveland Indians. Both teams have young players just entering their primes, and several stars on long-term contracts.But don’t print those tickets just yet.“I laugh so hard,” said Terry Francona, the Indians’ manager, who won two titles in Boston but never won back-to-back pennants. “When we were fortunate enough to win, people would come the next year and say, ‘Hey, is it hard to repeat?’ It’s hard to win the first one. I mean, a lot goes into it.”A lot can go wrong on the way to a dynasty. The Indians lost two World Series in the 1990s and quickly won three more division titles, but not a pennant. And the Cubs, considering their history, know better than to expect a long reign.Yet few teams are positioned better for sustained success. The Cubs’ starting infielders — Anthony Rizzo, Javier Baez, Addison Russell and Kris Bryant — are all under club control through 2021, and the ownership has the money to act boldly in free agency.AdvertisementThe Indians operate differently, but shrewd planning has given them a sound future. Their biggest financial commitment is to second baseman Jason Kipnis, who is halfway through a six-year, $52.5 million contract. No Cleveland player is owed even $10 million next season; the Cubs will have six such players, counting Jake Arrieta, who is due to earn more than that through salary arbitration.AdvertisementBut the Indians are in no danger of losing many core players. First baseman Mike Napoli and center fielder Rajai Davis are eligible for free agency, but the Indians bet on their young players before they had won much of anything. Now they will be rewarded for sound gambles.“We have a lot of players under control for a long period of time,” General Manager Mike Chernoff said. “It’s a team that’s mostly homegrown, and we haven’t had to supplement a ton with major free-agent signings. So we’ll lose a few guys that are key players on our team, but we largely bring back the same team next year and for the next couple of years, and we add Michael Brantley back to that.”Brantley — the outfielder who, in 2014, became the only Indians player this century to finish in the top three in voting for the Most Valuable Player Award — should be recovered from shoulder surgery. He is under club control through 2018, as are catcher Yan Gomes and the team’s dominant relievers, Andrew Miller and Cody Allen.Shortstop Francisco Lindor is not eligible for free agency until after the 2021 season, which is the last option year on the long-term contract of Cleveland’s ace, Corey Kluber. Starters Trevor Bauer, Carlos Carrasco and Danny Salazar are under club control through 2020, and Josh Tomlin through 2018.“We don’t have the highest payroll in the M.L.B., so you kind of have to find talent and develop that talent,” said Tomlin, who was drafted in 2006 and has been in the organization longer, consecutively, than any other player. “And when it gets here, you get a good group of guys that are already here and can lead them along the way. That helps build your future and helps you stay good for a long time.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Indians’ last aggressive foray into free agency was a nine-figure flop. Before the 2013 season, they signed Nick Swisher to a four-year, $56 million contract and Michael Bourn to a four-year, $48 million deal. Both helped the Indians win a wild-card spot in 2013 but were gone by last August.Chernoff said those deals came from need; the Indians, he said, lacked the internal options to fill those outfield spots, and the 2013 wild card helped the team chart a winning course.AdvertisementNow, though, the Indians believe they can avoid such risks, even with added revenue from attendance, which is likely to increase next season. The Indians ranked 13th in the American League in attendance this season (an average of 19,650 fans per game), but ticket sales usually surge after a team wins a pennant.“The structural differences between a small market like Cleveland and some of the bigger markets are so great that a boost in attendance can help us for sure — and will help us,” Chernoff said. “But it’s not going to change who we are and how we go about filling spots.”The Indians’ strong front office, led by Chris Antonetti, the president of baseball operations, helped sway Francona to join the team as manager before the 2013 season. Francona said the degree of difficulty made the Indians’ success more impressive.Their opening-day payroll, about $96 million, ranked them in the bottom third of major league teams, and far below the Cubs, whose payroll of roughly $170 million ranked near the top.“It’s not like when Jon Lester’s a free agent, Chris was like, ‘Oh, I don’t think he’s any good,’ you know?” Francona said. “You’re given a certain number and you have to make that work, and he’s managed to put together four years of pretty good teams. There’s no guarantees, but I think we’re built where our organization is pretty healthy.”The Cubs’ baseball operations president, Theo Epstein, was Francona’s boss in Boston. There, Epstein said, his first task was to strengthen the roster of a veteran team; he did it and won a World Series in 2004. Running the Cubs, whom he joined after the 2011 season, has been different.“The biggest difference in this one was the bottom up,” Epstein said. “We were single-minded about acquiring young talent and building a scouting and player-development department, kind of starting a little bit from scratch and building.”This Cubs team is more like Epstein’s 2007 Red Sox champions, a mix of homegrown talent like Lester, Jacoby Ellsbury, Jonathan Papelbon and Dustin Pedroia, and expensive veterans. In Chicago, Epstein has spent big on contracts for Lester, starter John Lackey and outfielders Jason Heyward and Ben Zobrist, but only after building a dynamic young nucleus.“Chemistry-wise, it’s kind of a perfect storm where the young guys just happen to be winners,” Epstein said. “They’re here for the right reasons, they’re already comfortable, they’re not here to put up numbers, they’re not here to enhance their brand — they’re here to be part of a winning team. And the older guys have chosen to be here, because they want to win and they want to win here.”AdvertisementYes, players now join the Cubs to win, a victory in itself for a franchise steeped in losing. The Indians, in their own way, have built a similar culture. A rematch is not guaranteed, but it sure would be fun.A version of this article appears in print on November 3, 2016, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Reaching the Top, Both Teams Are Poised to Stay There.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »