AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressOAKLAND, Calif. — As much as Kevin Durant might try to play down the drama, when he steps onto the court here against his former team, the Oklahoma City Thunder, for the first time on Thursday night, emotions will be running high for both sides.The last time the teams met, a little more than five months ago, Durant’s new team, the Golden State Warriors, rallied from a three-games-to-one deficit to beat Oklahoma City in the Western Conference finals.“I wouldn’t say ‘weird,’” Durant said. “I’ll just be locked in to follow the game plan, and just playing. But once you step on the court and see the different jersey, I’m sure it will hit me.”Durant will be facing his old running mate Russell Westbrook, who signed an extension with the Thunder.Durant departed as a free agent in July.“I think it will be a lot of emotions,” the Warriors’ Draymond Green said. “They’re going to want to beat him really bad; he’s going to want to beat them really bad.“In turn, we’re going to want to beat them really bad because we want him to beat them really bad. So I think it will be a fun game to play in. It’s always a high-intensity game against them, and I expect nothing less.”Westbrook went into Wednesday night’s game against the Clippers in Los Angeles leading the N.B.A. in scoring, averaging 38.7 points. Durant was sixth at 28.5.Golden State had Wednesday off from practice after a 127-104 win Tuesday night at Portland.“I’m going to enjoy myself and get away from basketball,” Durant said. “At shoot-around, we’ll think about going over the game plan and stuff and how we’re going to try to win the game.”Durant has scored 20 or more points in 68 straight regular-season games, the longest such streak since Michael Jordan’s 69 consecutive outings in 1990-91.Warriors Coach Steve Kerr has insisted that his team will need time to come together.Durant has made strides in learning the system and leads the Warriors in scoring, slightly ahead of Stephen Curry, the two-time reigning most valuable player.“K. D. is meshing with us beautifully,” Kerr said. “He fits right into what we want to do. He’s a playmaker. He’s perfect for what we already do.”Kerr added: “I’m sure he’s going to be excited. Every player is excited when he plays against his former team.“It’s a little different for Kevin, because he’s a superstar and the spotlight is on him. Everybody’s going to be asking him questions. The TV cameras will be on him and Russ. I’m sure it will be nice for both players to get this one behind them so they can go on with their season.”For Golden State, winning at Oracle Arena would mean a lot regardless of the opponent. The Warriors took a 29-point beating at the hands of San Antonio in their season opener Oct. 25, prompting fans to flood the exits with more than five minutes remaining in a rare blowout loss at home.But Golden State has a three-game winning streak since then. All of the wins have come on the road.“I’ve played Oklahoma City plenty of times, so I know what it’s like; he doesn’t,” Curry said of Durant. “We haven’t won at home in a while, so that’s all I’m really worried about. Just getting a home win.”Advertisement