
On Baseball By                     
 TYLER KEPNER
 
NOV. 2, 2016
CLEVELAND — The last time the Cleveland Indians won the World Series, in 1948, they had two Hall of Famers in the rotation, another in the bullpen, and three more in the starting lineup. The Indians team that will try to win this World Series, in Game 7 on Wednesday night against the Chicago Cubs, is different.“I went to see Cleveland play when they came to Texas this year,” said Eddie Robinson, 95, a former first baseman and the last living member of that team. “I told my wife, Betty, I said, ‘They have a good team, but I’ve never heard of anybody.’ ”Robinson, who attended Game 6 on Tuesday night, added that he had heard of Mike Napoli, but only because he roots for the Rangers and Napoli once played for them. Corey Kluber — the overpowering right-hander who, statistically, was the Indians’ best player this season — might as well have been just another guy.That would be just fine with Kluber, who has no use for celebrity and dismissed a campaign by his teammate Jason Kipnis to spread the word.Advertisement“He tried to give me a hard time about it,” Kluber said on Tuesday, before the Cubs beat the Indians, 9-3. “I told him: ‘Don’t waste your breath.’ It doesn’t matter to me.”AdvertisementIf Kluber leads the Indians to a championship in Game 7, though, he will etch his name in baseball lore. After winning Games 1 and 4, he has a chance to become the first pitcher in 48 years to start and win three games in a single World Series. The Indians might want to build Kluber a statue, even if he declines his invitation to the ceremony.“We’ve got Kluber on the mound, and he’s as good as they come,” Andrew Miller, the Indians’ relief ace, said. “You’ve got to like our chances. We’ve got a chance to win at home with our best guy on the mound. When you’re growing up, this is every kid’s dream. How many times have we all pretended we’re in Game 7 of the World Series? And here we are.”Since 1920, when Stan Coveleski did it for the Indians, only three pitchers have started and won three games in a single World Series: Lew Burdette of the Milwaukee Braves in 1957, Bob Gibson of the St. Louis Cardinals in 1967 and Mickey Lolich of the Detroit Tigers in 1968. Randy Johnson was the last to win three games in a World Series, for the Arizona Diamondbacks in 2001, but he started only twice.The Indians will most likely not ask much of Kluber, beyond what they already have. When late-season injuries cost the Indians two of their three best starters, it put an extra burden on Kluber, who started on short rest in Game 4 of the American League Championship Series and again in Game 4 of the World Series.Kluber has worked six innings in both starts against the Cubs, allowing one run, nine hits and one walk with 15 strikeouts. In five postseason starts, he is 4-1 with an 0.89 earned run average. And if he tires on Wednesday night, the Indians’ two best relievers, Miller and Cody Allen, are rested. Miller has not pitched since Saturday, Allen since Sunday.In Kluber, Miller and Allen, Manager Terry Francona can deploy three pitchers who have allowed just four earned runs in 59 innings this postseason, for a combined 0.61 E.R.A. The Cubs will counter with Kyle Hendricks, who has a 1.31 E.R.A. in four postseason starts (all at home). But Aroldis Chapman, their best reliever, worked an eight-out save in Game 5 and threw 20 pitches Tuesday, despite the Cubs’ big lead.“You always want to win the game, but the next best thing — and we’ve talked about this before we even started — was try to make them use pitching even in a loss,” Francona said. “So we hung around enough, at least Chapman had to pitch. You never know, maybe that helps us.”AdvertisementManager Joe Maddon said the Cubs could also use their ace, Jon Lester, in relief. Lester said he would pitch as long as Maddon needs — “There’s really no rules,” he said — but would rather Hendricks takes care of things.“Hopefully nothing weird is needed,” Lester said. “Hopefully Kyle is Kyle and the guys that have gotten us here all year are called upon and I can keep my happy little butt right there in that dugout and not have to worry about anything.”If the Indians scratch a lead off Hendricks, they will be thrilled to have Kluber protecting it. He won the A.L. Cy Young Award in 2014 and is a candidate again this season, after going 18-9 with a 3.14 E.R.A. His two-seam fastball is one of baseball’s best pitches and was especially effective in Game 1.“He had a lot of movement and was getting guys to take that pitch,” the Cubs’ Ben Zobrist said. “They thought it was a ball, and it would come back on the plate.”Anthony Rizzo, whose .364 World Series is second among Cubs regulars to Zobrist’s .391, said familiarity with Kluber would help the Cubs.“It’s good for us hitters, I’d say,” Rizzo said. “We made good adjustments off him last time. Let’s continue to do it and throw it all out there.”Kluber can also attack hitters with a cutter, a changeup and a hard curveball, which he used to great effect in the A.L.C.S. opener against Toronto. But the two-seamer made his career.A middling Class AA prospect with San Diego in 2010, Kluber was traded to the Indians in a three-way deal that summer for a veteran pitcher, Jake Westbrook, who went to St. Louis. (The Padres got outfielder Ryan Ludwick from the Cardinals.) Promoted a level the next year, Kluber had a 5.56 E.R.A. in 27 starts, going nowhere at age 25. That was when he started throwing the two-seamer.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Just throwing four-seam fastballs wasn’t going very well for me,” Kluber said. “So it was kind of, almost, a desperation thing. We had to try something different, and for whatever reason, the ball felt better in my hand that way.”AdvertisementKluber found that he could get the ball to run on a somewhat flat plane, more like a reverse cutter than a traditional sinker. The pitching coach Mickey Callaway said the angle of Kluber’s release — slightly across his body — helped give the pitch its sideways slash.“It’s almost like throwing a scuffed ball, but it’s not scuffed,” Callaway said. “You’re using the seams to your advantage.”Cleveland fans have reason to be nervous after losing two games in a row. With a loss on Wednesday, the Indians would become the first team since the 1979 Baltimore Orioles to drop Games 6 and 7 of the World Series at home.The Orioles’ loss gave the Pittsburgh Pirates their last championship. A Cleveland loss in Game 7 would give the Cubs their first in 108 years.Then again, these Indians could join Robinson as living Cleveland baseball champions. Francona can’t wait to find out.“It’s Game 7, you’ve got two really, really good pitchers, and it will be exciting,” he said. “It’s an honor to even be a part of it, and we’re going to give it everything we have. I can’t imagine a better group of guys to go through something like this with. I’m looking forward to it already.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »