By VICTOR MATHERNOV. 1, 2016
With the N.F.L. season around the halfway mark, there are many good teams. But just about any way you choose to look at it, one of them towers over all the rest.The New England Patriots.Check out something simple, like won-lost records. The Patriots are 7-1; the Dallas Cowboys are 6-1. Everyone else has lost twice or more.Want something a little more sophisticated, like point differential? The Patriots are at plus-85. Next are Dallas and Denver, but at plus-58.Only five quarterbacks have passer ratings above 100 this year. Matt Ryan of the Falcons stands at a sterling 115.8. The Patriots’ Tom Brady is at 133.9. He leads in a slew of other categories as well.AdvertisementThe leader in yards per reception, a category virtually always reserved for speedy wide receivers, is a tight end this year. Of course, it’s Rob Gronkowski. Running game? LeGarrette Blount has a league-leading nine rushing touchdowns.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Computer rankings agree. Jeff Sagarin’s system has nine teams clustered between a rating of 23 and 25. The Patriots are at 27.88, more than 3 points better than the next best team, the Broncos. The Massey ratings have the gap between No. 1 New England and No. 2 Denver the same as the gap between Denver and No. 8 Pittsburgh.AdvertisementOddsmakers, who try to factor in everything, see the Patriots as the league’s elite team. Ladbrokes has the Seahawks at 9-1 to win the Super Bowl, the Cowboys at 10-1 and the Steelers and the Packers at 12-1. The Patriots are 2-1.This season, optimism was not as sky high as it often is for the Patriots, and teams like the Seahawks, the Panthers, the Steelers and the Packers were rated higher by prognosticators. Only six of ESPN’s 42 experts liked the Patriots to win the Super Bowl before the season started.Last season’s conference championship loss to the Broncos seemed to have turned some against the Pats. Brady’s four-game suspension to start the season was also considered a negative. But the Patriots were 3-1 in Brady’s absence, and his replacement, Jimmy Garoppolo, adjusted so well that he ranks third in the N.F.L. in adjusted yards per pass this season. Brady is first, of course.Even the Patriots’ surprising trade Monday of linebacker Jamie Collins for a draft pick has not slowed their bandwagon, with most commentators shrugging and saying something like, “It seems to make no sense, but Bill Belichick must know what he’s doing.”Patriots fans are passionate, and Patriots haters match that passion.If you’re a hater, maybe you had better look away now.They’re going to win it, aren’t they?We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.