By DANIEL E. SLOTNIKNOV. 1, 2016
John Hicks, a standout offensive lineman at Ohio State University who became a first-round draft pick and rookie of the year for the Giants in 1974 but whose professional career rapidly fizzled, died on Saturday in Columbus, Ohio. He was 65.The cause was complications from diabetes, said his wife, Cindy.Hicks, at 6 feet 2 inches and about 260 pounds, started for the Ohio State Buckeyes as a tackle under Woody Hayes in 1970 and became a critical part of the team.He went on to capture the kind of national attention rarely given to offensive linemen when the Buckeyes won Big Ten Conference championships in 1970, 1972 and 1973. Ohio State went to the Rose Bowl in each of those seasons and emerged victorious in 1974, against the University of Southern California, by a score of 42-21.A Hicks teammate in 1973, Archie Griffin, a running back who won the Heisman Trophy twice, told The Columbus Dispatch in 2001 that having Hicks on the line was reassuring. “I just had so much confidence running behind him because I knew that what was supposed to be there was going to be there,” Griffin said.AdvertisementHicks was twice named an all-American and in 1973 won the Outland Trophy, for the best interior lineman in college football.That same year he finished second in the Heisman Trophy voting, behind Penn State running back John Cappelletti. It was a distinction unheard of for an offensive lineman. (Linemen Kurt Burris and Tom Brown had finished second in the Heisman voting in the past, but they had also played defense.)“John Hicks has never had a bad game,” Hayes, his coach, told The New York Times in 1973. “He’s the best football player on our team, and he’s the best interior lineman I’ve ever seen.”Hicks was drafted third over all by the Giants in 1974 and started at right guard that season, learning the finer points of pulling and pass blocking. “It’s a big difference changing from tackle to guard,” he told The Times.He was a rare bright spot during the Giants’ 1974 season, when they finished 2-12. He was voted United Press International’s National Football League rookie of the year.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The honor turned out to be the high point of Hicks’s N.F.L. career. He spent three more dismal seasons with the Giants, who finished 5-9, 3-11 and 5-9, and in 1976 was accused of slacking by teammates speaking anonymously to the press.AdvertisementThings grew worse in 1977. That August, during training camp, Giants Coach John McVay told The Times, “I don’t think John thinks he’s playing to his potential.”Hicks disagreed, telling The Times, “I’m playing better than I ever have.”He started in only eight games that season, and that December he got into a barroom fistfight with a teammate, Jack Gregory, a scrap they both played down.Traded to the Pittsburgh Steelers in 1978, Hicks did not play in a single regular-season or postseason game for them because of injuries. After the Steelers won the Super Bowl in January 1979, Hicks left the N.F.L.John Charles Hicks Jr. was born on March 21, 1951, in Cleveland. He played offense and defense at John Hay High School there before going to Ohio State, where he studied economics.He was inducted into the College Football Hall of Fame in 2001. After leaving the N.F.L., he ran a real estate development company.In 2004 he married Cindy Bredbeck, with whom he lived in Dublin, Ohio. He is also survived by a brother, Michael; a sister, Jacqueline Harris; three daughters, Alyssa Murfield, Alayna Hicks and Amarah Dawes; a son, Brandon; and four grandchildren.A version of this article appears in print on November 2, 2016, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: John Hicks, 65, a Star Lineman for Top Ohio State Teams.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.