AdvertisementSupported byThe best-selling sports books in September 2016, according to the New York Times best-seller list.1. THE BOYS IN THE BOAT by Daniel James Brown (Penguin). The American rowers who pursued gold at the 1936 Berlin Olympics.2. SHOE DOG by Phil Knight (Scribner). A memoir by the founder of Nike.3. RUN FAST. EAT SLOW. by Shalane Flanagan and Elyse Kopecky (Rodale). A broad range of recipes for athletes created by an Olympic marathoner and a chef/nutrition coach.4. BELIEVING IN MAGIC by Cookie Johnson with Denene Millner (Howard Books). A memoir by the wife of Magic Johnson.5. UNBROKEN by Laura Hillenbrand (Random House). An Olympic runner’s story of survival as a prisoner of the Japanese in World War II.6. HEAD BALL COACH by Steve Spurrier with Buddy Martin (Blue Rider). A memoir by a Heisman Trophy winner who coached the Florida Gators, the Washington Redskins and the South Carolina Gamecocks.7. BARBARIAN DAYS by William Finnegan (Penguin). A Pulitzer Prize-winning surfing chronicle and memoir by a writer for The New Yorker that celebrates a lifelong obsession.8. WRITINGS ON THE WALL by Kareem Abdul-Jabbar and Raymond Obstfeld (Time). The basketball legend shares his views on, and personal experiences regarding, the racial, religious and political divide, as well as his thoughts on possible solutions.9. THE QUEEN OF KATWE by Tim Crothers (Scribner). The true story of Phiona Mutesi, a teenage chess prodigy from the slums of Uganda.10. FIND A WAY by Diana Nyad (Knopf). A memoir by the champion swimmer who, in 2013, at age 64, swam 111 miles in shark-infested waters, from Cuba to Florida, in 53 hours.18. THE PERFECT PASS by S. C. Gwynne (Scribner). How two little-known college coaches in Iowa introduced offensive plays and passing techniques that revolutionized American football at every level.Rankings reflect sales for September 2016. The sports titles ranked here are selected by the editors from among all adult nonfiction books in all print and electronic formats, as reported to the New York Times best-seller list for the previous month. The definition of sports is deliberately broad and inclusive, so as to reflect all manner of the outdoor sports world, varying from the professional leagues to personal athleticism.Advertisement