By MIKE VORKUNOVAPRIL 13, 2017
As the N.B.A.’s trade deadline approached in mid-February, Carmelo Anthony heard the same rumors that everyone else did. He knew he had been shopped around by the Knicks, and that after several months of a public dispute with Phil Jackson, the team president, his future with the organization was murky.Anthony, the Knicks’ star, began to ponder his next steps.“There was a point in time,” he said on Wednesday, “when I didn’t think I would be back here.”His assumption was premature, at least at that point in the season. The Knicks did not trade him as the deadline passed, but the next two months brought little relief. Anthony took the floor at Madison Square Garden on Wednesday night, having donned his white No. 7 Knicks jersey perhaps for the last time. Since the trade deadline passed, speculation about his future has not abated.The game may have served as his goodbye. At 8:09 p.m., he was introduced to a frothing crowd that gave him a warm ovation — a sign of gratitude for nearly seven seasons of service. Yet Anthony’s presence, amid speculation over his future, cast a bit of a cloud over the night.AdvertisementAnthony played 23 minutes and scored 17 points in a 114-113 win over the Philadelphia 76ers, but sat out the final 15-plus minutes. The victory gave the Knicks a 31-51 record, tying Minnesota for the sixth-worst record in the N.B.A and finally ending another miserable season, one that will be remembered more for controversy and futility than anything else.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Anthony sat down on the bench with 3 minutes 3 seconds remaining in the third quarter and never re-entered the game, even as a “We want Melo” chant broke out in the fourth. His minutes had been planned out before the game, and Coach Jeff Hornacek had no interest in changing them, even though Hornacek had said Tuesday that Anthony would miss the game; Anthony said after the game that his playing had always been the plan.AdvertisementAfter Anthony had finished doling out his apparel to the fans who crept down to the court, he retreated to the locker room and addressed the elephant in the room: his future.“At this point it’s all on me,” he said. “I have a lot of thinking and reflecting to do. It’s all on me at this point. I’m pretty sure the organization has an idea, a thought of what they want to do, how they want to do it. But at this point it’s all on me.”Anthony maintains control of his future. He has two years remaining on the five-year contract he signed in 2014 and holds a no-trade clause that allows him to pick his exit and his destination.But a season-long rift with Jackson, the team president, has taken its toll. Anthony was wholly committed to the Knicks when this season began, but that attitude wavered as he took repeated public barbs of varying subtlety from Jackson.The two will meet this week for the usual exit meetings, along with General Manager Steve Mills and Hornacek. While no fireworks are expected, Anthony hinted that he could use more clarity. Even when he believed his divorce from the team was near, a lack of communication left him uncertain. That issue has not been resolved either.“I would love to be back,” Anthony said. “But there’s some things I would love to see different. Kind of just the mentality, just a winning mentality and wanting to win and being committed to that.”AdvertisementAnthony declined to go into specifics but suggested that he wanted changes that would prove to him that the Knicks were committed to winning now. But words would not do much to sway him, he said. He is looking for action.The Knicks’ preparations over the summer will reveal how they view the 2017-18 season. Anthony knows that the team could commit to rebuilding and forsake the present. They will have a top-10 pick in this June’s N.B.A. draft. Kristaps Porzingis is a budding star, and the rookie center Willy Hernangomez has emerged as a building block. Hornacek has asserted that the team will be committed to the triangle offense — long a nuisance to Anthony — from the outset.Anthony expressed no interest in a diminished role and said he would steel him himself for any idea the Knicks throw at him.But a decision will not come quickly. He will take the next few weeks to reflect and confer with his family and his representatives. Winning, he says, will be his primary incentive.If this is the end, it would be a subdued finish to a partnership that began with grand expectations. Anthony joined the organization in a high-profile trade in 2011 but has endured four consecutive losing seasons. The Knicks hoped he could be a savior, but he may leave asmore of a scapegoat.Now that relationship appears to be on the precipice of breaking apart. As the Knicks’ season was caught in a downward spiral, Anthony said he had found peace amid a fourth straight losing season and his own drama. But with the year over, he is left to make a choice on what next season will look like and whether he will be back in New York.A version of this article appears in print on April 13, 2017, on Page B15 of the New York edition with the headline: Questions Hang Over Knicks’ Finale.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.