AdvertisementSupported byYankees 8, Rays 4By Seth BerkmanBrett Gardner sneaked into the Yankees’ clubhouse after an 8-4 win over the Tampa Bay Rays on Wednesday, grabbed a few belongings and slipped away largely unbothered, without discussing the bruised jaw and strained neck that forced him to leave the game.An injured player rarely avoids the news media so easily, but Yankees General Manager Brian Cashman provided something of a diversion by holding court a few hundred feet away — although he was probably unhappy to be addressing the news media again so early in the season. Despite encouraging signs from the Yankees, who moved back to .500 with a solid major league debut by starter Jordan Montgomery and Aaron Judge’s third home run in three games, injuries have been the dominant narrative for the organization so far this season.Cashman provided an update on the health of pitcher James Kaprielian, the Yankees’ 2015 first-round draft pick. Last Thursday, Kaprielian, 23, was placed on the 15-day minor league disabled list with pain in his right elbow, having made only three minor league appearances last year because of similar elbow trouble.He had a magnetic resonance imaging exam on Friday and then visited Dr. Neal ElAttrache on Tuesday for a second opinion. Cashman said ElAttrache had mapped out Kaprielian’s options: either having an operation — possibly Tommy John surgery — or continuing to pitch through the pain.“So he’s basically going to have a day or two, I think, to talk to his father and his family and his agency and then get back to us what he would like to see happen,” Cashman said.If Kaprielian opts for an operation, it could set back his already injury-plagued career by another year. Cashman was asked if, from his perspective, the matter might become the worst-case scenario. Indeed it might, he said.Last year, the Yankees would not reveal if Kaprielian had torn the ulnar collateral ligament in his elbow, and Cashman would not comment on the exact nature of his current injury. But another detour for Kaprielian is frustrating for a front office that had envisioned him rising through the minor league ranks by this point.This season, the Yankees (4-4) are trying to establish and develop a young core of homegrown talent. But Kaprielian’s setback, combined with catcher Gary Sanchez’s trip to the disabled list and an ankle injury that has kept first baseman Greg Bird out of the last four games, has muddled their plans.Manager Joe Girardi said he hoped Bird would be back in the lineup Thursday, although Gardner’s status after his collision on Wednesday was unknown.With the game tied at 3-3 in the sixth inning, Gardner pinch-hit for Pete Kozma with one out and runners on first and third. Gardner hit a ground ball to reliever Xavier Cedeno, who, seeing that his middle infielders were unable to cover second base in time, rushed a throw to first base. Rickie Weeks could not field the short hop that resulted, and as Weeks turned, he collided with Gardner, who was barreling down the line.The play allowed Chase Headley to score a go-ahead run from third base, but attention immediately turned to the sprawled players near first.Gardner’s chest had slammed into Weeks’s head, sending both of them to the ground. Gardner slowly crawled to the base and then lay on his back for several minutes before exiting the game. Weeks also left with neck and right shoulder soreness.Cashman said that he hoped Gardner would not be headed to the disabled list but that the play looked as if “two Mack trucks collided.”Girardi and Cashman said Gardner had cleared early exams but would be re-evaluated Thursday, so the possibility that he sustained a concussion remains.After Headley scored, the Yankees added two runs in the sixth inning for a 6-3 lead. Judge then hit a two-run homer in the seventh.Gardner’s injury marred Montgomery’s first career start, in which he struck out seven over four and two-thirds innings and allowed two earned runs.Montgomery, 24, struck out the first two batters he faced but could not capitalize on an 0-2 count against Evan Longoria, resulting in a walk. Weeks followed by belting a 1-2 pitch over the left-field wall.Still, Montgomery showed an ability to rebound, forcing Corey Dickerson into a groundout to end the inning. Montgomery also escaped jams with two runners on base in the third and fourth innings.For Cashman, simply seeing Montgomery exit the game in good health might have been enough of a positive sign.“I thought he did a tremendous job,” Cashman said. “A continuation of what we saw in spring training. A lot of poise. A lot of pitchability. So it looks like somebody who hopefully can help us for quite some time.”Advertisement