By RORY SMITHAPRIL 12, 2017
Didier Drogba was not short of choices. In the months since he called time on his stay with the Montreal Impact, Drogba has fielded inquiries about his availability from all corners of the globe. Even at 39, the light fading on his playing career, his name carries enough weight to command attention.There were offers from France, where it all began, and from England, where he had long assumed it would finish. Corinthians, of Brazil, even started selling jerseys bearing his name. Like any household player at loose ends these days, he received a lucrative approach from China, too.In the end, though, it was the curveball choice that appealed most. Drogba, an Ivorian who is one of the most decorated players of his generation and recognized as one of the most influential strikers of the last 20 years, will finish one journey, and start another, in Arizona.A multiple English, and one-time European, champion with Chelsea, he has agreed to join Phoenix Rising, of the United Soccer League, which is one step removed from Major League Soccer in the United States’ slightly splintered soccer pyramid.AdvertisementHis contract allows for either one or two more seasons as a player, before moving to a role either in the back office or on the club’s coaching staff. He has also taken equity in the team, which aims to secure one of four M.L.S. expansion slots in the next three years. “I believe I can help them reach M.L.S.,” Drogba said. “I have always liked challenges.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In Phoenix, Drogba will encounter two. The first is helping to deliver M.L.S. to the state and to the Southwest. Phoenix has a compelling case for an expansion slot: It is growing rapidly, with large millennial and Hispanic populations; it sits in a corner of the country with no M.L.S. presence; and it has an ambitious ownership group with just a little stardust, in the form of Diplo, a D.J., and the bassist Pete Wentz, behind the principal investor, Berke Bakay. The competition, though, is intense: 12 cities submitted bids to be considered for a franchise to M.L.S. in February, including Detroit, San Diego and St. Louis.AdvertisementDrogba’s arrival is meant, in part, to help tilt the balance. His presence in Phoenix — alongside two other marquee players in Shaun Wright-Phillips and the Mexican international Omar Bravo — serves both to showcase the team’s intent and to dazzle M.L.S. with glamour. “They called me and asked me to be the face of the franchise,” Drogba said. “That was amazing for me.”So, too, he said, were the plans Bakay and his team put in front of him, particularly for an advanced, soccer-specific stadium and campus. “I went to Phoenix and they showed me what they had presented to M.L.S., and the reaction they had got,” he said. “Everything is in place in the city and in the state. All that is missing now is that M.L.S. status.”His second challenge, though, is more personal. For all his raw power on the field, Drogba is a bright, contemplative character away from it. He likes “to know what I am going to do,” he said, and has been trying to work out what his “after football” life will look like for “three or four years.” He has never considered walking away from the game — “that was not an option,” he said — but he has not decided precisely what he wants to do within it.The appeal of Phoenix to him, then, was that it provided a chance to test the waters. He will complete his coaching badges during the final act of his playing career; he could yet choose a career in management. More likely, though, he will investigate roles in the back office, probably as a sporting director, when he does retire. “This is a transition for me,” he said. “It is time to prepare for the next stage of my life, to get everything ready for the next phase.”He has long suspected, though, that whatever comes next, it will be in the United States. He first took notice of the growth of M.L.S. when visiting as a player on preseason tours with Chelsea. “You could see the difference between when we came in my first years at the club and when we came back a few years later,” he said. He was sufficiently impressed by it to spend 18 months with Montreal, where he helped the team to the postseason for the first time.His move to Phoenix is further proof of his conviction. Professional soccer’s arrival in Phoenix has not been a smooth one: The previous two U.S.L. teams — Phoenix F.C. and Arizona United — struggled to find a home stadium and support base. Drogba’s move to Phoenix serves as proof that he not only believes soccer is going to stick around, but that the Rising will also.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.