By ALLAN KREDAAPRIL 12, 2017
Doug Weight was officially named head coach of the Islanders on Wednesday, three months after he took over from Jack Capuano on an interim basis.Weight, 46, is 24-12-4 since moving behind the bench and nearly led the team to the N.H.L. playoffs after it started 17-17-8 under Capuano.The Islanders’ play was spirited and energetic under Weight, but the team still could not force its way into a playoff berth for a third consecutive season. It finished one point behind the Toronto Maple Leafs for the second wild-card spot in the Eastern Conference.Weight expressed confidence in his squad despite several lopsided losses in crucial games down the stretch, particularly an 8-4 home loss to Carolina on March 13 and a meltdown at Philadelphia on March 30 when it allowed five goals in the first period in a 6-3 loss to the Flyers.Advertisement“I felt like the players were responding,” said Weight, who concluded his two-decade playing career with the Islanders in 2011 before joining the team’s coaching staff under Capuano. “Our team got better. I did gain momentum and I felt our team did.”AdvertisementGeneral Manager Garth Snow said he was confident with Weight in charge heading into next season.“Doug had the respect of the players,” Snow said on a conference call Wednesday morning. “As soon as he walks into a room, he has command. You see how the players competed for him. Those are all positive attributes.”Snow’s involvement in Wednesday’s announcement seemed to indicate he also would remain in his position, which he has held since 2006. He has only one playoff series win to show for it.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Islanders struggled in the first half behind the free agents Andrew Ladd and Jason Chimera, who were added after the departures of veterans like Kyle Okposo, Frans Nielsen and Matt Martin via free agency last summer.The problems were compounded by a confusing three-way goalie situation with Jaroslav Halak, Thomas Greiss and Jean-Francois Berube. Snow defended the decision to demote Halak in late December and keep the younger Berube on the roster. Halak eventually returned to the Islanders for the playoff push.“In all candor, our goaltending struggled maybe the first 10 weeks, and we had an injury at Bridgeport,” Snow said, referring to a season-ending knee injury to Christopher Gibson with the Sound Tigers. “There was a fear that if we put J.F. on waivers, we were confident he would have been picked up and we would have been left with Jaro and Thomas Greiss and two very young goaltenders trying to develop.”Weight said he would take time to assess the future makeup of his staff.“I want people who want to work and have a passion to win,” he said. “I’m excited to be entrusted.”Snow expressed hope that the Islanders captain John Tavares and the team could reach an agreement on a contract extension in the months ahead. Tavares, 26, will be entering the final year of his contract next season and can sign an extension starting in July.Advertisement“John has been here since he was an 18-year-old kid and he’s the face of our team and our franchise,” Snow said. “He knows how we feel about him and how much respect we have for him.”As he has done repeatedly during his tenure, Snow was left to try to explain another disappointing and premature finish to an Islanders season.“When you’re sitting here like we are with 94 points, one point out of a playoff spot, you leave yourself open to criticism,” he said. “It’s part of the drill. We get it.”Weight promised to get to work immediately on next season.“I’m a note taker, so I have 50 million things in my head,” he said.A version of this article appears in print on April 13, 2017, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: Islanders Keep Coach.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.