By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSAPRIL 12, 2017
MONTREAL — Henrik Lundqvist got over his troubles with the Montreal Canadiens in a hurry.Lundqvist survived a shaky first period to make 31 saves in the Rangers’ 2-0 victory on Wednesday night in their playoff opener.It will be up to the Canadiens to come up with an answer in Game 2 on Friday night at Bell Centre, or else risk heading to New York down two games in the best-of-seven series.“We didn’t put out there that Hank is going to have a hard time here,” Rangers Coach Alain Vigneault said. “We’ve always had a lot of confidence in his game, and what he did tonight was what we expected.”Montreal went 3-0-0 against Lundqvist and the Rangers in the regular season, continuing a trend from the last two seasons in which Carey Price has shone against the Rangers while Lundqvist has labored. But the same may not apply in the postseason.AdvertisementWhen the Rangers knocked off the Canadiens in six games in 2014, a series in which Price was injured in the opening game, Lundqvist was pulled for Game 5 but bounced back with a Game 6 shutout. His shutout in this year’s opener put him in the career lead among active N.H.L. goalies with 10.Advertisement“We know Hank’s going to bring it,” the Rangers’ captain, Ryan McDonagh, said. “His focus and determination really fed to the rest of the team.”Tanner Glass scored in the first period. Montreal pulled Price late in the third, but Michael Grabner settled the issue with an empty-net goal with 1 minute 10 seconds left.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Montreal outshot the Rangers, 16-5, in the first period but could not beat Lundqvist.Fired up by a national anthem performance by the 1960s pop star Ginette Reno, the Canadiens were all over the Rangers in the opening period, but it was the Rangers who struck first, at 9 minutes 50 seconds, on only their third shot. Montreal’s Tomas Plekanec won a draw in his own zone, but Glass, a fourth-line wing, pounced on it and lifted a backhand from the slot over Price’s shoulder.“Certainly a goal helped to settle us down and get back to the focus and making the plays we needed to make,” McDonagh said.Montreal Coach Claude Julien said he wanted to make “little adjustments” for Game 2.“We can definitely get better in the board battles,” Julien said. “Little details here and there made the difference. We had some chances in the first and came out of it down, 1-0, when you should have been up. That’s what happens in the playoffs. What you need to do is keep your composure. You face adversity along the way, you regroup and go back to work.”The Canadiens had some clean chances but were up against a Rangers defense that did a good job of limiting rebounds.“It was more about finish,” Julien said. “We had some good looks. There were loose pucks there. It’s about winning those little battles for loose pucks and making sure you pounce on them and finish it off.”A version of this article appears in print on April 13, 2017, on Page B15 of the New York edition with the headline: Lundqvist Turns Aside 31 Shots, and His Struggles Against Montreal.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.