AdvertisementSupported byBy Daniel VictorWhen The New York Times asked readers how to fix baseball, we all neglected to consider the obvious answer: cats.Seldom does traditional baseball please a crowd the way a renegade feline scampering across the infield can. Few home runs are as gratifying as a groundskeeper futilely chasing a cat who is having absolutely no part of it.On Tuesday, fans of the Miami Marlins were delighted to stop watching baseball for a bit as a stray cat evaded capture in the outfield.A cat intrusion on #NationalPetDay? How purrr-fect. 🐱🎥: https://t.co/njxsxShFnD#LetsPlay pic.twitter.com/oawbDp48OUGiancarlo Stanton, the Marlins’ all-star right fielder, tried to directly approach the cat as it burrowed under the outfield wall. An overconfident Marlins employee tried to pet the cat, who declined the overture and scurried away.A pink advertisement for T-Mobile on the outfield wall caught the cat’s eye, and it leapt toward the heavens, scaling the advertisement. For a moment it seemed stuck under a yellow ledge, but it proved no obstacle as the cat found its way higher, above the outfield wall and clear of the field.“Look at this cat,” Rich Waltz, a Marlins announcer, beamed on the team’s broadcast. “Terrific stuff by the cat. Outstanding!”The cat settled itself away from the dirty hands of humans on a gaudy sculpture that lights up, sprays water and does other gaudy things on the occasion of each Marlins home run. It lay down on a portion of the sculpture painted to look like water, but found no tuna or minnows.The baseball game resumed, and the Marlins announced that in the event of a home run they would not activate the sculpture. More than an hour after the game finished, the Marlins said the cat had darted away, eschewing the media spotlight, never to be seen again by its adoring fans. The Marlins beat the Atlanta Braves, 8-4.The cat became the latest animal in a long history of baseball field invaders to capture the hearts of the public.In 1984, a cat on the field at the Kingdome in Seattle brought joy to everyone except the groundskeeper, who was bitten and clawed as he tried to carry the cat to safety.Some cats want to prove their speed and sprint across the field, ending with either an open bullpen door or a quick-handed staff member.But cats are not the only diamond disrupters in the animal kingdom. Squirrels have been known to frequently take in a ballgame, though they tend to be more acceptable on the field than cats.As seen during a 2014 game, play can continue when a squirrel is in foul territory or the outfield, but a squirrel in the infield is not cool. Dancing across the netting is fine, but running into a dugout will cause a delay.And sometimes pigeons like the space right between the pitcher and the batter. In 2014, Vance Worley, a Pittsburgh Pirates pitcher, tried to bowl a baseball near two pigeons to shoo them away, but they were unperturbed.While it would appear none of those animals were harmed, at least one animal was not so lucky during a much-replayed pitch by Randy Johnson, the Hall of Fame pitcher, in 2001. R.I.P. to the bird.Advertisement