By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSAPRIL 12, 2017
European soccer’s governing body insisted on Wednesday that Borussia Dortmund had agreed to the rapid rescheduling of its Champions League quarterfinal, responding to complaints by the German club about being forced to play a day after its bus was targeted by bombs.After losing 3-2 to Monaco on Wednesday, Dortmund Coach Thomas Tuchel said his players had wanted more time to recover from the previous day’s attack that left defender Marc Bartra requiring surgery on his wrist.But UEFA said Dortmund had been satisfied with playing the first leg against Monaco just 24 hours after three devices packed with metal pins detonated close to the team bus.“The decision to play the match today at 18.45 was made last night at BVB stadium in cooperation and complete agreement with clubs and authorities,” the UEFA communications director, Pedro Pinto, told The Associated Press. “We were in touch with all parties today and never received any information which suggested that any of the teams did not want to play.”AdvertisementTuchel said he felt that UEFA had not taken the attack seriously enough and claimed “we weren’t asked at all at any time” about whether to proceed with the game.Advertisement“Basically, we had the feeling that we were being treated as if a beer can had hit our bus, and half an hour later the decision was there” that the game would be played the following evening, Tuchel said, adding, “That gives you a feeling of powerlessness.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Despite the congested calendar in the final months of the season, Dortmund felt the game could have been shifted to a later date. The second leg is being played next Wednesday in Monaco.“We were not attacked on the field by an opponent; we were attacked from inside the bus as men,” Tuchel added in a broadcast interview with the former Norwegian international player Jan Aage Fjortoft. “Of course this has an effect and it was a terrible experience for all of us. We wanted to have a bit more time to deal with it. We didn’t get the time.“The team wanted so badly a bit of time to deal with it so we were in our best shape because the dream is to go to the semifinals in Europe. We had the feeling today everybody that we are not in the best shape, not focused enough for football. Who will blame us for that? Nobody.”The Dortmund players were back in training on Wednesday morning to prepare for the evening’s game.“I have a bit more experience than my players and I told them not to worry so much about it, try not to think so much about it, it does not get better,” Tuchel said. “Everybody has the right to deal with it the way he wants to. If you want to talk about it, talk. If you want to be silent, be silent. If you need a hug, I hug you, or find someone who hugs you at home.“It’s all different characters and it was very inspiring to see how we dealt with it in the second half. We made a good second half. The game is over now and it feels a bit weird.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.