By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSFEB. 24, 2017
The track and field authorities cleared three Russian athletes to compete next month at the European indoor track championships and other events.The International Association of Athletics Federations has established new criteria requiring Russian athletes to show they have been subject to compliant antidoping regimens while the Russian track federation is suspended.The three athletes cleared Thursday are the pole-vaulter Anzhelika Sidorova, the sprinter Kristina Sivkova and the hammer thrower Alexei Sokirsky.The long jumper Darya Klishina and the sprinter Yulia Stepanova had previously been declared eligible.AdvertisementKlishina was the only Russian track and field athlete to compete at last year’s Olympics. Stepanova is the whistle-blower who was cleared by the I.A.A.F. but was denied entry into the Olympics by the International Olympic Committee.AdvertisementI.A.A.F. said six applications had been declined. The rest of the 48 applications remain under review.Mika Zibanejad scored the shootout winner, and the Rangers continued a strong February with a 2-1 victory over the host Maple Leafs.Henrik Lundqvist made 32 saves, and J. T. Miller scored the game-tying goal in the third period for the Rangers, who improved to 8-1-1 this month.The Rangers moved into third place in the Metropolitan Division, with 80 points.ISLANDERS 3, CANADIENS 0 The rookie Anthony Beauvillier scored in the first period, Thomas Greiss made 24 saves, and the Islanders won in Montreal. Anders Lee scored in the second period and John Tavares added an empty-netter in the final minute to seal the Islanders’ third straight win.The New Orleans tandem of the newly acquired All-Star DeMarcus Cousins and the All-Star Game most valuable player Anthony Davis was no match for visiting Houston.The reserve Lou Williams hit seven 3-pointers and scored 27 points in his Houston debut, and the Rockets routed the Pelicans, 129-99.Davis had 29 points, and Cousins finished with 27 points and 14 rebounds. But New Orleans turned the ball over 20 times and could not keep pace with Houston, which hit 20 3-pointers.AdvertisementCody Gribble and Wesley Bryan returned to a familiar course in Palm Beach Gardens, Fla., and each shot a six-under-par 64 to share the early lead at the Honda Classic.Bryan was last at PGA National for the Web.com Tour qualifying tournament in 2015. Gribble was there the year before.The defending champion Adam Scott opened with a 68. Sergio García was among the leaders until a rough stretch near the end of his round also led to a 68.The defending champion Sam Querrey reached the Delray Beach Open quarterfinals in Florida by hitting 13 aces and winning 24 of 25 first-serve points in a 6-2, 6-3 victory over Jared Donaldson.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Querrey, ranked 35th and seeded No. 4, saved both break points he faced and took an hour to beat Donaldson, 20, in a match between two Americans at the hardcourt tournament.In other action, Donald Young of the United States followed up his upset of No. 2 seed Ivo Karlovic of Croatia by rallying to defeat the American Taylor Fritz, 4-6, 6-3, 6-4, and reach the quarterfinals.MONFILS AND TSONGA WIN IN FRANCE Top-seeded Gaël Monfils and No. 2 Jo-Wilfried Tsonga, both of France, won in straight sets to reach the quarterfinals of the Open 13 in Marseille.Monfils beat Sergiy Stakhovsky of Ukraine, 6-1, 6-4, in less than an hour.Tsonga, who won the World Tennis Tournament in Rotterdam, Netherlands, last weekend for his 13th career title, defeated Illya Marchenko of Ukraine, 6-3, 6-3.KERBER AND WOZNIACKI PREVAIL Top-seeded Angelique Kerber of Germany advanced to her first Dubai Tennis Championships semifinals, while Caroline Wozniacki of Denmark reached her sixth semifinals in the United Arab Emirates.AdvertisementKerber, who is two match wins away from returning to the No. 1 ranking, beat Ana Konjuh of Croatia, 6-3, 6-2, in the quarterfinals.Wozniacki, who won the Dubai title in 2011, defeated CiCi Bellis of the United States, 6-3, 6-2.Makayla Epps scored the go-ahead basket with 8.7 seconds remaining in overtime, and Evelyn Akhator had 8 points in the extra period to give No. 22 Kentucky (20-8, 11-4 Southeastern Conference) a 78-75 upset victory over No. 3 Mississippi State (27-2, 13-2) in Lexington, Ky.After Akhator’s layup with 55 seconds left it tied at 75, Epps grabbed Makenzie Cann’s missed 3-point attempt and moved in for a soft tip-in to put Kentucky ahead to stay in a tense game that featured nine ties and 15 lead changes, with most coming after halftime. Maci Morris’s free throw with 1.8 seconds left sealed the victory and gave the Wildcats their eighth straight 20-win season.U.C.L.A. MEN DEFEAT ARIZONA STATE T .J. Leaf scored 25 points, and No. 5 U.C.L.A. (25-3, 12-3 Pacific-12) survived an upset bid by host Arizona State (13-16, 6-10) with an 87-75 victory.Lyon powered into the final 16 of the Europa League, handing Alkmaar a second heavy beating in a week. Lyon followed up a 4-1 victory in the first leg with a 7-1 thrashing at home, with Nabil Fekir scoring three times. Lyon’s 11-2 total was the second-biggest aggregate success in the competition’s history.In other matches, Villarreal, behind by 4-0 after the first leg, won the return match at Roma, 1-0, but still bowed out. Borussia Mönchengladbach, down by 1-0 after the first leg, scored four goals in a 17-minute span at Fiorentina and advanced, 4-3 on aggregate.Celta Vigo scored in second-half stoppage time and then in extra time to eliminate host Shakhtar Donetsk, which had won all of its seven games in the Europa League, 2-1 on aggregate. Gent advanced, 3-2 on aggregate, after a 2-2 draw with Tottenham at Wembley Stadium.The Jets released two veterans: right tackle Breno Giacomini and kicker Nick Folk.Needing salary-cap room, the Jets released Folk, their second-leading career scorer, and Giacomini. That will save them about $7.5 million — $3 million for Folk and $4.5 million for Giacomini.Releasing Giacomini, 31, who was plagued by injuries last season, was expected. Parting ways with Folk, a consistently strong performer in his seven seasons with the Jets, was more of a surprise.A version of this article appears in print on February 24, 2017, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: Track and Field; 3 Russians Cleared to Compete in European Indoor Event.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.