By WALLACE MATTHEWSJULY 1, 2017
It was Asdrubal Cabrera bobblehead day at Citi Field on Saturday, which was slightly embarrassing since it was only a week ago that Cabrera demanded a trade after he learned the Mets were moving him from shortstop to second base.Then the Mets made three errors and two egregious base-running gaffes, failed to get four innings out of their starting pitcher, and found themselves trailing the Philadelphia Phillies, the worst team in the National League, by three runs in the bottom of the seventh inning. Suddenly, a slightly embarrassing day was on the verge of being catastrophic.After all, it was only a day earlier that General Manager Sandy Alderson had been predicting a second-half turnaround for his injury-depleted club, starting with what were supposed to be three easy games against the bottom feeders of the N.L. East. He even repeated his forecast in a casual conversation with a handful of reporters about three hours before first pitch.“Tomorrow’s Game Number 81, right?” Alderson said. “So we win today and tomorrow and we’ll be three games under .500. Then we go 12 games over in the second half, and that gets us to 87 wins. It can be done. You never know.”AdvertisementThat looked like the worst kind of wishful thinking when Phillies first baseman Tommy Joseph launched a pitch from Fernando Salas into the left-field seats for a tiebreaking three-run homer in the top of the seventh.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But the Mets rallied and Cabrera, whose reluctance to be a Met has waned since his trade request, belted a two-run home run to cap the comeback in a 7-6 victory, the Mets’ fourth straight win and the seventh in their last eight games.“These are the games where you got to say to yourself, look, we’re not out of it,” Manager Terry Collins said. “We got a good team here. Let’s put a couple of hits on the board and try to put one over the fence.”AdvertisementCabrera’s home run followed a home run by T. J. Rivera to lead off the inning, a double by Travis d’Arnaud and a run-scoring single by pinch-hitter Wilmer Flores, all off Phillies reliever Pat Neshek.That inning rescued what to that point had been an ugly day, starting with the unsurprising announcement that outfielder Michael Conforto had been placed on the 10-day disabled list with a bone bruise on his left hand.Then, Zack Wheeler, in his first start since he came off the disabled list with biceps tendinitis, was lifted from the game after coming apart in the fourth inning. He followed an error at third base by Rivera with two walks and an error of his own — dropping the relay on what should have been an inning-ending double play — that allowed two runs.There were other gaffes as well. Jose Reyes doubled in his first two at-bats, but nullified both with base-running mistakes. The first time, he was picked off by Phillies starter Jeremy Hellickson. The second time, he broke for third on an infield grounder and was easily thrown out. That mistake cost the Mets a run when pinch-hitter Brandon Nimmo doubled off the wall in right.Lucas Duda gave the Mets a 3-2 lead with a solo homer in the fourth, but the Phillies tied the game in the fifth on an double by Joseph. And when Joseph homered two innings later, the stage seemed set for a disastrous loss.But the Mets put a couple of hits on the board, and then Cabrera put one over the fence.Cabrera’s home run did not close the book on the game. There was a 57-minute rain delay with two outs in the eighth inning, forcing Collins to use Addison Reed for a four-out save, and some anxious moments in the ninth when Aaron Altherr narrowly missed tying the game with a drive off the wall in right that became a leadoff double.Afterward, bedecked in the regalia of the Mets’ player of the game — a plastic crown and a blue-and-orange boxing robe — Cabrera declined to revisit the discontent he expressed a week ago when he learned that the shortstop job would belong to Reyes.“I’m not going to talk about that anymore,” he said. “I’m really happy here right now. We trust everybody here. I’m just coming every day to get better and help the team to win.”Collins said he had faith that Cabrera would settle in at second.“I’ll tell you, if we get him hot, we’re going to have a good finish,” Collins said.A version of this article appears in print on July 2, 2017, on Page SP3 of the New York edition with the headline: Mets Preach Optimism  And Practice a Rescue.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.