

 Scott Cacciola
 

ON PRO BASKETBALL
JULY 1, 2017
ORLANDO, Fla. — Amid the frenzy of the first few hours of N.B.A. free agency on Saturday morning, the Knicks were essentially spectators.The Oklahoma City Thunder acquired Paul George in a blockbuster trade with the Indiana Pacers. Blake Griffin agreed to re-sign with the Los Angeles Clippers. The Golden State Warriors, as expected, cracked open a bank vault to keep Stephen Curry in the Bay Area through 2022. And Gordon Hayward, an All-Star forward with the Utah Jazz last season, remained one of the most coveted players on the market.The Knicks’ most noteworthy move was re-signing Ron Baker, a guard who averaged 4.1 points a game for them last season. The team’s relative inactivity was not surprising. It lacks the financial flexibility to woo elite players, and its recent history — including this past season’s 31-51 record — has made New York one of the less desirable N.B.A. destinations.As Saturday wore on, the Knicks were still searching for a starting point guard. Things could have been worse. With this team, doing little is better than doing something stupid.AdvertisementAt this time a year ago, under the tumultuous stewardship of Phil Jackson, the Knicks opened free agency by committing $72 million to the veteran center Joakim Noah. Noah, of course, struggled with injuries last season — and he will start next season serving the final 12 games of a suspension for violating the league’s antidoping policy.AdvertisementJackson was relieved of his duties as team president last week. Now the Knicks are trying to move on as best they can.It remains to be seen whether their future will include Carmelo Anthony. Last week, Coach Jeff Hornacek offered a lukewarm response when he was asked whether Anthony, their All-Star forward, would stay. Hornacek called him a “great scorer” and left it at that. Anthony has a pesky no-trade clause in his contract, and the Knicks are reluctant to negotiate a buyout with him. Jackson had approached James L. Dolan, the team’s owner, with that option in his final days with the organization — and was firmly rebuffed.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Steve Mills, the team’s general manager, is running the front office as Dolan seeks a replacement for Jackson. For now, finding a point guard is more urgent.In his one of his last acts with the team, Jackson selected Frank Ntilikina, an 18-year-old point guard from France, with the eighth overall pick in the draft. The Knicks would obviously prefer to groom Ntilikina behind a veteran, and were believed to be interested in George Hill, 31, a free agent who spent last season with the Jazz.The first day of free agency brought a run on starting point guards. Curry, a two-time most valuable player, accepted the most lucrative contract in N.B.A. history — $201 million over five years — to stay with the league champions. Jrue Holiday, who averaged 15.4 points and 7.3 assists a game last season, agreed to re-sign with the New Orleans Pelicans for five years and $126 million, according to multiple reports. Jeff Teague, formerly of the Pacers, joined the new-look Minnesota Timberwolves for three years and $57 million. And Patty Mills was said to have agreed to re-sign with the San Antonio Spurs for four years and $50 million.Without Jackson around to alienate his star players in public and preach the gospel of the triangle offense, which had become a three-sided drag on the franchise, the Knicks might find it somewhat easier to recruit free agents. Hornacek, who ought to feel liberated, said last week that he wanted the Knicks to run more than they did last season.But the Knicks are budget shoppers — for now, if not forever. If, as expected, they renounce their rights to Derrick Rose, they will have less than $16 million to spend under the league’s $99 million salary cap for next season.AdvertisementThe good news for the Knicks is that the Eastern Conference continues to grow more feeble. Even before free agency began, two playoff teams from last season traded away their star players. After the Chicago Bulls sent Jimmy Butler, their All-Star swingman, to the Timberwolves in a seismic move, the Pacers dealt George to the Thunder — and received little in return.One exception in the East might be the Philadelphia 76ers. In addition to gaining point guard Markelle Fultz with the top pick in the draft last month, the Sixers have reportedly agreed to a one-year deal with guard J. J. Redick for $23 million.By Saturday afternoon, the pool of franchise-altering free agents had basically dwindled to Hayward, who was said to be considering the Miami Heat, the Boston Celtics and the Jazz.As the rosters look now, even the most mediocre teams in the East seem capable of making playoff runs next season. The Knicks, with a young core headlined by Kristaps Porzingis, would love to put themselves in such a position. And they might not even have to do all that much to get there.A version of this article appears in print on July 2, 2017, on Page SP6 of the New York edition with the headline: Knicks, After Jackson’s Ouster, Are Moving on as Best They Can.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »