By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSJULY 1, 2017
DÜSSELDORF, Germany — Chris Froome’s most loyal support rider finally got some glory of his own.Geraint Thomas won the wet and slippery opening stage of the Tour de France on Saturday and claimed the yellow jersey.It was the first Grand Tour stage victory for Thomas, who has escorted Froome, his Team Sky teammate and the defending champion, to Paris for Froome’s three Tour victories.“I just can’t believe it,” Thomas said. “I got into cycling because of the Tour de France.”AdvertisementThomas said he watched the Tour as a child and harangued his dad to get satellite TV coverage.“I ran home from school to watch it,” he said. “It’s crazy to be in the camera.”AdvertisementAveraging 32 miles per hour, Thomas required little more than 16 minutes to cover the almost entirely flat 8.7-mile individual time trial along the banks of the Rhine River in downtown Düsseldorf.Stefan Küng of BMC Racing Team finished second, five seconds behind, and Vasil Kiryienka of Sky was third, seven seconds back.Froome finished sixth, 12 seconds behind, and gained time on all of his expected challengers. He finished about 40 seconds ahead of both Richie Porte and Nairo Quintana.“I’ve been cautious,” Porte said. “It was slippery. It wasn’t the best time trial for me. I was nervous. It was better to take no risk.”Thomas opened the year aiming for an overall victory at the Giro d’Italia but abandoned that race because of injuries in a crash caused by a police motorbike. He started his career as a track cyclist, winning Olympic and world titles in team pursuit.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In the opening stage of the 2013 Tour, Thomas crashed and broke his pelvis, but he remained in the race until the end to help Froome take his first victory.It was a banner day for Team Sky, which placed four riders in the top 10, with Michal Kwiatkowski one spot behind Froome in seventh.AdvertisementThe pre-stage favorite Tony Martin, the four-time time trial world champion, racing before his home fans, finished fourth, eight seconds behind.Many riders complained about the slippery combination of oil and rain on the road, and they were careful to avoid riding over white traffic lines, which can be extra treacherous when wet.“It hasn’t rained here for months — like everywhere else in Europe,” said the former world champion Philippe Gilbert. “Millions of cars have used these roads. There’s oil and diesel on the road. It’s necessary to be cautious.”There were numerous crashes, including two involving key support riders for the overall favorites — Alejandro Valverde, who assists Quintana at Movistar, and Nicolas Roche, who helps Porte with BMC.Valverde slammed into the barriers at high speed after falling off his bike and was forced to abandon the race in a neck brace. Roche lost control while crossing over tram tracks.Tony Gallopin was also the victim of an ugly crash, while two riders of the Lotto-Jumbo team hit the ground.A Tour rookie, Dylan Groenewegen, slid across the pavement entangled with his bike for about 15 yards, as if he were on ice. The Tour of California winner, George Bennett, was in a similar crash, and a Lotto-Jumbo team official nearly lost control, too, while helping Bennett to get going again.Stage 2 on Sunday is a mostly flat 126-mile leg from Düsseldorf to Liège, Belgium, that should set up well for sprinters.The three-week Tour will conclude in Paris on July 23.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.