
On Tennis By                     
 CHRISTOPHER CLAREY
 
JULY 2, 2017
Only two women playing in the Wimbledon singles tournament this year have won the singles title.Neither of them is Serena Williams, which makes for quite a career opportunity.“When Serena is not around, the field is definitely wide open,” said Martina Navratilova, the nine-time Wimbledon singles champion who once was even more dominant than the seven-time champion Williams at the All England Club.With Williams pregnant and out until at least next season, the two former champions in the draw are Petra Kvitova and Williams’s older sister, Venus.Both Venus Williams and Kvitova, for different reasons, will be sentimental favorites. Both, for different reasons, are dealing with more than forehands and backhands.Kvitova has made one of the great comebacks in a sport that seems to have cornered the market in comebacks, but it is unclear how much the effort has taken out of her physically or emotionally. She withdrew from the grass-court tournament in Eastbourne, England, last week, citing an abdominal strain.AdvertisementWilliams, now 37 and preparing to play in her 20th Wimbledon, is having the finest season of her late-career phase, but she was involved in a car crash in Florida in early June that led to the death of an elderly passenger in the other vehicle, according to a police report released last week.AdvertisementThe crash remains under investigation, according to police in Palm Beach Gardens, Fla. As of last Friday, Williams had not been cited or charged and hadn’t commented publicly on the accident, but she has arrived at Wimbledon along with all the younger women who have a better-than-usual chance in Serena’s absence.There are new threats like Jelena Ostapenko, the surprise French Open champion. There are established threats like Garbine Muguruza and Angelique Kerber, the struggling top-ranked player, both of whom have lost Wimbledon finals to Serena.There are dangerous and unpredictable outsiders like the Americans CoCo Vandeweghe and Madison Keys, and the rising Kristina Mladenovic of France. There is the imposing Karolina Pliskova, the No. 3 seed whose flat-hitting game looks well suited to Wimbledon but whose results at the All England Club have yet to reflect that.“Pliskova will need to get that center of gravity a little bit lower, but there’s no reason why she can’t win on this stuff,” Navratilova said. “Petra plays pretty tall tennis, too, and I think Pliskova moves as well as Petra did when she won.”Kvitova, who won Wimbledon in 2011 and 2014, does have the advantage, like Navratilova, of being left-handed. Above all, she can create acute angles and big openings with her flat, often overpowering groundstrokes.That Kvitova can do all this only six months after being attacked and suffering serious, career-threatening knife wounds to her left hand is remarkable.Kvitova, who was slashed by an assailant in her home in the Czech Republic last December, won the title at the Aegon Classic in Birmingham, England, last week in only her second tournament since her return.Advertisement“It’s kind of a fairy tale,” Kvitova said in Birmingham.It has also been a year of tennis comebacks. Roger Federer returned from his first-ever operation to win the Australian Open. Victoria Azarenka returned to the circuit in June after childbirth, with her son, Leo, in tow; and Maria Sharapova returned in April after a doping violation and played well before injuring her leg and missing the entirety of the grass-court season.But Kvitova’s comeback deserves a category and a paragraph of its own: The British Broadcasting Corporation, thinking she had no chance to play, had even contacted her about doing commentary at Wimbledon. She told a group of British reporters last week that she had enrolled in a social media and communications course at Prague University after the attack.“There was the thought in my mind that maybe I would never play again, so I would need to have something else to do in my life,” Kvitova said in comments reported by The Daily Telegraph.Kvitova still lacks full feeling in her left hand, she said, but for now there is no need for a second career.“It’s an astonishing story,” Navratilova said. “What’s pressure to her now? She’s been through the worst thing in her life already. When she’s down a break point, you think she’s going to be nervous? You know, in a way it’s a gift. What a horrible way to get it. Of course you don’t want that, but pressure must be a piece of cake now for her.”Kvitova is seeded 11th and has a promising draw. Her first-round opponent is Johanna Larsson, a Swedish veteran who is 0-6 in singles at Wimbledon.“I think the biggest question mark for Petra is if her body holds up, because now she has got the confidence,” Navratilova said. “It’s just a matter of her body, not necessarily the hand but the legs. Grass is very physical on the midsection: the adductors, the abductors, the butt muscles, the hamstrings. All that stuff gets tweaked a little more, and then you put on top of that the fact that Petra hasn’t played many matches really in such a long time.”Williams, seeded 10th, is set to face Elise Mertens, a Wimbledon singles rookie, in the first round. Williams has not played since the French Open, which is her customary preparation. She played no warm-up tournaments on grass when she won Wimbledon in 2000, 2001, 2005, 2007 and 2008, choosing to train in Florida on hard courts.AdvertisementShe has had a fine season, beginning with a run to the final of the Australian Open, where she lost to Serena.“I’d like to just continue to rise,” Venus said after losing in the fourth round at the French Open.Winning a sixth Wimbledon would certainly do the trick. It has long been her special tennis place: a good fit for her understated personality, innate dignity and sometimes Sahara-dry wit. She first played Wimbledon in 1997 at age 17, losing in the first round, 4-6, 6-2, 6-4, to Magdalena Grzybowska, a promising Polish player who was only a year older.But Grzybowska, like so many of their peers, would retire long before Williams.“Venus is the most committed person I have ever known,” wrote her father, Richard Williams, in his autobiography, “Black and White: The Way I See It.”She has needed to be — playing on despite being eclipsed on court by her younger sister’s game-changing achievements; playing on despite Sjogren’s syndrome, an autoimmune disorder that has forced her to modify her diet, lifestyle and training methods.“In 2012, when she played at the Olympics, I remember her wanting to practice so much and her mom saying, ‘Please be careful, she can’t be practicing that much,’” said Mary Joe Fernandez, Williams’s former Fed Cup captain and Olympic coach. “She definitely wants to train the way she used to, but has learned she cannot. It was hard in the beginning, but now she manages her Sjogren’s really well, knows when to push and when to back off.”Fernandez thinks Williams has shored up her forehand and second serve, achievements Navratilova attributes in part to the evolution of string and racket technology. But Fernandez sees above all a phenomenal athlete with a self-improvement streak that extends far beyond tennis.“She’s always studying,” Fernandez said. “Every time I had her, whether Fed Cup or the Olympics, she always had her books with her, always was looking to improve some aspect of her life, and I think that’s why the longevity is there in her tennis.”AdvertisementCompeting selectively has also surely played a role. So has her sister. Without Serena, the tour would certainly have felt like a much lonelier place. Without Serena, the idea of winning major singles titles deep into one’s 30s would most likely have seemed less plausible.But Venus knows in her marrow that it can be done, and without Serena, the prospect of doing it must seem all the more real.“Serena is the one person who is not a good matchup for her on grass,” Fernandez said. “There’s no one in the draw Venus can’t beat.”But in this particularly wide-open Wimbledon, there are also so many others who just might rise to this rare occasion.A version of this article appears in print on July 3, 2017, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »