By ALLAN KREDAJULY 1, 2017
The Rangers reached an agreement with defenseman Kevin Shattenkirk on a four-year, $26.6 million contract on Saturday, adding a coveted right-handed defenseman to run their power play. Shattenkirk was also highly sought at the trade deadline in March, when he went from St. Louis to Washington. A 6-foot blue-liner, he has 68 goals and 230 assists in 490 career games with the Blues, the Capitals and the Colorado Avalanche, who drafted him in the first round in 2007.Shattenkirk, 28, grew up a Rangers fan in New Rochelle and said he preferred to play near home even if it meant forgoing a contract elsewhere that might have been richer in pay or longer in years.“I know there was maybe some term and some money left on the table, but when you have the opportunity to fulfill a lifelong dream like this, it’s an opportunity that may only come once in my career, and I felt like this is my chance,” Shattenkirk said on a conference call with members of the news media. “I envisioned myself being a Ranger from the moment I stepped on the ice as a kid.”AdvertisementShattenkirk makes the Rangers’ defense younger and more mobile. He will join the rising star Brady Skjei, plus the veterans Ryan McDonagh, Marc Staal, Nick Holden and Brendan Smith. Smith, who was acquired from Detroit at the trade deadline, agreed to a four-year contract last week.AdvertisementRangers General Manager Jeff Gorton said he was happy that Shattenkirk — who will most likely be paired with the left-handed McDonagh — decided the Rangers were his best fit. He also praised Shattenkirk for agreeing to a contract that will give the Rangers flexibility in the future.“We felt like this was an opportunity to get a really good player for a term we could live with that we thought was fair for him and for us,” said Gorton, who is still seeking a top center to replace Derek Stepan, whom he traded to Arizona last month just before the draft. “He’s a player that really wanted to be here, that left money on the table. It sent a pretty strong message to us.”The Rangers also reached an agreement with goaltender Ondrej Pavelec, a former starter for the Winnipeg Jets, on a one-year, $1.3 million deal to back up Henrik Lundqvist. Lundqvist’s previous understudy, Antti Raanta, and Stepan were part of the June 23 deal that brought the 21-year-old defenseman Anthony DeAngelo to New York from Arizona.Pavelec, 29, a native of the Czech Republic, played only eight games for the Jets last season. He was 152-158-47 over 10 seasons for the franchise, which was known as the Atlanta Thrashers when it selected him in the second round of the 2005 draft.Pavelec spent most of last year with the Manitoba Moose of the American Hockey League and missed time because of a leg injury and a concussion.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Rangers also signed forwards Paul Carey and Cole Schneider, who both spent nearly all of last season in the A.H.L.In other developments Saturday, the former Rangers defenseman Dan Girardi — whose contract was bought out on June 14 — agreed to a two-year, $6 million contract with the Tampa Bay Lightning. Girardi, 33, will be reunited with the former Rangers captain Ryan Callahan and defenseman Anton Stralman. Another former Ranger, center Dominic Moore, agreed to a one-year, $1 million contract with the Toronto Maple Leafs.The Devils agreed to a contract with the former Rangers forward Brian Boyle for two years and $5.1 million. The Devils also agreed to contracts with the former Islanders defenseman Brian Strait and forwards Bracken Kearns and Brian Gibbons. Forward Mike Cammalleri, whom the Devils bought out on Friday, agreed to a one-year, $1 million deal with the Los Angeles Kings.AdvertisementThe Islanders acquired goaltender Kristers Gudlevskis from Tampa Bay for forward Carter Verhaeghe. Gudlevskis, a 24-year-old from Latvia, has spent most of his career in the A.H.L. since the Lightning picked him in the fifth round of the 2013 draft.Goaltender Jean-Francois Berube, who was part of a three-way battle for the Islanders’ job last season, reached a deal with the Chicago Blackhawks for two years and $1.5 million.In other notable moves, Patrick Sharp, 35, agreed to leave the Dallas Stars to rejoin the Blackhawks, whom he helped to three Stanley Cup titles, for one year and $800,000. Washington Capitals defenseman Karl Alzner agreed to a five-year, $23 million deal with the Montreal Canadiens.The San Jose Sharks agreed to contracts to retain several key players: defenseman Marc-Edouard Vlasic to an eight-year, $56 million contract; the 37-year-old forward Joe Thornton to a one-year deal worth $6.5 million; and goaltender Martin Jones to a six-year, $34.5 million pact. The Anaheim Ducks also retained defenseman Cam Fowler, who agreed to an eight-year, $52 million dealThe Stanley Cup champion Penguins agreed to keep defenseman Justin Schultz on a three-year, $16.5 million contract, but two other defensemen, Trevor Daley and Ron Hainsey, as well as wing Chris Kunitz, will be leaving Pittsburgh — Daley for the Detroit Red Wings, Hainsey for Toronto and Kunitz for Tampa Bay.Forward Nick Bonino also left the Penguins, agreeing to a contract with the Nashville Predators — the team Pittsburgh defeated in the finals to win the Stanley Cup — for four years and $16.4 million.A version of this article appears in print on July 2, 2017, on Page SP6 of the New York edition with the headline: Rangers Move to Bolster Their Power Play With Shattenkirk, a Lifelong Fan.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.