By BEN ROTHENBERGJULY 1, 2017
LONDON — After just two tournaments back on tour after a knife attack that damaged her primary playing hand, Petra Kvitova has completed an improbable transition from sentimental favorite to oddsmakers’ choice.The third event of her comeback will be Wimbledon, where she won her two Grand Slam singles titles, in 2011 and 2014. Kvitova, a 27-year-old left-hander, is the No. 11 seed and will play Johanna Larsson, 28, of Sweden in the first round Monday.After an intruder at Kvitova’s home in the Czech Republic sliced her hand in December, she underwent surgery and months of rehabilitation, then returned to the tour earlier than expected — at the French Open in May. Kvitova won one match on the clay at Roland Garros, then dominated on grass, her favorite surface, last week in Birmingham, England. She lost only one set there on her way to winning the Aegon Classic, a premier-level WTA tournament.Kvitova is eager to play down her chances.“I think you should stay low, as well, with your expectations about me,” Kvitova said with laughter in an interview last week as she prepared for Wimbledon. “I’m not in as great form as I was in ’11 or ’14. It depends on everything, and in Birmingham I played better and better every round. Who knows how everything will be here? So I’m still down to earth. I’ll just play.”AdvertisementThe betting world took a different view.According to the aggregator Oddschecker after the Wimbledon draw Friday, Kvitova was the 5-to-1 best bet, if not an overwhelming favorite, to claim the women’s singles title. Her teammate on the Czech Fed Cup team, third-seeded Karolina Pliskova, is a close second at 11-2.AdvertisementAs she has done since starting her recovery, Kvitova said she was not focusing on big goals, beyond that first match against Larsson, who is ranked 52nd.“When everything happened and the way back was so long and tough, my dream was to play in Wimbledon,” she said. “I would have been very sad not to be able to play here. This is still the dream: to come here and play. And even playing before was amazing.”Kvitova said that her left hand still lacked full mobility and that she had wondered for a while whether she could rediscover the competitive fire she had before the attack. Tennis, she thought, could seem unimportant after a violent attack. Her assailant has not been caught.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I do feel different as a person, and probably then as a player as well, because I know now what is important in life, and I know what is really difficult,” she said. “I’m happy that I’m still here, alive, and being one of the players on the tour and part of the tennis family. I’m enjoying every moment from a different view.”Kvitova was encouraged by how she reacted to losing the first set of the final in Birmingham to Ashleigh Barty.“I’m really happy that my fighting spirit stayed with me through this period,” Kvitova said.“I’m happy that when I am on the court, I do feel everything,” she added, “and I’m fighting again. It’s kind of good that I lost the first set in the final and was able to mentally come back and play good tennis afterward. It’s helped me with confidence coming into the Wimbledon.”One outward sign of Kvitova’s resolve is still missing, however: the fist pump that usually accompanies her trademark bark of “Pojd,” which means “Come on!” in Czech. Because she has not fully healed, Kvitova cannot clench the fingers on her left hand into a tight fist.“I have to do it with my right hand — and it’s not good,” Kvitova said with a sigh. “I wish, one day, I can do my fist pump again with my left, with my ‘Pojd.’ I need that. I need to work hard on it.”The oddsmakers would agree. They expect Kvitova to hit many more shots worth celebrating.A version of this article appears in print on July 2, 2017, on Page SP7 of the New York edition with the headline: Kvitova Keeps Expectations Low, Even if Oddsmakers Disagree.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.