By BILLY WITZJULY 1, 2017
HOUSTON — One swing of the bat did not wipe away all the frustration of the last few weeks for the Yankees — the raft of injuries, the mounting losses — but watching Brett Gardner crossing home plate on Friday suggested otherwise.Waiting for him were Ronald Torreyes, Austin Romine and Tyler Wade — each of whom received a fierce forearm bash from Gardner.Gardner’s grand slam was the decisive blow in an unexpected Yankees win, a resounding 13-4 thumping of the Houston Astros.It was only the Yankees’ fifth win in their past 17 games. But it was emphatic, against the team with the best record in the majors, and cathartic, coming on the heels of the rookie Dustin Fowler’s season-ending knee injury and a hellish travel day that saw them arrive from Chicago after dawn.AdvertisementThat they did it by rallying after the departure of Astros starter Lance McCullers Jr., who had dominated in his previous two starts against them, made it all the more satisfying.AdvertisementThe Yankees, trailing by 3-1 after the fifth inning, scored five times in the sixth after McCullers left with one out. After Torreyes singled in a run, the Yankees got a two-out, game-tying single from the much-maligned Chris Carter. They put the game out of reach even for the Astros’ prolific offense when Gardner belted his homer in the seventh off the right-hander James Hoyt.Asked if he was afraid he might hurt one of his teammates with his forearm celebration, Gardner laughed.“I’m too small to hurt somebody,” he said. “If I don’t, those guys might hurt me. It was a big swing of the bat and a big four runs. It really opened up the game.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The 3-2 slider that Hoyt left on the inner half was similar to the pitch that Gardner hit nearly two months ago off Hector Rondon to win a game at Wrigley Field.But that came near the start of the season, when the Yankees were sailing. Lately, it has been a different story, much of it because of injuries. Another rookie, Clint Frazier, will be recalled Saturday from Class AAA Scranton/Wilkes-Barre — and when he plays, he will be the 10th player to make his major league debut for the Yankees this season.Manager Joe Girard said Frazier would play regularly. One question will be how Frazier, who capitulated during spring training and cut his bushy red hair to conform more tightly to the Yankees’ guidelines, will react to the spotlight to which he seems drawn.“I don’t necessarily think that will be the case if he’s here,” Girardi said. “I’m sure the first day will be, but there’s a lot of other guys that garner a lot of attention there and are important to this club.”On Friday night that was Gardner, who finished with six R.B.I., equaling a career high.Beyond him, it was largely the understudies who delivered. Torreyes, playing second base for the injured Starlin Castro, had three hits and two walks. Romine had two hits, walked and scored twice. And Carter, who was designated for assignment and then brought back, had two hits and two R.B.I.Aaron Judge was one of only two Yankees starters who did not have a hit. In his final at-bat, against Astros outfielder Nori Aoki, he flied out — but not before swinging through a hanging curveball — and cracked a slight smile.AdvertisementIt was one of the rare times lately that the Yankees could afford to do so.A version of this article appears in print on July 1, 2017, on Page D4 of the New York edition with the headline: For One Night, at Least, Yankees Forget Worries.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.