By ADAM SCHUPAKJUNE 30, 2017
CROMWELL, Conn. — In the moment that Wesley Bryan realized his lead was insurmountable and he would become the first South Carolina native to win the RBC Heritage, he was seated in the CBS broadcast booth. Sitting with Jim Nantz and Nick Faldo in April, Bryan delivered the type of soul-bearing interview rarely seen, recounting his emotions as he stood on the 17th tee and realized he had the lead.“Honestly I just threw up a little bit in my mouth,” said Bryan of the moment he looked at the electronic scoreboard. “And I was like, ‘Well, shoot, I guess this is what nervous feels like.’”Until recently, Bryan, 27, was better known for batting golf balls out of midair, chipping basketballs into hoops, and banking shots off walls and into trash cans. He compiled these trick shots in homemade videos recorded with his older brother and setup man, George, at their father’s practice range in Chapin, S.C.But Bryan’s best trick of all has been his rapid ascension over 16 months: going from not having membership privileges on the PGA Tour in 2015 to competing on the Web.com Tour to receiving an automatic promotion to the PGA Tour to winning a PGA tournament. Bryan has improved from No. 1,127 in the Official World Golf Ranking at the start of 2016 to No. 42 this week.Advertisement“It’s kind of like I’m living in a big fairy tale and I don’t want to wake up,” Bryan said.AdvertisementAt the Travelers Championship last week, Bryan received a reminder of just how far his game had come. He was paired with Jordan Spieth, now a two-time major winner, during the first two rounds of the tournament. The last time they had played together, at the amateur Jones Cup in 2011, Bryan shot 92, fired his father as his caddie, and withdrew from the tournament.“Jordan probably doesn’t remember it,” Bryan said, “but that was the low point in my golf career. That was rock bottom. But I’ve always been one of those guys, when things aren’t going the direction I want them to, you have two options: You can either work like crazy or you can just crawl in a hole and hide. And I kind of chose the first of those.”After turning pro in 2012, Bryan toiled in mini-tour obscurity. He and his wife, Elizabeth, moved to Augusta, Ga., where she attended school to become a physician assistant. They lived on a tight budget, clipping coupons; Elizabeth remembers fretting over her husband buying a $25 shirt.Bryan never lost sight of his goal to play on the PGA Tour, but his path took a detour in 2014. He and his brother were watching ESPN’s “SportsCenter,” and a video of a golf trick-shot made its “Top 10 plays.” It did not look too difficult, the brothers thought, so they tried it the next day. That led to them creating their own video and posting it to their social media accounts.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“If it gets over 100 views, we’ll do another one,” George Bryan said.It did, and their second one — thanks to the Tour pros Rickie Fowler and Bubba Watson sharing it on Twitter — went viral.Before long, the “Bryan Bros” had their own YouTube channel, teamed with Rory McIlroy in a sponsor video, and signed a handful of endorsement deals. The financial freedom liberated Bryan, and he rediscovered his joy for the game through trick shots. In July 2015, Bryan recommitted to climbing the ladder to the PGA Tour.“What I tell people is I’m retired,” he said of the trick-shot videos. “I can still come out of retirement. If Brett Favre and Michael Jordan can pull it off, I can too.”AdvertisementBryan earned his way onto the 2016 Web.com Tour in his fourth trip to Qualifying School. There were skeptics, saying he had gotten lucky at Q-School. But Bryan, despite never having competed in a PGA Tour-sanctioned tournament before 2016, won three times in just 13 starts on the Web.com Tour, earning an automatic promotion to the PGA Tour.His performance served notice that it was time to take him seriously.“What a beast!” tweeted Ollie Schniederjans after Bryan’s third victory, at the Digital Ally Open. “Now get the hell out of here.”On Easter, it all culminated with Bryan’s maiden Tour victory at Harbour Town Golf Links, where his father, George III, had competed in the 2004 RBC Heritage. (Bryan remembers the free candy bars and making himself at home at a table with the biggest superstar, Ernie Els.)After Bryan signed his winning scorecard this year, his father, who had taught him the game, hugged him, tears streaming from his eyes. Bryan did a cellphone video chat with George, and savored the ride home with Elizabeth, who had to work the next day. She drove and he recorded on Facebook Live until losing cell service. Then they reflected on a meteoric rise that nobody could have predicted, one that Bryan still struggles to explain.“I don’t know. Will Ferrell said it best: ‘Escalated quickly,’” Bryan said. “What I’ve learned is when I’m playing my best I’m good enough to win even on this tour.”Steve Spurrier, the former University of South Carolina football coach, was among the well-wishers who called to congratulate Bryan, and his victory earned him his first trip to the Masters in 2018. Augusta National is only three and a half miles from his home.Bryan said, “I’ll be frequenting the property as often as they allow me.”A version of this article appears in print on July 1, 2017, on Page D3 of the New York edition with the headline: A Trick-Shot Artist’s Greatest Act: Finishing First on the PGA Tour.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.