By TIM ROHANMARCH 20, 2016
SPOKANE, Wash. — With about 90 seconds remaining, trailing by 1 point, Oregon zipped the ball around until it found Dillon Brooks, its best shooter, open on the wing. St. Joseph’s players kept swiveling their heads, trying to keep up and stay in position, but with this Oregon team, no matter where the ball landed, it would not have been ideal.Brooks rose and coolly drilled a 3-pointer.In the waning moments, St. Joseph’s had the ball, trailing by 3, in the hands of their best player, DeAndre’ Bembry. But again, the Ducks’ depth bothered the Hawks. Trying to create something near two Oregon defenders, Bembry fumbled the ball away, and that allowed the Ducks to hold on and beat St. Joseph’s, 69-64, on Sunday and advance to face Duke in the round of 16 in the West Region.Brooks led the top-seeded Ducks with 25 points, shooting 4 of 7 from 3-point range. But contributions came from all seven Ducks who played. Tyler Dorsey scored 14 points and secured the turnover Bembry gave up. Elgin Cook added 18 points and threw down an intimidating dunk in the first half. Chris Boucher made three acrobatic blocks.Led by Bembry, the eighth-seeded Hawks made a run in the second half, building a 7-point lead with about five minutes remaining. But the Ducks’ depth proved too much, as they went on a 13-4 run, capped by that 3-pointer Brooks nailed from the wing. After it went in, his teammates, all of those Ducks who had contributed along the way, mobbed him together.AdvertisementTEXAS A&M 92, N. IOWA 88 Alex Caruso scored 25 points as Texas A&M overcame a 10-point deficit with less than 30 seconds remaining in regulation to come back for a victory in two overtimes against Northern Iowa in Oklahoma City.AdvertisementThe win put the third-seeded Aggies (28-8) in the round of 16 for the third time in program history, the first since 2007. They will play Oklahoma.Danuel House scored all 22 of his points in the second half and overtime.Jeremy Morgan had career highs of 36 points and 12 rebounds to lead the 11th-seeded Panthers (23-13), who led by 69-59 in the final minute of regulation before committing four turnovers in the final 29 seconds to allow the comeback. (AP)VILLANOVA 87, IOWA 68 Since Villanova arrived in Brooklyn last week, the Wildcats have been shadowed by questions about their recent inability to advance past the round of 32.The albatross became tiresome. Over the past four days, players opened news media sessions trying to give courteous answers, acknowledging their recent stumbles. But as the hours wore on and different variations of the same questions were repeated, their heads hung low, the smiles disappeared and they grumbled through replies on how they did not want to be defined as underachievers.The second-seeded Wildcats’ most potent retort came Sunday afternoon with a dominating win over seventh-seeded Iowa in a South Region game at Barclays Center. Josh Hart led the way with a game-high 19 points.“It’s definitely a sigh of relief,” the senior Ryan Arcidiacono said. “I just think the biggest thing is I’m honestly just done answering the questions about getting past the second weekend.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Villanova will play No. 3-seeded Miami in the round of 16 on Thursday in Louisville, Ky. SETH BERKMANSYRACUSE 75, MID. TENN. ST. 50 Few expected to see either team playing in the second round of the N.C.A.A. tournament. Syracuse had needed the equivalent of a favorable roll in the men’s basketball selection committee room one week earlier even to be in the bracket. And Middle Tennessee State had to accomplish probably the biggest upset of the tournament to advance to the round of 32.AdvertisementBoth teams played with the extraordinary ferocity of competitors who do not want to lose with house money, with much shouting after makes and profanity after errors. But in the end, 10th-seeded Syracuse (22-13), the major-conference power playing its 100th N.C.A.A. tournament game, outlasted 15th-seeded Middle Tennessee (25-11), 75-50, pulling away in the second half in St. Louis. Syracuse plays 11th-seeded Gonzaga on Friday in Chicago.The Syracuse senior Michael Gbinije led all players with 23 points, including 9 on 3-pointers. Forward Tyler Roberson, a junior, contributed 12 points, 9 rebounds and 3 assists.The Blue Raiders started 1 for 6 from behind the 3-point arc, then 2 for 9, and finally 3 for 11 in the first half.It was not solely a matter of Middle Tennessee losing its touch. Syracuse is a nightmare matchup for many opponents. Few teams combine Syracuse’s commitment to an unorthodox defense — Coach Jim Boeheim’s 2-3 zone — with the athleticism and the size to execute it. MARC TRACYOKLAHOMA 85, V.C.U. 81 Buddy Hield scored 19 of his 36 points in the final eight minutes to help No. 2-seeded Oklahoma (27-7) hold off No. 10-seeded Virginia Commonwealth in Oklahoma City in the West Region.Hield, who did not score for more than 10 minutes to start the game, made 9 of 12 shots in the second half after going 2 for 8 in the first. Hield, a senior guard, scored at least 30 points for the 11th time this season.Melvin Johnson scored 18 of his 23 points in the second half, JeQuan Lewis scored 22 points, and Michael Gilmore added 12 for V.C.U. (25-11). (AP)A version of this article appears in print on March 21, 2016, on Page D4 of the New York edition with the headline: Oregon Moves On; Aggies Need Two Overtimes.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.