By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSFEB. 22, 2017
The former W.N.B.A. player Candice Wiggins said her experience in the league was “toxic” and was a major reason she retired last season. In an interview with The San Diego Union-Tribune, Wiggins said that the culture in the league was “very, very harmful” and that she was targeted throughout her career for being heterosexual and popular.Wiggins said that she was treated poorly because she was straight. Wiggins, a 30-year-old Stanford graduate, said she was bullied from the time she was drafted by Minnesota.“Me being heterosexual and straight, and being vocal in my identity as a straight woman was huge,” said Wiggins, who played eight years in the league with four teams.At the time she retired last year, Wiggins told The Associated Press that she “had nothing left to prove.”Advertisement“I wanted to play two more seasons of W.N.B.A., but the experience didn’t lend itself to my mental state,” Wiggins said in the interview with the newspaper. “It was a depressing state in the W.N.B.A. It’s not watched. Our value is diminished. It can be quite hard.”AdvertisementManchester City overcame an onslaught from Monaco’s prolific attack, scoring three late goals in 11 minutes for a wild 5-3 win at home in the Champions League’s round of 16.The game — the highest-scoring first leg in the Champions League’s knockout phase — was breathless from start to finish. Monaco took a 3-2 lead in the 61st minute, but in a stunning turnaround, Sergio Agüero volleyed in a 71st-minute equalizer for his second goal of the night, John Stones scored in the 77th, and Leroy Sane recorded the final goal, a tap-in in the 82nd.ATLÉTICO MADRID WINS ON ROAD The French forwards Antoine Griezmann and Kevin Gameiro tore Bayer Leverkusen’s defense apart to give Atlético Madrid a 4-2 away victory and put the Champions League quarterfinals within reach. Gameiro created one goal for Griezmann and scored one, with Saúl Ñíguez setting Atlético on its way before the substitute Fernando Torres completed the scoring.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Johnathan Motley had 21 points and 16 rebounds, and No. 9 Baylor (23-5, 10-5) ended a two-game slide with a 60-54 win over visiting Oklahoma (23-5, 10-5) to remain in a tie for second place in the Big 12. The Bears stayed even with No. 12 West Virginia and Iowa State in the conference standings with three games to play.AROUND THE N.C.A.A. KeVaughn Allen scored 26 points, and No. 13 Florida (23-5, 13-2 Southeastern Conference) won at home against South Carolina (20-8, 10-5).  Ryan Cline scored 6 of his 11 points in overtime to lift No. 14 Purdue (23-5, 12-3 Big Ten) to a 74-70 victory at Penn State (14-14, 6-9).Craig Anderson made 29 saves as the visiting Ottawa Senators subdued the Devils, 2-1, despite playing without three of their top forwards. Ottawa was without Mark Stone (22 goals), Mike Hoffman (19 goals) and Bobby Ryan (12 goals) after all three were injured over the weekend. Ryan will miss four to six weeks with a broken finger while Stone (neck) and Hoffman (groin) are listed as day to day.Kyle Turris and Erik Karlsson scored for Ottawa, which swept the three-game season series with the Devils while allowing a total of three goals.Travis Zajac scored his 12th goal, and Cory Schneider made 21 saves for the Devils, who have lost two straight and three of four.ISLANDERS OVERCOME RED WINGS Calvin de Haan was credited with a go-ahead goal that caromed off an opponent late in the second period, and the Islanders went on to beat the Red Wings, 3-1, in Detroit.AdvertisementThe Islanders, in contention for a wild-card spot, started the day tied with Dallas for the fewest points on the road, with a 7-18-4 record.A version of this article appears in print on February 22, 2017, on Page B8 of the New York edition with the headline: Pro Basketball; Ex-Player Calls W.N.B.A. ‘Toxic’.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.