By MARC TRACYMARCH 20, 2016
Cupid. Artemis. Robin Hood. Katniss Everdeen. Jamal Murray. Great archers, all of them.Murray has yet to hit his target in the heart and make her fall in love, or kill an opponent in the “Hunger Games.” Instead, Murray, a freshman guard for Kentucky, regularly takes deadly aim with a basketball from nearly 21 feet from the basket.This season, Murray averaged 3.1 3-pointers per game, making them at a rate of 40.8 percent. When he makes the long-distance shot, he mimes shooting an arrow with a bow.If Murray is William Tell, the apple atop a distant head is his teammate E. J. Floreal. Murray will shoot his arrow toward the bench, and Floreal is most often hit. Floreal will pantomime a shot to the chest, sometimes falling into the arms of his teammates.But Murray’s marksmanship will next be seen in the N.B.A. He is expected to be a lottery pick in the June draft.AdvertisementOn Saturday in Des Moines, Murray and his merry men in blue were unseated by Indiana’s star point guard, Yogi Ferrell, as the fifth-seeded Hoosiers knocked off fourth-seeded Kentucky, 73-67, setting up an N.C.A.A. tournament round-of-16 confrontation Friday in Philadelphia against top-seeded North Carolina.Also an adept 3-point shooter, shooting 41.9 percent from deep, Ferrell, too, has taken to shooting an imaginary arrow when he sinks a 3-pointer. In Thursday’s opening-round East Region victory against Chattanooga, his three sisters in the stands shot arrows his way — benign ones, presumably — after he sank shots from deep.AdvertisementBefore Saturday’s game, Floreal had archly accused Ferrell of copying Murray, but Ferrell said his inspiration came from Wesley Matthews of the N.B.A.’s Dallas Mavericks.“I saw him do that first,” Ferrell said, noting that Matthews had played for Indiana’s coach, Tom Crean, at Marquette.It should also be noted that Fernando Rodney, a pitcher for the San Diego Padres, has been doing a similar move for several years after he makes a save: He arcs his aim upward, pulls an arrow from a shoulder quiver and loads his bow before letting loose. The Jamaican sprinter Usain Bolt has, for even longer, struck a pose interpreted by some as an archer preparing to shoot.Michael Gbinije, a senior forward for Syracuse who shoots 41 percent from behind the arc, said he had been doing the archery move since the beginning of the season after seeing an N.B.A. player — he could not remember which one — do it during a Nets game.“I thought it was pretty cool, and I decided to put it in,” he said, adding, “It gets the bench going, gets the energy going for the team.”On another sharpshooting squad, Notre Dame, which defeated Stephen F. Austin, 76-75, on Sunday, Chad Holtz and Rex Pflueger have been known to do the gesture from the bench.AdvertisementIf ever a disagreement were to arise over the provenance of a 3-point celebration in college basketball, this would be the year for it to happen. As a result of a number of factors — prospects coming in with better shooting skills, a proliferation of so-called small-ball lineups with more shooters, analytics revealing the efficiency of certain 3-point shots, the influence of the professional game — there has been a surge of 3-point attempts in college basketball.Entering the weekend, Division I teams made 34.8 percent of their 3-point attempts, averaging more than seven per game. Both figures are the highest since 2008, when the line was moved back a foot to its current distance, 20 feet 9 inches.Big men, who often have more limited shooting ranges than guards, seem to tolerate the fanfare.“It’s cool to me,” Syracuse’s DaJuan Coleman said of Gbinije. “As long as he keeps making 3s, he can do whatever he wants, right?”That seems to be the attitude in the N.B.A., where the 3-pointer is more important than ever. Players, recognizing that in its potency and flash the 3-pointer is the new slam dunk, have devised increasingly elaborate celebrations.The Knicks’ Carmelo Anthony takes three fingers and bumps them against his head. The Oklahoma City Thunder’s Russell Westbrook holsters his hands, their shooting done. In perhaps the most ostentatious unostentatious move, the Golden State Warriors’ Stephen Curry simply runs back on defense after releasing a 3-point attempt, assuming — usually correctly — that the shot will go in.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.On Friday, after Notre Dame’s V. J. Beacham tied a close game with Michigan, Holtz opted for one of the popular celebrations: “3-point goggles,” in which the player forms the goggles with his thumbs and forefingers, and extends the other three fingers outward.“It’s spur of the moment; I never plan,” Holtz said. “My grandpa’s always watching; my family’s always talking about it. It’s fun.”Wisconsin’s Bronson Koenig, a junior, identified two favorite N.B.A. celebrations: that of the Cleveland Cavaliers’ J. R. Smith, which involves a windmill motion and then a praise to the heavens, and that of the Phoenix Suns’ Devin Booker — which dates to last year, when Booker was on Kentucky — who feigns locking and loading a shotgun.AdvertisementBut on the perennially unflashy Badgers, 3-point celebrations are few and far between — and not only because, with the losses of Frank Kaminsky and Sam Dekker to the N.B.A., seventh-seeded Wisconsin, which was to play No. 2-seeded Xavier on Sunday evening in the round of 32, makes fewer 3-pointers.Koenig, the team’s leader from long range, said he celebrated rarely.“If it’s a big-time 3-pointer, maybe I yell or something,” he said.Nigel Hayes, a junior, said he appreciated what others did — “those are cool celebrations” — but that he did not indulge.“Kobe doesn’t do them,” Hayes said, referring to the Lakers star Kobe Bryant, “so I don’t feel the need to.”Pat Borzi, Seth Berkman and Ben Shpigel contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on March 21, 2016, on Page D1 of the New York edition with the headline: Shooters Add Theatrics to Their Quivers.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.