
On Soccer By                     
 SAM BORDEN
 
MARCH 20, 2016
MANCHESTER, England — The 171st game between Manchester City and Manchester United was, much like the previous 170, emotional. There were fans in blue (City) and fans in red (United). There was chanting (some of it encouraging) and singing (some of it crude). There was, it seemed, a fair bit of prematch drinking. All pretty standard.Noticeably missing, though, was a sense of immediacy. While victory in Sunday’s match was as coveted as ever — United won, 1-0, and celebrated with particular verve — the focus for many of the spectators on both sides, if not both clubs’ executives as well, has already shifted to the future. There are eight games remaining in the Premier League season, yet on the first day of spring, the thinking here was about the summer.It is not hard to see why. For each of the past 10 seasons, at least one of the two Manchester clubs finished first or second in the league, meaning that at least half of this rivalry was always pushing for the ultimate glory (and the other, at minimum, was pushing to be the delighted spoiler).This season, neither team will win the league. And while Newcastle United and Sunderland played another local rivalry game a few hours up the road on Sunday that had serious relegation implications — both teams are in danger of dropping out of the top division — the match here had no such gravity.AdvertisementYes, there are European considerations; earning a spot in the continental Champions League next season is important. But Manchester City and Manchester United are hardly relying on such a place for financial reasons (both are valued among the top five clubs in the world), and, as Arsenal fans can surely confirm, the relative bliss of finishing “in the top four,” as the label goes, does not necessarily come with any kind of enduring reward.AdvertisementNo, it is about next year here now, about the next step. After a season in which both clubs have underperformed (relative to their astronomical financial resources), most in this city would rather talk about something new. New players. New strategies. New coaches.One team has already fired — or, really, promised to fire — its coach, and unknowing observers could be forgiven for assuming it is Manchester United. After all, United has had a variety of personnel miscalculations and a slew of underwhelming performances (a tepid showing against Liverpool in the Europa League was among the recent examples), all of which has been set against a backdrop of continuing consternation among Manager Louis van Gaal, the English news media and the United fans.United’s fans are used to success, and the news media, including a variety of former United players who now work as analysts, have used that high standard to criticize van Gaal and, seemingly from the start of the season, question whether it is time for him to be removed. Van Gaal has continued to be the stout, dismissive, borderline (and sometimes not-so-borderline) arrogant presence that was palatable when he was leading the Netherlands to third place at the 2014 World Cup but has often felt ridiculous coming from a man leading a team that has been beaten by the likes of Bournemouth, Norwich City and Denmark’s Midtjylland.Over the weekend, there were reports that United had already agreed to a precontract with José Mourinho for next season, a hire that had been deemed inevitable in many quarters. Of course, van Gaal, after seeing his team win on Sunday, spoke excitedly about claiming a place in the Champions League himself.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“When I see the dressing room,” he said, “I think it shall give a boost and real belief.”Van Gaal’s assured demeanor — blind as it may be — stood in contrast with Manchester City Manager Manuel Pellegrini’s stoic acceptance. Pellegrini, despite having won two league titles since 2012 and having his team in the quarterfinals of the Champions League, has been told that he will be replaced at the end of the season by Pep Guardiola, the soccer savant who led Barcelona to four years of dominance and currently coaches Bayern Munich.Guardiola’s arrival was seen as one of the final pieces in City’s makeover, a revamping that began in 2008, when investors from Abu Dhabi poured money into the club, and has included a new stadium, new partnerships, a new (sky-high) payroll and new executive staff members, several of whom previously worked at Barcelona.It is expected that Guardiola will want to make changes to City’s roster, and ultimately, those player choices figure to dictate which Manchester team has the quickest return to the top. As important as Guardiola (or Mourinho, or van Gaal, or whoever coaches United) is, both teams have glaring deficiencies and looming concerns.That much was clear on Sunday. City’s back line was in disarray, with Vincent Kompany out with an injury (yet again) and Martín Demichelis so poor — he was a statue on Marcus Rashford’s first-half goal, and his awful back pass led goalkeeper Joe Hart to injure himself in a lunge — that the biggest roar from the City fans came when he was replaced.AdvertisementUnited, too, will be in search of help, though its need is more in attack. Wayne Rooney, the club legend, was absent because of injury Sunday and cannot be a centerpiece in the future. Van Gaal has said Juan Mata is not a good fit in a creative role. As a whole, finishing in front of goal has been a problem, and while Rashford’s goal against City was encouraging — Rashford, a teenager, delivered a smooth run and a slick shot underneath Hart — United needs much more.They both do. And that was why, after the final whistle blew here, it was hard not to look at the players shaking hands with one another and wonder how many would be doing the same this fall.This much seems sure: The Manchester derby will look different next season. Fans of both teams certainly hope so.A version of this article appears in print on March 21, 2016, on Page D5 of the New York edition with the headline: A Manchester Derby With an Unfamiliar Focus: The Future.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »