By BRAD SPURGEONMARCH 20, 2016
MELBOURNE, Australia — Formula One demonstrated once again Sunday that it might not know how to design racing rules that guarantee a great show, but it does know how to write regulations to build racing cars to save drivers’ lives in case of an accident.On Lap 17 of the season-opening Australian Grand Prix in Melbourne, after a high-speed accident from which no driver would have survived 25 years ago, Fernando Alonso, the two-time world champion driver for the McLaren Honda team, climbed out of the wreck uninjured, in one of the most horrific crashes the series has witnessed in years.But Sunday’s event also showed that whatever the criticisms of the series may be, races under the current rules can still be as action-packed and unpredictable as anyone would want. But manipulating the format to produce excitement can backfire, after a change to the qualifying format on Saturday proved a complete failure.Still, the result of the first of 21 races this year again came to a 1-2 finish by the dominant Mercedes team, whose driver, Nico Rosberg, won the race, his fourth in a row after winning the last three races last season. His teammate, Lewis Hamilton, finished in second place, after dropping as low as seventh after a poor start on pole position.AdvertisementSebastian Vettel of the Ferrari team, who led for much of the race after charging into the lead at the start, finished third after his team made an error in tire strategy, while his teammate, Kimi Raikkonen, retired nearly halfway through the race after his engine caught fire while he was in third place.Advertisement“The strategy was crucial today, so I am really thankful,” Rosberg said. “It’s early days, but a perfect start. We have to keep an eye on the red guys,” he added, referring to the Ferrari cars’ color.It was the 15th victory of Rosberg’s career, and his second in Australia, where he also won in 2014.But it was Alonso’s horrific crash for which the race will be remembered. With roughly a quarter of the 57-lap race run, the Spaniard was trying to pass the car of Esteban Gutiérrez, a Mexican driving for the new United States-based Haas team. As Alonso moved to the left to pass, Gutiérrez drifted over to the left as well to enter the corner. Alonso’s front right wheel ran into one of the wheels of Gutiérrez’s car. The McLaren flew off the side of the track into a wall and then rolled through the gravel and came to rest at the retaining wall.Very little of the car remained intact aside from the so-called survival cell surrounding the driver, proving that the cars are constructed to withstand the worst beating.“I feel good,” Alonso said. “Obviously I’m trying to put everything in place again in my body. It was a big, big crash.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.He added, “I’m thankful for the safety of those cars and that I’m alive talking to you.”It was testament to the stringent safety regulations and accident research that the series has undertaken since the deaths of Ayrton Senna and Roland Ratzenberger during a race in Italy in 1994. The series went another 21 years without a fatality until Jules Bianchi died last year from injuries in an accident at the Japanese Grand Prix of October 2014.The spectacle of Sunday’s race was a huge contrast to Saturday’s qualifying session, for which the series had made its biggest change in the racing rules in years. In an effort to counter the predictability of the Mercedes team’s domination and spice up the weekend’s show at the race, Formula One changed the format of the best parts of the weekend’s action at the track.Again the Formula One organizers were criticized over the winter, for while the Mercedes team had won all but six of the 38 races over the last two seasons, the qualifying sessions had been a highlight of weekend’s track action.AdvertisementThe qualifying sessions last one hour in three separate heats during which the cars try to set the fastest lap time and establish the final grid formation for the race the following day.Under the new rules, cars were progressively eliminated in a complicated system that was both difficult to understand and that left the track empty of cars for long periods of time.Moreover, it favored the stronger teams, punished the weaker ones, and the pole position was decided five minutes before the end of the final session, leaving the track empty for the last three minutes of the session. The teams had a quick meeting and decided to scrap the new system for the next race, in Bahrain in two weeks.“For me, this new qualifying system did not work, and really we should apologize to the fans,” said Christian Horner, the director of the Red Bull team, which had dominated the series for the four years prior to the Mercedes reign of the past two seasons.“We have not put on a show for them at all today, which is a shame, especially for the first race of the season,” he added on Saturday. “It’s not good for qualifying to be done with five minutes to go; drivers and cars need to be out on track fighting for pole up until the last second.”A version of this article appears in print on March 21, 2016, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.