By HUW RICHARDSMARCH 20, 2016
PARIS — It had been 13 years since England last won a Grand Slam in European rugby, and its 31-21 victory over France in Paris over the weekend secured that title for the 13th time.England clinched its fifth and final victory in its sweep Saturday night of the Six Nations season in much the same way as the previous four. Although their game never really flowed, the English always had the measure of their opponent. That the victory might be thwarted was possible until the last few minutes, but never seemed likely.It could be argued that this is not a great England team — not in the same class, for instance, as its predecessor of 2003, which went on to win the World Cup later that year. But it is not claiming to be.“It is a nice first step, but only a small step, and we have much larger steps to come,” said Coach Eddie Jones. “We’ve improved a lot, but the great thing is that there’s still a long way to go.”AdvertisementThere is no quality threshold for winning a Grand Slam. All it requires of a team is that it should defeat all five of its bitterest rivals and nearest neighbors over the space of seven weekends — no easy feat for even the best.AdvertisementEngland was patently the better team in all five of its matches. It trailed for only 17 minutes of the 400 it played, and never by more than four points.The victory marked a triumphant first Six Nations for Jones, an Australian who is England’s first foreign coach. He had talked a good game and the talk was backed up by results, delivering a five-game sweep after five consecutive seasons in which England won four and lost one.He raised the stakes again Saturday night when he said: “In the next two or three years we’ll have a team to beat the All Blacks,” rugby’s dominant team from New Zealand.He will remember Saturday night more fondly than his captain, Dylan Hartley — assuming Hartley remembers it at all. A controversial choice as captain because of his disciplinary record, Hartley was 12 minutes short of the greatest triumph of his rugby life when he appeared to be knocked cold and was carried off on a stretcher.He was able to return to receive the trophy, but did not attend the postgame news conference. “He’s a bit under the weather and will go through the usual protocols,” said Jones, who paid tribute to his contribution. “His individual leadership has been outstanding.”England was only four points ahead when it lost Hartley, but it controlled the closing stages and extended its lead on two penalty goals by the inside center Owen Farrell, who finished with 16 points on the night.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.England’s superiority was shown by scoring three tries to none, but it could never quite finish off the spirited French. For its part, France could never quite get ahead of England.“We were chasing all evening,” said France’s captain, Guilhem Guirado. “We never gave up and while we felt we could even things up, we did not.”AdvertisementEngland led 17-12 at halftime, with its tries coming from a solo break by scrumhalf Danny Care and a dive over from close range by prop forward Dan Cole.In the second half, its smart young lock forwards Maro Itoje and George Kruis disrupted France’s lineout, four times stealing the ball from a French throw. And a try from wing Anthony Watson, created by a break and kick from Ben Youngs, who had replaced Care shortly after halftime, settled English nerves after a period in which the French scrumhalf Maxime Machenaud, who kicked six penalties, had cut the margin to only two points.While England rejoiced, France finished its season in fifth place, continuing its worst run in the championship since the 1920s.“Finishing fifth does not make me happy, but we can do better in coming years,” said France’s coach Guy Novès. “I did not expect to be fifth, but I did not expect to win, either.”Earlier on Saturday, Wales clinched second place when it defeated hapless Italy 67-14, its highest ever score in a championship match, in Cardiff, Wales. Ross Moriarty, who made his championship debut as a replacement flanker, scored two of the nine Welsh tries.The deposed champion Ireland took third when it defeated Scotland, 35-25, in an extremely lively contest in Dublin. Scotland, whose last top-half finish was when it won the final Five Nations championship in 1999, has been the most consistently attractive team this season, but continues to find ways to lose matches it might win.This time Scotland, which finished fourth, was undone by indiscipline, with Ireland scoring three of its four tries during the 20 minutes Scotland was reduced to 14 men because of a yellow card. Scotland scored three tries itself, the first a brilliant effort by its fullback Stuart Hogg — perhaps the most creative player in this year’s tournament. But Scotland always trailed after Ireland’s flanker CJ Stander and wing Keith Earls scored tries during the team’s first period with an extra man.A version of this article appears in print on March 21, 2016, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.