AdvertisementSupported bySyracuse 75, Middle Tennessee 50 | Midwest RegionBy Marc TracyST. LOUIS — Few expected to see either team playing in the N.C.A.A. tournament on Sunday. Syracuse had needed the equivalent of a favorable roll in the men’s basketball selection committee room one week earlier even to be in the bracket. And Middle Tennessee State had to accomplish probably the biggest upset of the tournament to advance to the round of 32.Both teams played with the extraordinary ferocity of competitors who do not want to lose with house money, with much shouting after makes and profanity after errors. But in the end, 10th-seeded Syracuse (22-13), the major-conference power playing its 100th N.C.A.A. tournament game, outlasted 15th-seeded Middle Tennessee (25-11), 75-50, pulling away in the second half.Syracuse, which imposed a postseason ban on itself last season in the course of an N.C.A.A. investigation that later found violations had been committed by men’s basketball program, clinched a spot in the round of 16 for the first time since it made the Final Four in 2013. Syracuse plays 11th-seeded Gonzaga on Friday in Chicago.The Syracuse senior Michael Gbinije led all players with 23 points, including 9 on 3-pointers. Forward Tyler Roberson, a junior, contributed 12 points, 9 rebounds and 3 assists.The Blue Raiders had upset Michigan State on Friday, just the eighth time a No. 15 seed had eliminated a No. 2 seed since the tournament expanded in 1985, by jumping to an early lead on the strength of accurate shooting and then staying with the Spartans the rest of the way. But on Sunday, they started 1 for 6 from behind the 3-point arc, then 2 for 9, and finally 3 for 11 in the first half. Giddy Potts, a sophomore guard who entered the game as Division I’s top 3-point shooter, was just 1 for 3. In the end, the senior forward Darnell Harris led his team with 11 points.It was not solely a matter of Middle Tennessee losing its touch. Syracuse is a nightmare matchup for many opponents. Few teams combine Syracuse’s commitment to an unorthodox defense — Coach Jim Boeheim’s 2-3 zone — with the athleticism and the size to execute it.Kansas, North Carolina, Virginia and Oregon are the top seeds in the N.C.A.A. men’s basketball tournament.“Our zone is a little bit different, and people aren’t used to seeing our zone,” Boeheim said after the game. “That’s always a little bit of an advantage for us when there’s just a one-day turnaround.”From the beginning, the Orange disrupted the Blue Raiders’ passing lanes and made them slow to the rim, causing several shot-clock violations. Syracuse forces its opponents to take more time on their possessions than any other team, according to the analytics website KenPom.com.But Syracuse’s victory was not just one of scheme. Its dynamic players protecting the rim prevented Middle Tennessee from going inside effectively when it became clear that its outside shots were not falling. On one early possession, the Blue Raiders ran a gorgeous set to beat the zone, passing the ball down the perimeter, over to the left block. and then to a cutting Harris. But the Syracuse freshman Tyler Lydon was able to guard Harris closely enough to make him miss the layup. That instance was not even one of the six blocks by the 6-foot-8 Lydon, but it presaged the problems Middle Tennessee would have — even well-executed plays failed to reap rewards. Middle Tennessee’s own confusing, varied defensive schemes allowed it to stay close in the first half, which the Blue Raiders finished trailing by just 4 points. But in the second half, they were smothered by the Syracuse defense, at one point going 2 for 20 from the field as the Orange piled up points.Before the tournament bracket was announced, there was some controversy over how the selection committee should account for the nine games Boeheim, a Hall of Fame coach, missed as part of N.C.A.A. sanctions. The Orange went 4-5, and 0-3 in the Atlantic Coast Conference. Joe Castiglione, Oklahoma’s athletic director and the committee chairman, said the panel would not “pretend he’s not a difference-maker.”In the end, that consideration was enough to get Syracuse, with its 20-13 résumé, into the tournament — it was one of the lowest-rated at-large teams — yet may have made it a higher seed than its talent justified. That, along with Middle Tennessee’s earlier upset, paved the Orange’s way to the second weekend.Advertisement