By TOM WORGOMARCH 19, 2016
When Mitch Korn became the coach of the Washington Capitals’ goaltenders in June 2014, he set about familiarizing himself with his players.Korn found out, much to his surprise, that he and Capitals goalie Braden Holtby shared a birthday: Sept. 16.“What are the odds?” Korn asked, grinning. “Every once in a while, you buy a lottery ticket and you let it pick the numbers for you, and all your favorite numbers come up. I think that, more than anything, it made me and him feel that this was kind of a match that was made in heaven.”That may sound exaggerated, but Holtby, with Korn’s help, has developed into the premier player he always wanted to be.AdvertisementHoltby is a favorite to win the Vezina Trophy for best goalie, is a strong candidate for the Hart Memorial Trophy for most valuable player and may well break Martin Brodeur’s single-season record of 48 wins, set in 2007. Holtby has 43 and is on pace for 50.AdvertisementJust two years ago, Holtby, 26, suffered through an up-and-down season under the former Capitals coach Adam Oates.Oates wanted his goalies playing deeper in the goal, a style that did not fit Holtby.Korn has a well-earned reputation for developing first-rate goalies. He coached the Hall of Famer Dominik Hasek in Buffalo and the All-Stars Pekka Rinne and Tomas Vokoun in Nashville.So even before Holtby met Korn, he knew that when Korn talked, it paid to listen.“I knew there were some things that needed to be fixed,” Holtby said. “But I didn’t really know how to do it. He found ways.”Holtby’s improvement started with a pointed question that Korn asked him on a flight home after a loss early in the 2014-15 season.Holtby, a fourth-round pick in the 2008 draft, had not been playing well.“I asked him, ‘Would you call yourself a blue-collar goalie?’ ” Korn recalled. “He said: ‘Absolutely. I am a farmer from Saskatchewan. I am not the most skilled guy, but I work and compete. I grind it.’ ”Nice, but that was not the answer Korn, 58, wanted to hear.“So I said, ‘O.K., I haven’t known you a long time, but for a blue-collar guy, I just don’t think you are blue-collar enough,’ ” he said. “But he looked at me and said, ‘You know, I think you are right.’ For me, I think it was one of the turning points. Not in our relationship, but in his play.”Holtby had been relying too much on his athleticism to make eye-catching saves.Now, with Korn’s coaching, Holtby has learned to use that athleticism to better position himself for saves. His body control and technique have also improved.Advertisement“I used to be a little more explosive in situations where I didn’t really need to be,” Holtby said. “He found ways to tighten things up and make sure there were less holes. Those are the things we have really worked on.”Kevin Weekes, a studio analyst for NHL Network and a former goalie in the league, sees Korn’s influence.“He is not overreaching,” Weeks said of Holtby. “Very seldom is he late to get in position or executing a save. So he can play with a smoother cadence, and more often than not, he is a lot more consistent as a direct result of that.”After a tough 2014-15 season, Holtby was eager to learn from Korn, who has coached in the N.H.L. for 25 seasons, including a 16-year stint in Nashville and seven years in Buffalo.When Korn and Holtby traveled together in the summer of 2014 to Minnesota to work with an optometrist, it also gave them a chance to become acquainted. Holtby took a quick liking to Korn.“He is an innovator,” Holtby said. “He is at the top of coaching. He is always coming up with new ideas. He has adapted with every single style change over the years, and he has usually been the first to adapt. He lives and breathes hockey and watches it religiously. He is always finding ways to see the position differently. He is a very intelligent hockey man.”Korn is known for his use of props for training: white pucks, mini pucks, medicine balls, on-ice lighting systems and unbreakable mirrors.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.While training Holtby, Korn realized that his influence extended a decade further back: When Holtby was 16, his goalie coach was John Stevenson, a friend of Korn’s.Advertisement“We joke that it’s like the movie ‘Back to the Future,’ ” said Korn, who had showed Stevenson how he used props in training.“Lo and behold, years later, I get Braden,” Korn said, “and he has already experienced and believed in some of the things I do.”One challenge that Korn and Capitals Coach Barry Trotz face is keeping Holtby fresh for the playoffs.Holtby started a league-high 72 games last year and is on pace for 66 this season.“He is very similar to Marty Brodeur,” Trotz said.If Holtby does not play, then he will stay on the ice in practice for a couple of hours “and take 10 times more shots then he would in a game,” Trotz added.If it were up to him, Holtby would play in every game.“I really don’t like the feeling of having off days,” he said. “I take a step back instead of taking a step forward.”Now, Holtby owns the team record for wins in a season with 43 after beating Nashville, 4-1, on Friday; he broke the record Monday against Carolina.Brodeur’s mark is up next.Holtby said that was hardly on his mind, but Korn figured that would change later in the season.“If there is anything that would intrigue him in breaking a record, it would probably be Brodeur’s,” he said. “Anytime you can be mentioned in the same breath as Brodeur, that’s a pretty cool thing.”A version of this article appears in print on March 20, 2016, on Page SP2 of the New York edition with the headline: Kindred Spirits Meet at the Capitals’ Net.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.