By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSJUNE 3, 2016
ENGLEWOOD, Colo. — Mark Sanchez has thrown 2,424 passes in the N.F.L.That’s 2,424 more than Trevor Siemian and Paxton Lynch, the two other quarterbacks vying to replace Peyton Manning on the Super Bowl champion Denver Broncos with the start of the N.F.L. season about 100 days away.So you might think that part of Sanchez’s duties in Denver was to tutor the younger quarterbacks.Not exactly.“That’s an interesting dynamic,” Coach Gary Kubiak said. “Mark is the guy with the most experience, but he has no experience here. He’s got his own problems right now getting everything down. I’m not going to try to ask him to do too much.”In addition, Sanchez is recovering from surgery to his left thumb that prevented him from taking any snaps during the first few days of organized team activities last week.AdvertisementIt is Siemian, then, who finds himself in the unusual position of being the quarterback providing guidance, despite having never thrown a pass in the pros.Advertisement“Even though Trevor is only in his second year, he is a vet to me,” Lynch said. “He’s the only quarterback in this system who has been here for a year. He was here when Peyton was here, too.”Lynch, who is working on his footwork and cramming mentally — he said this was the “first time I’ve seen a playbook that looked like a dictionary” — is picking not only Sanchez’s brain, but Siemian’s, too.“I take some stuff from Trevor, too, as much as I do from Mark, because Trevor has been in the offense longer than any other quarterback here,” Lynch said.Siemian earned the No. 3 job at training camp last year despite missing the off-season program while recovering from knee surgery. But he had a half-season’s worth of work as the primary backup because Brock Osweiler started for two months while Manning recovered from a foot injury.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.So Siemian took advantage of his snaps with the starting receivers Demaryius Thomas and Emmanuel Sanders at organized team activities, and he was more than willing to share a tip or two.Siemian said he learned from Manning that “sometimes things may mean a little more coming from another player” rather than a coach or coordinator.“I’ve been here for a year, so there are some things that I can offer up that may help him out,” Siemian said.AdvertisementSiemian couldn’t have seen himself in this role just a few months ago, even though he knew Manning was contemplating retirement and Osweiler was heading for free agency, where he ultimately took Houston’s big offer.“Last year was a heck of a ride, and I wasn’t looking too far ahead,” Siemian said. “I had no clue what was going to happen. I was just kind of holding on to the seat of my pants last year and taking everything in.”Now, he’s the most experienced quarterback in terms of Kubiak’s offense. Siemian figures that throwing to Thomas and Sanders and facing the likes of Aqib Talib and Chris Harris Jr., whom he went up against last year while running the scout team, can only make him better.Last week, he worked with the first-teamers before giving way to Sanchez, who exchanged the wrap he wore on his left hand for a soft splint and had a full workload in team and seven-on-seven drills.Kubiak, who never had quarterback stability last year, insists he doesn’t necessarily need to know who his starter is going into training camp. “I don’t have a timeline on anything,” he said.“Let me just say this: I’m very comfortable with our three guys right now,” Kubiak said. “That’s where I’m at. I love the competition that’s going on.”He added: “ They’re all very capable of helping this football team win. That’s why they’re here.”A version of this article appears in print on June 5, 2016, on Page SP2 of the New York edition with the headline: At Least He Knows the Broncos’ Offense.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.