AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressDUBLIN, Ohio — Hunter Mahan had two shafts at his feet for alignment. His coach was at his side for one shot, stood behind him on the next, and then crouched to block the glare of the hot sun to study the video.At one point, Mahan dropped his club after an errant shot, and Sean Foley, the coach, moved in for more instruction.These are the unhappy signs of a player in search of his game.“There is no joy in playing bad,” Mahan said.Mahan, reflective and honest, said last week that he was thankful for a life he described as incredible because he has rarely experienced stress on or off the golf course. He is approaching $30 million in career earnings despite having had to return to qualifying school once early in his P.G.A. Tour career. Each year he got a little better. He has played in every major since the 2007 United States Open at Oakmont.All that has changed. Once as high as No. 4 in the world, Mahan checked in last week at No. 143.“I haven’t had many struggles in my life,” Mahan said. “This is foreign territory to me.”Mahan is not currently eligible for any more majors. And he was not aware that the top players had been invited to be fitted for Ryder Cup uniforms on Tuesday at Muirfield Village, though for a man who has played on seven United States teams, the Ryder Cup was the least of his concerns.“The hard part is showing up every day with a good attitude, because the bad stuff is with you,” he said. “When you’re playing good, the bad stuff goes away. It’s like you’re waterproof. And when you’re playing bad, it feels like you’re a sponge.”Do not get the idea that Mahan, 34, was sulking. He said life off the course had never been better. In some respects, life off the course is part of why he is struggling, though Mahan would not change that.His first child, Zoe, was born in 2013 during the Canadian Open, where Mahan held a two-shot lead but withdrew and raced home to Dallas to be with his wife, Kandi, in time for the birth. His second child, Miller, was born about 18 months later.“We wanted them close together. We had two and it was like, ‘Holy moly, two is a lot.’ And then she was pregnant,” Mahan said with a smile.His third child is due next month.“I was kind of looking forward to a year without anything new, which hasn’t happened. Everything in my life is really good. I’m just not shooting the scores I should.”Soon, the couple will have three children under the age of 3.“We have a lot going on,” Mahan said. “Mentally, you’d like to deal with one thing at a time. I think it overwhelmed me, and I lost track of my swing a little bit. It feels like an avalanche, but it’s just a snow flurry.”Mahan has felt the pull to be at home with two toddlers and a pregnant wife, and that is where he has felt his energy should be. And so it has been difficult for him to devote his previous intensity his game, which had been so reliable that he was the only player to have never missed a FedEx Cup playoff event since its inception in 2007 — until he failed to reach the Tour Championship last year.Mahan said he was not sure what would be harder to find: his swing or the right balance in life.“I’m a father and a husband, and I have to be there first,” he said. “It’s hard to be there mentally in both places.”It shows. This year, he has missed the cut seven times in 13 starts. His best finish was a tie for 43rd at Torrey Pines, his first event of the year. He did not break 70 until the second round of the Players Championship, a stretch of 34 straight rounds at 70 or higher.Mahan was confident that his work and his game were going in the right direction. As far away as he appears on paper, he said he did not feel the gap was too large.“I’m not trying to get back to where I’m a top-50 player,” he said. “I’m trying to get back to where I’m a top-five or top-10 player.“I’m making headway. I’m doing the right things. It’s just going to take time, and time moves slow,” he continued. “It moves fast when you’re playing good. When you’re playing bad, every hole takes forever, and every round takes forever. You think a 65 will fix everything, and it won’t.”Advertisement