By BEN ROTHENBERGJUNE 3, 2016
PARIS — Tommy Haas was named tournament director of the BNP Paribas Open in Indian Wells, Calif., on Friday, filling a position vacated by Raymond Moore in March after he made derisive comments about women’s tennis.Haas, a native of Germany who rose to the No. 2 ranking in 2002 and reached four Grand Slam semifinals, remains an active player at 38, persevering in an injury-plagued professional career that began in 1996.“This is really something I’m looking forward to doing, and I couldn’t be more happy about this new position I’m taking on,” Haas said in a conference call. “I can’t wait to go out there and work around a team, such a great team that is in place already out in Indian Wells.”Moore aroused anger on the last day of this year’s tournament when he said that female players were “very, very lucky” and that they “ride the coattails of the men.”AdvertisementHe added, “If I was a lady player, I’d go down every night on my knees and thank God that Roger Federer and Rafa Nadal were born, because they have carried this sport.”AdvertisementMoore resigned as tournament director 36 hours later.His comments prompted renewed conversation about equal prize money at combined ATP-WTA events such as his. While Haas did not specifically address the topic in the conference call, in the past he has balked at the notion of equal pay. When Wimbledon became the final Grand Slam event to offer equal prize money to men and women in 2007, Haas was outspoken against the decision.“I think the depth of men’s tennis is much tougher than the women’s, plus we play best of five sets,” Haas said in 2007. “Not to say the women don’t deserve it; the top players train very hard and are very good players. But, in general, I don’t agree with it.”On Friday, Haas said he maintained good relationships with many current and former WTA players.“I’m sure we’re going to brainstorm about that, and make sure that they’re going to feel very welcome,” he said of the WTA players. “We need the women, just like always. It’s a combined event. To have one of the best tournaments, where the best female players and the best male players come together is such an important thing for us, and we know that.”He added: “The statements that were made, it was very, very unfortunate. But there shouldn’t be a cloud over this event by any means at all, because of all they have done in the past, and what they continue to do is to make it an amazing, amazing experience.”Haas is the third former ATP player to be named director of an important tournament this year. In February, Guy Forget was named director of the French Open, and Andre Silva was named director of the Cincinnati Masters in May.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Unlike Forget and Silva, who each had extensive previous experience on the organizational side of the sport, Haas has formal experience only as a player.Though at an age at which most players have long since retired, Haas played as recently as last fall in Vienna. Currently ranked 353rd, he said he hoped to be able to return to the court at least for a few events next year after recovering from toe surgery.“I think every athlete with thoughts of retirement has problems with accepting it at some point,” Haas said. “But for me it would certainly be a dream of mine, on my own terms, to come back and play a few events, or one event, and retire on court or at some event where I would feel comfortable doing so.”AdvertisementSteve Birdwell, the chief operating officer for the Indian Wells tournament, said Haas had quickly proved to be a popular nominee for Moore’s former post.“We kept hearing that he has a great heart and is such a great guy,” Birdwell said.Haas was visible in the front row of this year’s tournament beside Larry Ellison, the billionaire who is chairman of the software company Oracle and is the owner of the tournament. Haas said he had a “very, very great relationship” with Ellison. That relationship left many in the sport unsurprised by the otherwise unorthodox hire.“I think it’s a great solution for Larry and for Indian Wells,” top-ranked Novak Djokovic said.Haas said that he had first expressed his interest in the position to Ellison when it previously became previously open last fall, after Steve Simon left to become chief executive of the WTA. The position was ultimately filled by Moore.Haas indicated that his role might be more part-time than others who hold such posts, saying he had no plans to relocate to Indian Wells, but instead would commute in on “a regular basis” from his home in Los Angeles, which is more than two hours away by car.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.