By DAVID WALDSTEINOCT. 31, 2016
CLEVELAND — The Cleveland Indians remain one victory from winning their first World Series in 68 years. But in an alternate universe, the Indians’ wait for another championship is not nearly that long.Somewhere, perhaps at the bottom of a landfill on Staten Island, is the decaying hard drive of my old laptop on which I once wrote a story that included the following words: “After 49 years of frustration and misery, the Cleveland Indians won the 1997 World Series.”At the time, I was working for another New York newspaper and typed out that sentence in the bottom of the ninth inning of Game 7 of the World Series, in Miami, with the Indians about to vanquish the Florida Marlins and become baseball’s champions.It was gorgeous prose, I convinced myself, suitable for the occasion. This was, it should be noted, before the Boston Red Sox or the Chicago White Sox went on to break their long droughts without a championship or before the Chicago Cubs even made it back to the World Series, which they have finally done this year.AdvertisementSo in the story I completed before Game 7 was actually over, I had the Indians carrying the banner for all of those teams, for frustrated fans everywhere.AdvertisementIt was a romantic notion, and because of deadline pressures, I wrote all of it before it happened.Not that it was unusual to do so. Sportswriters usually write about a baseball game as it is being played, tapping away as the plays unfold, hoping to identify the ultimate outcome early enough to give the story a coherent theme way before the final out.It’s easy to do this when the game isn’t that close. In Game 6 of that World Series, when Cleveland led the Marlins by a 4-1 score, the Indians’ good bullpen made it safe to assume they would win. And they did.Earlier in the Series, in Game 4, the Indians led, 6-0, after three innings in a snowy setting in Cleveland, so it felt safe to start typing an “Indians win” story with much of the game still to go. Game 7, however, was close, with Bobby Bonilla hitting a home run in the bottom of the seventh to cut the Indians’ lead to 2-1.Different writers have different methods for handling games like that, when the deadline is bearing down and either team might still win. This was my first year as a baseball writer, and my first World Series. My method was to use split screens on my computer.On one screen I went on about the Indians’ historic achievement, recalling the great Lou Boudreau, the player-manager of the 1948 Indians, and Larry Doby, a key member of that team and the player who integrated the American League. For some reason, I may have even mentioned Harry Truman, who was president in 1948.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In any case, I was on a roll, and there is a good chance I even typed that Jose Mesa, the Indians’ closer that season, had nailed down the final three outs of the game. Which, at that point, unfortunately, he had not.Meanwhile, I opened up another screen on the computer and began cautiously typing a story about a dramatic Marlins comeback. In part, I fixated on the idea that it was not fair that the Marlins, a team in existence for just five years, would usurp a title from fans waiting half a century.AdvertisementBut my focus had to be on the Indians, the team that was still leading the game, so that story was getting more of my attention and words.And then came the bottom of the ninth. My “Indians win” story was ready to go. But with Mesa on the mound, Moises Alou and Charles Johnson singled before Alou scored on a sacrifice fly by Craig Counsell.The score was now tied and groans went up in the press box from dozens of writers facing the same dilemma. The Marlins’ fans, of course, were elated and loud.I switched screens and started writing frantically about the Marlins winning it all right then and there. But Mesa got Jim Eisenreich to ground out and end the ninth with the score still tied, 2-2. In the press box, everyone relaxed for a minute.But just for a minute. Now it was extra innings, and either team could quickly win. So, in the top of the extra innings, I would open the historical “Indians win” screen and work on that version. And when they didn’t score, and the Marlins came to bat, I would flip over to the “Marlins win” story.I was sitting in the first row of the press box, next to a glass wall. On the other side of the glass was Gloria Estefan, the singer and the Marlins’ most famous fan. She could see how frantically I was working and she tapped on the glass and mimicked my manic energy.Switching back and forth between screens, I was trying, among other things, to keep the stories straight. And then in the bottom of the 11th, Edgar Renteria singled home Counsell, and Estefan and her fellow fans celebrated into the night. My “Marlins win” story was on its way into print.Looking back, all these years later, I can only wince that I was a relative neophyte at the time and allowed too much negative opinion about the Marlins — they played in a football stadium, for goodness’ sake — to infiltrate what I wrote.As for that other story, the one with the Indians finally winning it all, the one with all that great prose? I hope the rats enjoyed it.A version of this article appears in print on November 1, 2016, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: In 1997, an Indians Title Was Put in Writing, Until the Story Changed.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »