By JAMES WAGNEROCT. 31, 2016
CLEVELAND — Defense does not usually get top billing in baseball, and it remains one of the harder aspects of the game to measure. But in Game 5 of the World Series on Sunday night, the Chicago Cubs put on a display of stellar fielding that was hard to overlook and highlighted how important good glove work can be to a team’s success.Javier Baez’s speedy hands at second base allowed the Cubs to prevent a stolen base by the Cleveland Indians in a key moment of the game. At the edge of the Indians’ dugout, Cubs first baseman Anthony Rizzo kept a foul pop-up that bounced off the glove of catcher David Ross from hitting the ground in an uncanny moment that seemed more fitting of a circus juggling act.“I always try to be there on tough plays to get the rebound,” Rizzo joked afterward.Jason Heyward used his athleticism to catch a wind-driven fly ball at the wall in right field. Rebounding from a two-error game, Kris Bryant flashed nifty leather at third base. With a quick flick of his glove, Willson Contreras vacuumed up a 101-mile-per-hour fastball from Aroldis Chapman that bounced in front of the plate with two runners on base.With the Cubs trying to protect a 3-2 lead at that point, the runners would have advanced to second and third had the ball eluded Contreras, leaving Cleveland one base hit from taking the lead and putting even more pressure on Chapman. Instead, the runners had to stay put, and the Cubs held on to win.Advertisement“That was great defense,” Contreras said in Spanish, speaking about not only his play but also his teammates’. “People probably thought our energy level was going to be down, but that wasn’t the case. We are a team that keeps our heads up. And if we do something wrong, we make the needed small adjustments, as much on defense as on offense.”AdvertisementDefensive statistics in baseball can fail to paint a complete picture, but they generally point to the dominance of the Cubs’ defense this season. In fact, some metrics suggested that this season’s Cubs were among the best defensive teams in baseball in the last two decades.“Last year we played some pretty good defense,” said the Cubs’ Addison Russell, a finalist for the National League Gold Glove Award at shortstop this season. “I think this year we played the best defense that I’ve ever been a part of.”Quantifying that excellence can be a challenge. The Cubs made 101 regular-season errors, tied for the eighth most in baseball. But that can be misleading because Cubs fielders reached more balls than most teams.This measurement was more telling: The Cubs’ defense converted 73.1 percent of balls in play into outs, by far the highest rate in baseball. The next-best team, the Toronto Blue Jays, had a 70.5 percent success rate.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Cubs were so much better than everyone else that the gap between them and the Blue Jays was not much smaller than the one separating the Blue Jays and the last-place Minnesota Twins, who were at 66.6 percent.In addition to their sterling defense, the Cubs were the third-highest scoring team in the majors during the regular season. Although their offense has sputtered against the Indians’ talented pitching staff in the World Series, the Cubs were as strong offensively this year as they were defensively. The youth of the Cubs’ roster helped. Six of the regular players in the lineup are 27 or younger.“Nobody wants to sacrifice the chance of offense for defense,” Theo Epstein, the Cubs’ president for baseball operations, said last week. “But we also want defense. So the key becomes finding well-rounded players or athletic players and frankly younger players. You get young guys who can hit, they’re going to be a little more athletic, and there’s a chance to cover more ground defensively.”AdvertisementThe Cubs’ ability to patrol wide swaths of the infield and outfield also helped their pitching staff post a 3.15 E.R.A. in the regular season, appreciably better than the second-best Washington Nationals (3.51).Individually, the Cubs’ Kyle Hendricks (2.13) and Jon Lester (2.44) had the lowest E.R.A.s among qualifying major league starters, and Hendricks said he owed a lot of his success to the defense behind him.“I’m not an overpowering-type or strikeout-type pitcher,” said Hendricks, who would be in line to start Game 7 if the Cubs can make the Series go the distance. “I pitch to contact. Balls are going to be put in play, and that’s how it was all year long, even in the playoffs. I need those guys behind me, and they know they’re going to be making a lot of plays. And all year long, they were the best defense in baseball.”During the regular season, the Cubs’ defensive versatility helped them take advantage of matchups, overcome injuries and give breathers to players in slumps. Bryant, the front-runner for the N.L.’s Most Valuable Player Award, played 107 games at his natural position, third base. But he also played left field, right field and first base.“I take pride in that,” said Bryant, whose locker always has two third baseman’s gloves, an outfielder’s glove and a first baseman’s mitt. “I don’t want to be a one-dimensional player.’’The veteran utility man Ben Zobrist signed with the Cubs in the off-season to handle second base but has mostly played in left in the postseason. Baez, who has played second in the playoffs, has the athleticism to handle third or shortstop. Contreras, on days he did not catch during the season, sometimes sneaked into the lineup as a left fielder. Dexter Fowler played deeper in center this season and had a strong defensive showing. Heyward can play anywhere in the outfield.The Cubs so valued the defense of Heyward — a three-time Gold Glove winner in right — that he started on Sunday despite his struggles at the plate. Although it was counterintuitive, Cubs Manager Joe Maddon said he wanted to play the strongest defense he could in a game in which his team needed to start scoring more. It worked.“We have to catch the ball to win,” Maddon said. “We have to, and we did.”A version of this article appears in print on November 1, 2016, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: Defense, Though Hard to Gauge, Gives Cubs a Clear Edge.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.