By MIKE VORKUNOVAPRIL 11, 2017
Mike Hamersky, the Knicks fan who got into an altercation with James L. Dolan, the team’s owner, outside Madison Square Garden last week, now says he is having trouble renewing his season tickets.Hamersky, a lawyer from Queens, made headlines last week when he spotted Dolan walking past him and, he said, yelled at Dolan to sell the team. Dolan acknowledged that he had heard what was shouted and that he had confronted Hamersky and cursed at him.Although Hamersky was able to get into the Knicks game that night, he now says he has been thwarted by the Knicks in his attempts to renew his ticket plan for the 2017-18 season. The early deadline to renew tickets was Tuesday while the final deadline is April 25.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Hamersky said he had not had his emails answered by the Knicks’ ticket representative whom he normally deals with, was locked out of the team’s online ticket portal, and had been hung up on multiple times when he tried to contact someone by phone.AdvertisementThe Knicks declined to comment about Hamersky’s assertions. When asked whether Hamersky would be able to enter the Garden if, for instance, he resorted to buying tickets on the secondary market, the team also declined to comment.Hamersky has not been to a Knicks game at the Garden since the one he attended the night of the altercation, he said. He did not have tickets for Sunday’s matinee, nor does he have them for Wednesday’s regular-season finale.AdvertisementBut as bad as the Knicks have been, Hamersky said, he would like tickets for next season.Earlier this season, Dolan barred Charles Oakley, a former Knicks star, from the Garden after a confrontation with security guards that resulted in Oakley’s being escorted from the arena in handcuffs. That ban was later dropped after Dolan and Oakley spoke in a meeting brokered by Commissioner Adam Silver.A version of this article appears in print on April 12, 2017, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Fan Says Ticket Woes Follow a Dolan Run-In.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.