By TOM WORGOAPRIL 12, 2017
ARLINGTON, Va. — As Jay Beagle, a fourth-line center for the Capitals, watched the Pittsburgh Penguins fight their way to a Stanley Cup last spring, he realized he might be able to get Washington over the hump and into the finals.Beagle noticed that what Pittsburgh had that Washington lacked was secondary scoring — players who could step up and produce behind a superstar forward.Soon after the season finished, Beagle set up a net in the backyard of his Calgary home and went to work to help remedy the situation.“I would go out and shoot 100 pucks a day, then head to my workouts,” Beagle said of his training schedule, which started after Pittsburgh ousted Washington in the second round last spring. “I incorporated that into my routine.”AdvertisementIt was something he had never done before, and it has worked. Beagle set career highs in goals (13), assists (17) and shooting percentage (13).Advertisement“I feel like I have gotten more quality scoring chances,” he said.Beagle’s numbers may not seem significant, but a player like him may be the key to the Capitals breaking their postseason hex.Three times since 2010, including this season and last, Washington entered the postseason with the N.H.L.’s best record. But the Capitals have not advanced past the second round since 1998, when the Detroit Red Wings swept them in the Stanley Cup finals. The Capitals open the playoffs on Thursday against the Toronto Maple Leafs.Alex Ovechkin remains the Capitals’ driving force, but Beagle is the team’s most versatile player. Coach Barry Trotz has not hesitated to insert Beagle up and down the lineup in critical situations.Whatever his role, Beagle, Washington’s top penalty killer, has delivered grit, prowess on face-offs and defensive ability, which played a big part in getting him to the N.H.L.He finished second in the league in short-handed face-offs won (151) and ranked ninth over all in face-off winning percentage (56.4).Beagle, 31, also averaged the second-highest ice time (13 minutes 38 seconds) in his nine-year career.Washington defenseman Karl Alzner calls Beagle the N.H.L.’s best fourth-line center, saying, “He’s been so good in every facet of the game.”AdvertisementCapitals General Manager Brian MacLellan added: “He always plays with energy. He sets the tone for the team.”Over the years, the Capitals have cemented their reputation as the league’s most disappointing team come playoff time. Secondary scoring, or the lack of it, has played a significant role in the drought.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Opponents have figured out how to stop Ovechkin in the playoffs. He has only 11 goals in Washington’s last 33 playoff games. When Ovechkin doesn’t score, the Capitals don’t score much either.“You saw it last year with the Penguins throughout the playoffs,” Trotz said. “A lot of times the stars nullify each other, so the secondary scoring is one of the catalysts for success.”Fixing the issue became MacLellan’s top off-season priority.He made a number of changes with an eye on bolstering secondary scoring. MacLellan traded for center Lars Eller and signed the free agent Brett Connolly. They play on the third line with left wing Andre Burakovsky.“I just think last year when we lost to Pittsburgh, we were a couple of goals short,” MacLellan said. “I don’t think our third and fourth lines produced as well as the Penguins’ third and fourth lines produced. I thought we needed to upgrade in that area and become more well-rounded instead of being top-heavy.”Eller (12 goals, 13 assists) and Connolly (15, 8) have provided the scoring punch the Capitals coveted.Washington is even getting offense from the fourth-line wing Daniel Winnik, whom MacLellan picked up at last year’s trade deadline. Winnik, who has played for seven teams, came through with a career-high 12 goals.AdvertisementConnolly’s offense has been as surprising as Winnik’s. Tampa Bay drafted Connolly sixth over all in 2010, but his best offensive output was 12 goals during the 2014-15 season.MacLellan continued to tinker after the season began.He acquired the most sought-after player at the trade deadline, defenseman Kevin Shattenkirk, from the St. Louis Blues. The Capitals immediately made Shattenkirk the quarterback of their power play, replacing John Carlson.Coming from a St. Louis team that has suffered its share of premature playoff exits, Shattenkirk is eager to see the Capitals break out.“There’s some demons that these guys have,” Shattenkirk said. “I dealt with that a lot in St. Louis. We had some guys come in last year who were able to say: ‘It’s a new year. The responsibility doesn’t fall on your shoulders.’ That’s what I am trying to do here for these guys — just make them realize you can’t focus on the past.”More than anything else, the additional scoring options are giving Washington hope this year.They have allowed Trotz to cut back on playing time for Ovechkin and the first-line center Nicklas Backstrom, who was second in the league in assists (63). Ovechkin (18:22) and Backstrom (18:16) are averaging career lows in minutes played.“I am trying to keep them fresh” for the playoffs, Trotz said. “Lines can grow stale.”The offense the Capitals get from their bottom lines and the freshness of the team’s stars are critical to an extended playoff run.“Last year, they went through the first round, but it was a chore for them to beat Philadelphia,” the NBC analyst Pierre McGuire said. “They extended themselves the year before. They had to go to Game 7 with the Islanders and they were worn out. They had nothing left.”Beagle is convinced the team’s past failures can be remedied with more offense. And this year, the Capitals just might have it.“When you are watching the playoffs, you see secondary scoring is huge,” Beagle said. “You just can’t rely on your power play and your top two lines. If you have four lines chipping in, it’s huge. It takes a lot of the load off the top guys. That’s how teams win the playoffs.”A version of this article appears in print on April 13, 2017, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: Capitals See Supporting Cast as a Key to Success.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.