By ALLAN KREDAAPRIL 11, 2017
GREENBURGH, N.Y. — The Rangers issued all the appropriate proclamations heading into Wednesday’s playoff opener at Montreal, but amid the platitudes were potential pitfalls.The Rangers lost all three of their meetings with the Canadiens this season. They did not play particularly well in the season’s final weeks, winning only eight of their 21 games since Feb. 25.Although the Rangers recorded a league-leading 27 road wins, they have struggled in recent seasons at the raucous Bell Centre in Montreal. They lost their lone visit there this season, by 5-4 on Jan. 14, as Henrik Lundqvist replaced an injured Antti Raanta after the first period and allowed five goals.Center Derek Stepan, a veteran of 85 playoff games, said nuance and hard work would be crucial the moment the puck dropped in Montreal.Advertisement“The details in playoff hockey are so big,” Stepan said. “It’s amazing how every little play counts. We have to be extremely sharp mentally and physically be ready to go.”The Rangers finished fourth in the Metropolitan Division with 102 points, and facing Montreal in the opening round — instead of the Washington Capitals, who had the N.H.L.’s best record — could be seen as a benefit. The Canadiens trailed the Rangers in the Eastern Conference standings for much of the season before finishing 1 point ahead of them.Like the Rangers, the Canadiens are a speed team. And as with the Rangers, Montreal’s success depends heavily on a star goalie. Montreal’s Carey Price, who was injured by the Rangers’ Chris Kreider in Game 1 of the 2014 Eastern Conference finals, finished with 37 wins and a 2.23 goals against average this season.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.His rival with the Rangers, Lundqvist, 35, registered his 400th career victory among his 31 wins this season. But he was inconsistent at times, especially after the long layoffs brought on by the Rangers’ bye week and the All-Star break. He also missed several games after straining his hip in early March. He returned to win only one of six games down the stretch.But Lundqvist revels in the postseason, having registered 55 wins with nine shutouts and a 2.28 goals against average since 2006. The Rangers have missed the playoffs only once during his 12-year career.Advertisement“I love it; it’s great,” Lundqvist said after the Rangers practiced ahead of their trip to Montreal. “Everybody is feeling a little nervous and excited. You’ve just got to go out and enjoy it.”Lundqvist, who seems to fully embrace his role as the Rangers’ resident sage during the playoffs, said it would be essential for him and his teammates to forget their troubles in Montreal. He has a 4-8-2 regular-season record there.“The Bell Centre is a great atmosphere, and they always play with confidence there with the crowd behind them,” he said. “When you go out there, you don’t think too much. Especially in playoffs, it’s easier to block things out, things that don’t really matter. We just have to get that first win.”Lundqvist has started 103 straight Rangers playoff games and has reached the Stanley Cup finals only once — a five-game series loss to the Los Angeles Kings in 2014. He said savoring the moment would also be important from a mental standpoint, as well as in finding a higher physical gear.“You try to make the most of it,” Lundqvist said. “We know what’s ahead of us, the type of team we are playing. Most important for us is to focus on our game and what we need to do.”Rangers Coach Alain Vigneault, who coached the Canadiens from 1997 to 2000, would not tip his hand as far as lineup decisions, except for announcing that defenseman Kevin Klein would most likely sit out the opener in favor of Brendan Smith.It also seemed likely that the agitator Tanner Glass would play on the fourth line instead of Pavel Buchnevich.Jesper Fast, who figures to play on the fourth line with Glass and Oscar Lindberg, said the Rangers would need to use their speed against the Canadiens, who are led by Max Pacioretty and the huge defenseman Shea Weber.Advertisement“I believe we have to play hard, play smart,” Fast said. “We have four lines with speed, and we move the puck well. We have to play our best hockey.”Stepan said he tried to illustrate to his younger teammates the sudden rise in energy and pressure the playoff atmosphere generates. He emphasized that firsthand sensory overload would be the best teacher.“I’m not going to tell them anything,” he said. “Let them experience it for themselves. We’ll get the first-period jitters out of the way and go from there.”A version of this article appears in print on April 12, 2017, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: Rangers Look to Forget Their Recent History of Struggle in Montreal.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.