AdvertisementSupported byBy Andrew KnollThe N.H.L. playoffs begin Wednesday, and many of the league’s youngest and brightest stars, including Edmonton’s Connor McDavid and Toronto’s Auston Matthews, will be in the spotlight.The benefits — or detriments, depending on your point of view — of the division-based playoff system will also be on display, particularly in the Eastern Conference. The defending champion Pittsburgh Penguins (111 points) and the Columbus Blue Jackets (108 points) have the second- and third-best records in the East, but will face each other in the first round because both play in the Metropolitan Division. Because of the strength of that division, the Rangers’ 102 points were good enough for only a wild card, which means they will play the Atlantic Division-winning Canadiens (103 points) in the first round.The complete first-round schedule can be found here.No. 1 Washington Capitals vs. No. 4 Toronto Maple LeafsThe Capitals (55-19-8) captured the Presidents’ Trophy with the N.H.L.’s best record for the second season in a row. They have excelled in all situations, leading the league in goal differential (plus-81) by a wide margin and finishing tied for third on the power play and seventh in penalty killing. Seeking its elusive first championship, Washington enters the playoffs having won 10 of 12 games and added the most significant player at the trading deadline, defenseman Kevin Shattenkirk.Just making the playoffs has been elusive for Toronto. In the previous 11 seasons, the Leafs qualified for the playoffs only once, in 2012-13, when they famously collapsed in the first round after taking a 4-1 lead in the third period of Game 7 against the Boston Bruins. But the city and the franchise hope this playoff berth proves to be the first step on a long path to glory. After a top-to-bottom shift in personnel, Coach Mike Babcock has gotten the most out of an exceptional crop of rookies. Matthews, the No. 1 draft pick last June, tallied 69 points to lead all rookies, and his 40 goals tied him for second among all players. Mitch Marner and William Nylander tied for third in rookie scoring, each notching 61 points.The Capitals won the high-scoring season series, 2-1. The series begins Thursday in Washington.No. 2 Pittsburgh Penguins vs. No. 3 Columbus Blue JacketsColumbus Coach John Tortorella and Pittsburgh Coach Mike Sullivan are close friends, but do not expect this series to be friendly. The Penguins (50-21-11) had a litany of injuries down the stretch including to defenseman Kris Letang, their leader in time on ice, and Evgeni Malkin, one of their big-ticket forwards. While Letang is done for the year, Malkin should be ready for the playoffs. Mending or recently returned Penguins include defensemen Olli Maatta and Trevor Daley as well as forwards Matt Cullen, Bryan Rust, Carl Hagelin and Chris Kunitz.The Blue Jackets (50-24-8) have one of the top goaltenders in hockey in Sergei Bobrovsky, but he is unproven in the playoffs. Since entering the league in 2000-1, Columbus has never won a playoff series in two appearances. Only three Blue Jackets, forwards Brandon Saad and Scott Hartnell and center Brandon Dubinsky, have been to the conference finals or beyond. Columbus backed into the playoffs, losing six of its last seven games. The Jackets are also hobbled by injuries. Defenseman Ryan Murray appears unlikely to play in the series, but the star rookie defenseman Zach Werenski is expected to return from an upper-body injury he sustained April 2.The teams split their season series, 2-2. Game 1 is Wednesday in Pittsburgh.No. 1 Montreal Canadiens vs. No. 4 RangersMontreal (47-26-9) essentially went wire to wire in first place in the Atlantic, though that may be more of an indictment of the team’s competition than an endorsement of its performance. The Canadiens even fired their coach, Michel Therrien, in February and replaced him with Claude Julien, a former Montreal coach who had recently been let go by the Bruins. Montreal went 16-7-1 under Julien. The Canadiens’ success still starts and ends in net with Carey Price, who was injured by the Rangers’ Chris Kreider the last time the teams met in the postseason, in the 2014 Eastern Conference finals.Rangers goalie Henrik Lundqvist has struggled this season. He also has a poor playing history in Montreal, where he has not won a regular-season game since 2009, though he was 2-1 with a 2.82 goals-against average and a .915 save percentage during the 2014 playoffs.The Rangers (48-28-6) have won only three of their past 10 games, but are the stronger offensive team in the series. They would love to see a resurgence from the speedy wing Michael Grabner, who was second on the team in goals but had only one in his last 23 games.The Canadiens swept the season series, 3-0. Game 1 is Wednesday in Montreal.No. 2 Ottawa Senators vs. No. 3 Boston BruinsAfter three years out of the N.H.L., Coach Guy Boucher made a triumphant return, leading the Senators to the playoffs despite a goalie carousel, mediocre special teams and an offense that was 22nd in goals. But sound defensive structure and the wizardry of Erik Karlsson buoyed Ottawa (44-28-10). He remains a strong candidate for the Norris Trophy, which honors the league’s top defenseman, an award he has already earned twice, and may be considered for the Hart Trophy, given to the most valuable player. His 71 points led the team by a wide margin.In February, the Bruins (44-31-7) fired Julien, who led them to a Stanley Cup in 2011 and a finals berth in 2013, and replaced him with Bruce Cassidy. The change reignited the offense, increasing its production by about a goal a game. Under Cassidy, Boston has gone 18-8-1. There are significant holdovers from the Julien era meshed with more recently integrated talent. Most notable, wing Brad Marchand has gone from pesky to prolific, notching a career-high 39 goals.The Senators won all four games between the teams this season. Game 1 is Wednesday in Ottawa.No. 1 Anaheim Ducks vs. No. 4 Calgary FlamesThe series highlights one of the strangest current losing streaks in the N.H.L. The Flames have not won a regular-season game in Anaheim since Jan. 19, 2004, losing 25 games in a row. Calgary won a playoff game in Anaheim in 2006 and will have to win at least one to get past the Ducks, who ended the season on a 14-game point streak. Since Feb. 14, the Ducks have gone 13-1-1 against playoff teams. Their captain, Ryan Getzlaf, erupted in March, posting 20 points in 13 games. Patrick Eaves, a trade-deadline acquisition, has 11 goals in 21 games with Anaheim (46-23-13). But No. 1 defenseman Cam Fowler will probably miss the first round after injuring his knee against the Flames this month.Calgary (45-33-4) returns to the playoffs after a one-year absence and a coaching change that left the playoff newcomer Glen Gulutzan behind its bench. The youthful Flames, led by Johnny Gaudreau and Sean Monahan, have an intriguing mix of skill and grit as well as overhauled goaltending. Their starter, Brian Elliott, won 17 of his 21 starts in February and March, and defenseman Dougie Hamilton blossomed into a 50-point scorer this season.Anaheim took four out of five regular-season games from Calgary, with two of those wins coming in April. In their final meeting, the teams combined for 112 penalty minutes. Anaheim led the league with 46 fighting majors, and the Flames were fourth with 35, which means this could be the most volatile matchup of the playoffs. Game 1 is Thursday in Anaheim.No. 2 Edmonton Oilers vs. No. 3 San Jose SharksThe Oilers (47-26-9) last qualified for the playoffs in 2006, when Chris Pronger led them to within a game of their first Stanley Cup since 1990. This season McDavid, their captain, is a Hart Trophy candidate at age 20, having led the N.H.L. in points with 100. With players like Milan Lucic and Andrej Sekera, the Oilers have added grit and defensive depth over the past two seasons, and an underperforming second line found its scoring stroke late in the season. Edmonton Coach Todd McLellan knows the Sharks well — he coached them for seven seasons.The Sharks (46-29-7) are the defending Western Conference champions, but they did not end the regular season on a high note, losing nine of their last 13 games. San Jose hopes to get star forwards Logan Couture and Joe Thornton back from injuries for the series. Still, other core players like Joe Pavelski, Patrick Marleau, Brent Burns and Marc-Edouard Vlasic have proved bankable.Edmonton won three of five regular-season games against San Jose, with McDavid notching 8 points in those games. Game 1 is Wednesday in Edmonton.No. 1 Chicago Blackhawks vs. No. 4 Nashville PredatorsThe Blackhawks (50-23-9), who have won three Stanley Cups in the past seven years, are battle tested, and the star forward Patrick Kane is on a roll. His 40 points and 19 goals since the All-Star break are the most of any player in the playoffs. Kane’s linemate Artemi Panarin was also a point-per-game player in that span as the Hawks surged to the top of the West in the second half of the season. Chicago reacquired Johnny Oduya at the deadline, restoring its core four defensemen from the 2015 Cup-winning team.Nashville (41-29-12) overcame a stumbling start to make the playoffs. Defenseman P. K. Subban, acquired in a blockbuster trade in the off-season, heated up down the stretch, as did wings James Neal and Filip Forsberg. Pekka Rinne may not be as consistently dominant as he once was, but he put together a strong finish.Chicago won four of five regular-season meetings. Both teams like to push speed and tempo, which resulted in some high-scoring clashes. The series starts Thursday in Chicago, and the Predators are tied with the Ducks for the fewest road wins (17) among the teams in the playoffs.No. 2 Minnesota Wild vs. No. 3 St. Louis BluesThe Wild thrived for most of the season under their new coach, Bruce Boudreau, until a free fall in March, when they won only four of 16 games. But the Wild (49-25-8) finished the season by winning five of six, and they have a deep, well-rounded roster that ranked in the top 10 in goals for, goals against, power-play conversion rate, penalty-kill percentage, shots per game and face-off percentage. Normally a low-scoring team, Minnesota had a goal differential of plus-58. Center Eric Staal, signed as a free agent, had his best season in five years, and Minnesota’s deadline pickup, the shutdown center Martin Hanzal, offers Boudreau options in line combinations and defensive matchups.The Blues (46-29-7) counter with Mike Yeo, who coached the Wild for nearly five seasons. He took over in St. Louis after Ken Hitchcock was dismissed 50 games into a meandering season. Yeo led them to a 22-8-2 record. At the trade deadline, the Blues dealt a coveted defenseman, Shattenkirk, to Washington, and may have considered selling off more players. Instead, they elevated their game. In contrast to years past, the Blues are not a bruising team loaded with size. They have transitioned to a skill-based attack led by right wing Vladimir Tarasenko, left wing Jaden Schwartz and defenseman Alex Pietrangelo.The Blues took three of five games from the Wild during the season. Game 1 is Wednesday in St. Paul.Advertisement