By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSAPRIL 11, 2017
MEMPHIS — Mike Conley found the perfect way to answer all the questions about the Memphis Grizzlies’ decision last summer to give an injury-prone point guard with no All-Star Game appearances a five-year, $153 million contract: He had the best season of his career.“I knew people would be waiting for me to fail and saying their opinion was right,” Conley said. “I knew that was out there, but at the same time, I was only worried about the good that has come out of it.”Conley, who is 6 feet 1 inch and 175 pounds, usually goes unmentioned when the discussion turns to the N.B.A.’s best players. With Conley’s history of injuries to his ankles, his Achilles’ tendon and, during the 2015 playoffs, his face, the contract just seemed, to anyone outside Memphis, way too costly, even if Conley had been a key piece of the longest playoff run in Grizzlies history.Conley, 29, has provided Memphis fans — and ownership — quite a return on the team’s investment. Ten of his 15 career 30-point games have come this season, and he scored a career-high 38 points against Phoenix in January. He is averaging 20.6 points a game, 7 points higher than his career average through last season, and he is making 40.7 percent of his 3-point attempts, also a career high.AdvertisementConley has become the Grizzlies’ career scoring leader and has also made the most 3-pointers in franchise history. And he became the only player beyond LeBron James, Chris Paul and Russell Westbrook with at least 10,000 points, 4,000 assists and 1,000 steals since he entered the N.B.A. in November 2007.Advertisement“He’s been playing phenomenal,” Grizzlies guard Tony Allen said. “He’s one of the top five point guards in the league. He’s definitely an all-N.B.A.-caliber kind of guy. He’s been showing that.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Coaches and other players around the league often talk about how Conley is underappreciated. After a 110-97 Grizzlies win over Indiana a couple of weeks ago, Pacers forward Paul George talked about Conley’s 36-point performance — which also included seven 3-pointers, six assists, four steals and only one turnover.“We allowed him to kind of orchestrate the whole offense, and he got comfortable early,” George said. “He’s a flamethrower. Once he gets hot, it’s over.”Conley is known as Captain Clutch and as the Conductor — that nickname from a video the Grizzlies put together, featuring the minority owner Justin Timberlake and directed by Craig Brewer, to ensure that Conley re-signed with Memphis last summer.This season, the first-year coach David Fizdale asked even more of Conley, starting with having him coach a quarter in a preseason game. The switch in roles was not a stunt or a lark. Fizdale wanted Conley to understand the role he wanted from him as a leader.“He’s really tried to embrace that for me and take his aggressiveness up another level,” Fizdale said. “He is truly the glue to this whole thing connecting everyone, and he does it without an ego.”Injuries continue to plague Conley, yet he keeps coming back faster than anyone expects. Conley was back in three weeks after breaking vertebrae in his lower back in late November, an injury expected to keep him out six weeks. He needed 13 stitches over his right eye after butting heads with Kawhi Leonard on April 4; that kept him out of one game, and then only because he could not see out of the swollen eye.Conley said his thought process returning from injury was simple: If he can play, he will play. After cutting his eye, he missed only the one game to send a message of the urgency the Grizzlies need going into the postseason. Memphis has earned the No. 7 seed in the Western Conference and will play San Antonio in the opening round.AdvertisementConley feels as if he is ready. “I’m better for having had the pressure of the contract and having the opportunity and the responsibility to lead this team,” he said.A version of this article appears in print on April 12, 2017, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: With Expectations Higher, Conley Is Better Than Ever.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.