By SCOTT CACCIOLAJUNE 30, 2017
With hours to spare before the start of the N.B.A.’s free agency period, the Oklahoma City Thunder engineered a blockbuster deal on Friday night by acquiring forward Paul George from the Indiana Pacers in a trade, according to a person with direct knowledge of the deal who requested anonymity because it had not yet been announced.George, a three-time All-Star who had spent his seven-year career with the Pacers, will now form one of the league’s more intriguing tandems alongside Russell Westbrook, the league’s most valuable player, in Oklahoma City. The deal, which was first reported by ESPN, was also a convenient way for the Thunder to bolster their case that Westbrook ought to re-sign with the team. They were prepared to offer him a long-term extension at 12:01 a.m. Saturday, when free agency began.George, who averaged 23.7 points and 6.6 rebounds a game last season, had recently informed the Pacers that he intended to leave the team once he became a free agent next summer. Rather than allow the remaining year on his contract play out, the Pacers pursued a trade.In exchange for George, the Thunder shipped Victor Oladipo, their starting shooting guard, and Domantas Sabonis, a 21-year-old power forward, to the Pacers, who, like many other teams around the league, are in full rebuild mode.AdvertisementThe Boston Celtics and the Cleveland Cavaliers were said to have been interested in landing George. Any trade for him comes fraught with some risk. George will still be due for free agency next summer, and he had informed the Pacers that his preferred destination was the Los Angeles Lakers.But after losing Kevin Durant to the Golden State Warriors in free agency a year ago, the Thunder were aggressors this time around. George’s high-octane pairing with Westbrook could be one of the N.B.A.’s grandest, most dynamic experiments next season.If it were to go awry, the Thunder could still trade George before next season’s trade deadline and get additional assets in return. If he were to leave at the end of the season, the Thunder would have ample space under the salary cap to potentially improve the roster next season. In many ways, the deal was a no-lose for the Thunder.AdvertisementAs for Westbrook, the Thunder were expected to crack open the bank vault and offer him a five-year extension worth around $200 million — the maximum allowed — at the start of Saturday’s free agency period. If he were to sign, the contract would make him one of the highest-paid players in league history.Westbrook’s current contract is guaranteed through next season, with a player option for 2018-19.The Pacers’ plans are less clear. They obviously believe in Oladipo, who has four years and a guaranteed $84 million remaining on his contract. Last season, he averaged 15.9 points and 4.3 rebounds a game. But he struggled in the playoffs, averaging 10.8 points while shooting just 34.4 percent from the field.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In any case, George’s move to Oklahoma City only added more luster to the Western Conference while further diluting the quality of the Eastern Conference. Already this week, the Chicago Bulls, who were a playoff team last season, traded the All-Star swingman Jimmy Butler to the Minnesota Timberwolves, an up-and-coming team in the West.KNICKS WAIVE FORWARD The Knicks waived the reserve forward Maurice Ndour as a cost-cutting measure on the eve of the N.B.A.’s free-agency period.Steve Mills, the team’s general manager, made the move hours before Ndour’s $1.3 million contract for next season would have been fully guaranteed. Ndour, 25, was a favorite of Phil Jackson, who was ousted as team president this week. Ndour appeared in 32 games as a first-year player last season, averaging 3.1 points and 2 rebounds per game.RUBIO TRADED TO JAZZ The Minnesota Timberwolves reached an agreement with Utah to send point guard Ricky Rubio to the Jazz to clear salary-cap space for a big run in free agency.The Jazz sent a protected future first-round pick from the Oklahoma City Thunder to the Timberwolves in exchange for Rubio, who has struggled with injuries at times during his six years in Minnesota. Utah received the pick when it traded Enes Kanter in a three-team deal in 2015.The two sides agreed to the move hours before free agency opened at 12:01 a.m. Saturday. The Jazz needed to make the deal before July 1 or would have lost the salary-cap room necessary to pull it off.They Jazz are looking to bolster their roster with hopes of convincing the All-Star Gordon Hayward, who is a free agent, to return and build off last season’s playoff appearance, the team’s first since 2012.  (AP) BULLS RELEASE RONDO Chicago waived the veteran point guard Rajon Rondo. The Bulls bought out Rondo for $3 million rather than exercising a $13.4 million option for next season. He signed a two-year deal to join the Bulls last summer. Rondo, 31, a four-time All-Star, averaged 7.8 points and 6.7 assists per game.  (AP)A version of this article appears in print on July 1, 2017, on Page D3 of the New York edition with the headline: Thunder Said to Reach Trade For George, a Coveted Asset.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.