AdvertisementSupported byBy Rob HughesThe importance of derby matches in England, where neighbor battles neighbor, has been played out through 135 years. There were two such contests on Sunday — one when Manchester City was beaten at home by Manchester United, a game illuminated by a goal from an 18-year-old student, Marcus Rashford, who two months ago was almost unknown.Rashford’s brilliant strike proved the only score in a game that leaves the two teams neck and neck for fourth place in the Premier League. But with respect to the Manchesters, a more important derby took place north of their city, where Newcastle United and Sunderland fought out a desperate 1-1 draw. What made this, the North-East Derby, so much more vital was that the stakes were higher.Whatever happens to City or United, their owners will go out and spend hundreds of millions of dollars. They can afford it; they are among the top five richest clubs on earth.For Newcastle and Sunderland, marooned among the bottom three places at the foot of the Premier League, failure to stay in the league means being cut off from the global television income that, starting next season, will pay each of the 20 teams $150 million to $200 million.“We are in massive danger of getting relegated,” said Sam Allardyce, the Sunderland manager. “And it’s the worst ever season to do so. The two sets of players are fighting for their lives, and not just for ourselves. If we don’t stay in this league, then we lose the employees here.”Allardyce is of the old school of English soccer. He was extremely physical as a defender, and any team that he has managed, including Newcastle in the past, goes to the limit to stay in games. Rafa Benítez, the Spaniard hired this month to try to save Newcastle’s season, has more of a European approach, less physical and more tactical.In the stalemate of Sunday, neither approach gained or lost. But the result leaves the North-East teams, separated only by the rivers Tyne and Wear, on the edge, with eight games to rescue their situation and send someone else down and out of the money.Imagine then the atmosphere at Newcastle’s steeply layered, 52,000-capacity stadium. Imagine the deathly silence, the fear that befell the vast majority of fans in the home team’s black and white colors when Sunderland stole a first-half lead.It was no more than Sunderland, the “Black Cats,” deserved. The team had dominated the flow of the game, and scored just before the half-time whistle. The goal followed a corner kick that led to Fabio Borini shooting hard and low. Rob Elliot, the Newcastle goalkeeper, managed to push the ball into the air, but when his defenders failed to head the ball to safety, it fell to the most intuitive striker on the pitch.Jermain Defoe, formerly of West Ham United, Spurs and Toronto FC, responded instantly and instinctively, volleying the first goal from 10 yards.What could Benítez, a new manager in the job for barely more than one week, do to turn Newcastle around? The players said after the game that Benítez was cool, calm and positive in the locker room during half time. He told his players to press higher up the field, to believe, and to feed the potential of Aleksandar Mitrovic, the Serbian striker whom Benítez had observed from watching games on television to be the best finisher in his attack.Less than 10 minutes remained when Mitrovic proved the point, and saved a point. Midfielder Georginio Wijnaldum burst down the right and sent a looping cross into the goalmouth. There, rising above the defense and seeming to hang in the air, was the big and athletic Mitrovic; and when his head met the ball there was not a chance of the Sunderland goalkeeper’s preventing the goal, which squared up the derby game.The result leaves both teams to fight another day, though days — and games — are running out in the Premier League. There was one more chance for Mitrovic, but as he put his head in there for a second time, he collided with a defender and was momentarily concussed.Once he was roused, Mitrovic tried to be macho man and insist he could carry on. But, clearly disoriented, he was dragged off the field by the medical staff and told by his new manager that his game was over.Even in this high-pressured game, common sense prevailed. And that, which has not always been the case where soccer has willfully ignored the repercussions of concussion, was perhaps Sunday’s biggest victory of all.Advertisement