By JOHN DUERDENMARCH 19, 2016
ABU DHABI, United Arab Emirates —  In international soccer, the United Arab Emirates are looking good. The national team finished third at the 2015 Asian Cup continental tournament, and it is stocked with the country’s golden generation of players. The team has a real chance to qualify for the 2018 World Cup.The 14-team Arabian Gulf League, which professionalized in 2008, is now regarded as one of the best in Asia. One of the clubs, Al Ahli of Dubai, reached the final of the Asian Champions League last year.Yet the league still struggles to attract fans, and it is now facing twin threats from the rise of Qatar and China in global soccer that threaten to knock the Emirates down the soccer ladder.The Emirates, along with Qatar, are seen as a place for European and South American stars to earn big, tax-free salaries in the twilight of their careers. The captain of Italy’s 2006 World Cup-winning team, Fabio Cannavaro, ended his career in Dubai with Al Ahli, while David Trezeguet, a member of France’s Cup winner in 1998, played briefly for Baniyas in Abu Dhabi near the end of his career.AdvertisementThe A-list veterans now go to Major League Soccer, while the younger talents who previously signed with Emirates clubs are heading to China and a league that has spent about $285 million in the transfer market in recent weeks.AdvertisementNot only have the most famous clubs in the Emirates been unable to compete financially with the Chinese teams — a decline in oil prices has not helped — but a few have ended up selling to them. In July 2015, three years after joining Al Ain of Abu Dhabi from the Premier League team Sunderland in England, Asamoah Gyan joined Shanghai S.I.P.G. for a transfer fee thought to be about $25 million, at the time an Asian transfer record.“Now U.A.E. teams are missing out on players who go to China,” Javier Aguirre, coach of Al Wahda, a club in Abu Dhabi, said in January after a victory over Dibba Club of Al Fujayrah. “I remember a few years ago seeing that big stars went to Abu Dhabi or Dubai. China is now a big destination for players. The money is good there, and there is something happening.”United Arab Emirates clubs have struggled to attract supporters to the stadium in a culture where many choose to watch games at home or in cafes. Al Wahda’s official attendance against Dibba may have been 1,200, but there seemed to be considerably fewer fans in the stadium. While league games in China and Japan in 2015 averaged about 22,000 and 17,000 fans, the average attendance in the U.A.E. League was 2,529 during the 2014-15 season.“It surprised me,” Aguirre said. “If you go to do your job with empty seats, then it is not really good. That is the most difficult part for me. We have the facilities, but we need the fans.”Qatar has similar issues, but it also has the 2022 World Cup. The Arabian Gulf League has traditionally been considered stronger than the Qatar Stars League, but there are worries that the World Cup may change that. (The Qatari club Al Sadd S.C. made the biggest splash among Middle Eastern clubs last year when it signed the former Barcelona playmaker Xavi Hernández to end his career in Doha.)Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“This country has to do something like Qatar,” Aguirre said. “For the World Cup, Qatar is investing. As the World Cup gets closer, many big players will go there. The Emirates has to do something similar.”Perhaps one way would be for some of the Emirates’ most talented players to go to Europe to challenge themselves against top talents, but few rarely do.AdvertisementSome may be good enough to. Ali Mabkhout was the top scorer at the 2015 Asian Cup, and Ahmed Khalil was the 2015 Asian player of the year. Omar Abdulrahman, a bushy-haired playmaker, is regarded as one of the most talented in Asia and is monitored by many of the top clubs in the world.Abdulrahman was so impressive at the 2012 Olympics that he was offered a deal by the then-English champion Manchester City. He turned it down. In 2015, after starring at the Asian Cup, he signed a lucrative new deal with Al Ain.For many players, the opportunity to earn big salaries at home, while paying no taxes, makes it harder to leave. Until the emergence of Abdulrahman, Ismail Matar was the biggest star in the country. An attacker, he was named the most valuable player at the 2003 World Youth Cup and was widely expected to join the big leagues in Europe. It never happened.“I played against a lot of big names at that time,” Matar said. He went on: “And they all said the same thing, “Why you don’t play in Europe?’ I know I have the quality to play there, but I didn’t have the chance.”Traditionally, the owners of clubs in the country have been reluctant to let stars go. In 2008, Sheikh Mohammed bin Rashid al-Maktoum, the crown prince of Dubai and the president of Al Ahli, intervened to stop striker Faisal Khalil from moving to France.“If they go to the next step and sending people to Europe, then the league will be better,” said Aguirre, who has also coached the Japanese and Mexican national teams and several teams in Spain’s top tier. “They have a good league, good players and salaries, but they need to put some young Emirate players in other countries, like Japan and Mexico do.”He added: “Omar Abdulrahman can play in any part of the world. In my opinion, it is not about money, it is about this kind of life, this kind of pressure. They are in a comfort zone here.”The Emirates qualified for the World Cup once, in 1990, but Matar believes that the current golden generation can qualify for the 2018 tournament in Russia and give the local game a lift.“Japan, Australia and Iran are not the same as before,” he said. “We have the quality, and for me, it is easy.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.