By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSMARCH 20, 2016
COLUMBUS, Ohio —  The rookie Oliver Bjorkstrand got his first two N.H.L. goals in the third period and the Columbus Blue Jackets beat the Devils, 6-3, on Saturday night.Columbus also got a goal and an assist from Boone Jenner and two assists each for Alexander Wennberg and Matt Calvert. Sergei Bobrovsky made 27 saves.Kyle Palmieri had two goals and an assist for the Devils, who have lost two straight.The Blue Jackets are 4-0-0 against the Devils this season and are 5-0-1 in the last six games against them. The teams play again Sunday at Prudential Center.Columbus scored the first three and the last three goals.Palmieri, Bjorkstrand and William Karlsson each scored for Columbus within a 45-second span early in the third period.AdvertisementPalmieri’s second of the game and 27th of the season at 49 seconds tied the score at 3-3.Bjorkstrand made it 4-3 at 1 minute 23 seconds after taking a pass in the slot from Wennberg. Karlsson scored 11 seconds later to put Columbus ahead by 5-3 and Bjorkstrand scored again at 6:38.AdvertisementJenner put Columbus up by 3-0 at 2:50 of the second with his 25th goal. At that point, Devils goalie Keith Kinkaid, who had 16 saves, was replaced by Yann Danis.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Devils then got power-play goals by Palmieri at 5:42 and Adam Henrique at 8:57. Each has 26 goals to lead the team.Columbus took a 2-0 lead after one period when Cam Atkinson scored his 25th goal and Seth Jones got his third.Atkinson scored on the power play at 10:38 with Wennberg setting him up with a cross-ice pass to the left circle. Atkinson’s shot went off the stick of Devils defenseman Andy Greene and fluttered into the goal.Jones made it 2-0 with a long shot from the left wall that was also deflected in the circle by Devils defenseman Adam Larsson and went over Kinkaid’s glove.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.