By SETH BERKMANMARCH 20, 2016
Entering Notre Dame’s matchup with Stephen F. Austin, Rex Pflueger was a sparingly used, little-known freshman guard for the Irish who had not scored a field goal since March 5.But Notre Dame Coach Mike Brey liked to have Pflueger on the floor for his athleticism, and on Sunday at Barclays Center, his decision was amply rewarded.With 1.5 seconds left, Pflueger, an occasional beach volleyball player growing up in Southern California, drew on that sport’s esoteric skills, extending his right arm as if reaching high to keep the ball from hitting the sand and tipping in a missed layup attempt by Zach Auguste. The basket gave the Irish a 76-75 victory over the Lumberjacks and secured a spot in the N.C.A.A. tournament’s round of 16, where they will play No. 7-seeded Wisconsin, which defeated No. 2 Xavier, 66-63, on Sunday on Bronson Koenig’s 3-pointer at the buzzer, just moments after he had tied the game with a 3.“Are you kidding me?” Brey said during his postgame news conference. “Are you freaking kidding me? That was unbelievable.”AdvertisementBrey’s excitement was understandable. The Irish were on the brink of becoming the latest victim of No. 14-seeded Stephen F. Austin, which upset third-seeded West Virginia, 70-56, on Friday.In a back-and-forth game, a jumper by V. J. Beachem at 9 minutes 18 seconds of the second half gave Notre Dame a 62-55 lead, its largest of the game, but a run by the Lumberjacks, highlighted by consecutive Demetrious Floyd 3-pointers, evened the score at 64-64.AdvertisementWith the game tied at 70-70, Floyd hit another 3-pointer, giving the Lumberjacks a 73-70 lead, and two free throws by Thomas Walkup, who scored a game-high 21 points, made it 75-70.But 4 straight points by Demetrius Jackson pulled Notre Dame to within 75-74. Walkup then missed an off-balance shot with 23 seconds left, and Ty Charles’s tip was off-target. Auguste collected the rebound for Notre Dame, and Jackson, who had kept the Irish on pace with the Lumberjacks with 12 points through a frenetic second half, was determined to take the final shot.His attempt off a baseline drive hit the side of the backboard. Jackson fell to the ground and later said he had no idea who had tipped the ball when he saw it fall through the net.For much of the game’s final stretch, it appeared as if Stephen F. Austin would continue its majestic run. But when Clide Geffrard’s last-second heave sailed wide right, the Lumberjacks’ season was over.Later, in Notre Dame’s locker room, team staff members had to move Pflueger’s nameplate out from a corner stall into an open area where television cameras anticipated his arrival. Among those waiting for Pflueger was New Jersey’s governor, Chris Christie, beaming in a gray pullover with a blue Notre Dame logo on the left side of his chest. Christie, a Delaware graduate, said he and Brey had been friends for 21 years.Near Pflueger’s empty space, teammates watched replays of the final seconds on their phones, resting from a ferocious game in which players regularly dived to the floor chasing loose balls. Forward Bonzie Colson seemingly did not recognize the five bloody marks on his left biceps.Advertisement“I think I just blacked out,” Notre Dame guard Matt Farrell said, sitting in a jersey speckled with bloodstains. “It was crazy.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Since Friday night, the news media had been poking away at the Lumberjacks, trying to extract every intricacy of their formerly anonymous lives in Nacogdoches, a small city in eastern Texas. Walkup revealed that for Halloween, he had dressed as Green Man, a character from the television comedy “It’s Always Sunny in Philadelphia.” Tyler Underwood tore his anterior cruciate ligament as a high school senior, ending his recruitment by small Division I schools. In the stands that day was his father, Brad Underwood, who rarely attended his son’s high school games because he was busy coaching Stephen F. Austin. Brad Underwood brought Tyler on as a walk-on this season.But after Sunday’s loss, the Lumberjacks’ locker room was practically devoid of reporters. There were only players holding back tears, their hands cupped over their mouths with distant-looking eyes.The story had become about Pflueger, a new unknown.A version of this article appears in print on March 21, 2016, on Page D3 of the New York edition with the headline: With a Tip-In, a Freshman Steps Into the Spotlight .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.