

 Scott Cacciola
 

ON PRO BASKETBALL
MARCH 20, 2016
SAN ANTONIO — Draymond Green of the Golden State Warriors was minutes removed from a rare loss when he fielded a question about the team’s pursuit of the 1995-96 Chicago Bulls for the best record in N.B.A. history. Green asked for clarification: What sort of work did the Warriors have ahead of them? Eleven wins in their final 13 games?“We’ve won 11 games in a row this season, so there ain’t nothing we can’t do,” he said. “It’s possible. So we’re going after it.”Someone unfamiliar with the Warriors and their approach this season might have assumed that Green would tap-dance around the issue, especially after his team lost, 87-79, to the San Antonio Spurs. But the Warriors are bold and seemingly invulnerable to pressure, and they somehow managed to leave on Saturday night feeling good about themselves — even encouraged.Coach Steve Kerr: “I couldn’t be prouder of our guys. What an effort tonight.”Klay Thompson: “We’ll live with this. Obviously it’s not the result we wanted. But we see these guys two more times, and we know what we’ve got to do to be successful.”AdvertisementStephen Curry: “It’s a good learning experience.”And, of course, there was Green, the team’s walking megaphone, who proclaimed loudly, and decisively, that the Warriors remained undaunted in their pursuit of history. So what if they were minutes removed from falling to San Antonio, their biggest threat in the West? So what if the Spurs had played claustrophobic defense on Curry, switching on nearly every screen and barely allowing him slivers of daylight? So what if the loss dropped their record to 62-7, making their push to surpass the Bulls of yore that much more difficult?Advertisement“I want that pressure,” Green said. “I like the pressure, so I’m not going to shy away from saying we want the record. Because absolutely we want it, and we’re going after it.”In a dark hallway near the court, the arena having long since emptied, Green wore a camouflage jacket. Any symbolism appeared unintentional. But if anyone expected the Warriors to leave the building a broken mess, their collective self-esteem in tatters, they delivered a message: fat chance. It was one game. It meant little.“We just couldn’t hit a lot of the shots we usually hit,” Green said. “When that happens, especially against a team like that on the road, it’s tough to win. Hey, it happens.”Kerr said the odds had been “stacked against” his team, and if he seemed to be making excuses — well, maybe he was. But there is a fine line between excuses and explanations, and Kerr wanted to explain some of the mitigating factors in the loss. So he reiterated that his team had been missing three key players because of injuries: Andre Iguodala, Festus Ezeli and Andrew Bogut. And that it had been the Warriors’ second game in two nights (both on the road), and their ninth in 14 days.“The Spurs played great, and they deserved to win,” Kerr said. “But I’m really, really proud of the way we fought tonight. It was awesome.”More remarkable, none of Kerr’s comments sounded packaged or canned; he really seemed to mean what he was saying.Coaches do not often willingly go down the road of moral victories, especially after their team shoots 37.8 percent from the field and reveals some flaws in a loss to its biggest rival.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But perhaps that was the point: The Warriors, hamstrung by injuries and fatigue, could play a deeply imperfect game and still nearly take down the Spurs. The game hinged on a couple of plays in the closing moments.Advertisement“They played a good defensive game,” Thompson said. “At the same time, we had a lot of bunnies that we missed.”Missed layups, missed opportunities — the Warriors did not exactly sound shaken. In the teams’ first meeting this season, on Jan. 25, Golden State won by 30 points. Green acknowledged that the Spurs had played better this time around, “which shouldn’t have been that hard,” he said.The Spurs (59-10), who have quietly been assembling a magical season in the shadow cast by the Warriors, were, as expected, much more muted in their postgame commentary. Danny Green, who defended Curry for long stretches and played an outsize role in limiting him to 4-of-18 shooting, basically shrugged it off as an anomaly.“We want to focus on ourselves and not send messages,” Green said. “A player like that, he can get hot at any moment. Tonight he had a cold night, an off night. We did play pretty good defense, but he had an off night. You send a message to that guy, you never know what he’s going to come back with.”In a quirk of the schedule, the games between the Warriors and the Spurs are backloaded this season. They will face each other twice more: on April 7 in Oakland, Calif., and on April 10 in San Antonio, when the Warriors will have another chance to earn their first regular-season win here since 1997.“It’s a small, small, microscopic blemish” on the identity of the franchise, Curry said. “We’ll eventually get rid of that.”A version of this article appears in print on March 21, 2016, on Page D6 of the New York edition with the headline: After Loss, Warriors Are Bullish as Ever in Pursuit of a Record.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »