By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSMAY 3, 2016
Rafael Nadal easily defeated Andrey Kuznetsov, 6-3, 6-3, on Tuesday to reach the third round of the Madrid Open while Andy Murray advanced with a hard-fought 7-6, 3-6, 6-1 win over Radek Stepanek.Nadal broke Kuznetsov’s serve once in the first set and twice in the second to secure the win in his opening match at the event, a clay-court tournament that he has won twice in the last three seasons.The match lasted just 1 hour 18 minutes, during which Nadal had four aces and no double faults as he won his 11th consecutive match. He has not lost since his opening match at the Miami Open in March and is coming off consecutive title wins at the Monte Carlo Masters and the Barcelona Open.In the third round, Nadal will face either Sam Querrey or Lucas Pouille, who play each other on Wednesday.AdvertisementAnother tournament win in Madrid would allow Nadal to match his total number of titles from last year and would certainly give his confidence a further boost heading into the French Open, which begins at Roland Garros Stadium in three weeks. Nadal last won there in 2014.AdvertisementAfter struggling last season, Nadal is off to a good start in 2016. He has reached at least the semifinals in six of the eight tournaments he has played, with early eliminations at the Australian Open and at Miami.“I’m happy with the way I started the clay-court season,” Nadal said. “Today, another victory, so that’s great news. I’m excited about this tournament.”Nadal dominated on Tuesday by serving extremely well. He needed only eight second serves the entire match and lost only five points on his first. He hit 22 winners and had only nine unforced errors at the Magic Box center court in Madrid.“My serve has been solid,” Nadal said. “I served well both in Monte Carlo and in Barcelona. And it’s going to be vital to serve well here, as well to have a good tournament.”Nadal, who is Spanish, has won the Madrid Open four times, including 2013 and 2014, but he lost the final last year to Murray.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The second-ranked Murray battled hard to get past Stepanek, 37, who on Monday had become the oldest player to win a match at a Masters 1000 tournament since Jimmy Connors in 1992.Murray was broken early in the first two sets but came back strongly in the third to close out the match and secure a spot in the next round. He had 11 aces over all, including four in the decisive set.Advertisement“He played very well; it was not easy,” Murray said of Stepanek. “He was hitting the ball big up the lines. There was nothing I could do.”In women’s singles, sixth-seeded Simona Halep routed Karin Knapp, 6-1, 6-1, while eighth-seeded Carla Suárez Navarro beat Sabine Lisicki, 6-3, 6-2.Dominika Cibulkova lost the first nine games of her match but recovered to defeat Caroline Garcia, 0-6, 6-3, 6-4, and reach the round of 16.Tenth-seeded Timea Bacsinszky beat Ekaterina Makarova, 6-4, 5-7, 6-4, and Samantha Stosur advanced to the third round when 11th-seeded Lucie Safarova withdrew because of a stomach virus.FRENCH FEDERATION RAIDED French prosecutors seized documents after carrying out a series of searches at the country’s tennis federation and the home of its president, Jean Gachassin.France’s financial prosecutors’ office said in a statement that the searches had related to possible “misappropriation of property and influence trafficking” pertaining to the existence of “an illicit system of reselling tickets for the French Open tournament” and to the “awarding of the contract for the renovation and enlargement of Roland Garros.”The searches resulted in the “seizure of documents useful to the investigation,” the office added.In a brief statement, the tennis federation said it was “fully cooperating with the investigators.”Havas Voyages La Depeche, a travel agency based in southern France, was also searched as part of the investigation.AdvertisementIn February, the French newspaper Le Canard Enchaîné reported that French Open tickets had been sold to the travel agency for a significant profit.A version of this list appears in print on May 4, 2016, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Sports Briefing | Tennis; Nadal Rolls in Madrid.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.