AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressAVONDALE, La. — Brian Stuard made steady golf pay off on a waterlogged course in the haunting cypress swamps outside New Orleans.He birdied the final hole of a largely unspectacular final round to sneak into a three-way playoff on Monday at the Zurich Classic, then beat Jamie Lovemark on the second extra hole for his first PGA Tour triumph.During the tournament, Stuard, 33, never bogeyed a hole on the 7,425-yard, par-72 TPC Louisiana course, which was soaked with more than four and a half inches of rain. Weather delays on Thursday, Saturday and Sunday not only forced a Monday finish, but also led officials to shorten the tournament to 54 holes.“I wasn’t playing great,” Stuard said after his final-round 69, which was not even among the top 20 scores on the day. “I was just kind of, I don’t know — hanging around. I kind of hung in there all week. I just didn’t get too ahead of myself and just stayed real patient.”Lovemark, Stuard and Byeong-Hun An entered the playoff at 15 under par.An came apart on the first playoff hole and Lovemark on the second as Stuard remained composed, virtually clinching the win with a 160-yard approach to within two and a half feet of the pin for an easy birdie putt.Stuard’s best previous PGA Tour finishes were second places in Mexico, one in 2010 and the other in 2014. He arrived in New Orleans with conditional status on the PGA Tour, meaning he could play only in tournaments that had room for him when enough higher-ranked players skipped the event. His victory was worth $1.26 million. It also gives him a two-year exemption to play in majors and any other tour event he wants.“I’ve always been, I guess, a journeyman kind of player, just always grinded it out,” said Stuard, who became the seventh first-time winner in New Orleans in the past 11 years. “You just had to have the confidence to say, ‘One day, it’s going to be your time.’ ”Lovemark came in with only five top-10 finishes in his career, but four of those had come this season.“I feel good,” Lovemark said after his best finish since his only other second place in 2009. “Not too disappointed. Just a little bummed, but moving on to next week.”Jason Day, the world’s top-ranked player, wound up tied for fifth with Chris Kirk at 13 under.“I just wish it was 72 holes,” Day said. “At least I gave myself an opportunity to be around the leaders.”The saturated course rewarded players most adept at hitting long in the air off the tee and aiming right for the pin on approach shots. On many shots, balls hardly moved upon landing.Players sometimes struggled to gauge abnormally slow greens. It happened to Lovemark at the most pivotal of moments: He left a nine-and-a-half-foot birdie putt for the win inches short on the 18th green.The narrow miss seemed to unsettle Lovemark, whose shots became erratic. He managed to par the 18th on the first playoff hole, but his approach on the second playoff — also on 18 — found a muddy area near the grandstand, well left of the green.An did not look like a contender entering Monday, but he shot up the leaderboard with birdies on 11, 13, 14 and 15. His five-foot birdie putt on 18 landed him in the playoff for only his second top-10 and his first top-three finish. But he botched consecutive approach shots on the first playoff hole, leaving him with a bogey that ended his tournament.Bobby Wyatt, a 23-year-old making his ninth PGA Tour start on a sponsor invitation, briefly surged into the lead with an eagle and six birdies on his first 13 holes of his final round. But three-putts for bogeys on the 14th and 15th cost him.“I certainly haven’t been in this position a lot, so I think probably some of it is nerves,” Wyatt said.A birdie on 16, highlighted by a 138-yard approach shot to four feet from the hole, followed by a seven-foot putt on 18 for his eighth birdie of the round, left him alone in fourth at 14 under.Wyatt still felt like a winner in the scheme of things. His first top-10 finish earned him $336,000 and qualified him for a 10th tour start at the Wells Fargo Championship in Charlotte, N.C., this week.“I found out I can play with these guys,” he said.Advertisement