
Sports of The Times By                     
 WILLIAM C. RHODEN
 
APRIL 17, 2016
I still have the baseball that Bob Watson, then the Yankees’ general manager, signed for me in October 1996 after the Yankees had defeated the Atlanta Braves to win the World Series, ending an 18-year World Series drought.That World Series victory was the beginning of another Yankees championship cycle.The Yankees won the title again in 1998, 1999 and 2000. They lost the World Series in 2001 and 2003 and won their most recent championship in 2009.I thought about Watson this weekend as the Yankees lost two of three games to the Seattle Mariners.This year is the 20th anniversary of Watson’s World Series title, and it feels as if the Yankees may be entering another championship-less cycle.“You’re as good as your pitching,” Watson said Saturday during a telephone interview. In the 1996 season, the Yankees received a nearly miraculous contribution from pitcher David Cone, who had to recover from an aneurysm. They also got a surprise performance from a revitalized Dwight Gooden.Advertisement“These Yankees have a great bullpen; now they need to score runs,” Watson said. “In the American League East, you have to score more than three or four runs a game to win.”AdvertisementI’m intrigued by franchises like the Yankees, the Los Angeles Lakers and, to a lesser extent, the San Antonio Spurs and the New England Patriots. Their history suggests that titles are inevitable; they come in cycles.There was the Minneapolis Lakers cycle with George Mikan, then the Los Angeles Lakers cycle with Jerry West and Elgin Baylor and then with Wilt Chamberlain, then the Kareem Abdul-Jabbar and Magic Johnson cycle, the Kobe Bryant and Shaquille O’Neal cycle, then the cycle Bryant led.The Yankees’ championship cycles, which began in 1923, have run even longer.The straw that stirs the drink may not always be known, but the best franchises always have a way of putting change in motion at the right time. This means making tough decisions.In 1996, under Watson’s direction, the Yankees parted ways with the popular utility player Randy Velarde and the popular catcher Mike Stanley. Watson did not re-sign the beloved first baseman Don Mattingly.During that 1996 season, Watson said that the bottom line was winning, and winning was not a popularity contest. It involved bold, usually unpopular moves.“Go back and look at every team that was successful,” Watson said. “You’ll find, somewhere along the line, they took some risks.”The question I ask is, what are the tough but necessary decisions the Yankees have to make in 2016 to begin another championship cycle? And how long will it take before fans begin calling for heads?Advertisement“New York is not an easy place to play in,” Watson said. “The fans, the media — no one is going to let a great franchise get away with playing mediocre ball.”However, the new economics no longer mandate that the biggest stars go to the biggest markets.Watson became the general manager at a time when big-market, big-money teams could offer prospective players blank checks, and players more often than not had to go to places like New York, Boston and Los Angeles to receive astronomical compensation.No more.The Minnesota Twins were able to keep Joe Mauer, Seattle signed the Yankees’ Robinson Cano, and Giancarlo Stanton signed a 13-year, $325 million contract with the Miami Marlins.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Yankees have been to the playoffs, but the Yankees’ brand is championships, and six full seasons have gone by since they won one.Teams now have to build their way back, and the Yankees seem to be doing that. They have replaced Cano with Starlin Castro, and Didi Gregorius has played solidly at shortstop. The Yankees’ bullpen is strong once again, but the bats and the starting pitching, which leads to the bullpen, are aging and erratic.Watson recalled his first spring training as general manager under the Yankees owner George M. Steinbrenner.“When I came to New York, the budget was $39 million,” Watson said. “Before I left spring training, it was $60 million. He wanted to win.”At one point in the season, Steinbrenner asked Watson what he needed. Watson said he needed a bat: Cecil Fielder. “He told me go make the deal.” Fielder’s acquisition was crucial to the Yankees’ championship run.“One guy I tip my cap to is Brian Cashman,” Watson said, referring to the man who replaced him in 1998. “He’s closing in on 20 years of being there. For many a times he was called a clerk — ‘All you are is a clerk’ — I tip my cap for him hanging in there.”AdvertisementWatson resigned before the ’98 season began. He had helped set the table for a remarkable Yankees run, but health problems, aggravated by tension with Steinbrenner, became too much.“I had gotten tired of being threatened with being fired,” he said. “I just couldn’t take the stress every day that I was going to get fired — the yelling and screaming.”Watson said the tipping point was a trade that the Boss wanted him to make.“He wanted me to trade Andy Pettitte and Bernie Williams for Chuck Knoblauch,” Watson said. “I told him I wouldn’t do that.”Watson recalled that Steinbrenner pulled rank, saying that it was his team and he wanted Knoblauch.“I said, ‘Well you’re going to have to do it, because I quit.’ ”Watson, 70, and his wife, Carole, now live in Houston. Watson still works with U.S.A. Baseball’s youth initiative.“There is so much focus now on winning,” Watson said. “I want to get back to basics, learning to play the game.”And yet, every time I look at that World Series baseball Watson signed in October 1996, I am reminded that in this city with this particular franchise, winning still is the name of the game.Email: wcr@nytimes.com
A version of this article appears in print on April 18, 2016, on Page D3 of the New York edition with the headline: Pursuit of Titles Requires Tough Decisions .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »