
Sports Business By                     
 JOE NOCERA
 
APRIL 15, 2016
MINNEAPOLIS — Target Field, home of the Minnesota Twins, is one of those wondrous new ballparks that combine modern amenities with an old-timey feel. With a capacity under 40,000, it’s the kind of stadium people describe as intimate.Like many teams building new ballparks, the Twins were striving for precisely that feeling when they designed Target Field, which opened in 2010. An intimate setting evokes the fabled stadiums of yore, like Ebbets Field in Brooklyn or Forbes Field in Pittsburgh — not to mention Fenway Park and Wrigley Field.Intimacy is also an important part of baseball’s self-image; it wants to be seen as a sport where fans can be close enough to the field to snag an autograph from a favorite player before a game, or catch a ball tossed by a first baseman as he jogs toward the dugout after a third out.But there is another reason Target Field is intimate: The Twins didn’t really have any choice. The site on which the stadium stands, in the warehouse district near downtown Minneapolis, is only eight acres. The seats in Target Field aren’t just close to the action; they are the closest of any team in the majors. The distance between the first- and third-base foul lines and the fans in the first row behind the dugout is a mere 46 feet.Advertisement“We were so excited about creating an intimate experience that we didn’t think there might be a potential problem,” said Matt Hoy, the team’s senior vice president for operations, who oversaw the construction of Target Field. But there was. Fans sitting that close to the field risked injury — serious injury — from splintered bats flying into the seats, or from screaming foul balls that could reach the stands in less than a second.AdvertisementAnd while baseball is largely protected from lawsuits by what’s called the assumption-of-risk doctrine — the fine print on the back of a ticket tells fans that they alone bear the risk of being hurt at the ballpark — there has been a series of horrendous injuries in recent years that have gotten a lot of publicity and have alarmed Major League Baseball. The most worrisome recent instance took place last season at Fenway Park when a fan named Tonya Carpenter sustained life-threatening injuries after she was impaled by a splintered bat. (Notwithstanding the assumption-of-risk doctrine, the courts have allowed a few lawsuits to proceed. This undoubtedly also alarms baseball executives.)Thus it was that last December, Commissioner Rob Manfred issued a recommendation that teams extend the netting from behind home plate to either the near ends of the dugouts or to any seat within 70 feet of the batter’s box. The league says every team is now in compliance with the recommendation, though in some cases, teams really didn’t do much beyond widening the netting behind home plate a few feet in either direction.But several teams have gone further, extending their netting to the far ends of the dugouts, protecting seats usually sold to season-ticket holders. One of those teams was the Twins. I went to Minneapolis this week to see for myself what it was like to take in a game in these newly protected seats — and to better understand the Twins’ rationale.Those seats behind the dugout can present a real danger to fans — more danger, in fact, than the seats Manfred has asked teams to protect. Think about it: Hitters don’t spray line-drive foul balls to the near end of the dugout; the foul balls that are truly smashed go to the far end of the dugout and beyond. And the Twins, unlike far too many teams, weren’t willing to simply hide behind the assumption-of-risk doctrine. (Are you listening, Yankees and Mets?)According to Dave St. Peter, the team’s longtime president, the Twins were already in compliance when Manfred issued his recommendation. But the commissioner’s call for additional netting essentially gave the team cover to extend its netting down the foul line. It was something the Twins had clearly wanted to do but didn’t want to do alone, fearing fan backlash.“Our footprint gives our fans great sightlines,” St. Peter said. “But we were fully aware of the proximity of those seats. When the commissioner decided to take a deeper look at fan safety, it was very much welcomed by Jim Pohlad, our owner, and myself.”Hoy, the operations head, said, “We have thought about this for years.” He was leaning against the top of the visitors’ dugout a few hours before the game, looking out at the rows of now-protected seats.Advertisement“Every time a fan gets injured, you think about it,” he said. “Fortunately, we haven’t had a serious injury.” He added, however, that if a child got hurt and the team hadn’t done anything despite knowing the danger of installing seats that close, “I wouldn’t want to own that for the rest of my life.”Hoy then turned his gaze to the netting in front of us. It was called Dyneema, he said, purchased from C&H Baseball, a company that sells equipment like netting and outfield padding to baseball teams. (Danielle Huff, the president of C&H, told me that the additional netting costs $15,000 to $100,000 per team — a small expense for a big-league team.) It is made of extremely thin fibers, 1.2 millimeters at the thickest point, yet strong enough to withstand the impact of the hardest-hit ball.There was no netting overhead, so fans could still catch pop fouls. And at 7 feet high, Hoy told me, the netting was high enough to protect the entire front section from a hard-hit line drive — 14 rows of seats in all. It was obvious that the Twins had put a lot of thought into their new netting.As for the season-ticket holders who held those seats, St. Peter said the team had reached out to them, explaining its decision and offering to move them to an unprotected area if they preferred. Only about a half-dozen did. “I am not necessarily declaring victory,” he said, “but I am not aware of a single cancellation.”What came through most clearly is that Hoy, St. Peter and the rest of the Twins organization viewed extending the netting down the foul lines as a no-brainer. The question is: Why don’t more teams feel the same sense of urgency about protecting fans?Part of the answer, sadly, is that they don’t have to. There is virtually no legal consequence for a team when a fan loses vision, sustains a fractured skull or needs multiple operations after being hit by a foul ball — all of which have happened in recent years.Teams are also afraid of alienating fans who are paying to sit in some of their highest-priced seats. In Boston, for instance, the author Stephen King wrote an essay blasting the new netting as stealing “the pure joy of being there.” He added that the netting “may be a fine mesh, but you are still looking through a barrier instead of right at the thing you came to see.” He concluded that you might just as well watch the game on TV at home.So instead, many clubs emphasize that it’s up to the fans to pay better attention. And to some degree, that is true — anybody who sits close, in an unprotected seat, and spends the entire time on a cellphone is acting recklessly. But why, then, are teams installing Wi-Fi and creating all sorts of other distractions?AdvertisementIn Atlanta, the Braves announced in December that they would raise the height of their netting to 35 feet from 10 feet. The next day, according to Bill Torpy, a columnist for The Atlanta Journal-Constitution, “the Braves and their corporate partner, Comcast, gushed about the high-speed fiber optic cable at the new SunTrust Park.”And even when fans are paying attention, they may have no chance when they are sitting 80 feet from home plate — barely farther than the pitcher’s rubber — and a hitter pulls the ball sharply. Players are stronger, and balls fly off modern bats at incredible speed. Jim Kaat, the former Twins pitcher and longtime baseball broadcaster, told me he thought the modern bats were a big part of the problem. Because of the way they are now made, “bats don’t splinter anymore; they shatter and become projectiles,” he said.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In the Twins’ locker room before Wednesday’s game against the Chicago White Sox, I spoke to a handful of players; none expressed the slightest reservation about the extended netting.Trevor Plouffe, the team’s third baseman, was particularly outspoken. “I hear that the fans’ biggest complaint is that they can’t catch foul balls,” he said. “I think it is ridiculous to sacrifice your safety to be able to get a baseball. I am close enough to the stands that I can see how little time people have to react. It’s incredible to me that they didn’t do this years ago.”Paul Molitor, the Twins’ manager — whose 21-year career got him into the Hall of Fame — told me that he “applauded” the team’s decision.“I have seen too many things over too many years,” he said. “I know it is a game that involves intimacy with our fans. But too many times I’ve seen families with young kids in unprotected seats, and I just pray that something doesn’t happen. Because the ball comes too fast.”When the game began, I took my seat behind the dugout. There is no question that it felt a little less intimate. And though the mesh was thin, it wasn’t invisible. It took me a few innings to get used to it. But it was like wearing glasses with a new prescription: It wasn’t long before I stopped paying attention to it.The man sitting behind me, a season-ticket holder named Jay Kim, who is general counsel for a Minneapolis bank, told me that while he appreciated that his seat was safer than it used to be — “last year, a guy took a ball right in the face” — he also worried that baseball fans would lose something important.Advertisement“This is where kids always used to congregate for autographs,” he said. “At the All-Star Game a few years ago, Derek Jeter tossed his batting glove to a kid in this section. That experience will be lost for the next generation.”Just then, the White Sox first-base coach grabbed a foul grounder. He walked toward the stands — just beyond the netting — and tossed the ball to a child. My first thought was: See, baseball hadn’t lost its intimacy, even with the new netting.But then I took a closer look at those seats. On both the first- and third-base sides, they jutted out until they were as close to the field as the dugouts. Without a doubt, these were the most dangerous seats in the stadium, the area where a foul ball could really hurt someone. These seats were unprotected because the Twins, for all their good intentions, were still trying to balance intimacy and safety.It’s the wrong priority. The Kansas City Royals are another team that decided to extend the netting to the end of the dugouts. Yet on opening day at Kauffman Stadium, during a game against the Mets, a fan sitting just past the new netting was hit hard in the mouth by a foul ball that he didn’t see coming. He was lucky: Although he was temporarily knocked out, he required only some stitches.(The Texas Rangers may have the answer. Their netting is lifted like a curtain before the game and then drops down when the game starts.)With stronger players, more explosive bats, closer seats and all those modern distractions, the experience of attending a baseball game is simply not what we so fondly recall as children. It is more dangerous. Baseball needs to more fully acknowledge this, as do the fans. Safety needs to come before intimacy. To their credit, the Twins are moving in that direction. But they aren’t there yet.The Sports Business column on April 16, about protective netting set up at Target Field in Minneapolis, referred incorrectly in some copies to the Atlanta Journal-Constitution columnist Bill Torpy, who wrote that the Braves gushed about the high speed fiber optic cable at their new ballpark the day after announcing they would use higher netting. He writes for the metro section, not for sports.Email: nocera@nytimes.com
 
Twitter: @NoceraNYT A version of this article appears in print on April 16, 2016, on Page D1 of the New York edition with the headline: A Fine Line Separates Ball and Fan.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »