AdvertisementSupported byBy Victor MatherMarcus Paige, meet Sean Woods. And Mark Harmon. And Lenny Dykstra and Christine Sinclair.The shots and plays that win big, thrilling games are long remembered, and people will be talking about Kris Jenkins’s remarkable 3-pointer that won Monday night’s men’s national basketball championship game for Villanova for years to come.But the plays that very nearly won the game for the other team are sometimes forgotten.Paige’s off-balance 3-pointer from long distance had tied Monday’s game at 74-74 and would surely have gone down as one of the great moments in North Carolina basketball history, were it not for Jenkins’s heroics 4.7 seconds later.“I don’t think there’s a whole lot of people that have experienced such highs and such lows in that short of a time,” Paige told ESPN after the game.Before Monday, the most recalled shot in tournament history might have been Christian Laettner’s improbable buzzer-beater that sent Duke to the Final Four in 1992 at the expense of Kentucky. But his heroics would not have been needed had Sean Woods not somehow sunk a push shot over Laettner’s outstretched arms to give Kentucky a 1-point lead with two seconds left.“I thought it was over,” Woods, now the coach at Morehead State, told Yahoo. “Let’s go home. We’re going to the Final Four, baby.”Everyone who has seen them remembers the series of laterals that led California to a winning touchdown against Stanford in 1982. But who remembers that just before, John Elway had led a drive that included a fourth-and-17 on the 13 to get the ball into field-goal range? More people could probably tell you that the Stanford band was playing “All Right Now” when the winning touchdown was scored than know that the kicker who punched through what looked to be the game winner for Stanford was named Mark Harmon.Joe Carter of the Blue Jays never would have had the opportunity to break Mitch Williams’s heart with a World Series-winning homer in 1993 were it not for Lenny Dykstra’s three-run homer, which helped begin a Phillies rally from 5-1 down.Soccer moves at a slower pace, but last-second heroics are not unknown. A 123rd-minute goal by Alex Morgan sent the United States to the Olympic final in 2012. Christine Sinclair’s hat trick for Canada was forgotten.“It’s weird,” Sinclair told The Toronto Globe and Mail. “Everyone talks about that game, and I just say, ‘We lost. We lost.’ ”There’s an alternate universe where Woods, Harmon, Dykstra and Sinclair are as celebrated as Bobby Thomson, Bucky Dent, Doug Flutie and Michael Jordan. Paige may want to find a way to get there.Advertisement