
Sports of The Times By                     
 WILLIAM C. RHODEN
 
APRIL 14, 2016
For me, Jackie Robinson day is a celebration of struggle and perseverance, a reminder that hope and progress in civil rights are often mistimed allies.There are steps forward, then back, with incremental advances to show for them. The process is frustrating and frequently demoralizing, and it shaves years off the lives of the pioneers and activists who have been compelled by conscience or circumstance to challenge the status quo.Created by Major League Baseball to recognize one of the most important individuals in United States history, Jackie Robinson day commemorates April 15, 1947, the day he broke the major league color barrier. It resonates more deeply this year, thanks to Ken Burns’s four-hour film on Robinson’s life, showing on PBS.The documentary tells a familiar story with great depth, though this time Robinson’s wife emerges as the heroic pillar of strength for the Robinsons and their three children.AdvertisementRachel Robinson, now 94, has been the keeper of the flame and a paragon of strength from the time she met her husband at U.C.L.A. to the morning he collapsed in her arms from a fatal heart attack at their home in Connecticut on Oct. 24, 1972.AdvertisementI have spoken formally and informally with Rachel Robinson several times over the years, and still recall sitting down with her in her office not long after Barack Obama had become the Jackie Robinson of politics with his election as president of the United States.She talked about how her husband, by the end of his life, had become disillusioned by baseball’s intransigence, not just over the thinning ranks of black American players but the league’s blatant failure to promote diversity among its managerial and executive ranks.“He was getting so discouraged at the end of his life that change would not take place, that it would not be permanent, that it would not be expansive,” she said.Statements from that period, included in his autobiography, reflect Robinson’s disillusionment.On one occasion, he said: “I cannot stand and sing the anthem. I cannot salute the flag. I know that I am a black man in a white world. In 1972, 1947, at my birth in 1919, I know I never had it made.”In each of our conversations, and convincingly in the new documentary, Rachel Robinson took pains to point out that her husband was not bitter and did not feel that the game of baseball owed him anything.There was a larger, more universal disappointment that Major League Baseball had gone only part of the way — and had done only the part that benefited baseball, namely the procurement of black players.“It hadn’t made the changes that would have allowed for change of attitude going all the way through to ownership,” she said when I spoke with her. “They were still in control, they were still dominating and they were still excluding.”AdvertisementThe Jackie Robinson story makes everyone feel good. All but the most ardent racists can look at Burns’s documentary and agree that Robinson was mistreated, that he was courageous, and aren’t we glad we have overcome?We in the United States are prone to self-congratulation, and the annual commemoration has become the perfect vehicle for gushing. Players wear Robinson’s No. 42, and everyone from the commissioner on down speaks of Robinson’s impact on the nation.This year, the city of Philadelphia officially apologized for the racist taunts that members of the Phillies rained on Robinson when the Dodgers played them.Yet the game, with few black or Latino managers over the years, and only an executive of color here and there, remains an old-boys’ network and has resisted the changes Robinson hoped for in 1972, when, after throwing out the ceremonial first pitch at a World Series game, he said:“I am extremely proud and pleased to be here this afternoon, but must admit I’m going to be tremendously more pleased and more proud when I look at that third-base coaching line one day and see a black face managing in baseball.” (Team managers then typically positioned themselves at third base.)Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Last week, Tony Clark, the executive director of the Major League Baseball Players Association, sent a proposal to the baseball commissioner, Rob Manfred. Clark is proposing a joint initiative, the Career Preparation Project. It is designed to bring more black Americans into the game and promote the growing number of Spanish-speaking players to the ranks of coaches, managers and baseball executives.“Despite incremental progress, there remains a lack of diversity in the ranks of the management of baseball,” Clark wrote in the proposal.He continued: “The fact that the business of baseball fails to reflect the diversity of those who play or even the social diversity of the United States is undermining the growth of the game and creating the impression that those in charge are increasingly isolated from players and the fan base.”The genesis of the initiative was a conversation Clark had about 12 years ago with the general manager of a team about Clark’s own ambitions to become a baseball executive. He was told he would need, for starters, a degree from a reputable institution of higher learning. When Clark asked him whether his 20 years in the game counted for anything, he was told yes, perhaps an entry-level position.AdvertisementAmong other things, Clark said, the joint venture would provide players with access to education and degrees and remove “educational and workplace barriers that disproportionately impact minorities within baseball.” He added, “There is a career transition program, a job placement program and a program to help players leverage their careers into entrepreneurial opportunities.”Jackie Robinson day is, indeed, a great, well-intentioned celebration. But an industry that relies so much on relationships and networks must be compelled to go beyond the annual backslapping, ceremonial first pitch and jersey-wearing — the distinguishing features of the day.It is especially important in this period of racially charged debate across the country.“This is dealing with things that we’re talking about now,” Burns told me in a recent interview. “This is driving while black, this is stop-and-frisk, this is the Confederate flag, this is Black Lives Matter, this is burned churches.”Rachel Robinson expressed a similar sentiment when she wrote an essay commemorating yet another anniversary honoring her husband.“The fundamental questions that faced Jack in 1947 are abounding today,” she wrote. “We’ve got to go beyond celebrating the past and use our emotions, sentiments, ideas and analysis to move forward. This would be the greatest tribute to Jackie Robinson.”Email: wcr@nytimes.com A version of this article appears in print on April 17, 2016, on Page SP4 of the New York edition with the headline: Baseball Has Yet to Deliver the Greatest Tribute to Robinson .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »