

 Michael Powell
 

SPORTS OF THE TIMES
APRIL 8, 2016
This opening day had a Rip Van Winkle feel to it, as if we’d fallen off to sleep in early November and awakened a day or two later.The sky at Citi Field still was slate gray and wind slapped the face, and the jet stream snapped the flags taut. The infielders wore their Nanook of the North gear, the face masks and long sleeves under their uniforms. And fans trooped in by the tens of thousands in their woolies and long johns, waving their homely orange towels, electric and ready to celebrate.For at least one day, the Mets had the most desired continuity of all with 2015, in the form of an easy celebration of a 7-2 win over the Phillies.It’s an ironclad rule of baseball: Player or fan, you’re allowed to conclude nothing from an April win or four, or a loss or five. You like how the pitchers look? The hitters seem on every full count? Groovy. If your team is still doing that in mid-June, let’s talk.Advertisement“It’s a long, grinding season,” Manager Terry Collins said before the game.He spoke in that clipped, exuberant style of his, each sentence tumbling too quickly on the heels of the next. His ritual caution was correct. Yet he could not help giving a passing nod to last season. His eyes flashed. “To get to the World Series, that’s a childhood dream,” he said.AdvertisementFor a lifelong Mets fan, accustomed to crawling into the fetal position one time too many with this franchise, there are worrying signs to be found. Third baseman David Wright, this team’s captain and for so long its beating heart, is not precisely himself, and perhaps never will be again. His back is a chronic problem, and his throws to first base can call to mind the submariner Terry Leach more so than the rifle-armed kid of 2006.He takes questions patiently, even as you can see him inwardly recoil at these excursions into his baseball mortality. The temperatures Saturday are not expected to nose above 45 degrees. Will he play? You should ask the manager, he replies. What of that bunt in the middle innings, he was asked after Friday’s game. Were you worried about that one?He smiled and looked at the reporter, slightly bemused. In more limber days, he’d won two Gold Gloves for his catlike defense.“When it’s a bunting situation, I’d like to think that I can make that play pretty easily,” he said.The Mets’ pitching offers a deep vein of diamonds. Yet arms are a tenuous currency. Jacob deGrom pitched beautifully Friday, moving the ball up and down in the strike zone, a movable feast of speeds and looks. He just might be the most complete pitcher on this staff. Then a muscle in his side stiffened, and he had to ask Collins to take him out after the sixth inning.“It stiffened up pretty good,” Collins noted.Last year, Steven Matz, another of the Mets’ young pitching prodigies, missed many weeks with a tear of his lat. The other day, the pitching coach Dan Warthen went for a walk with my colleague Tim Rohan, and the old pitcher acknowledged that his mind could go to dark places now and then. Surgery for a young fastball hurler? “I think it’s not a matter of if,” Warthen said. “It’s a matter of when.”These ruminations come as deGrom, however brilliantly he is pitching, came up a little short this spring. Everyone insists that there’s no need to put out an arrest warrant for those missing miles per hour on his fastball. It will come as the weather heats up, or not.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Let’s put those worries in a box and lock the lid for now.On this day, the Mets did what they wanted. They faced a Phillies team that, within easy memory, caused the Mets much pain, overtaking them twice, in 2007 and 2008, in the final weeks of the season.AdvertisementThose days are gone.This Phillies team is filled with young talent. But to journey to adulthood in the major leagues is a brutal business. Ryan Howard, who back in ’07 and ’08 put together a Jimmie Foxx-like string of seasons, is a shadow of his Thunder God self. And Jimmy Rollins and Chase Utley are gone, although Utley appeared wraithlike last October and broke the leg of a Mets shortstop.All these memories were consigned to the trash heap Friday. This was baseball as Mets General Manager Sandy Alderson scripted it. The young left fielder, Michael Conforto, whapped a double deep into the corner. More impressive, he batted later in the game against a lefty reliever and slapped a solid single to right.It is Collins’s plan to platoon Conforto, feeding him a confidence-fattening diet of right-handers. Conforto, however, arrived in the majors on an express elevator last season, and the intrigue goes to whether he once again can force the Mets to alter their plans.The Mets squandered scoring chances early. Then they drained the bucket of runs in the later innings. By that time the wind was whipping, sending plastic and paper skittering, and setting players’ pant legs to flapping like laundry on a line.The fans worked their way down vertiginous steps toward the exit. In my family, we try to observe a taboo against early exits. Once long ago, I stood in the 48 degree temperature of an early September playoff for the Vermont Expos and pleaded with my son Nick, then 7 years old, to let us leave. He was unrelenting, and insisted on cadging autographs after the game.As I sat Friday in the bourgeois comfort of the press box, however, I can lay no claim to disapproval. Opening days are the most aspirational days in the baseball calendar, and for now the expectations for an embarrassment of riches were happily met.Email: powellm@nytimes.com A version of this article appears in print on April 9, 2016, on Page D7 of the New York edition with the headline: A Mets Win on Opening Day Keeps Apprehensions on Ice.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »