AdvertisementSupported byTV SportsBy Richard SandomirIn the new ESPN “30 for 30” documentary, “Doc & Darryl,” Dwight Gooden and Darryl Strawberry face each other in a diner in Maspeth, N.Y. — former Mets who are not close friends but were brought together by filmmakers hoping to ignite a conversation between the two recovering addicts.“Just thinking about the stuff we did, I bust out laughing,” Gooden told Strawberry in a scene shot last summer.“We were self-destructive,” Strawberry said.Strawberry recalled that Frank Cashen, the former Mets general manager who built the 1986 World Series-winning team, told them, “I want you guys to drink milk.” I said, “We ain’t drinking no milk.”The documentary quickly cuts from the diner — which was a location in the film “Goodfellas” — to a milk commercial in which Strawberry guzzled milk and declared, “It’s got the power I need for pure energy.”The two young Mets were, of course, using substances far more potent, and less wholesome, than milk.Gooden and Strawberry do not see each other often and had much to say. When they speak to each other, it is easy to conclude that Strawberry, a founder of two drug treatment and recovery centers in Florida, looks healthier and sounds more self-assured than Gooden. Gooden exudes less confidence in his sobriety than Strawberry, who has turned his broken life into one that he says is devoted to helping others. Like Gooden, if he asked.“Doc & Darryl” was directed by Judd Apatow and Michael Bonfiglio. Apatow’s credits include “Anchorman: The Legend of Ron Burgundy” and the HBO series “Girls.” Bonfiglio directed the “30 for 30” documentary “You Don’t Know Bo: The Legend of Bo Jackson,” a much lighter subject.“Who could top Bo?” Bonfiglio said. “He was such a fairy tale. I wouldn’t do another one unless it was the complete opposite story.”“Doc & Darryl” fits that bill. It is a well-made film and a profoundly sad story about how two young African-American men, one a power hitter and the other a pitcher, arrived in New York a season apart, bringing wondrous talents that were briefly realized before their careers were derailed by drug suspensions, arrests and jail time. “Doc & Darryl” strongly suggests that they came to Flushing unprepared for instant stardom in a city with too many temptations on a team with too many players willing to be tempted and a manager, Davey Johnson, with a laissez-faire style.“Doc & Darryl,” which ESPN will broadcast on July 14, arrives as the Mets have been celebrating the 30th anniversary of their second World Series championship. Two books by members of the 1986 Mets have been published, one by Ron Darling (“Game 7, 1986: Failure and Triumph in the Biggest Game of My Life”), another by Lenny Dykstra (“House of Nails: A Memoir of Life on the Edge”). But the current Mets, at 44-37 after Sunday, have grown weak offensively and do not look like the team that finished strongly last season before losing the World Series in five games to the Kansas City Royals.Apatow grew up as a Mets fan, and he prefers their underdog, underachieving days.“I loved the Mets when they were terrible, “ he said, tossing out his favorites of lesser times, such as George Foster and Dave Kingman. “I was also a Rusty fan,” he said referring to Rusty Staub. By the time the Mets won the 1986 Series, Apatow had graduated from Syosset High School and was at the University of Southern California and following the Mets less intently.“Doc & Darryl” should not be compared with last month’s five-part “O.J.: Made in America” documentary that was the most important edition of the “30 for 30” series. Yet “Doc & Darryl” is a valuable work that synthesizes the lives of two men who uplifted fans for a certain time with their athletic skills but were unable to control their addictive impulses. Yet, their careers lasted long enough for Gooden to pitch a no-hitter for the Yankees in 1996 and for Strawberry to experience his own Yankees renaissance in the late 1990s.Apatow and Bonfiglio could have produced a broader work on the dysfunctional Mets of the 1980s or about substance abuse in baseball, but they chose to burrow in on Strawberry and Gooden.“We wanted to focus on them and their interaction with each other,” Apatow said.Gooden and, to a greater degree, Strawberry, volunteered the grim narratives of their substance abuse, much of which is already known.Gooden shows where in Tampa, Fla., he drank and smoked marijuana in high school, and he discusses missing the World Series parade because he was snorting cocaine and watching it on TV, overwhelmed by depression and self-pity. Strawberry talks about his abusive, alcoholic father; about passing Major League Baseball’s drug tests and about the “many days of hangovers where I’d hit two homers like it was nothing.”“I was introduced to cocaine in my rookie year,” Strawberry said.After his first taste of cocaine, Gooden said he was hooked. “It was over,” he said.Gooden and Strawberry were united in one incident. Gooden tried to track down Strawberry when he left a drug-treatment center in North Tampa, Fla., in 2001. Strawberry went on a cocaine-smoking spree before he was found in Daytona Beach, Fla., several days later.“Girl picked me up, she had a pipe, we used crack and I have an ankle bracelet on,” Strawberry said in the documentary.Gooden and Strawberry’s continuing drug problems and crimes gave Apatow and Bonfiglio a trove of material.“They got into trouble more times than we had time for,” Apatow said during a break from directing “Crashing,” a coming HBO comedy series.“You had to choose which ones to talk about. They were at war with terrible diseases, and they were losing a lot of battles.”Bonfiglio said that Gooden seemed to be in a more precarious state of recovery.“Yeah, it’s a struggle for him,” Bonfiglio said. “Addicts and recovering addicts are never fully through it, and it’s something you live with. These guys may be at different places, and that can change at any moment.”Email: sandor@nytimes.comAdvertisement