NOV. 13, 2016
Croatia’s national team did not have any fans in its stands to cheer it on, but it did not seem to matter.Marcelo Brozovic scored twice as Croatia beat Iceland, 2-0, in Zagreb on Saturday and opened up a lead at the top of European Group I in World Cup qualifying.Croatia, forced to host the match in an empty arena because of cases of spectator unrest, took the lead early when Brozovic curled in a shot from outside the box. Croatia dominated the rest of the game but struggled to find a second goal in the face of Iceland’s stubborn defense.Baylor University said the former football coach Art Briles, the former athletic director Ian McCaw and another head coach all failed to report a female athlete’s allegation that she had been gang-raped by five football players.AdvertisementUniversity officials said the athlete told her head coach in April 2013 that she had been assaulted a year earlier and provided the names of the players, The Dallas Morning News reported.AdvertisementThe university said that the coach reported the matter to Briles, McCaw and a sports administrator, but that no one reported it to the university’s office of Judicial Affairs, as required by federal law.Rondae Hollis-Jefferson scored a career-high 20 points and grabbed 13 rebounds, leading the Nets to their first road victory of the season, 122-104 over the Phoenix Suns.The Nets held a 102-100 lead with 4 minutes 16 seconds to play, then scored the next 17 points, including a 3-pointer by Brook Lopez with 1:47 to go to make the score 113-100.Trevor Booker added 19 points and 8 rebounds, and Sean Kilpatrick had 19 points and 9 boards for the Nets. Joe Harris also scored 19 points.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Jonathan Marchessault tied the game with 13.6 seconds left in regulation and Denis Malgin scored late in overtime, helping the Panthers beat the visiting Islanders, 3-2.Florida trailed, 2-0, in the third period before getting goals from Kyle Rau and Marchessault. Marchessault tied it when Jaroslav Halak blocked a shot but let the puck trickle through his pads and in. Malgin poked in a rebound with 45.8 seconds left in overtime.Brock Nelson and Nick Leddy scored for the Islanders, and Halak had 40 saves.DEVILS BEAT SABRES Nick Lappin and Kyle Palmieri scored in the second period to lead the Devils to a 4-2 victory at home over Buffalo. Kyle Quincey and John Moore also scored for the Devils, and Cory Schneider stopped 21 shots. The Devils won their fourth straight.AdvertisementCANADIENS SHUT OUT RED WINGS Carey Price made 24 saves for his second shutout of the season and Montreal won at home against Detroit, 5-0. The Canadiens improved their record to 13-1-1, the best in the league.Gary Woodland took a one-stroke lead into the final round of the PGA Tour’s OHL Classic at Mayakoba in Playa del Carmen, Mexico, after dropping two strokes on the par-3 15th hole. Woodland finished with a five-under-par 66 to reach 18-under 195. He won tour titles in 2011 and 2013.TWO-STROKE LEAD IN SENIORS’ FINALE Paul Goydos shot a three-under-par 67 to take a two-stroke lead into the final round of the PGA Tour Champions’ season-ending Charles Schwab Cup Championship in Scottsdale, Ariz.AMERICAN IS AHEAD IN MEXICO Austin Ernst shot her second straight five-under-par 67 to take the third-round lead in the Lorena Ochoa Invitational in Mexico City.Caroline Garcia defeated the two-time Wimbledon champion Petra Kvitova to end the first day of the Fed Cup final with France and the Czech Republic even at one match apiece in Strasbourg, France.Karolina Pliskova gave the Czech team, the defending champions, an early lead with a marathon three-set victory over Kristina Mladenovic — 6-3, 4-6, 16-14 — in the first singles match.Garcia pulled France level by beating Kvitova, 7-6 (6), 6-3. Kvitova came back from 2-4 in the opening set before Garcia took the tiebreaker.Despite shifting some of her preseason training to other events, the Olympic and world champion Mikaela Shiffrin won the first women’s World Cup slalom of the season in Levi, Finland.A version of this article appears in print on November 13, 2016, on Page SP6 of the New York edition with the headline: Croatia Beats Iceland Before a Crowd of Zero.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.