AdvertisementSupported byEssayBy Filip BondyThe Knicks are finally respectable again, the Giants seem headed toward a playoff berth, and the Rangers own one of the better records in their conference. The Mets recently re-signed Yoenis Cespedes, and the Yanks threw a Boss’s ransom, old style, at Aroldis Chapman.And for these developments, New York sports fans are supposed to be infinitely grateful? Unlikely. These are dark days, I tell you. Dark days.Everything is relative, and New Yorkers are not at all accustomed to playing the role of marginal contender. Nearly five years have passed since a team from the New York metro area won a major professional sports championship — the Giants taking Super Bowl XLVI in February 2012. That was so long ago, Super Bowls required more than two Roman numerals for identification purposes. Taylor Swift was just 22!This has become a drought of epic proportions, by our spoiled-rotten standards. It has been nearly half a century since the region suffered for this long without a pro title of some kind. If this is a test of patience, it is too cruel a torment for our pampered lot.Our greater metropolis now has 13 urban and suburban pro teams — counting the N.F.L., M.L.B., N.B.A., W.N.B.A., N.H.L., M.L.S. and N.W.S.L. armada. They are all failing us, consistently, on an annual basis. Where are the ticker-tape parades, the gaudy trophies, the commemorative T-shirts, the cloying mayoral speeches? As another titleless year comes to a close, New Yorkers are once again being asked to settle for mere competitiveness.That is never going to happen. Our memories are too imbued with special moments, names and game faces. Joe Namath, Tom Seaver, Willis Reed, Thurman Munson, Walt Frazier, Reggie Jackson, Lawrence Taylor, Phil Simms, Bryan Trottier, Mark Messier, Martin Brodeur, Derek Jeter, Eli Manning, Mariano Rivera: It seemed there was always somebody, or some franchise, ready to step up when the clock ran down or the ninth inning approached. Somebody was always spraying champagne at somebody else, or right into the camera.New York’s major pro teams have captured 27 titles since 1969, including Sky Blue’s N.W.S.L. victory in 2009 and the New York Nets’ A.B.A. championships in 1974 and 1976 (sorry, not including the old or new Cosmos, whose history is too convoluted).The Yanks accounted for seven titles, the most. The Giants and the Isles won four apiece. The Devils earned three Stanley Cups. The Knicks won twice, in 1970 and 1973. The Mets triumphed in 1969 and 1986. The Rangers have their single season of glory, 1994, which Madison Square Garden still celebrates daily.The Jets won it all only once, in Super Bowl III. The local men’s soccer teams, relatively new, have given us nothing except a couple of Supporters’ Shields for best regular-season record. That is a category few Americans fully comprehend, or even wish to contemplate.Before the Namath-navigated title for the Jets in 1969, more than six years had passed since the Yankees beat San Francisco in the 1962 Series. That was the last time New York endured such a famine. For much of that span, there were only six New York teams: Yankees, Mets, Knicks, Rangers, Giants and Titans/Jets. That wasn’t much of an excuse, however, since they were competing in smaller, pre-expansion leagues and should have won a greater share of titles.Shame on them.There is some hope that the current slide can be halted sooner than later. The Giants are probably not strong enough, but then they didn’t look strong enough in the 2007 season, either. The high-scoring Rangers are fun to watch, and have about as good a shot at the Cup as five or six other top N.H.L. teams. The Mets’ rotation, if it ever heals, could carry them back to a World Series.The greatest disappointment in recent seasons, clearly, has been the Yankees, once our most reliable champions, our crown jewel. Somewhere along the way, Brian Cashman and Hal Steinbrenner began settling for wild-card contention with uninspired, starless rosters. The club has won only one World Series in the past 16 years, which is not the way the Yankees are supposed to operate. Despite promising young players in the pipeline, they still look unprepared to challenge — at least any time soon — the stocked and stoked Red Sox.How bleak is that? Without the Yankees, we might as well be Philadelphia.If the current situation with professional sports weren’t maddening enough, there is really no place to hide. It’s not as if we dare widen our rooting interests around here to include the colleges. We might actually find ourselves at a Rutgers football game or another Big East disaster for St. John’s basketball.We are a people in search of titles, to reinforce the obvious fact that New York is better than every other city in America. We used to be able to prove that with large banners. Instead, as 2016 comes to an end, we may again have to stake our reputation on theater and the fine arts.We still win Tonys. Practically all of them.Advertisement