By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSNOV. 11, 2016
Neymar scored his 50th international goal as host Brazil thrashed Argentina, 3-0, in their 2018 World Cup qualifying duel on Thursday.Neymar reached the 50-goal mark in 74 games as Brazil recorded its fifth consecutive victory under it new coach, Tite, to remain on top of South America’s qualification table.Philippe Coutinho and Paulinho also scored as the Brazilians made a triumphant return to Mineirão Stadium, scene of their humiliating 7-1 loss against Germany in a 2014 World Cup semifinal.Brazil now leads the 10-team round-robin competition with 24 points after 11 games. Argentina is in sixth place over all, one spot outside the qualifying positions for the finals in Russia.AdvertisementBrazil powered into a 2-0 lead in the first half after two wonderfully worked goals from Coutinho and Neymar.The Argentines created the first chance when Lucas Biglia’s shot from outside the penalty area was saved by Brazil goalkeeper Alisson in the 23rd minute.AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSECHILE GOALKEEPER INJURED IN DRAW  Before leaving the game with a leg injury, Claudio Bravo was the hero as Chile ground out a hard-fought 0-0 draw in its 2018 World Cup qualifier against host Colombia.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Bravo made two superb first-half saves as Chile, the Copa América champion, dug in for a vital point in sweltering conditions in Barranquilla, Colombia. But Bravo’s display was soured by what looked like a pulled muscle in the second half, forcing him to be replaced by Johnny Herrera in the 65th minute.Colombia brought on the veteran striker Radamel Falcao at the start of the second half but he was unable to break the deadlock.AdvertisementThe tie left Colombia with 18 points after 11 games in South America’s qualifying race; Chile had 17 points. AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSESOUNDERS ROOKIE RECEIVES HONOR Seattle Sounders forward Jordan Morris was named Major League Soccer’s Rookie of the Year after scoring 12 goals, tying for the second-most goals by an M.L.S. newcomer. Orlando City’s Cyle Larin set the mark with 17 in 2015.Morris beat Philadelphia Union defender Keegan Rosenberry and New York City F.C. forward Jack Harrison for the honor.Morris played a key role in Seattle’s run to the M.L.S. playoffs, and he has started all three of its postseason matches as it booked a berth in the Western Conference finals.“We think he has been as impactful in his first season as any rookie in the history of the league,” Sounders General Manager Garth Lagerway said of Morris, who made his debut with the United States’ national team in 2015 when he was still playing in college.Morris signed with the Sounders in January 2016 and made his starting debut on March 6.After Morris strained a hamstring in the Sounders’ playoff game at Dallas on Sunday, he was removed from the United States’ roster for Friday’s World Cup qualifier against Mexico. It was not yet known if he would be available when the Sounders host the Colorado Rapids in the first leg of the Western Conference Championship on Nov. 22. AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSESteven Stamkos had a goal and two assists, Andrei Vasilevskiy made 31 saves and the Tampa Bay Lightning beat the Islanders, 4-1, in Tampa, Fla.Nikita Kucherov, Tyler Johnson and Brian Boyle also scored for the Lightning, who have outscored the Islanders by 10-2 in winning the first two games of the season series.AdvertisementThe Islanders got a goal from Andrew Ladd.Stamkos opened the scoring by beating Jaroslav Halak from the left circle during a power play 8 minutes 3 seconds into the game. Stamkos has 111 career power-play goals with Tampa Bay, one shy of Vincent Lecavalier’s team record.Quarterback Daniel Jones ran for two touchdowns and threw for another to help Duke upset No. 15 North Carolina, 28-27, in Durham, N.C.Jones, a redshirt freshman, gave the defense fits all night with his mobility for the Blue Devils, who are 4-6 over all and 1-5 in the Atlantic Coast Conference. He ran for 94 yards as part of a ground game that kept moving the chains against the Tar Heels (7-3, 5-2), who were No. 17 in the College Football Playoff rankings.Shaun Wilson ran for a game-high 107 yards and a touchdown as Duke finished with 227 rushing yards and converted 10 of 17 third-down chances.BROWNS’ SEASON-LONG SKID CONTINUES Joe Flacco threw three touchdown passes, and the host Baltimore Ravens beat Cleveland, 28-7, to leave the winless Browns at a low point in franchise history.Baltimore trailed by 7-3 late in the second quarter before gaining control during a third quarter in which Flacco went 10 for 12 with two scores. The Ravens (5-4) have won two in a row following a four-game losing streak. Baltimore is the only team in the A.F.C. North above .500.Cleveland (0-10) has opened a season with 10 consecutive losses for the first time since joining the N.F.L. in 1950.The loss left Cleveland’s all-time record at 461-461-10. The Browns have never been below .500.SEATTLE’S SHERMAN FINED FOR HIT Seattle Seahawks cornerback Richard Sherman confirmed that he was fined by the N.F.L. for his hit on Buffalo kicker Dan Carpenter in Monday night’s game against the Bills.AdvertisementSherman said the league’s explanation made it nearly impossible for him to appeal the $9,115 fine. Sherman said the league’s justification in its letter to him was that his hit on Carpenter as he attempted to block a field-goal attempt at the end of the first half came after the whistle was blown.Sherman said he would not appeal the fine.“It would be a long, thoughtless process,” Sherman said. “Their logic is impeccable so there’s not really a fight. I’m still fine with everything.”Sherman was not penalized for unnecessary roughness on the play. He was flagged for being offside, but the referee Walt Anderson’s said after the game that he did not believe the contact was excessive enough to warrant a penalty.The N.F.L.’s head of officiating, Dean Blandino, later said that Anderson’s interpretation was incorrect and that Sherman should have received a personal foul on the play, an interpretation that Seattle Coach Pete Carroll agreed with.Anthony Davis hit two free throws with 12 seconds left and scored 32 points, and the New Orleans Pelicans got their first victory after losing their first eight games by beating the Bucks, 112-106, in Milwaukee.The Philadelphia 76ers (0-7) are the only remaining winless team in the N.B.A.Jabari Parker scored a season-high 33 points for Milwaukee, which lost its second straight game to a team that was winless.In their last game Sunday, the Bucks fell by 86-75 in overtime to Dallas, which was 0-5 coming into that game.CAVALIERS SALUTED AT THE WHITE HOUSE You learn a lot about people when they are down, President Barack Obama declared Thursday, and he was not talking about an election. Obama saluted the N.B.A.’s Cleveland Cavaliers for rallying from behind to defeat the Golden State Warriors and end a Cleveland pro sports title drought stretching back to 1964.AdvertisementObama honored the Cavaliers on the South Lawn of the White House, squeezing in another sports champion before he leaves office. He opened by saying: “That’s right. I said world champion and Cleveland in the same sentence.”Cleveland came back from a three-games-to-one deficit to win the championship against a Warriors team that had set an N.B.A. record for most victories during a regular season.“The first team in history to dig themselves out of a hole like that,” Obama said. “The comeback was remarkable, and you learn about people when they’re down.”A version of this article appears in print on November 11, 2016, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Neymar Scores 50th Goal in Brazil’s Rout of Argentina.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.