DEC. 27, 2016
Wide receiver Dez Bryant threw his first career touchdown pass between a pair of scoring catches, Ezekiel Elliott ran for two touchdowns, and the host Dallas Cowboys kept Detroit from clinching a playoff spot with a 42-21 win over the Lions on Monday night.With home-field advantage already wrapped up, the Cowboys (13-2) did not let up in their seventh straight home win while matching their franchise record in victories, reached twice before.The biggest sign that the Cowboys were serious about this game came late in the third quarter, when Bryant took a reverse pitch from quarterback Dak Prescott and tucked the ball as if planning to run before pulling up and lobbing the ball to Jason Witten for an easy 10-yard score and a 35-21 lead.Detroit quarterback Matthew Stafford lost in a visit to his hometown team again, after a wild-card defeat two years ago.AdvertisementWhile the Lions (9-6) missed a chance to clinch a playoff berth with their second straight loss following five consecutive wins, they still control their postseason fate. Detroit plays Green Bay (9-6) for the N.F.C. North title in the finale on Sunday.AdvertisementJETS PLACE PETTY ON INJURED RESERVE The Jets placed quarterback Bryce Petty on injured reserve, ending his short stint as the team’s starting quarterback.Petty, in his second season, tore the labrum in his left shoulder during Saturday’s 41-3 loss to the New England Patriots while tackling Malcolm Butler after a second-quarter turnover.Petty made four starts this season and appeared in five games, completing 56.4 percent of his passes for 809 yards with three touchdowns and seven interceptions. Ryan Fitzpatrick was benched so the Jets (4-11) could take a look at Petty, but they won only one of his starts.Fitzpatrick is expected to start Sunday’s finale against the Buffalo Bills, with the second-round draft pick Christian Hackenberg likely to be active for the first time.MARIOTA TO HAVE SURGERY Tennessee Titans quarterback Marcus Mariota will have surgery Wednesday on his broken right leg, and Coach Mike Mularkey said Mariota would need four to five months to recover.The N.B.A. said Monday that two calls were missed in the final moments of Cleveland’s win over Golden State on Sunday, and both missed calls contributed to the Cavaliers’ 109-108 victory.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The league said that Cleveland’s LeBron James should have been assessed a technical foul for deliberately hanging on the rim after his dunk with 1 minute 43 seconds remaining, and that Cavaliers forward Richard Jefferson should have been called for fouling the Warriors’ Kevin Durant on the final play.AdvertisementJefferson’s feet appeared to get tangled with Durant’s on that last play. Durant tumbled to the floor and could manage only a one-handed fling toward the basket as time expired.“There’s a lot of fouls that go on throughout the course of the game that doesn’t get called,” Cavaliers Coach Tyronn Lue said before Monday night’s game at Detroit, which the Cavaliers lost, 106-90. Lue gave James the night off.The American gymnast Simone Biles, who won four gold medals at the Rio Games last summer, was voted The Associated Press’s female athlete of the year.In a vote by editors and news directors, Biles received 31 votes out of a possible 59. The American swimmer Katie Ledecky, who won four golds and a silver in Rio, finished second with 20 votes. Serena Williams, who won Wimbledon for the seventh time to tie Steffi Graf’s record of 22 Grand Slam singles titles, and Breanna Stewart, a three-time A.P. women’s basketball player of the year, tied for third with four votes apiece.Mike Sullivan’s arrival in Pittsburgh last season provided the spark that turned the Penguins’ listless season around.The franchise rewarded the fiery Sullivan with a three-year contract extension that will keep him with the team through 2019-20.Sullivan, 48, took over for Mike Johnson last December and guided the team on a spirited run that concluded with the Penguins’ fourth Stanley Cup. Sullivan is 55-24-10 with Pittsburgh, the second-best point total in the N.H.L. over that time.General Manager Jim Rutherford said Sullivan “did the best coaching job in the N.H.L. last season.” The Penguins, who are scheduled to play the Devils on Tuesday, are second in the Metropolitan Division, 1 point behind Columbus.AdvertisementThe eight-time line honors winner Wild Oats XI retired from the Rolex Sydney Hobart Yacht Race for the second straight year after sustaining damage to a hydraulic ram.Wild Oats XI, a 100-foot supermaxi, was leading the race by around eight miles early Tuesday morning and was several hours ahead of its race record set in 2012 when the skipper Mark Richards made the decision to retire.Supermaxi Perpetual Loyal now leads the race by about 15 miles.A series of human errors caused an airliner to run out of fuel and crash in Colombia last month, killing 71 people, including most of the Chapecoense soccer team, as well as team officials and journalists, aviation authorities said.Colombia’s Civil Aeronautics agency concluded in its investigation that the plan for the Nov. 28 flight operated by the Bolivia-based charter company LaMia did not meet international standards. Among the errors made were the decisions to let the plane take off without enough fuel to make the flight safely and then not to stop midway to refuel. The pilot also did not report the plane’s emergency until it was too late, the agency said.An Associated Press report in the Scoreboard column on Tuesday about a decision by the Jets to place quarterback Bryce Petty on injured reserve misstated his record as the team’s starting quarterback. Petty was the starter in the Jets’ 23-17 victory at San Francisco on Dec. 11; it is not the case that the Jets “did not win any of his starts.”A version of this article appears in print on December 27, 2016, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: Cowboys Keep the Lions From Wrapping Up a Berth.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.