By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSOCT. 23, 2016
Dan Girardi scored 1 minute 55 seconds into the third period on Sunday night, and the Rangers edged the Arizona Coyotes, 3-2, at Madison Square Garden.Josh Jooris and J. T. Miller also scored for the Rangers, who are 4-2-0 after consecutive victories. Henrik Lundqvist made 27 saves.Radim Vrbata scored both of Arizona’s goals, and Louis Domingue had 23 saves. The Coyotes have lost their first four games on a six-game trip since a home win over the Philadelphia Flyers in overtime to open the season.ISLANDERS 6, WILD 3 John Tavares had two goals and an assist, Johnny Boychuk scored for the second straight game, and the Islanders trounced Minnesota in Brooklyn. Calvin de Haan, Alan Quine and Thomas Hickey also scored for the Islanders. Zach Parise scored twice for the Wild to top 300 goals for his career.AdvertisementAlexis Pinturault of France built on his first-run lead to win the season-opening World Cup giant slalom in Sölden, Austria.AdvertisementPinturault led the defending overall champion, Marcel Hirscher of Austria, by 0.70 of a second. Felix Neureuther of Germany was third, 1.37 seconds back.FIGURE SKATING Shoma Uno of Japan landed three quadruple jumps to win the Skate America men’s title in Hoffman Estates, Ill. The Americans Jason Brown and Adam Rippon placed second and third.Fresno State fired Coach Tim DeRuyter after the Bulldogs slipped to 1-7 in his fifth season.The offensive coordinator Eric Kiesau was named the interim head coach.DeRuyter went 30-30 at Fresno State, and he had two years left on a five-year, $7.5 million contract.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Lewis Hamilton got the victory he needed to keep his Formula One championship hopes alive, winning the United States Grand Prix in Austin, Tex., for the fourth time in five years.Hamilton cut the advantage of his Mercedes teammate Nico Rosberg, the championship leader, to 26 points with three races to go. Rosberg, a German, finished second ahead of Red Bull’s Daniel Ricciardo of Australia to maintain a comfortable cushion over Hamilton, an Englishman, in the title chase.LOGANO EARNS KEY NASCAR VICTORY Joey Logano grabbed a critical win in the Hellman’s 500 to give Team Penske one car in the next round of Nascar’s playoffs in Talladega, Ala. Denny Hamlin edged Austin Dillon for the final spot in the field on a tiebreaker at Talladega Superspeedway. Logano did not have to win, but the victory gave him a guaranteed slot on a day when the Chase for the Sprint Cup championship field was cut from 12 drivers to eight.AdvertisementPadraig Harrington stayed calm on the final hole to win the Portugal Masters for his first European Tour victory in eight years.The Irishman Harrington pitched from the rough and holed a 4-foot par putt to close with a six-under 65 in Vilamoura. That left him at 23-under 261 for the tournament, enough for a one-shot win over the defending champion Andy Sullivan of England.AUSTRALIAN WINS IN CHINA Minjee Lee of Australia won the Blue Bay L.P.G.A. in Hainan, China, by one stroke. She closed with a two-under-par 70 to finish at 13-under 275.Manchester City failed to win for a fifth straight game in all competitions, avoiding a loss to visiting Southampton when Kelechi Iheanacho scored a second-half equalizer for a 1-1 draw.Although Pep Guardiola is enduring a five-game skid for the first time since his debut in charge of Barcelona in 2008-9, City is at the top of the Premier League on goal difference.REAL MADRID EDGES ATHLETIC BILBAO Real Madrid needed an 83rd-minute game winner by the substitute Alvaro Morata to earn a hard-fought 2-1 win over visiting Athletic Bilbao.Top-seeded Angelique Kerber of Germany struggled to defeat seventh-seeded Dominika Cibulkova of Slovakia, 7-6 (5), 2-6, 6-3, on the opening day of the WTA Finals in Singapore.Kerber, who secured the top ranking last month, battled Cibulkova for 2 hours 17 minutes before Cibulkova finally succumbed.A version of this article appears in print on October 24, 2016, on Page D7 of the New York edition with the headline: Girardi’s Goal Lifts Rangers Over the Coyotes.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.