By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSDEC. 24, 2016
The Minnesota Vikings’ team plane slid off the runway after landing at Appleton International Airport in Wisconsin and became stuck in the grass, leaving players waiting for hours to get off the aircraft. A team spokesman said there were no injuries. The Vikings will play the Green Bay Packers on Saturday.FOOT OUT THE DOOR The San Diego Chargers have made preparations for a potential move to Los Angeles, leasing a portion of an office facility in Costa Mesa, Calif., and working to secure nearby land for practice fields, the N.F.L. said on its website. (REUTERS)Oklahoma running back Joe Mixon made a tearful public apology, more than two years after punching a woman and breaking bones in her face.As Coach Bob Stoops looked on, Mixon spoke at a news conference in Norman, Okla., and discussed the confrontation in which he assaulted Amelia Molitor. Mixon said he wanted to address the matter earlier, but his legal team advised him not to.Advertisement“I let a lot of people down,” said Mixon, who was suspended for a year after hitting Molitor. He added: “I take full responsibility of what happened that night. It’s never O.K. to hit a woman. Never.”AdvertisementARMED FORCES BOWL Jonathan Barnes kicked a game-ending 32-yard field goal and Louisiana Tech beat Navy, 48-45, in Fort Worth.The Bulldogs (9-5) drove for the winning score after Navy’s freshman quarterback, Malcolm Perry, ran 30 yards for a touchdown with 3 minutes 46 seconds left. Ryan Higgins threw for 409 yards and four touchdowns, two each to Trent Taylor and Carlos Henderson.Navy (9-5), which was trying for its first consecutive 10-win seasons, instead ended with its third straight loss.Madison Keys will miss the Australian Open after having wrist surgery.Keys, a 21-year-old American ranked No. 8 in the world, said in a statement on Twitter that she had arthroscopic surgery on her left wrist three days after the season-ending WTA Finals in October.Keys said that she was training with her coach, Lindsay Davenport, but that she would not be ready to play the first Grand Slam event of the season, which begins Jan. 16.Mikko Koivu, Nino Niederreiter and Marco Scandella scored in a five-minute span early in the second period, and the Minnesota Wild beat the Rangers, 7-4, at Madison Square Garden for their franchise-record 10th straight win.Mikael Granlund, Jason Zucker, Matt Dumba and Charlie Coyle also scored for the Wild, who chased Henrik Lundqvist with four goals on 13 shots. Chris Kreider scored twice for the Rangers.AdvertisementISLANDERS 5, SABRES 1 Ryan Strome had a goal and an assist, Thomas Greiss made 28 saves and the Islanders beat Buffalo. John Tavares had a power-play goal, and defenseman Travis Hamonic had two assists as the Islanders ended a three-game losing streak at Barclays Center.PENGUINS 4, DEVILS 1 Sidney Crosby scored his N.H.L.-leading 24th goal as host Pittsburgh defeated the Devils, who lost for the eighth time in nine games.BLUE JACKETS 2, CANADIENS 1 Columbus made it 12 straight victories by winning at home against Montreal to maintain the best record in the N.H.L. The win was a league-leading 20th for goalie Sergei Bobrovsky.A.C. Milan lifted the Italian Super Cup after winning a penalty shootout in Doha, Qatar, against the defending champions Juventus. It was the ninth time the competition had been played outside Italy.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mario Pasalic scored the winning penalty as A.C. Milan edged a 4-3 shootout victory after the game finished, 1-1. Pasalic scored Milan’s fifth penalty after their 17-year-old goalkeeper, Gianluigi Donnarumma, denied Paulo Dybala.Giorgio Chiellini scored for Juventus in the 18th minute but Giacomo Bonaventura scored on a header before halftime to tie the score.CRYSTAL PALACE HIRES ALLARDYCE Sam Allardyce, the former coach of England’s national team, has been hired as the manager of Crystal Palace, and given the task of keeping a struggling team in the Premier League.Allardyce, 62, is back in soccer three months after losing his job with England’s national team because of unguarded comments he made to undercover reporters posing as businessmen. He has never been relegated from the Premier League — a record that attracted Palace, which is 17th in the 20-team standings after winning only four matches this season.AdvertisementLeBron James scored 19 points, Kevin Love added 14 points and 15 rebounds, and the Cleveland Cavaliers rolled past the visiting Nets, 119-99.The lopsided margin gave the Cavaliers a chance to rest their stars heading into a Christmas showdown against the Golden State Warriors. James, Love and Kyrie Irving, who had 13 points and 10 assists, were all removed with 3:57 remaining in the third quarter and Cleveland leading, 90-48.Love returned after missing two games because of a bruised left knee, but the Cavaliers discovered that J. R. Smith could be sidelined until the end of the regular season after surgery to repair what the team called a “complex fracture” of his right thumb.Brook Lopez scored 16 points for the Nets, who have lost five straight games.WARRIORS 119, PISTONS 113 Draymond Green made a tiebreaking dunk with 1:31 left and Kevin Durant scored 32 points despite playing in foul trouble, lifting visiting Golden State over Detroit.THUNDER 117, CELTICS 112 Russell Westbrook had his 14th triple-double of the season and his third straight 40-point game, scoring 45 points with 11 assists and 11 rebounds to lead Oklahoma City to a victory in Boston.A version of this article appears in print on December 24, 2016, on Page D4 of the New York edition with the headline: Rough Landing for Vikings.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.