By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSDEC. 22, 2016
Petra Kvitova could return to tennis in about six months, the surgeon who operated on her left hand said Wednesday.Kvitova, a two-time Wimbledon champion, was injured Tuesday when a knife-wielding intruder attacked her at her home in Prostejov, Czech Republic. The attacker is still at large, and the police have asked the public for help.Kvitova underwent nearly four hours of surgery on Tuesday at a specialized clinic in Vysoke nad Jizerou.“It’s a serious injury, and we have to deal with that accordingly,” said Radek Kebrle, a surgeon at the clinic, the Hand and Plastic Surgery Institute. “She’s young and healthy and has long, slim fingers. That’s a good prognosis.”AdvertisementQuentin Snider scored a career-high 22 points, with a key drive with 1 minute 44 seconds remaining, and Jaylen Johnson and Donovan Mitchell combined for 4 points in the final 16 seconds to help No. 10 Louisville win at home against No. 6 Kentucky, 73-70.AdvertisementMalik Monk’s 3-point attempt to tie the score for Kentucky (10-2) bounced off the front of the rim with three seconds left, and Deng Adel grabbed the rebound to seal the win for Louisville (11-1).A BAD LOSS FOR SYRACUSE Three St. John’s players scored in double figures, and the Red Storm dealt the host Orange their worst loss at the Carrier Dome, a 90-63 defeat. St. John’s (6-7) has won three straight against Syracuse (7-5).UCONN WOMEN WIN 86TH STRAIGHT In a women’s game, Katie Lou Samuelson scored 23 points to help No. 1 Connecticut rout host Nebraska, 84-41, the Huskies’ 86th consecutive victory. The Huskies (11-0) were never challenged by Nebraska (4-8), which hit just one of its first 10 shots.Kyrie Irving had 31 points and 13 assists, and LeBron James scored 29 points as the host Cleveland Cavaliers won their second game in two nights over the Milwaukee Bucks, 113-102, despite being without two starters.Kevin Love did not dress for the second straight game with a bruised left knee, and J. R. Smith sat out after breaking his right thumb Tuesday at Milwaukee. Smith needs surgery, and the Cavaliers will not have a timetable on his return until after the operation.Luke Kuechly, the Carolina Panthers’ three-time All-Pro middle linebacker, said he had no plans to retire from playing football after sustaining his second concussion in two years. Kuechly, 25, has missed seven games in the past two seasons, including the last four this season.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Kuechly was cleared to play Monday night against Washington, but Coach Ron Rivera held him out. Rivera has not decided whether Kuechly will play against Atlanta on Saturday, or again this season, for the 6-8 Panthers.PETERSON MAY NOT PLAY AGAINST PACKERS Minnesota Vikings running back Adrian Peterson did not practice, and his status for a game against Green Bay on Saturday is in question. Peterson said he had “a couple of nicks” that were being treated after he played his first game in three months on Sunday.Advertisement FOOTBALL SPAT LED TO KILLING, POLICE SAY The authorities in Austin, Tex., said a woman’s exuberance over the Dallas Cowboys’ victory Sunday night led her stepson to fatally stab her.Court documents reviewed by the Austin television station KEYE showed that Magdalena Ruiz was “gloating” about Dallas’s victory over Tampa Bay after watching the game on TV with her husband. Detectives said that her stepson, Pontrey O’Neal Jones, 20, believed she was disrespecting his father, so he walked behind a couch, lunged at his stepmother and stabbed her several times.It seems that University of Texas football fans turned to alcohol to cope with a less than successful product on the field at Royal-Memorial Stadium.Records obtained by The Austin American-Statesman showed that alcohol sales at six Longhorns home games this season were up more than 70 percent over last year, generating $3.1 million in revenue. Under a contract with its vendor, the university’s athletic program pocketed about $1.3 million.The Longhorns finished 5-7 this season, in sixth place in the Big 12.Jakub Voracek and Wayne Simmonds scored in the shootout, Steve Mason made 36 saves, and the Flyers beat the Washington Capitals, 3-2, in Philadelphia.Michael Raffl and Claude Giroux scored in regulation for Philadelphia, which ended a two-game skid that had followed a 10-game winning streak.Bayern Munich eased to a comfortable 3-0 victory over Leipzig to claim the Bundesliga’s unofficial title of autumn champion. The two teams had been tied atop the league’s standings.Leipzig, playing on the road, was down by two goals when its hopes were virtually extinguished as Emil Forsberg was sent off for a dangerous lunge in the 30th minute.A version of this article appears in print on December 22, 2016, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: Kvitova Could Return in About Six Months.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.