AdvertisementSupported bySports BriefingBy The Associated PressLeBron James scored 35 points, Kevin Love had 16 points and 13 rebounds, and the Cleveland Cavaliers pulled away in the fourth quarter to beat the Raptors, 115-94, in Toronto on Friday night and take a 3-0 lead in their second-round playoff series.DeMar DeRozan scored 37 points and Jonas Valanciunas had 19 for the Raptors, who were without the three-time All-Star Kyle Lowry. Toronto trailed by only 2 points after three quarters before the Cavaliers blew the game open.The Cavaliers are the only team since the Minneapolis Lakers in 1949 and 1950 to win their first seven playoff games in consecutive seasons.Commissioner Rob Manfred said that all 30 teams were being surveyed as Major League Baseball considered instituting leaguewide guidelines for handling fans who make racist remarks like those at Fenway Park this week.Manfred, who said the goal was to make sure players felt comfortable in every ballpark, spoke in Minneapolis before the Twins hosted the Boston Red Sox, who were at the center of the controversy this week after a fan directed racial slurs at Baltimore Orioles outfielder Adam Jones. Another fan was removed and barred for life from Fenway Park the next day for making a racist remark.NATIONALS 4, PHILLIES 2 Stephen Strasburg hit his second major league home run and pitched five and two-thirds scoreless innings, leading visiting Washington over Philadelphia. Ryan Zimmeman hit his 12th homer and raised his average to .433 for the Nationals, who improved to 20-9, the best in the majors.ORIOLES 4, WHITE SOX 2 Gabriel Ynoa pitched six sharp innings after Orioles starter Wade Miley was forced out of the game, and Chris Davis hit a home run for host Baltimore in a victory over Chicago.Lionel Messi, Argentina’s captain, was cleared by FIFA to play in the next three World Cup qualifiers after a ban for insulting a referee’s assistant was lifted.Messi served one match of the four-match ban. FIFA said its appeal committee considered Messi’s behavior — verbally abusing a linesman late in a 1-0 win over Chile on March 23 — “reproachable.” But the panel concluded that the “evidence available was not sufficient to establish to the appropriate standard” required for the disciplinary committee to impose the initial suspension.BAN RESCINDED OVER WALKOFF The Italian soccer federation has rescinded Sulley Muntari’s one-match ban for walking off the field in response to racist abuse during a Serie A game last weekend. Muntari, a Ghanaian who plays for Pescara, received a yellow card at Cagliari for protesting the abuse and was booked again for leaving the field without following procedures.Dmitrij Jaskin scored in his first playoff game this season and Jaden Schwartz scored the winner, helping the host St. Louis Blues stay alive against the Nashville Predators with a 2-1 victory in Game 5 of their second-round series. Nashville leads the series, 3-2.Schwartz scored 25 seconds into the third period on a rebound off a Colton Parayko shot, giving St. Louis a 2-1 lead. Schwartz has a team-high four postseason goals.Jake Allen made 21 saves for the Blues, who had dropped two in a row. James Neal scored for the Predators, and Pekka Rinne made 30 saves.CROSBY PRACTICES Sidney Crosby practiced with his Pittsburgh Penguins teammates barely four days removed from a frightening hit that left him with a concussion and his status for the rest of the playoffs uncertain.Crosby declined to say whether he would be available for Game 5 against the Washington Capitals on Saturday. The Penguins lead the Eastern Conference semifinal series, 3-1, and are looking to close out the top-seeded Capitals in Washington.GERMANY STUNS U.S. AT WORLDS Patrick Hager scored a late winning goal as Germany stunned the United States with a 2-1 victory on the opening day of the ice hockey world championships in Cologne, Germany. The German goaltender Thomas Greis, who plays for the Islanders, made 42 saves.Aaron Hernandez was a member of the Bloods street gang and was once disciplined in prison for having gang paraphernalia, according to newly released documents related to the investigation into his suicide.A death report listed the Bloods under Hernandez’s “gang profile” and said Hernandez had once been disciplined for having “STG” paraphernalia. In prison, “STG” stands for “Security Threat Group,” a term for gangs. The Bloods is a violent gang that started in California and now has thousands of members.Hernandez, a former Patriots tight end, was found hanging from a bedsheet in his cell on April 19 in a maximum-security prison in Massachusetts, where he was serving a life sentence for a 2013 murder. His suicide came five days after he was acquitted in a 2012 double slaying.Abel Tasman charged late to win the Kentucky Oaks by one and a quarter lengths and give the Hall of Fame trainer Bob Baffert the victory with his lone entrant in the weekend marquee races at Churchill Downs in Louisville, Ky. Baffert, who does not have a horse in the Kentucky Derby, and his son Bode celebrated by dabbing.Advertisement