By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSMAY 6, 2017
Kevin Durant had 38 points and 13 rebounds, and the Golden State Warriors beat the Utah Jazz, 102-91, in Salt Lake City on Saturday night to take a 3-0 lead in the teams’ Western Conference semifinal series.Stephen Curry and Klay Thompson were a combined 7 of 29 from the field and 3 of 15 from 3-point range, leaving Durant to pace the Warriors.Utah led, 75-74, early in the fourth quarter, but Golden State went on a 10-4 run and did not trail again. Curry and Durant hit back to back 3-pointers to give the Warriors a 92-84 lead with 3 minutes 4 seconds remaining.Curry finished with 23 points, shooting 6 of 20.Gordon Hayward led the Jazz with 29 points. Rudy Gobert added 21 points and 15 rebounds.AdvertisementGame 4 is scheduled for Monday night in Utah.Evgeny Kuznetsov and Alex Ovechkin scored 27 seconds apart in the third period as host Washington avoided elimination by beating Pittsburgh, 4-2, in Game 5 of their second-round N.H.L. playoff series.AdvertisementNicklas Backstrom tied the score early in the third period as the Capitals finally solved Penguins goaltender Marc-Andre Fleury, who allowed four goals on 32 shots. Andre Burakovsky also had a goal for Washington.The Capitals’ comeback spoiled the return of Pittsburgh’s captain, Sidney Crosby, who missed one game because of a concussion.Carl Hagelin and Phil Kessel scored for the Penguins.Adam Duvall, Patrick Kivlehan and Eugenio Suarez each hit solo home runs during the first three innings, and Cincinnati set a season high in runs for the second straight game with a 14-2 rout of visiting San Francisco.Nine players drove in runs for the Reds, who had 18 hits and have scored 27 runs in a two-game span for the first time since May 2010 against Houston. Nine of Cincinnati’s hits went for extra bases.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Reds sent 11 batters to the plate during a six-run third inning that put them up, 10-2. Seven had hits, including Suarez’s run-scoring double and Kivlehan’s first home run of the season.ROCKIES 9, DIAMONDBACKS 1 Tyler Anderson matched a career high with 10 strikeouts, Mark Reynolds homered for the second consecutive game, and Colorado routed Arizona in Denver. Nolan Arenado also went deep, and Charlie Blackmon added three hits for the Rockies, including a double and a run-scoring triple.C. J. Sapong scored three times in 11 minutes late in the second half as the Philadelphia Union (1-4-4) won for the first time this season, 3-0, over the Red Bulls (5-5-1) in Chester, Pa.Philadelphia goalkeeper Andre Blake made four saves for his third shutout.Patrick Reed birdied his final two holes for a five-under-par 67 to surge into the lead at the PGA Tour’s Wells Fargo Championship in Wilmington, N.C., but not by much.AdvertisementWith one round remaining at Eagle Point, the tournament remained wide open.Reed held a one-shot advantage on John Rahm of Spain and Alex Noren of Sweden.Seventeen players were within four shots of the lead.WIE ADVANCES IN MEXICO Michelle Wie rallied to beat Angel Yin at the Lorena Ochoa Match Play in Mexico City to join Ariya Jutanugarn of Thailand and the South Koreans Sei Young Kim and Mi Jung Hur in the semifinals.Nicolas Szerszen led the Ohio State men to their second straight N.C.A.A. volleyball championship, hitting .480 and finishing with 16 kills and eight digs as the top-ranked Buckeyes defeated Brigham Young, 25-19, 25-20, 25-22, in Columbus, Ohio.Ohio State (32-2) also beat B.Y.U. (26-5) in the title game last year.The Cougars, who entered the day ranked fourth in the nation in hitting percentage, at .323, managed a percentage of just .243 and looked out of sync from the start.A version of this article appears in print on May 7, 2017, on Page SP8 of the New York edition with the headline: Pro Basketball; Warriors’ Road Win Pushes Jazz to the Brink.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.