By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSMAY 3, 2017
The Pittsburgh Penguins found a way to survive without their injured star Sidney Crosby.Marc-Andre Fleury stopped 36 shots, and the rookie Jake Guentzel took advantage of a fortunate bounce to earn his N.H.L.-leading eighth goal of the playoffs as the Penguins, the defending Stanley Cup champions, held off the visiting Washington Capitals, 3-2, on Wednesday night in Game 4 of their Eastern Conference semifinal series.Justin Schultz scored in a second straight game, and Patric Hornqvist picked up his third goal of the postseason as Pittsburgh took a 3-1 lead in the series. The Penguins played without Crosby, who is out indefinitely with a concussion he sustained in Game 3.The Penguins have a chance to eliminate the Capitals in Game 5 on Saturday in Washington.Evgeny Kuznetsov and Nate Schmidt scored for the Capitals, but Washington failed to even the series despite controlling play for long stretches.Dominic Dwyer scored two second-half goals, Tim Melia had his sixth shutout of the season, and Sporting Kansas City won at home, 2-0, to snap the Red Bulls’ three-game winning streak.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.AJAX WINS IN EUROPA SEMIFINALS Bertrand Traore scored two goals and created another as Ajax beat Lyon, 4-1, in Amsterdam in the first leg of their Europa League semifinal. The status of Traore, who is on loan to Ajax from Chelsea, had been in doubt before kickoff because of a groin injury. But he showed no ill effects as Ajax, a four-time European Cup winner, made the most of its first European semifinal since 1997.AdvertisementBilly Hamilton ended one of the major leagues’ longest home run droughts with a three-run shot, and Devin Mesoraco hit his first home run in more than two years, powering the Reds to a 7-2 victory over the Pittsburgh Pirates in Cincinnati.AdvertisementHamilton hit his first homer since June 28 — a streak of 319 at-bats that was the third-longest active drought in the majors — with the ball passing just inside the right-field pole to give the Reds a 6-0 lead in the fourth inning.AROUND THE MAJORS Ryan Zimmerman had two hits and doubled in the go-ahead run, Jacob Turner worked four innings of scoreless relief, and the Nationals beat the Arizona Diamondbacks, 2-1, in Washington. • Carlos Carrasco pitched six impressive innings, and the bullpen held on to give the Cleveland Indians a 3-2 victory over the Tigers in Detroit. • J. T. Realmuto drove in four runs, Giancarlo Stanton hit a two-run double in Miami’s five-run sixth inning, and the Marlins beat the host Tampa Bay Rays, 10-6.The two-time Formula One champion Fernando Alonso passed his rookie orientation test at Indianapolis Motor Speedway, allowing him to try to qualify for the Indianapolis 500 this month. Alonso turned 50 laps in his morning test session, taking less than three hours to pass all three phases of the rookie test on his first oval track.Alonso posted a best lap speed of 219.654 miles per hour in the early session and was even faster in the afternoon. With the threat of rain, Alonso drove another 38 laps, going as fast 222.548 m.p.h. in less than ideal conditions.A version of this article appears in print on May 4, 2017, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: Hockey; Without Crosby, Penguins Hold On for Victory.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.