AdvertisementSupported bySports BriefingBy The Associated PressLiverpool improved its bid to secure a Champions League spot by winning at Watford, 1-0, in a largely forgettable Premier League match. Only Emre Can made this one memorable, by meeting a Lucas Leiva cross with a bicycle-kick score in first-half stoppage time.“I have never scored a goal like that, maybe when I was younger,” Can said. “That is the best goal I’ve ever scored.”The league rivals Manchester City, Manchester United and Arsenal dropped points in the race for a top-four position, so a win was vital for Liverpool, which has struggled against teams in the bottom half. The Reds moved 4 points ahead of fifth-place United, though they have played an extra game.“Everything is in our hands,” Can said. “If we win the three (remaining) games, we are in the Champions League. We are confident.”The victory came at a cost, as forward Philippe Coutinho lasted less than 10 minutes.SEVILLA IS DEFEATED Sevilla conceded two late goals in a 4-2 loss at Malaga Málaga that left the team 3 points behind Atlético Madrid in the fight for third place in the Spanish league. Sevilla, which had won three of its last four, has three games left to try to overcome Atlético and secure the an automatic qualification spot into the Champions League next season. The fourth-place team has to go through a playoff.UNITED STATES TO FACE GHANA The United States national team will play Ghana on July 1 in East Hartford, Conn., to prepare for the Concacaf Gold Cup. The Gold Cup is Cup, the biennial championship for the North, Central American and Caribbean regions. Twelve teams take part in the tournament, which will be played in 14 United States cities July 7 to July 26.Manny Machado hit a long home run out of Fenway Park, drove in two runs and made three solid plays at third base in his first game against Boston since a dust-up with the Red Sox just over a week ago, carrying the Baltimore Orioles to a 5-2 victory.Caleb Joseph added a run-scoring double for the Orioles, who beat Boston for the fourth time in six games this season.In the teams’ last meeting at Camden Yards, reliever Matt Barnes sent a pitch behind Machado’s head that hit his bat. Barnes was suspended four games and fined. Machado had angered the Red Sox with a late slide into second baseman Dustin Pedroia’s left leg two days earlier.In Monday’s game, Machado hit a hanging slider on the inner half of the plate over the Green Monster seats, making it 2-0 in the sixth inning. He was loudly booed. ASTROS 6, RANGERS 2 Jose Altuve, Carlos Correa and Yuli Gurriel each hit run-scoring doubles in a five-run seventh inning that lifted host Houston to a win over Texas in a game that included a benches-clearing tussle.TIGERS 7, INDIANS 1 Tyler Collins hit a three-run homer and Daniel Norris gave up only one run as host Detroit opened a series against first-place Cleveland with a victory.REDS 4, PIRATES 3 Billy Hamilton, who stole three bases, hit a run-scoring double in the 10th inning to lift host Cincinnati to a win over Pittsburgh. The Reds have consecutive wins for the first time since completing a four-game winning streak on April 12. RAYS 4, MARLINS 2 Jake Odorizzi returned from the disabled list to combine with four relievers on a four-hitter and help visiting Tampa Bay beat Miami.ROYALS 6, WHITE SOX 1 Eric Hosmer and Jorge Bonifacio hit two-run homers, and host Kansas City ended a nine-game losing streak with a victory over Chicago.The team of Cameron Smith and Jonas Blixt won the Zurich Classic on the fourth playoff hole, capturing a new-format tournament in Avondale, La., that had been held over a day because of darkness.Smith, an Australian, hit his approach shot within a couple of feet of the pin, and he sank a birdie putt on the par-5 18th hole to give himself and his Swedish teammate the victory. Smith and Blixt could have won it on earlier playoff holes but missed short birdie putts.Advertisement