By BILLY WITZJUNE 15, 2017
OAKLAND, Calif. — When the Yankees chose U.C.L.A. pitcher James Kaprielian two years ago with the 16th overall pick in the amateur draft, they liked his sturdy build, his powerful arm and his breaking pitches, which showed great promise. But the Yankees were also drawn by something else.“The first thing we liked about James is he’s been a healthy pitcher,” Damon Oppenheimer, the Yankees’ vice president of domestic amateur scouting, said then.Kaprielian was with the Yankees this week — but only as a spectator in Anaheim, near his home in Southern California, where he is recovering from Tommy John surgery.He is the 15th pitcher in the organization to have the surgery, intended to repair an elbow ligament, in a little more than two years.AdvertisementThat heavy toll of elbow injuries helps explain the Yankees’ draft haul this year.They used their first pick, again No. 16 over all, on a college pitcher: Clarke Schmidt, a right-hander from the University of South Carolina. That Schmidt is also recovering from Tommy John surgery did not deter the Yankees. They have come to view the surgery not as a red flag but as a cost of dealing with hard-throwing young pitchers.AdvertisementWith that in mind, the Yankees not only shrugged at Schmidt’s injury, they stockpiled pitchers — something they have steadily done since last summer. They have acquired 14 minor league pitchers since the Aug. 1 nonwaiver trade deadline.In the draft, which began Monday and ended Wednesday, 10 of the Yankees’ first 11 picks were pitchers — and only one was a high school player: Matt Sauer, the second-round pick from Santa Maria, Calif.Of the Yankees’ 40 selections over all, 28 were pitchers.Asked on a conference call what he liked most about the draft, Oppenheimer said: “the amount of power arms that we were able to put into the system.” He added: “You can never have enough pitching. I know it’s a cliché.”It seems especially true, given the injury history of the Yankees’ top prospects. Andrew Brackman, who signed for $3.5 million in 2007, had Tommy John surgery almost immediately after the Yankees chose him in the first round. He appeared in just three major-league games.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The top pitchers drafted by the Yankees from 2011 through 2015 have had serious arm injuries.Sam Safford, the 88th overall pick in 2011, never signed; the Yankees learned he needed shoulder surgery after they chose him. Ty Hensley, selected 30th over all in 2012, has needed two Tommy John operations and is now in the Tampa Bay Rays’ system. Ian Clarkin, picked 33rd in 2013, missed the entire 2015 season with elbow inflammation. Jacob Lindgren, the 55th pick in 2014, has had Tommy John surgery and is now in Atlanta’s system. Then came Kaprielian, who received a $2.65 million signing bonus.Several studies indicate that major league pitchers return after the surgery about 80 percent of the time, with younger pitchers faring slightly better. Reliever Dellin Betances is a success story for the Yankees, developing into a three-time All-Star after having the surgery as a minor leaguer.But many others, even when they come back, are not as hearty as Betances. The writer Jon Roegele, who tracks Tommy John surgery, wrote in 2015 that only 40 percent of pitchers younger than 24 who have the operation return to log more than 400 innings or 100 appearances over the rest of their careers.AdvertisementOppenheimer said several factors had led the Yankees to draft Schmidt. They liked him when he was healthy and throwing a deceptive fastball that reached 97 miles per hour. They also liked his work ethic, which they believed would be a factor in a successful recovery. And the medical reports the Yankees examined led them to believe the surgery had gone smoothly.“That combination made it seem like he was the right guy to take a chance on,” Oppenheimer said.Asked if there was anything in Schmidt’s mechanics that could be changed to avoid further elbow trouble, Oppenheimer said: “That’s like the magic question in the whole industry. It’s hard to find guys nowadays that combine power with their stuff that haven’t had something like this.”Sauer, a 6-foot-4, 195-pound right-hander, could develop into a front-line starter, Oppenheimer said.Some college pitchers chosen recently have made it to the majors in short order.On the Yankees’ current roster are two 2014 picks: starter Jordan Montgomery, taken in the fourth round, and reliever Jonathan Holder, taken in the sixth. Chance Adams, a fifth-round pick in 2015 who is currently in Class AAA, is considered the Yankees’ best starting prospect.The one nonpitcher the Yankees selected in the first 11 rounds this year was the high school outfielder Canaan Smith, a left-handed power hitter from the Dallas area who has a keen eye; he walked 57 times this season.Farther down in the draft, the Yankees called a couple of interesting names. In the 20th round, they selected Notre Dame catcher Ryan Lidge — a cousin of Brad Lidge, the former Philadelphia and Houston closer. In the 22nd round, they nabbed a slender right-handed pitcher from Seattle University named Janson Junk.Alas, Oppenheimer said that with a fastball that clips 96, it would be hard to describe him as a junk baller.Because of an editing error, an article on Friday about the Yankees’ history of drafting pitchers misstated, in some copies, the surname of a pitcher they drafted in 2011. He is Sam Safford, not Stafford.A version of this article appears in print on June 16, 2017, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: Yanks Take Risk on Pitcher and Stock Up on Others.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.