APRIL 30, 2017
Isaiah Thomas had a game-high 33 points and added 9 assists, and the Boston Celtics made 19 3-pointers on Sunday to defeat the visiting Washington Wizards, 123-111, in the first game of their Eastern Conference semifinal.Thomas played a day after attending the funeral of his sister, Chyna, 22, who died in a car crash last month outside Tacoma, Wash. Al Horford added 21 points, 10 rebounds and 9 assists, and Jae Crowder finished with 24 points.The Wizards jumped out to a 16-0 lead, but the Celtics rallied in the second quarter, with Thomas briefly sidelined after one of his front teeth was knocked out.Bradley Beal led Washington with 27 points. John Wall added 20 points and 16 assists.Cody McLeod scored the game-winner early in the second period, and host Nashville beat St. Louis, 3-1, to grab a two-games-to-one lead in their Western Conference semifinal.AdvertisementDefensemen Ryan Ellis and Roman Josi also scored for the Predators, Colton Sissons added two assists and Pekka Rinne made 22 saves. Nashville outshot St. Louis by 34-23 and has won seven straight playoff games on its home ice.Alexander Steen scored for the Blues, who lost for the first time on the road this postseason.DUCKS 6, OILERS 3 Jakob Silfverberg scored twice to lead Anaheim past host Edmonton, cutting the Oilers’ series lead to two games to one.Anaheim took a 3-0 lead in the first period before Edmonton rallied to tie the game. Chris Wagner scored the tiebreaking goal midway through the second period, firing a shot that deflected off goalie Cam Talbot’s arm.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Russell Martin hit a go-ahead single during a three-run rally in the eighth inning, and Toronto earned a second consecutive win — for the first time this season — by beating visiting Tampa Bay, 3-1.The Blue Jays entered with a 7-17 record, the worst in the majors. A loss would have given them the worst winning percentage in March and April in team history.AdvertisementToronto lost starter Aaron Sanchez, the American League E.R.A. leader last season, after one inning because of a split fingernail. He had been activated off the 10-day disabled list before the game after a blister on his middle finger healed.DIAMONDBACKS 2, ROCKIES 0 Daniel Descalso ended the longest scoreless game at Chase Field with a two-run homer in the 13th inning. Arizona became the first National League team to strike out at least 11 in seven straight games.TWINS 7, ROYALS 5 Miguel Sano homered and drove in five runs, and visiting Minnesota handed Kansas City its ninth straight loss.MARLINS 10, PIRATES 3 Justin Bour drove in six runs with four hits, both career highs, and host Miami rallied from a three-run deficit to end a four-game skid.INDIANS 12, MARINERS 4 Michael Brantley homered, Francisco Lindor had a two-run double, and Cleveland scored eight times in the third inning to rout Seattle at home.Hara Nomura two-putted for birdie on the sixth playoff hole to win her third L.P.G.A. Tour event, the Volunteers of America Texas Shootout in Irving, Tex.Nomura had given up the lead for the first time with a double bogey at No. 17, then birdied the par-5 18th hole at the end of regulation to force the playoff with Cristie Kerr.Kerr and Nomura finished regulation at three-under-par 281, then played the 518-yard 18th hole six more times. There were five matching pars before Kerr’s 12-foot birdie chance slid left of the cup.Advertisement TIMELY EAGLE IN ZURICH CLASSIC Kevin Kisner chipped in for eagle from nearly 95 feet on the 18th hole as darkness fell, lifting himself and his teammate Scott Brown into a Monday playoff at the Zurich Classic in Avondale, La. They will face Jonas Blixt and Cameron Smith, who have not bogeyed a hole in the PGA Tour’s first team event in 36 years.CHINA OPEN WON IN PLAYOFF Alexander Levy beat Dylan Frittelli in a one-hole playoff to win the European Tour’s China Open in Beijing. Levy, the 2014 champion, began the final round seven shots behind Frittelli, the overnight leader.Rafael Nadal defeated Dominic Thiem of Austria, 6-4, 6-1, to win his 10th Barcelona Open title in Spain.It was the second consecutive week that Nadal, a Spaniard, won a tournament for the 10th time. He had earlier become the first men’s player in the Open era to win the same title 10 times at the Monte Carlo Masters in Monaco.Joey Logano pulled away after a restart with about 20 laps to go to win Nascar’s Toyota Owners 400 at Richmond International Raceway in Virginia.Logano, who qualified fifth but had to start 37th after making a transmission change, grabbed the lead from his Penske Racing teammate Brad Keselowski when Keselowski had to make a defensive move to keep Kyle Busch from sneaking past him on the inside.Logano then had to get around Kyle Larson and five others who stayed on the track when everyone else pitted with a little more than 20 laps remaining.Keselowski held on for second, followed by Denny Hamlin, Ricky Stenhouse Jr. and Kevin Harvick.FINN CLAIMS RUSSIAN GRAND PRIX Finland’s Valtteri Bottas claimed his first Formula One win after holding off a late charge by Germany’s Sebastian Vettel at the Russian Grand Prix in Sochi. Bottas, who drives for Mercedes, started third but grabbed the lead on the first lap, finishing 0.6 of a second ahead of Ferrari’s Vettel.Richie Porte of Australia won the six-day Tour of Romandie with a strong ride in the final time-trial stage in Lausanne, Switzerland. Starting 19 seconds behind the overnight leader, Simon Yates of England, Porte rallied to beat Yates by 21 seconds.A version of this article appears in print on May 1, 2017, on Page D6 of the New York edition with the headline: Pro Basketball; Celtics Open Conference Semifinal With a Win.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.