By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSAPRIL 29, 2017
Rafael Nadal and Andy Murray reached the Barcelona Open semifinals on Friday in the same manner in which they had won all week: Nadal cruised and Murray labored.Nadal, the defending champion, eased past Hyeon Chung, 7-6 (1), 6-2. Murray fought hard to beat Albert Ramos-Viñolas, 2-6, 6-4, 7-6 (4), controlling the decisive points to close out the match in three hours.Murray will play fourth-seeded Dominic Thiem, who defeated the lucky loser Yuichi Sugita, 6-1, 6-2.Nadal, seeking his 10th Barcelona title, struggled in the first set but took control of the match after winning the tiebreaker. He broke Chung to start the second set and cruised to his second straight semifinal appearance.Nadal will play in the semifinals against Horacio Zeballos, who beat Karen Khachanov, 6-4, 6-1.MORE DOPING TESTS The International Tennis Federation said that more doping tests would be carried out on professional players this year. In a joint initiative among the I.T.F., the ATP, the Grand Slam Board and the WTA, the number of tests this year will increase to 8,000, from 4,899 in 2016, and more samples will be placed into long-term storage.AdvertisementThe sprawling American investigation of bribery and corruption in international soccer has reached into Asia and claimed the first guilty plea from a senior official in the new FIFA leadership.AdvertisementA member of FIFA’s Audit and Compliance Committee, Richard Lai of Guam, was provisionally suspended by FIFA’s ethics committee after admitting to taking about $1 million in bribes, including some from senior Kuwaiti officials seeking to buy influence among Asian FIFA voters.Lai, a United States citizen and president of Guam’s soccer federation since 2001, pleaded guilty in federal court in Brooklyn on Thursday.The plea linked the scandal to Asian soccer for the first time and involved an official who retained his position monitoring FIFA’s multibillion-dollar income and spending in the transition from the former president Sepp Blatter to his successor, Gianni Infantino.Ariel Miranda allowed two hits and pitched into the sixth inning, Robinson Cano and Ben Gamel homered, and the Seattle Mariners defeated the Indians, 3-1, in Cleveland.Miranda did not give up a hit until Jose Ramirez’s one-out homer in the fourth, and he struck out seven in five and a third innings.Before the game, the Mariners announced that the team’s ace, Felix Hernandez, was expected to miss three to four weeks because of bursitis in his right shoulder.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.AROUND THE MAJORS Madison Bumgarner, the San Francisco Giants’ ace, is expected to be sidelined until after the All-Star break after sustaining a shoulder sprain in a dirt-biking accident last week. • Andrew Benintendi hit a homer off Jake Arrieta during a five-run first inning, and the Boston Red Sox beat the visiting Chicago Cubs, 5-4. • Albert Pujols hit a tiebreaking three-run homer in the Los Angeles Angels’ 6-3 victory over the host Texas Rangers. • Charlie Morton struck out a career-high 12 as the Houston Astros rallied past the visiting Oakland A’s, 9-4.The PGA Tour meted out its first slow-play penalty since 1995 in the first round of the Zurich Classic of New Orleans on Thursday.AdvertisementThe tour rookie Brian Campbell and Argentina’s Miguel Angel Carballo, playing together in the two-man team format that is new to the event this year, were both charged with failing to play shots within the 40 seconds allowed under the tour’s pace-of-play policy. They were assessed a one-shot penalty as a team, leaving them with a two-over-par score of 74 for the first round.On Friday, Jonas Blixt and Cameron Smith posted a 10-under-par 62 in the tournament’s four-ball format to move into a one-stroke lead.  (AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE)NOMURA LEADS IN TEXAS Haru Nomura shot a six-under 65 to take a one-shot lead after the second round of the North Texas L.P.G.A. Shootout in Irving, Tex. Ariya Jutanugarn is second after shooting a 67, with Suzann Pettersen another shot behind.Vladimir Tarasenko scored twice, including the tiebreaking goal with 3 minutes 51 seconds left, to give the host St. Louis Blues a 3-2 victory over the Predators, ending Nashville’s five-game winning streak and tying the Western Conference semifinal at one game apiece.Tarasenko’s game-winner came on a lucky bounce. Jaden Schwartz led the rush and initially tried to pass it to Carl Gunnarsson, but the pass was off the mark and bounced off Gunnarsson’s foot right to Tarasenko’s stick. It was the first lead for St. Louis in the series.AROUND THE N.H.L. Carl Hagelin, a speedy winger, will be a game-time decision to return to the Pittsburgh Penguins’ lineup for Game 2 against the Washington Capitals on Saturday night. • The Carolina Hurricanes acquired goalie Scott Darling from the Chicago Blackhawks in exchange for a third-round draft pick. Darling, 28, had a career-best 18 wins with a 2.38 goals-against average in 32 games.Liberty guard Shoni Schimmel has missed the first few days of training camp and is not expected to be with the team any time soon. Schimmel sustained a concussion in August and was sidelined for the rest of the season. Coach Bill Laimbeer said he did not know how much time Schimmel planned to take off.A version of this article appears in print on April 29, 2017, on Page D6 of the New York edition with the headline: Tennis; Nadal and Murray Advance in Barcelona.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.