By JAMES WAGNERMAY 25, 2017
A day after Manager Terry Collins created an uproar of sorts by proclaiming he was no longer at liberty to discuss the Mets’ numerous injury situations, his boss, General Manager Sandy Alderson, tackled the issue himself.In an interview on Thursday, Alderson said the Mets, more than anything, wanted to put an end to false expectations about when injured players might be able to return to the lineup, which was why Collins was being asked by the team to limit what he said in his daily meetings with reporters.In a disappointing season in which key players like Noah Syndergaard, Yoenis Cespedes and Steven Matz have been sidelined, Alderson has been increasingly confronting a perception that has long hovered over the Mets: that they do not have a coherent plan for dealing with injuries.As a result, Alderson has taken a more hands-on approach to the issue, initiating daily meetings with the team’s training staff and strength coaches and now mandating that the team should stop assigning timetables for when players might be ready to play again. From his point of view, the Mets were seen as overly optimistic in this regard and would then come in for criticism when those target dates were not met.AdvertisementAlderson said before Thursday’s game against the San Diego Padres that the Mets would talk “less often and with less specificity” about injuries.AdvertisementAlderson thinks injuries to players are often hard to gauge. Cespedes, for example, has been out since April 28 with a left hamstring strain. He was expected to begin a running program last week at the team’s spring training facility in Florida and, barring setbacks, return this week. Cespedes has indeed begun running, but he is not yet back with the team.“Injuries are injuries,” Alderson said. “They’re unpredictable, in terms of their severity and scope and amount of time of recovery. And in the past what we’ve attempted to do is to give the most current information.“And now what we’re trying to do is provide information,” Alderson added. “But we think less is more.”’ And, Alderson said, that is the approach he has been taking for weeks, and that Collins will now take as well.“That’s just an organizational decision that we’ve made,” Alderson said, adding that another reason to limit discussion of injuries was to prevent them from becoming an all-purpose “excuse” for disappointing results by the Mets on the field.Before Wednesday’s game, Collins gave unusually terse answers to questions about injured Mets. Asked about outfielder Jay Bruce, who was battling back tightness, Collins said, “He’ll be in there when he’s in there.” (Bruce was in Thursday’s lineup.)Asked about Matz, Cespedes and two other injured players — Seth Lugo and Asdrubal Cabrera — Collins said he did not know their rehabilitation schedules or gave vague answers. (As it turned out, Cabrera was activated from the disabled list on Thursday.)Of course, Collins is not the team’s rehabilitation coordinator and has plenty of matters to deal with in trying to get his sputtering club moving in the right direction.AdvertisementBut what stood out about Collins’s short responses Wednesday was how uncomfortable he looked in making them. An emotional manager by nature, Collins, in his six-plus seasons with the Mets, has built a reputation as being available and forthcoming with the reporters who cover the team.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Limiting his comments is not his style, but when it comes to injuries, that is apparently what it will be from now on.“I get in trouble because I try to be as honest as I can with you guys and give you an honest look at things, and then if it doesn’t happen, we look like an idiot because there’s no guarantees,” he said Thursday, echoing what Alderson said in his interview.“So,” Collins added, “we’re going to try to stay away from trying to predict anything except the fact that, ‘Hey, look, there’s a process involved of getting these injured players back on the field and it changes every day.’”Unlike Alderson, whose regularly scheduled meetings with reporters generally occur at the start of every homestand, Collins is the public face of the team before and after every game. As such, he bears the brunt of the daily questions about the progress and return dates of injured players.So the change in the Mets’ approach to this issue will affect him more than anyone else. Which is not to say that he will not discuss injuries at all. But just not a lot.Before Thursday’s game, Collins did say that Bruce had been cleared to play and that there were no physical issues with Jacob deGrom, whose start was pushed back to Friday from Thursday to dodge the rainy weather.That left Rafael Montero as Thursday night’s emergency starter. Montero has pitched poorly this season, and Collins can presumably continue to talk about that problem as much as he wants.A version of this article appears in print on May 26, 2017, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: Mets’ Plan to Deal With Injuries: Don’t Talk About Them So Much.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.