By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSJULY 21, 2017
The French rider Warren Barguil prevailed on the barren slopes of the fearsome Col d’Izoard climb in the Alps, winning his second stage of the 104th Tour de France while Chris Froome defended his overall race lead Thursday, putting him in touching distance of a fourth Tour crown.On the last day of climbing in the Alps, Froome lost a handful of seconds to the French rider Romain Bardet, who moved up to second in the overall standings, relegating Rigoberto Urán of Colombia to third.But Froome still leads Bardet by 23 seconds, a margin that the French rider looks unlikely to close before the finish Sunday in Paris. The last opportunity is in a time trial Saturday, but Froome excels in that discipline.“I gave it all. I thought I was going to suffocate as I crossed the line,” Bardet said. “I have no regrets. I did everything I could.”AdvertisementFroome was relieved to put the Alps behind him. The mountains can crack even the best riders, and now that they are done, there remain no real obstacles to stop Froome from clinching a third consecutive title. He also won in 2013, which was his first title.Advertisement“I’m happy that I went through the Alps without any major problem,” Froome said. “I normally find the Alps more difficult.”Hendrick Motorsports picked the 24-year-old Alex Bowman to be Dale Earnhardt Jr.’s replacement next season, and Bowman has big shoes to fill.Earnhardt was named Nascar’s most popular driver each of the last 14 seasons, and his seat in the No. 88 car is one of the most coveted in the Cup series. After announcing his retirement earlier this year, the 42-year-old Earnhardt tabbed Bowman as his logical successor in May. Bowman drove 10 races for the team owner Rick Hendrick last year when Earnhardt missed time because of a concussion.Jamaica got an early goal from Shaun Francis and led the rest of the way, holding off Canada, 2-1, in the quarterfinals of the Concacaf Gold Cup in Glendale, Ariz. Romario Williams put Jamaica ahead, 2-0, five minutes into the second half. Canada’s David Junior Hoilett scored on a soaring shot from well beyond the penalty area in the 61st minute.In the semifinals Sunday at the Rose Bowl, Jamaica will face the winner of Thursday’s second game between Mexico and Honduras.BAIL DENIED FOR SPANISH FEDERATION PRESIDENT A judge denied bail for the Spanish football federation president, his son and a federation vice president arrested in an anticorruption probe after taking their testimony.According to a court statement, National Court Judge Santiago Pedraz made the decision to keep the federation president, Ángel María Villar; his son Gorka Villar; and the federation vice president for economic affairs, Juan Padron, behind bars while the investigation continues.AdvertisementCHANGES IN AFRICAN CUP The Confederation of African Football’s executive committee approved two major changes to the continent’s top soccer tournament, expanding it by eight teams, to 24, beginning in 2019 and moving it from the beginning of the year to June-July.Justin Smoak hit a pair of homers and Steve Pearce drove in two runs when Boston second baseman Brock Holt lost his pop-up in the sun, and the Toronto Blue Jays held on to beat the Red Sox, 8-6.The teams split the four-game series in Boston. Including the 15-inning game Tuesday with Toronto, the Red Sox, who lead the American League East, played 76 innings in about 144 hours — the equivalent of eight and a half games in six days.PIRATES SWEEP THE BREWERS Gregory Polanco homered, Chris Stewart added three hits and the Pirates completed a four-game sweep of the Milwaukee Brewers with a 4-2 victory in Pittsburgh.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.ORIOLES RALLY PAST RANGERS Jonathan Schoop and Adam Jones both homered and drove in three runs, and the Orioles rallied to beat Cole Hamels and the Texas Rangers, 9-7, to complete a four-game sweep in Baltimore.Peter Gojowczyk upset the defending champion Ivo Karlovic, 7-6 (5), 6-7 (1), 7-6 (4), to reach the Hall of Fame Tennis Championships semifinals in Newport, R.I.Gojowczyk, a 28-year-old German, overcame 30 aces from Karlovic. Gojowczyk was 3 for 3 on break points.Gojowczyk will face Australia’s Matthew Ebden, a 4-6, 7-6 (6), 6-4 winner over Germany’s Tobias Kamke. Ebden is the first qualifier to reach the semifinals on Newport’s grass courts since 2011.Martin Flores, Cameron Tringale and Zac Blair shared the Barbasol Championship lead at six-under-par 65 when first-round play in Opelika, Ala., was suspended because of darkness. Jim Furyk opened with a 69. Furyk, the 47-year-old United States Ryder Cup captain, is playing the event after failing to qualify for the British Open.PILLER HAS L.P.G.A. LEAD AFTER A 63 Gerina Piller shot an eight-under 63 in the Marathon Classic in Sylvania, Ohio, to take a one-stroke lead over the United States Women’s Open champion Sung Hyun Park and Peiyun Chien.AdvertisementThe Carolina Panthers released the former starting left tackle Michael Oher after he failed a physical. Oher, the subject of the movie “The Blind Side,” started 16 regular-season games and three playoff games for the Panthers during their Super Bowl run in 2015. However, he sustained a concussion in the third game of last season and has not played since.A version of this article appears in print on July 21, 2017, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: Cycling; On Last Day of Climbing, Froome Keeps Lead.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.