By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSJULY 19, 2017
The All-Star shortstop Carlos Correa of the Houston Astros is expected to miss six to eight weeks because of a torn ligament in his left thumb.The Astros, who lead the American League West, put Correa on the 10-day disabled list Tuesday, a day after he hurt himself taking a swing against Seattle. They expect to have him back for the stretch run in September. Infielder Colin Moran was recalled from Class AAA Fresno.“It’s obviously disappointing, but at the same time, I have to focus on what I can control, and that’s hopefully having successful surgery and finishing my rehab and hopefully coming back late September or so and being able to play in the playoffs,” Correa said.Correa, 22, is batting .320 with 18 doubles and 20 home runs, and his 67 R.B.I. have him second in the A.L. The Astros, who defeated the Mariners by 6-2 on Tuesday, plan to play Moran at third base and split time at shortstop between Alex Bregman, who has played third base all season, and Marwin Gonzalez, the team’s utility man.AdvertisementDIAMONDBACKS ADD OUTFIELDER The Arizona Diamondbacks acquired the star outfielder J. D. Martinez from the Detroit Tigers for a package of prospects, hoping to solidify a trouble spot while making a run toward the playoffs.AdvertisementDetroit received the Class AA infielder Dawel Lugo, the switch-hitting infield prospect Sergio Alcantara and shortstop Jose King. Lugo was regarded as the Diamondbacks’ No. 2 overall prospect.Martinez had been the subject of trade rumors for weeks as the Tigers slid from contention. Martinez, 29, is hitting .305 with 16 home runs and 39 R.B.I. Arizona, which won on the road against the Cincinnati Reds by 11-2, holds the top spot in the National League wild-card race despite problems in left field this season.BREWERS CATCHER HURT IN COLLISION Milwaukee Brewers catcher Stephen Vogt is out for at least a month with a sprained left knee after a collision at home plate Monday night in Pittsburgh.The N.L. Central-leading Brewers got Vogt off waivers from Oakland last month. Vogt, a two-time All-Star, is hitting .250 with four home runs and nine R.B.I. in 12 games for the Brewers, who lost to the Pirates by 4-3 on Tuesday.AROUND THE MAJORS Clayton Kershaw pitched seven scoreless innings for his major-league-leading 15th win, and the Los Angeles Dodgers edged the White Sox, 1-0, in Chicago for their 10th straight victory. • Chris Davis homered in a six-run first inning, added a grand slam in the fourth and finished with a career-high six R.B.I. to help the Orioles breeze past the Texas Rangers, 12-1, in Baltimore. • Nicholas Castellanos homered twice, Detroit scored five times in the second inning, and the Tigers cruised from there to a 9-3 road victory over the Kansas City Royals.Jerry Jones, the Dallas Cowboys’ owner, said the team was still gathering details about Ezekiel Elliott’s involvement in an altercation at a Dallas bar in his latest off-field episode.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Elliott, a star running back who was already facing a potential suspension in the N.F.L.’s investigation of a year-old domestic-violence case, was reportedly involved in a dispute Sunday night that led to a man being punched in the nose and being taken to a hospital. The Dallas police said the 30-year-old man who was punched did not know who hit him, and the report does not mention Elliott.Jones said he did not want to speculate about a possible suspension. An N.F.L. spokesman said the league was looking into the latest episode “to understand the facts.”AdvertisementN.B.A. teams are making a wardrobe change. The league said it was eliminating the old apparel designations starting with the 2017-18 season, when Nike becomes the official outfitter. Instead, there will be four primary uniforms for each team.The host team will pick which of its uniforms will be worn for each game, and the visitors will select a contrasting one from their collection. Previously, white uniforms were the default for home teams. The first two editions will make their first appearance at the start of the season.After swimming for almost two hours in open water, the Olympic champion Ferry Weertman edged the defending champion, Jordan Wilimovsky of the United States, by one-tenth of a second for the 10-kilometer title at the world championships.Weertman earned the Netherlands’ first medal of the championships, on Lake Balaton, about 80 miles southwest of Budapest. Marc-Antoine Olivier of France, who won the 5K on Saturday, was 0.70 of a second behind for bronze.In Budapest, Matthieu Rosset and Laura Marino won the mixed 3-meter and 10-meter team event for France’s first medal in any diving competition at the event. Krysta Palmer and David Dinsmore of the United States claimed the bronze. Earlier, Russia won its sixth straight women’s team technical synchronized swimming title for its fourth gold medal of the championships.Manager Antonio Conte signed a new two-year contract with Chelsea. Conte, a 47-year-old Italian, guided the Blues to the Premier League title in his first season at Stamford Bridge.M.L.S. ALL-STAR TEAM ADDS PLAYERS Thirteen players, including Toronto’s Jozy Altidore and Portland’s Diego Valeri, have been added to Major League Soccer’s All-Star team for the Aug. 2 game against Real Madrid in Chicago.A version of this article appears in print on July 19, 2017, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: Baseball; Astros’ Star Shortstop Could Miss Eight Weeks.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.