AdvertisementSupported bySports BriefingBy The Associated PressThe Washington Nationals, the National League East leaders, opened the second half of the season with a franchise record, a series sweep and a significant upgrade — exactly how they wanted to keep their momentum going.Ryan Zimmerman set the Nationals’ career home run record with a solo shot, and Bryce Harper connected again Monday as Washington powered its way to a 6-1 victory for a four-game sweep of the Reds in Cincinnati. Zimmerman’s 235th career homer moved him ahead of Vladimir Guerrero for the most in Expos and Nationals history.Washington improved to a season-high 20 games over .500 (56-36) with its ninth victory in 11 games.BLUE JAYS 4, RED SOX 3 Steve Pearce hit a solo homer, then drove in the go-ahead run in the eighth inning as visiting Toronto defeated Boston.The Blue Jays led, 3-0, after two innings, but Boston scored three in the seventh, tying it when Dustin Pedroia hit Dominic Leone’s only pitch off the Green Monster to tie it. One run scored, and Mookie Betts was thrown out at the plate. Toronto went back in front in the eighth when Pearce singled to drive in pinch-runner Ezequiel Carrera from third.PIRATES 4, BREWERS 2 Gregory Polanco doubled twice, drove in two runs and threw out a potential go-ahead run at the plate to lead surging Pittsburgh to a win over Milwaukee. The Pirates are now within six games of the first-place Brewers in the N.L. Central. Polanco finished 4 for 4 and is hitting .446 this month.ASTROS ALL-STAR HURTS THUMB Houston’s Carlos Correa, an All-Star shortstop, left a game against the Seattle Mariners with a jammed left thumb. Correa, 22, is hitting .320 with 20 homers and 67 R.B.I. for Houston, which leads the American League West. The team said Correa would be re-evaluated Tuesday.The deadline passed for quarterback Kirk Cousins and the Washington Redskins to sign a long-term deal, meaning Cousins will play a second consecutive season on the franchise tag. Cousins will make $23.94 million on the franchise tag in 2017 after $19.95 million last year. Cousins is the first quarterback in N.F.L. history to play two years in a row on the franchise tag.Cousins, 28, entering his third full season as Washington’s starter, set franchise records with 4,917 and 4,166 yards passing the past two seasons but has yet to win a playoff game.PANTHERS FIRE GENERAL MANAGER The Carolina Panthers fired General Manager Dave Gettleman eight days before the team is to report to training camp. Gettleman had been Carolina’s general manager for four seasons, when the Panthers went 43-26-1. But Carolina was 6-10 last season a year after reaching Super Bowl 50, where it lost to Denver.ONE-YEAR DEAL FOR BELL The Pittsburgh Steelers and the star running back Le’Veon Bell failed to reach an agreement on a long-term contract, meaning Bell will play on a one-year tender. Bell will make $12.1 million this season, the average of the five highest-paid running backs in the league.Italy provided a brief distraction from Chinese domination of diving at the world championships in Budapest when Giorgio Minisini and Manila Flamini claimed a gold medal in synchronized swimming.Shi Tingmao and Chang Yani won China’s ninth straight world title in women’s three-meter springboard synchronized diving, then Chen Aisen and Yang Hao delivered China’s fifth gold of the championships in the men’s 10-meter platform.Minisini and Flamini won the mixed duet technical title, edging Mikhaela Kalancha and Aleksandr Maltsev of Russia by just 0.034 of a point.In men’s water polo, Canada came from four goals down to tie Montenegro, 8-8, and Croatia beat the United States, 12-7.The Boston Celtics announced that they signed Paul Pierce to a contract so the 10-time All-Star could retire with the team. Pierce helped bring a championship in 2008 as part the Big Three of Kevin Garnett and Ray Allen.Drafted by Boston as the 10th overall pick in 1998, Pierce started a 15-season run that is behind only John Havlicek’s 16 seasons for the most played in a Celtics uniform. Pierce, 39, is Boston’s second-best career scorer with 24,021 points, trailing only Havlicek.Advertisement