By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSJULY 16, 2017
To fortify a bullpen that has squandered more than a third of its save chances, the Washington Nationals acquired relievers Ryan Madson and Sean Doolittle from the Oakland Athletics on Sunday for the right-hander Blake Treinen and the prospects Jesus Luzardo, a left-hander, and Sheldon Neuse, an infielder.Madson, a 36-year-old right-hander, has a 2.06 E.R.A. and is seventh among relievers in hits plus walks per inning, at 0.79. Doolittle is a 30-year-old left-hander who has held left-handed batters hitless in 23 at-bats this year, with 12 strikeouts and no walks.AROUND THE MAJORS Jose Quintana, acquired by the Chicago Cubs last week in a trade with the White Sox, struck out a season-high 12 while allowing three hits and no walks in seven innings in an 8-0 victory over the host Baltimore Orioles.  Daniel Murphy hit two of Washington’s five home runs to lead the Nationals to a 14-4 win at Cincinnati.  Justin Turner homered and singled, raising his batting average to .374 and helping the Los Angeles Dodgers extend their winning streak to nine games with a 3-2 victory at Miami. Five Los Angeles pitchers combined for 16 strikeouts with no walks.  Cleveland starter Trevor Bauer got just two outs in a four-run first inning as the Athletics beat the Indians, 7-3, in Oakland, Calif.Chris Froome fought back from a bike breakdown to hang onto the race leader’s yellow jersey on the tricky Stage 15 of the Tour de France, won by Bauke Mollema with a courageous solo breakaway.AdvertisementThe back wheel of Froome’s bike broke just as the AG2R team of his close rival Romain Bardet was picking up the pace before the last big climb of the day, a five-mile slog up the Col de Peyra Taillade. But Froome, a three-time Tour champion, worked furiously on the climb to reel in Bardet’s group. He now takes the jersey and an 18-second lead over Fabio Aru into Monday, a rest day.AdvertisementBryson DeChambeau overcame a four-stroke deficit to beat Patrick Rodgers by a stroke at the John Deere Classic for his first PGA Tour title and a spot in this week’s British Open. DeChambeau, 23, birdied four of the final six holes at TPC Deere Run in Silvis, Ill., for a six-under-par 65 and an 18-under total of 266. Rodgers closed with a 70.COURSE RECORD AT SCOTTISH OPEN Rafa Cabrera Bello shot a course-record 64 at Dundonald Links in Irvine and then birdied the first hole of a playoff with Callum Shinkwin to win the Scottish Open for his first title in over five years.MCCARRON PREVAILS Scott McCarron shot a six-under 66 and took advantage of a collapse by the three-time defending champion Bernhard Langer to win the Constellation Senior Players Championship in Owings Mills, Md.Lewis Hamilton slashed Sebastian Vettel’s lead in the Formula One championship to 1 point by winning a record-tying fifth British Grand Prix.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Vettel was in third place heading into the penultimate lap at Silverstone, England, but fell into seventh after his front left tire shredded. So did the 20-point lead he held over Hamilton going into the 10th round of the 20-race season.HAMLIN CAPTURES NASCAR RACE Denny Hamlin held off Kyle Larson over the final laps to win at New Hampshire Motor Speedway in Loudon, N.H., and send Joe Gibbs Racing to victory lane for the first time this season.Hamlin needed his 30th career Cup Series victory to secure a berth in Nascar’s version of the postseason and end a winless streak that stretched to last September at Richmond. Martin Truex Jr. was third.AMERICAN TAKES INDYCAR EVENT  Josef Newgarden raced to his second Toronto IndyCar title in three years, dominating on the streets surrounding Exhibition Place.AdvertisementNewgarden, an American, came out in front on Lap 25 after a crash by Tony Kanaan led to a caution. Newgarden maintained an advantage of over two seconds for most of the rest of the race. The win gave Team Penske its 193rd victory, the most of any team. Alexander Rossi was second.After his team’s recent scoring struggles, Liberty Coach Bill Laimbeer restored Bria Hartley to the starting lineup in place of Sugar Rodgers. The move worked.Hartley scored 15 points to help the host Liberty beat the short-handed Washington Mystics, 85-55. Rodgers came off the bench to add 14 points for the Liberty (9-9). The Mystics (11-9), who were missing their star, Elena Delle Donne, because of a right ankle injury, were led by Emma Meesseman’s 19 points.A version of this article appears in print on July 17, 2017, on Page D6 of the New York edition with the headline: Baseball; Nationals Trade for Two Oakland Relievers.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.