
TV Sports By                     
 RICHARD SANDOMIR
 
FEB. 8, 2016
With nine minutes left in Super Bowl 50, CBS’s Jim Nantz offered evidence that the game was anything but a golden evocation of the N.F.L.’s Big Game.Denver’s and Carolina’s offenses could not shake off the strengths of the opposing defenses, leaving viewers to wonder when either team would break loose.“So, it’s a game that’s featured 14 penalties, five sacks, five turnovers and, so far, only one offensive touchdown, and that was a thrilling 1-yard run,” Nantz said. Later, he added that the Panthers and the Broncos were a combined 4 for 25 on third downs.It became a game of greatly diminished expectations, especially about Denver’s offense, and Peyton Manning’s diminished skills as a passer. It did not make for a game bursting with life or producing a stirring broadcast. And whether it exceeds last year’s Super Bowl audience of 114 million (for a truly great game) might rely on whether Americans watched, in droves, in hopes of seeing Manning retire as a Super Bowl-winning quarterback, his second championship.AdvertisementLate in the fourth quarter, Nantz asked Phil Simms, an analyst, what he thought of Denver running on third-and-9. Simms said that he was not surprised and that it actually was the smart move.Advertisement“They’re watching the same game we are,” Simms said, adding that Denver was surmising that if it punted, Cam Newton and the Panthers would not be able to march down the field to score the go-ahead touchdown.Simms’s view was vindicated when Newton fumbled on the ensuing series and the Broncos scored, and added a 2-point conversion, to go up, 24-10.Manning was one of the main story lines heading into the game — the superstar-in-twilight who had adjusted his once-great passing game into a mastery of game management. He had been injured this season, missing six games, and few would have expected him to return to lead the Broncos to the Super Bowl, let alone guide them to victory.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.So while it has been clear that his throwing abilities have faded, CBS did not effectively illuminate that aspect of the story as it should have. The network could have used current technology to measure the speed of his passes (versus Newton’s) and archival video to compare his velocity and accuracy to his peak days with the Indianapolis Colts.An even tighter focus on Manning could have provided a more fascinating look at the oldest quarterback to start the Super Bowl. Two brief shots of Manning throwing passes showed more than a grimace, but pain, on his face. Was the effort of throwing as hard as he could — and sometimes producing nothing more than a wobbly effort — possibly that painful? With Simms in the booth, that would have been a path worth exploring.Similarly, CBS could have done far better to underscore how the Denver defense handled Newton, who entered as a superhero apparently able to do anything on the field, especially in the postseason. Where were the packages of two of Denver’s stars, Von Miller and DeMarcus Ware, and an insightful video analysis of how Denver shut down Carolina tight end Greg Olsen? Indeed, Denver’s defensive coordinator, Wade Phillips, deserved a greater focus on his strategy.Some other thoughts:■ CBS used a terrific graphic that could be an essential tool for the future. Near the end of the first half, it showed a 360-degree replay view of Jonathan Stewart leaping into the end zone for Carolina’s only touchdown, which had occurred earlier in the second quarter. Then it added a wrinkle that made it look as if Stewart had popped through a blue screen, breaking the plane of the goal line. A great effect — but it required a long time to show it.■ With a first-half story line of players changing shoes because of the slick turf, was anyone going to mention that Beyoncé seemed to have no trouble dancing on the grass in heels during the halftime show? (By the way, in the fourth quarter, the Mets announced that Beyoncé will be playing Citi Field June 7, giving her another chance to dance on stadium grass.)■ CBS made a poor decision to move to a full-screen graphic about Manning’s career with 11 seconds left — which meant leaving the celebratory scene where he was accepting congratulations. You simply can’t interrupt that tableau with statistics.Email: sandor@nytimes.com A version of this article appears in print on February 8, 2016, on Page D6 of the New York edition with the headline: Missing From the Big Picture, a Tighter Focus on Manning.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »