By KEVIN DRAPERDEC. 11, 2017
With television audiences for the N.F.L. getting smaller, the league’s new digital rights deal with Verizon Communications represents the latest challenge to the traditional media partnerships that for decades have served as the lifeblood for North America’s richest sports league.The league and Verizon announced Monday an extension to their mobile streaming agreement through 2022 that will give fans a series of options besides traditional television for watching their local teams, as well as games on Sunday, Monday and Thursday nights, even the playoffs and Super Bowl.The deal, which will cost Verizon more than $2 billion during the next five years, gives the telecommunications giant the rights to stream games across its variety of digital media brands, including Yahoo Sports, Complex and go90. In addition, fans no longer have to be Verizon customers to gain access to the games, which they can watch regardless of which company is their mobile provider.CBS, NBC, ESPN and Fox currently pay the NFL some $5 billion a year for the rights to televise those games. Those rights help those networks garner top fees from pay television distributors and help those distributors convince subscribers not to cut off their cable subscriptions.AdvertisementRick Cordella, executive vice president and general manager for digital media at NBC Sports, a unit of the pay television distributor Comcast, said the Verizon deal could help expand the reach for NBC’s advertisers, since fans watching the Verizon stream will see NBC’s inventory of ads.Advertisement“We are selling one audience, no matter where they watch our content,” Cordella said.Like previous agreements with Amazon, Twitter and Yahoo, the new Verizon agreement illustrates the N.F.L.’s proclivity to push the envelope to broaden its reach, especially among younger viewers, who may not have a pay television subscription, even if it means potentially angering its television partners as they approach the start of negotiations for new deals.In a statement announcing the deal, N.F.L. Commissioner Roger Goodell said the league was thrilled to get more deeply involved with digital distribution.“Live N.F.L. action directly on your mobile device — regardless of carrier — will give millions of fans additional ways to follow their favorite sport,” Goodell said.Hans Schroeder, an N.F.L. executive in charge of media, believes fans won’t choose to watch on their phones instead of their televisions, but instead will add to the television audience. “We think this is a very complementary way of growing, engaging and reaching younger fans that will ultimately become longer term viewers,” he said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Since 2010, Verizon mobile customers have been able to stream N.F.L. games for free through the N.F.L. Mobile app.The deal potentially allows Verizon, and the N.F.L., to reach more people, but also does away with what made the previous agreements so lucrative for Verizon: Exclusivity. When signing an extension of the mobile agreement in 2013, Verizon executives said that the number of subscribers the N.F.L. Mobile app helped retain, or add, contributed to the company’s decision to re-sign.Now Sprint, AT&T and T-Mobile customers will also be allowed to stream N.F.L. games, as long as they go to Verizon-owned apps or websites with their mobile phones.Over the past few years, Verizon has acquired a spate of digital media companies, including paying more than $9 billion combined to buy AOL and Yahoo, a sign of the company’s growing ambitions at becoming a digital media powerhouse able to challenge the likes of Google and Facebook for advertising dollars.AdvertisementThere are some protections for traditional broadcast partners built into the agreement, which does not extend to streaming on tablets or through smart televisions.For the N.F.L., the deal is surely a short-term win. Verizon is paying nearly double the amount of money each year and doesn’t retain exclusivity over the games, though they are adding a number of sponsorship benefits. But long term it seems certain to allow for further erosion of pay television subscriptions, and it will challenge the N.F.L.’s partners in legacy media, who are already facing two straight years of declining ratings.The N.F.L.’s broadcast agreements all expire after the 2022 season. With ratings trending downward and digital rights giants, such as Netflix, Facebook, Amazon and Google, so far balking at paying hundreds of millions, or billions, for sports rights, the N.F.L. could soon be in for a round of tense negotiations.Follow Kevin Draper on Twitter: @kevinmdraper.A version of this article appears in print on December 12, 2017, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: N.F.L. and Verizon Agree to a $2 Billion Mobile Streaming Deal.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.