By REBECCA R. RUIZDEC. 8, 2017
LAUSANNE, Switzerland — Various sports officials and antidoping investigators have drawn far-reaching conclusions based on the claims made by Grigory Rodchenkov, Russia’s former top sports chemist.Rodchenkov described dark-of-night cheating at the 2014 Sochi Olympics and systematic doping schemes stretching across several years. All of that was corroborated sufficiently, Olympic officials ruled this week, to justify levying an unprecedented penalty for doping — the barring of  Russia from the 2018 Winter Games.But one of Rodchenkov’s indirect allegations — sourced to a memo he wrote to the attention of Russia’s sports minister in 2015 — resulted in a cloud of suspicion around a fellow chemist, Martial Saugy of Switzerland, for which Rodchenkov is now apologizing.Following early whistle-blower accounts about Russia’s state-sponsored cheating, Rodchenkov suggested in an internal report to Russia’s sports ministry that Saugy was a sympathetic figure suited to help their national lab wallpaper over its problems.AdvertisementThat memo was obtained in 2015 by investigators who were additionally troubled by Saugy’s apparent destruction of 67 doping samples from Russian athletes that had been stored in his laboratory. Saugy has said he acted routinely in disposing them and detailed his frustration in an open letter to regulators early this year, arguing he had been fully cooperative.AdvertisementSaugy has maintained he had no part in covering up Russian doping violations at the Sochi Olympics, where he worked as a paid lab consultant, or in the preceding years, when he assisted in global antidoping work focused on Russian athletes and conducted tests in the Moscow lab that Rodchenkov led related to major competitions like the 2013 track and field world championships.Investigators for the World Anti-Doping Agency did not accept his explanations in their 2015 report. Earlier this year Saugy stepped down as head of the antidoping laboratory here in Lausanne — a central testing facility in the same city as the International Olympic Committee headquarters.“We concluded that we didn’t believe him,” said Richard Pound, who led the 2015 investigation and was the founding president of the World Anti-Doping Agency, the global regulator of drugs in sport. “But we didn’t have anywhere else to go with it. Rodchenkov was still director of the lab in Russia at the time, so he was not forthcoming with us at all."When asked through his lawyer last week about Saugy’s potential involvement in Russia’s schemes, Rodchenkov said investigators had been misled.“I owe Professor Saugy an apology,” Rodchenkov said. “Much speculation has been reported that he somehow helped me cover up doping in Russia. I certainly thought and hoped that he would be helpful to us — because I lied to him and convinced him that we were clean.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Rodchenkov said he had suggested Saugy would help because of the men’s friendship. Both were former runners with shared interests in chemistry and literature. They both liked the book “1984” by George Orwell, each said.“This was not because he was corrupt but because he believed in me,” Rodchenkov said of having implicated Saugy. “He is completely innocent.”In an interview in Lausanne on Friday, Saugy — who has also served as an antidoping adviser for the global governing bodies of track and field and soccer — said he was grateful.AdvertisementHe argued he had been vigilant in unearthing and reporting early clues to Russia’s schemes starting in 2007. “We revealed manipulations of samples in Russia prior to the Beijing Games,” he said of his lab, going on to cite a 2011 scientific paper he co-wrote. That paper examined thousands of blood samples collected from elite track and field athletes from 2001 to 2009: Russia stood out, with a higher number of suspicious samples — something he says he helped bring to regulators’ attention.Saugy said he had nothing to hide about his time spent working in the Moscow lab, or about the nature of his work in Sochi. “The collaboration of Lausanne with the Moscow lab was done always in a fully transparent way with the full support of IAAF, WADA and the I.O.C.,” Saugy said Friday, referring to track officials, regulators and the Olympic committee.Saugy came under previous suspicion in the United States in the case of Lance Armstrong. He worked as an antidoping adviser to cycling officials, and he was accused by American antidoping officials of having helped Armstrong beat drug tests, which he disputes. He says he simply delivered a scientific analysis of what constituted a drug violation versus what did not, noting what was not permissible under global sports rules.Pound said his 2015 investigation had not taken that part of Saugy’s past into account. His commission focused strictly on Russia’s systematic drug violations in track and field, he said.“I dedicated my whole life to fight against doping with the idea to have a cleaner sport,” Saugy said Friday. “I cannot believe that anybody thinks that I could be a cheater myself.”A version of this article appears in print on December 9, 2017, on Page D3 of the New York edition with the headline: Whistle-Blower Retracts Claim That Haunted Swiss Chemist.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.