By TYLER KEPNERMARCH 4, 2017
WEST PALM BEACH, Fla. — When the Mets’ Jacob deGrom struck out Houston Astros outfielder Josh Reddick in the first inning Saturday, he turned and faced the scoreboard at the Ballpark of the Palm Beaches. He liked what he saw: 97, as in miles per hour on his fastball. DeGrom’s old friend was back.DeGrom, 28, had surgery on Sept. 21 to reposition the ulnar nerve in his right elbow, on his pitching arm. The operation ended a frustrating season in which he had a solid E.R.A. (3.04) but a diminished fastball. He hoped to feel sharp in his spring training debut on Saturday, and he did, retiring all six batters he faced, with three strikeouts and a crisp fastball that consistently hit 96 m.p.h.“First outing off surgery, things went the right way,” deGrom said. “I was a little nervous. I get nervous before every start in the season, but not really that much in spring.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Facing the Astros’ everyday lineup, deGrom threw only fastballs in the first inning, getting a groundout, a strikeout and a pop-up. In the second, he sandwiched a flyout between two strikeouts. DeGrom said he had hit his spots with nearly every pitch and had fixed a mechanical flaw that was causing him to leave his pitches flat in the strike zone.AdvertisementThe trick, deGrom said, was to bring his arm down a bit when he took the ball from his glove, instead of taking it straight back, which was causing him to twist open too soon with his front side. By staying closed with his shoulder, he said, he could throw downhill again, with more power.“Last year it was all I had to get to 92,” he said. “I think it has to do with repeating my mechanics and getting back in line to where I need to be.”AdvertisementThe Mets won, 3-1, in their first game at the Palm Beaches park, which opened last month as the new spring home of the Astros and the Washington Nationals.A version of this article appears in print on March 5, 2017, on Page SP3 of the New York edition with the headline: Radar Gun Has deGrom Feeling Good.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.