By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSFEB. 3, 2017
Magic Johnson returned to the Los Angeles Lakers on Thursday as an adviser to the owner Jeanie Buss, possibly signaling a change in the power structure of the 16-time N.B.A. champion franchise.Johnson will assist Buss “in all areas of basketball and business,” according to the team’s news release.Buss’s brother, Jim, currently runs the Lakers’ basketball operations with General Manager Mitch Kupchak, but the Lakers are in the midst of their fourth consecutive losing season.The Lakers said that Johnson would report directly to Jeanie Buss, who has stayed out of basketball operations during her four years running the franchise after the death of her father, Jerry.AdvertisementSergio García carded a seven-under-par 65 for a one-shot lead over Felipe Aguilar and George Coetzee to open the Dubai Desert Classic in the United Arab Emirates.AdvertisementPlaying ahead of Tiger Woods, who posted a five-over 77, García made six birdies and an eagle before finally dropping a shot on the eighth hole, his 17th. Woods missed fairways and greens, and he needed 33 putts.Venus Williams lost, 6-3, 6-1, to Kristina Mladenovic in the St. Petersburg Ladies Trophy in Russia, Williams’s first loss since the Australian Open. Seeded fourth, Williams showed none of the spark that took her to the Australian Open final last weekend, failing to record a single winner in the opening set compared to 15 for her opponent.BROWN DENIES STRIKING EX-WIFE The former kicker Josh Brown admitted publicly to domestic violence for the first time but insisted that he had never struck his ex-wife.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“What I did was wrong, period,” Brown said on ABC’s “Good Morning America.” “Domestic violence is not just physical abuse. We’re talking intimidation and threats, the attempt to control, body language.”But Brown, who was cut by the Giants in October, said that he had never hit his former wife, Molly Brown, who has said she was physically abused by him more than 20 times. (AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE)Cameroon set up an Africa Cup of Nations final on Sunday against Egypt with a 2-0 win over Ghana in a semifinal in Franceville, Gabon. Michael Ngadeu scored the first goal in the 72nd minute, and Christian Bassogog rounded off a counterattack in injury time.COPA DEL REY Celta Vigo played to a scoreless draw at home against Alavés in the first leg of the semifinals. It was a lackluster match, with few scoring chances by either side under steady rain.AdvertisementThe National Women’s Hockey League, which drastically cut player salaries in November, has shortened its remaining schedule.Originally, the regular season was set to run until April 16, but the final regular-season games will now be played March 12. According to the N.W.H.L. website, the league champion will be decided in the playoffs from March 17 to 19. All four teams — the defending champion Boston Pride, the Buffalo Beauts, the Connecticut Whale and the New York Riveters — will qualify for the single-elimination postseason.The league’s original schedule included a break for the International Ice Hockey Federation World Championships from March 31 to April 7. This season’s contracts included a clause that would have allowed players not to return to the league after the championships.  SETH BERKMANThe Cardinals announced a five-year deal with the right-handed pitcher Carlos Martinez that includes two club options that could keep him in St. Louis through the 2023 season. Martinez, 25, was 16-9 with a 3.04 E.R.A. in 31 starts last season.PUNCHLESS CATCHER LOSES IN ARBITRATION Catcher Caleb Joseph lost his salary arbitration case with the Baltimore Orioles after setting major league records for most at-bats and plate appearances in a season with no R.B.I.Joseph was awarded the team’s $700,000 offer rather than his $1 million request. He hit .174 last year with three doubles in 132 at-bats.A version of this article appears in print on February 3, 2017, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Pro Basketball; Magic Johnson Rejoins Lakers as Adviser to the Owner.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.