AdvertisementSupported bySports of The TimesBy William C. RhodenFOXBOROUGH, Mass. — After the Patriots’ 27-20 victory Saturday over the previously scorching Kansas City Chiefs, New England’s coach, Bill Belichick, was asked how he felt about sharing a piece of football history: The Patriots, like the Oakland Raiders from 1973 to 1977, were headed to their fifth consecutive A.F.C. championship game.Belichick, a coach who has become famous for giving the news media nothing, actually gave a lot, defining the mentality that has made New England one of the most successful professional franchises in any sport.He and quarterback Tom Brady are this generation’s Vince Lombardi and Bart Starr of the Green Bay Packers, or Paul Brown and Otto Graham of the Cleveland Browns.“This is a hard place to play,” said Belichick, who went on to mention the organized team activities in the spring, the training camps, the meetings, the more than 100 practices during the season, the walk-throughs.The grind.“These guys come in here every day, their pencils are sharpened, they’re sitting right there in those seats, they’re ready to go, they’re attentive, they want to learn, they want to know how to get better, they want to compete, and they just do that on a daily basis,” Belichick said. “That’s been week after week and year after year.”Belichick then went down his roster, offering praise: Brady, Edelman, Gronkowski, Vollmer, Chung, McCourty, Hightower. He cited Chandler Jones, a Pro Bowl defensive end who had created off-the-field drama last week when reports suggested he had had a bad reaction to synthetic marijuana.A reporter asked whether Belichick had considered sending Jones a message by not starting him against the Chiefs.A message? What kind of message?Winning is the only message Belichick is interested in.“It’s what we do,” he said. “It’s what we’re here for, is to win.”Jones started and played a great game.“It’s a tough league,” Belichick said. “It’s tough to go out and play good every week, especially when you’ve got a target. Everybody is trying to knock us off, as they should be, and we’ve just got to stand up and compete every week. The players do a great job here; they really do. I’m really fortunate to have that group.”You can argue that many teams and coaches pay the same attention to detail, put in the same hours without the reward of winning.Is it luck in New England? Is it the nature of the players the Patriots bring in or how those players dedicate themselves to a higher level of preparation and performance?Back in October, in Foxborough, the Jets’ Brandon Marshall dropped a tough but catchable pass in the end zone. On the next drive, Danny Amendola made a spectacular catch in the end zone for a Patriots touchdown.I think about the last Super Bowl, when Seattle was on the New England 1-yard line with a chance to win. Russell Wilson threw an interception; Brady most likely would have thrown a touchdown pass. Seahawks Coach Pete Carroll made the wrong call; Belichick made the right one.On Saturday night, Belichick praised his offensive coordinator, Josh McDaniels, for being nearly prophetic as he called plays against Kansas City.“I thought he really had everything dialed in,” Belichick said. “Pretty much everything he called came out the way we thought it would. As we were breaking the huddle, we could already see we had what we wanted, and Tom and the offense executed it perfectly.”Contrast that with the Chiefs and their coach, Andy Reid, who bungled clock management at the end of the game. With more time to work with, Kansas City would have had a chance to kick off, stop the Patriots and then take over in better position to tie the game. Instead, an onside kick failed, and New England got the ball in Kansas City territory. Game, set, match — again.Kansas City quarterback Alex Smith acknowledged after the game that it “certainly would have been nice to get a score before the two-minute warning.” Smith said clock confusion “definitely hurt us there, not being able to get that off before the two-minute warning.”We are approaching the first anniversary of the deflated-football controversy triggered by the Indianapolis Colts.The league investigated and issued a report that concluded there was a strong likelihood that Brady knew footballs were being tampered with. A judge subsequently ruled not that Brady was innocent but that the N.F.L. had overstepped its authority in suspending him.The underinflated footballs, like the videotaping of an opponent’s defensive signals, are merely symbols of the limits that an organization and its highly driven coach and players are willing to test in order to achieve success.Belichick’s unassailable Hall of Fame résumé — and Brady’s — will certainly contain blemishes, but for the Patriots, no edge is too great or too small.No observers in their right football mind think Brady and Belichick have gotten where they are because of hidden cameras and deflated footballs. I certainly don’t, although Patriots fans will no doubt roll their eyes and wrap themselves tightly in the veil of persecution.I’m merely suggesting that fans embrace the totality of their team’s success.You could be a Cleveland Browns fan.Belichick was with Cleveland, and I believe the root of his current philosophy about winning, his obsession to win at all costs, evolved from his experience as the Browns’ coach — specifically, his being fired.The only time I have ever heard of anything remotely resembling vulnerability concerning Belichick was a story the great Jim Brown told me describing Belichick’s waning days in Cleveland.The Browns’ owner at the time, Art Modell, announced that he was moving the team to Baltimore after the season.“We were standing on the sidelines,” Brown recalled. “He was bewildered; I was bewildered. Bill said, ‘Well, I wonder what he’s going to do with me.’ I told Bill, ‘I don’t think we’re going to be dealing with him much more; I think this is a whole new move.’ And it was.”Belichick was dismissed months later, in February 1996.He went on to build an empire in Foxborough with Robert K. Kraft, the Patriots’ owner.Trust me: Millions of fans wish that Belichick and Brady were on their side.As Belichick said Saturday, “it’s what we do; it’s what we’re here for, is to win.”Email: wcr@nytimes.com Advertisement