AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressMELBOURNE, Australia — Martina Hingis and Sania Mirza maintained their perfect record in Grand Slam doubles finals, beating the Czech pair of Andrea Hlavackova and Lucie Hradecka, 7-6 (1), 6-3, at the Australian Open on Friday to extend their winning streak to 36 matches.Hingis, a three-time singles champion at Melbourne Park, and Mirza dominated the first-set tiebreaker preceded by eight service breaks, four by each team.Hingis and Mirza added to their Wimbledon and United States Open titles last year, and the pair also won at Brisbane and Sydney this month. They started playing together at Indian Wells in March of last year.Hingis is now a four-time doubles champion at the Australian Open. She won the singles titles here in 1997, 1998 and 1999.“Thank you to my partner, we’ve had an incredible year, we just keep going and going,” Mirza said. “She’s an amazing champion, but I’ve gotten to know her as a person and it’s a privilege to play with her.”Mirza, who won the 2009 Australian mixed doubles title with her fellow Indian Mahesh Bhupathi, could not extend her run in mixed doubles this year, losing with Ivan Dodig, 7-5, 7-6 (4), to Elena Vesnina and Bruno Soares. Vesnina and Soares will play Coco Vandeweghe and Horia Tecau in Sunday’s final.Hlavackova and Hradecka are now 2-3 in Grand Slam doubles finals. They won major doubles titles at the 2011 French Open and 2013 Untied States Open.Hingis appeared at a news conference without Mirza, who was playing the mixed semifinal.“I feel lonely without my partner,” Hingis said, smiling. “Our fairy tale continues. It’s amazing since winning Wimbledon. After that, we only lost two more matches. It keeps going.”Hingis’s doubles successes have not convinced her to make a return to singles, which she has not played in nearly 10 years. She came out of retirement to play doubles in 2013.“I’ve had this question for the last year,” Hingis, 35, said. “I always said no.”Hingis, who with Leander Paes lost to Mirza and Soares in the quarterfinals of mixed doubles, said deciding to play only doubles helped.“We’re really focused, that’s our strength, that we can practice together and we make each other better, even from the start when we played our first tournament in Indian Wells and Miami,” Hingis said.“There’s not that many people who can match her in the forehand rallies and me on the backhand side and at the net. That’s what we try to do every match.”Advertisement