By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSJAN. 28, 2016
The W.N.B.A., set to begin its 20th season in May, is changing its playoff format.The league announced Thursday that the top eight teams based on record, regardless of conference, will qualify for the postseason, beginning this year.Since the W.N.B.A. expanded its playoffs to eight teams in 2000, the best four teams from the Eastern and Western Conferences made the postseason.The league is also increasing the postseason to four rounds. The top two seeds receive a bye to the semifinals, which will be a best-of-five series, instead of best-of-three. The opening two rounds will be single-elimination games. The W.N.B.A. finals will remain a best-of-five series.This is not the first time the league has had one-game playoffs. The inaugural season in 1997, the semifinals and finals were one game each. In 1999, the conference semifinals were single games.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“First and foremost, the new postseason format provides an enhanced opportunity to showcase the best teams in the W.N.B.A. Finals,” said Mark Tatum, N.B.A. deputy commissioner, who is overseeing the W.N.B.A. on an interim basis.AdvertisementThe ESPN networks also will air every postseason game, which, Tatum said, “increased exposure and increased excitement.”AdvertisementThe teams will be reseeded after each postseason round.The W.N.B.A. had a tight postseason this past year with five of the seven series going the distance. Now with the opening-round games being elimination contests, it should create more excitement.“There’s a sense of urgency that the players and fans and TV will have,” Washington Mystics Coach Mike Thibault said. “It adds a little more spice to it.”Even with the change in the postseason, the W.N.B.A. is keeping its conference designations. The league is also altering its schedule to make it more balanced. Teams will play each other three times with one matchup occurring four times.The W.N.B.A. will tip off its 20th season on May 14. The league will take a monthlong break for the Rio Olympics, starting on July 23.A version of this article appears in print on January 29, 2016, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Sports Briefing | Pro Basketball; W.N.B.A. Alters Playoffs.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.