By RICHARD SANDOMIRFEB. 2, 2016
Fox Sports has added the English-language rights to 25 games involving Mexico’s national team to its arsenal of soccer properties.Through an agreement that will be announced Wednesday, Fox Sports 1 will televise 25 home games — friendlies and World Cup qualifiers — of the team called El Tri starting this year and continuing until the 2018 World Cup in Russia. Not all the home games will be played in Mexico, however; as part of an agreement with Major League Soccer’s marketing arm, Mexico has in recent years played an increasing number of its games in United States cities like Dallas and Los Angeles.The first game of the new Fox partnership will be a friendly on Feb. 10 against Senegal at Marlins Park in Miami. Two of Mexico’s World Cup qualifiers this year, against Canada and Honduras, also are part of the new deal.Fox acquired the games from Univision Deportes for an undisclosed sum.For Fox, the contract represents another way to reach Mexican-born and second- and third-generation Mexican-Americans who follow the national team. Since Fox already owns the rights to several other important events featuring Mexico, the deal effectively makes Fox the English-language home of the team for the foreseeable future.Advertisement“We get to tell the narrative of the Mexican national team through our tournaments such as Copa América Centenario this summer, and it is going to be the representative of the Concacaf region in the Confederations Cup in 2017,” David Nathanson, the head of business operations for Fox Sports, said in a joint telephone interview with Juan Carlos Rodriguez, the president of Univision Deportes. “This allows us to complete the story of arguably the team with the second-largest fan base in the United States.”AdvertisementIf the United States and Mexico advance as expected to the final round of regional World Cup qualifying, their showcase game in Mexico City will be carried by Fox Sports 1.“El Tri is the jewel in the crown,” Rodriguez said. “In partnership with Fox, a huge, English-dominant network, we can help grow the property.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Mexican national team has shown the ability to generate large audiences. During the 2014 World Cup, the team’s two group stage games on ESPN averaged 3.1 million viewers, and a group stage match on ESPN2 averaged 1.9 million. In the round of 16, the Mexico-Netherlands match generated 5.7 million viewers.And the two most-watched United States national team games on Fox Sports 1 — excluding the Gold Cup — have been against Mexico.“Without question, the biggest rivalry in our region is between Mexico and the U.S. and has been for decades,” Nathanson said. “It crosses all languages and all sorts of soccer fans.”The three-year deal will feature 10 Mexican national team games this year and next year and five in 2018, when Fox will also carry the World Cup.“It’s our job, not only to showcase the most exciting competitions in the sport but to tell the story from broadcast to broadcast so our audience can follow the Mexican team,” Nathanson said.In addition to the men’s and women’s World Cups through 2026, Fox also owns the rights to the Copa América Centenario, a special edition of the South American championship to be played in the United States in June; UEFA’s Champions League and Europa League; the F.A. Cup in England; Germany’s Bundesliga; Major League Soccer; Concacaf’s Champions League and Gold Cup; and the Scottish Premier League. It also shares a package of United States national team games with ESPN.A version of this article appears in print on February 3, 2016, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: Fox Adds the Mexican National Team to Its Soccer Stable.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.