AdvertisementSupported byOn TennisBy Christopher ClareyPARIS — On Sunday before the French Open men’s final, if all goes according to plan, Jim Courier will step back in time and onto the red clay with his 1-year-old son, Kellan.It has been 25 years since Courier — white ball cap and big forehand in place — beat his fellow Bollettieri Academy alumnus Andre Agassi to win the title at Roland Garros. It has also been 25 years since two American men squared off for the biggest prize in clay-court tennis: a high-water mark that is all the more remarkable for the Grand Slam singles drought that American men’s tennis continues to experience.“Those were good days,” Courier said. “These are good days, too, just not as much for Americans.”In 1991, the French Open’s main court had not yet been named for Philippe Chatrier, who was then still the president of the French Tennis Federation. The temple of terre battue was then simply called Le Court Central.But there was nothing straightforward about Courier’s run to his first major title. He was close to elimination in the third round against the big-hitting, sleepy-eyed Swede Magnus Larsson before rallying to win in five sets.“I’ll never forget; I was down, 2-4, 15-40, in the fourth set and serving,” Courier said. “I was getting ready to serve at the line, and a baby cried out in the stands. And I just looked up at the baby and said, ‘I know exactly how you feel.’ And it relaxed me for whatever reason, or maybe it tightened him up, but I ended up getting out of that game and out of that set and getting through that match. But I was at the exit. That was a virtual match point.”Courier then had to get past the No. 1 seed Stefan Edberg in the quarterfinals; the soon-to-be Wimbledon champ, Michael Stich, in the semifinals; and then Agassi and a shaky start in a five-set final that was full of subplots.At that stage, Courier was 20 years old and seeded ninth, the least celebrated of the four young Americans who would leave such a deep imprint on the game.Michael Chang had already won the French Open at age 17 in 1989. Pete Sampras had already won the United States Open at age 19 in 1990.Agassi, who had just turned 21, had already reached three Grand Slam semifinals and two finals and had made more headlines than the rest of the star-spangled group combined with his long hair (real in those days), flashy clothes, boxer-sized entourage and aversion to Wimbledon and its sartorial restrictions.“I always thought there could only be two poles, but those guys made me realize that there could actually be four,” said Todd Martin, the thoughtful American player who is now chief executive of the International Tennis Hall of Fame. “They were all so different at the time.”Bouncing off one another like free electrons, Sampras, Agassi, Courier and Chang — an American Big Four — would ride herd over men’s tennis for much of the 1990s.But that spring in Paris in 1991 belonged to Courier. Or, to be more precise, to Courier and his team, which included the coaches José Higueras and Brad Stine.Higueras, the former Spanish star who was at his best on clay, had been critical to Chang’s improbable run to the Roland Garros title in 1989.“I certainly didn’t expect to win; I’d never been past the fourth round of a major until that tournament, so it was a big leap,” Courier said. “Even getting to the semifinals was a big leap. It was a real learning process, and I was lucky to have someone in Joe who had steered a novice through those pearly gates a couple years earlier, so that was massive to have on my side.”Courier and Agassi had once shared a condominium at the Bollettieri Tennis Academy, the Darwinian tennis boot camp in Bradenton, Fla., started by Nick Bollettieri that made or cracked so many talented young players.“We survived, and lived to tell the tale,” Courier said.He and Agassi were both on scholarships. Agassi, a prodigy from Las Vegas, had been sent there against his will. But Courier, from Dade City, Fla., saw the place as a potential golden ticket.They shared that suite in 1985 during Courier’s first semester at the academy, with Courier sleeping in a bunk room with three other campers and Agassi sleeping in another bunk room with three other campers.“So eight kids in a condo with a common area,” Courier said. “There was a little clique of Las Vegas guys that he was in with, so he was challenging. They were ganging up on everybody who wasn’t from Vegas. It was high school, and there were a lot of egos and posturing and a lot of lashing out for people like Andre who didn’t want to be there, which was interesting for someone like me to see who did want to be there.”Agassi was brutally honest about this period in his life in his autobiography “Open.”“Should have kicked him out a hundred times,” Bollettieri said in a recent interview.But Courier makes it clear that he was no angel, either. “I am not sainting myself by any means,” he said. “I’m sure I gave as good as I got to a lot of people, including trying to give back to Andre. But I don’t think my wit was ever quite as quick as his.”The underlying tension had taken on a different dimension when Courier beat Agassi in the third round of the 1989 French Open and Bollettieri, whom Courier viewed as a mentor, sat in Agassi’s camp during the match and made his allegiances clear. Courier was hurt.“There was just a lot of confusion for a young, naïve athlete,” said Courier, who added that he had eventually realized and accepted that Bollettieri was making a simple and sound business decision by supporting the marketable Agassi.“That was an eye-opener, and we obviously have since rectified that a long time ago,” said Courier, who eventually supported Bollettieri’s successful candidacy for the International Tennis Hall of Fame.The final in 1991 still had an edge, and though Agassi started strong and was up a set and a break, the match turned — like so many big Grand Slam and French Open matches through the years — on a rain delay. During the break, Higueras advised Courier to move back on service returns and make the match more of a grinding, physical test. He did so and went on to win, 3-6, 6-4, 2-6, 6-1, 6-4.“I don’t think I felt resentment,” Courier said of Agassi. “I think I felt motivation to try to get my piece of the pie, too. Andre was awesome for our generation. He blazed the trail. He showed us it could be done very early by getting on tour at 15 or 16 years old. That opened up my eyes, and I’m pretty sure that opened Pete and Michael’s eyes, too, because we all had played juniors against him.”They would all eventually be Grand Slam champions, too, with Agassi breaking through to win Wimbledon of all tournaments in 1992. He, Courier and Sampras would all hold the No. 1 ranking; Chang peaked at No. 2.Courier went on to defend his title at the 1992 French Open, beating Agassi along the way, again. But they are good friends at this stage of their lives, not rivals — family men and fathers, too.And so on Sunday, Courier, who is in Paris commenting for British and American television, planned to walk back onto the clay with his young son and mark the passage of time. Just as he did earlier this year at the Australian Open, where he also won two titles.“We just had the court to ourselves for a few minutes, and I had a picture with him,” Courier said. “Because he’s a baby, and just to have that for the record, it’s kind of cool.”Advertisement