By TIM CASEYJUNE 3, 2016
GALLOWAY TOWNSHIP, N.J. — Teachers at San Marino High School in Southern California allowed Elizabeth Wang to finish her sophomore year a week earlier than her classmates. Wang had a compelling reason for the request: She was scheduled to compete in her first L.P.G.A. tournament.With the event approaching, Wang had not played as many rounds or practiced as often as she normally does. She was too busy finishing her homework assignments and studying for her final exams.Still, Wang, who turned 16 last week, did not display any outward signs of nervousness at the ShopRite L.P.G.A. Classic at the Stockton Seaview Hotel and Golf Club. In Friday’s first round, she birdied her first two holes and her last two holes en route to a two-over-par 73.Wang received an exemption into this weekend’s tournament, near Atlantic City, for winning the Junior P.G.A. Championship last August. On Friday, she played in a threesome with the L.P.G.A. Tour veterans Candy Hannemann, 35, and Michelle McGann, 46, who turned professional 11 years before Wang was born.AdvertisementWang, one of two amateurs in the 142-woman field, had plenty of family support. Her father, Peter, served as her caddie. Her mother, Patricia, was also in town, as was her 7-year-old sister, Elaina, and her mother’s parents, who flew in from their home in Shanghai.AdvertisementGolf has become a major part of the family’s life, but that was never the plan when Wang’s parents introduced her to the sport when she was 6. None of the Wangs had played golf or knew much about the game until Elizabeth began competing.Back then, Wang’s parents simply wanted her to try any sport. Patricia and Peter Wang, who grew up in China and came to the United States for college, always told her that academics were most important. Still, they thought getting involved in athletics would help her physically and socially. Wang decided to try golf because the family’s home in Parker, Colo., was next to the Black Bear Golf Club.“Whenever I got bored staring at books all day, I just looked out the window and saw people playing golf,” she said.During Wang’s first junior tournament, two weeks before her seventh birthday, she made a hole in one on a 112-yard, par-3 hole using a driver.“That was a great motivator,” Wang said.Soon, the head professional and manager at Black Bear allowed Wang to use the putting green and driving range even though the family did not belong to the club. She was eventually permitted to play on the 18-hole course free of charge.“It was really a privilege,” Patricia Wang said. “It gave her a lot of motivation to play even harder and practice even harder.”Wang was a fast learner. She was the top United States finisher and tied for third over all in the Callaway Golf junior world championship in July 2008, a little more than two years after she started playing.AdvertisementWang’s parents also became involved in their daughter’s passion. They began learning the rules of golf and bought her books by Annika Sorenstam and Tiger Woods. In 2010, the Wangs moved to San Marino because they wanted Elizabeth to be able to play golf year round.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.For the past few years, Peter Wang has cut back on his work as an electronics engineer, and he travels with Elizabeth to all her tournaments. Patricia Wang continues to work as a pharmacy manager to help pay for the steep travel costs, lessons and other golf-related expenses.Wang has had several coaches since arriving in California. Recently, she has worked with Vic Wilk, an instructor in Las Vegas, more than 250 miles from San Marino. Her parents typically drive her there one or two Sundays each month, arriving early in the morning and leaving in the late afternoon.College coaches have already reached out to Wilk and to Wyeth Collo, her high school coach and biology teacher. Wang, who earns mostly A’s in her classes, has been encouraged by her parents to attend college and earn a degree before turning professional.“She’s doing it right, I think,” Wilk said. “She’s wanting to really get the academics going as well. I keep trying to push that on her. I say, ‘You know, it’s a tough road going all the way to the pro tour, and there’s no guarantees even if you’re a can’t-miss kind of a kid and just keep working hard.’“Our goal is to work hard for her to get a nice education out of it at one of the top schools.”After this weekend, Wang plans on competing in several amateur tournaments this summer. She also hopes to qualify for the United States Women’s Amateur for the second consecutive year. She made the round of 16 last August.Even before she teed off Friday afternoon, it was a memorable week for Wang, who arrived in New Jersey last Saturday. She met several of her L.P.G.A. Tour idols, including Stacy Lewis and Natalie Gulbis. She also played nine holes with Alison Lee, 21, the youngest member of last year’s United States team.Wang has focused all week on preparing for the event and has not had a chance to explore much of the area, although her mother promised she would take her to New York for the first time early next week.“I’m holding her to it,” Wang said.A version of this article appears in print on June 5, 2016, on Page SP13 of the New York edition with the headline: A High Schooler’s Latest Test: Par.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.