
On Tennis By                     
 CHRISTOPHER CLAREY
 
JUNE 3, 2016
PARIS — Here he is again on the red clay. For the fourth time in five years, Novak Djokovic is just one victory from completing his collection of Grand Slam singles trophies.He put himself back in position to dream big with a complete and commanding 6-2, 6-1, 6-4 victory over the next-generation threat Dominic Thiem in the French Open semifinals Friday.“He doesn’t give you any presents,” said Thiem, a young man on a roll this season, still looking a bit shellshocked an hour after the drubbing.Djokovic, who has been edgy of late, can certainly be more generous, but he was in top form Friday, snuffing out threats and hope in all areas of the court, above all the corners, his traditional hunting ground.Advertisement“I did not start this tournament like I wanted, but today I played my best match,” Djokovic said during his on-court remarks in his fast-improving French.AdvertisementOn Sunday, the top-seeded Djokovic will now face No. 2 Andy Murray in what seems an appropriately rigorous final exam as Djokovic tries to finish off his 12-year Roland Garros apprenticeship.A final versus Rafael Nadal, the nine-time French Open champion who turned 30 on Friday, would have been more symbolic, but Nadal is out with a wrist injury.Murray, long at his best on faster surfaces, is the only man other than Roger Federer to have beaten Djokovic more than once in the past two seasons. He also has matured into a true clay-court player and has won 11 straight matches on the surface, including a victory over Djokovic in the Rome final last month.Murray has already made tennis history of his own in this waterlogged tournament, becoming the first British man since Bunny Austin in 1937 to reach the singles final at Roland Garros.Murray got there with one of his finer performances: a 6-4, 6-2, 4-6, 6-2 semifinal victory over Stan Wawrinka, the No. 3 seed and defending champion.Murray, who was pushed to five sets in the first round and second round, said he needed time to adjust to the slower conditions in Paris this year, and he made the unusual decision to alter the string tension in his rackets to improve his feel.He was often masterful against Wawrinka, and he will need much more of the same Sunday if he is to keep Djokovic’s story arc at bay.Advertisement“I was really impressed today; it’s the best I’ve seen Andy play on clay,” said Paul Annacone, Federer’s former coach and a Tennis Channel analyst. “I think Andy has the variation that can cause problems for Novak, and we saw it a little bit in Rome. Andy can attack Novak’s second serve. Andy can use low, short slices to bring Novak forward. Andy can go strong down the line with his two-handed backhand. Those are a few things that are really important to be able to do against Novak, because nobody has ever defended the baseline better than him.“For me, it’s the balance of how well Andy protects his own second serve and how well he creates imbalance in the rallies for Novak early in the match. If they play straightforward percentage tennis, two-hander to two-hander, crosscourt forehand to crosscourt forehand, Novak will win that match nine and a half times out of 10 over best-of-five sets.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Murray’s ability to take well-calculated risks and go for more than usual with his forehand should also be critical. He did that well in Rome, and he pushed Djokovic hard at the French Open last year before losing in the fifth set of a semifinal contested over two days. It was left to Wawrinka to stop Djokovic short of the only Grand Slam title he lacks, ambushing him with a free-swinging performance in the final.The French Open remains Djokovic’s stumbling block. He lost to Nadal in the 2012 and 2014 finals and has lost four times in the semifinals. He now ranks fourth on the men’s list for career victories at Roland Garros with 54. Nobody else in that elite group has failed to win the title.Will it be an injustice if he never does it?“We can talk about that in five years,” said Boris Becker, one of Djokovic’s coaches. “At the moment, we are intent on winning a few.”Djokovic is not only trying to join the elite club of seven men who have won all four Grand Slam singles titles. He is also trying to complete a so-called Djoker Slam by winning his fourth major in a row.But Murray is a hungry 29-year-old, too. This will be the first time the No. 1 and No. 2 men will meet in the final of a Grand Slam tournament that neither has won since the 1984 French Open, when Ivan Lendl rallied to beat John McEnroe.“There is a lot riding on the match for both of us,” Murray said. “We have had some really big battles in the Slams before on all the other surfaces. I’m sure it will be the same again on Sunday.”AdvertisementDjokovic leads, 4-2, in their Grand Slam finals and beat Murray to win the Australian Open in January. He dominates their overall head-to-head matches, having won 23 of their 33. But Murray — muttering to himself, shouting at himself, pushing himself — has managed to recreate something closer to a rivalry of late by winning two of the past six.He is a curmudgeonly perfectionist in a sport where perfection is unattainable. But he clearly cannot waste too much nervous or negative energy on things other than dealing with Djokovic.“Keeping his composure gives Andy his best chance, but he is so passionate and emotionally driven that he can’t be a total stoic,” Annacone said. “So he has to figure out how to manage it so it’s not a 15-minute running dialogue.”Murray’s 6-3, 6-3 victory in Rome came in a best-of-three-set format, not the best-of-five format in which Djokovic is at his elastic, rally-extending best. It also came with Djokovic weary in mind and body after a grueling week of back-to-back matches against the likes of Nadal and Kei Nishikori.Djokovic could be excused for feeling the same way in Paris after having to play for four straight days because of rain delays. But he did not have to compete for particularly long on any of those days. Nor has he been worn out by heat (it has been sweater and scarf weather in Paris), and he has long since proved that he is as good at recovering as he is at counterpunching.Thiem, seven years younger than Djokovic at age 22, had no answers. Djokovic was irresistible from the start, expertly mixing drop shots and forays to the net, returning and defending with trademark efficiency and making unforced errors very rarely. Thiem felt obliged to take big risk after big risk. Too few of them paid off.Seeded 13th, Thiem will break into the top 10 next week, at No. 7. But prime Djokovic remains a cut above. There are no weaknesses to exploit: He was even making overheads Friday in front of an enthusiastic crowd on Suzanne Lenglen Court, which was filled with Serbian banners and French fans happy to get such a bargain.With this week’s rain forcing French Open organizers to play the women’s and men’s semifinals on Friday, Djokovic and Thiem were bumped to Lenglen, the tournament’s second-largest show court, with Murray and Wawrinka on center stage on Philippe Chatrier Court.Fans with grounds passes — some purchased at only 10 euros — thus got the rare opportunity to see the reigning No. 1, who could very soon be a French Open champion, too.A version of this article appears in print on June 4, 2016, on Page D8 of the New York edition with the headline: With Elusive Title in View, a Final Hurdle.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »