By DAVID WALDSTEINJUNE 3, 2016
PARIS — A hobbled Kiki Bertens stood a few feet behind the baseline and watched Serena Williams carve out the underside of a tennis ball and drop it gently over the net, where it settled into Bertens’s side of the court.It was midway through the first set, and Bertens had been matching Williams, the defending champion and No. 1 player in the world, point for point in their semifinal match. But Bertens was slowed by a strained left calf, and Williams keyed in on it with merciless intent.Trailing, 2-4, Williams needed something to alter the course of the match, and the drop shot was the solution. First, she pushed Bertens back behind the baseline with powerful strokes, and then deftly sliced numerous balls into the forecourt, many with her backhand, where Bertens was unable to retrieve them. On a few occasions, Bertens could not even give chase.“I had some problems with it,” said Bertens, who came into the tournament ranked 58th. “I think it was really smart from Serena to hit the drop shots.”AdvertisementAs strong and overpowering as Williams can be, she is also one of the savviest players on tour, a combination that has led her to 21 Grand Slam singles championships.AdvertisementThat mixture of intellect, talent and desire is now Garbiñe Muguruza’s problem to solve in the French Open final.On Friday, Williams ultimately overcame some sluggishness of her own and a valiant effort by Bertens, winning, 7-6 (7), 6-4, for a place in her 27th Grand Slam tournament final. There, she will play Muguruza, the No. 4 seed who brushed aside No. 21 Samantha Stosur, 6-2, 6-4, on Suzanne Lenglen Court.“I’ll try and control my emotions,” Muguruza said of her final against Williams, “and I hope I can win this title. Why not?”The last time they met was in the 2015 Wimbledon final, which Williams won in routine fashion, 6-4, 6-4. That was the last major tournament Williams won. But a victory over Muguruza on Saturday would give Williams 22, equaling the mark set by Steffi Graf for the most Grand Slam singles titles in the Open era. Margaret Court holds the overall record with 24.Williams was asked what it would mean to her to reach 22, and how the wait — after losing in the semifinals of the United States Open and the final of the Australian Open — compared to her eight-month wait to get to 18 to tie Chris Evert and Martina Navratilova.Williams played down the number 22, while also noting the remarkable achievement of 18, with the same deftness as she hit her drop shots.“If I get there, it will be great,” she said. “I guess you can say it took me a while to get to 18, considering, you know, I’m the only one on tour that had 18.”AdvertisementWilliams and Muguruza have played four times, all in majors, and Muguruza won only once. But it was a significant one. It happened in the second round at Roland Garros in 2014 — part of that eight-month wait to get to 18.Williams has pointed to that 6-2, 6-2 loss as a turning point in the latter stages of her career. After the defeat to Muguruza, Williams began working with her current coach, Patrick Mouratoglou, and won four of the next five Grand Slam tournaments.“I don’t really want to elaborate, but it was a really unbelievable lesson for me,” she said. “It propelled me to many, many, many wins after that.”What could determine the outcome of Saturday’s match is how each player likes to assert herself on court. As Mouratoglou says, it is almost always up to Williams whether she wins or loses. But Muguruza is an aggressive player, and she, too, feels as if she will either win or lose the match depending on how well she strikes the ball and how well she can pinpoint her placement.She may even elect to take a page from Williams’s tactics against Bertens and force the No. 1 seed to run because Williams is also dealing with an injury.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.After her quarterfinal match against Yulia Putintseva, Williams had a lengthy treatment session. The former player Marion Bartoli, who is working for a French television network during the tournament, notified the world that Williams was dealing with an adductor strain in her upper leg.Based on her lack of fluid movement in her past two matches, it certainly appeared that something was limiting her. Williams acknowledged “some issues,” but she also indicated she had an issue with Bartoli being so chatty about it.“Yeah, I heard she said that,” Williams said. “I don’t know. I’ll have to ask her.”The cool temperatures and dense schedule of matches caused by the rain this week probably did not help either Williams or Bertens. Both wore long-sleeve tops, and Williams wore knee-length leggings.AdvertisementBertens, who had her left calf wrapped during her quarterfinal victory over Timea Bacsinszky, wore full leggings Friday, but at times, she had trouble moving.During a morning practice, she and her team debated whether to even play. But Bertens had never been past the fourth round of a major tournament before, and she did not want to look back with regret for not trying.“I’m really happy that I went on court,” she said. “I think I played a really good match, played really aggressive tennis, so I think I can be proud of myself.”Williams, of course, has much to be proud of, too. She has not been at her best in her past two matches and still found ways to advance past bothersome opponents. Then again, last year she did not play her best and managed to win.This time, she will have the added incentive — and pressure — of trying to win a 22nd title and catch Graf, one of the great practitioners of the slice backhand.Perhaps that was what Williams was doing with all those backhand drop shots Friday: a fitting tribute to her next milestone.A version of this article appears in print on June 4, 2016, on Page D8 of the New York edition with the headline: Powerful Williams Uses Finesse to Reach Final.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.