By BILLY WITZJUNE 2, 2016
DETROIT — Floundering offenses on two American League teams that are trying to get back to the playoffs recently perked to life by making unconventional changes.Houston Manager A. J. Hinch moved George Springer into the leadoff spot simply because Hinch had said he needed to do something different. Springer has been on fire since, and so have the Astros, who have won eight of nine.Toronto Manager John Gibbons was so frustrated two weeks ago that he threw up his hands and put Jose Bautista in the leadoff spot, where he had not hit in six years. The Blue Jays have won nine of 12 since.So Yankees Manager Joe Girardi, whose team is in an offensive funk that is deepening by the day, was asked if he might try something similar to shake up his team, which is also trying to return to the playoffs.AdvertisementThe suggestion struck a nerve with Girardi, who hit back harder than any Yankee has in recent days.“Who do you want me to lead off?” Girardi said. “Tell me. You guys have these questions, but do you want me to lead Tex off? You want me to lead Alex off? You want me to lead Carlos off?”AdvertisementReferring to the slow-footed sluggers Mark Teixeira, Alex Rodriguez and Carlos Beltran, Girardi said he could not shake things up because too many Yankees were struggling. He said it made no sense to move Jacoby Ellsbury, who leads the regulars with a .280 average, out of the leadoff spot. (The same could have been said for the Astros bumping Jose Altuve, who was hitting .328 at the time Springer replaced him.)“So now what?” Girardi said.For one night, his frustration may have been assuaged, as the Yankees, who were no-hit for five innings, used a late outburst and then hung on to beat the Detroit Tigers, 5-4, in a game making up for one that was rained out on April 10.The Yankees were not saved by their vaunted bullpen — Dellin Betances, Andrew Miller and Aroldis Chapman each surrendered a run — but by Didi Gregorius, who entered at shortstop as a late defensive replacement.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Gregorius threw out Justin Upton on a close relay at home to end the eighth, then helped Chapman escape a bases-loaded, none-out jam in the ninth by making a diving stop to start an audacious double play. Gregorius, while prone, flipped J. D. Martinez’s grounder up the middle to Starlin Castro, who caught it barehanded and threw to first while falling down — and blowing a bubble.Chapman then retired Miguel Cabrera on a grounder to end the game.The win ended a three-game losing streak and was just the Yankees’ third in nine games. It also featured a heartening performance from pitcher Michael Pineda, who has struggled mightily in his own right, and an offense that was ignited by Rob Refsnyder, the recently recalled utility player, who doubled leading off the sixth.Refsnyder’s hit was the first off the Tigers left-hander Matt Boyd, and he went on to score the tying run, ending a 22-inning scoreless streak. Refsnyder then singled in the go-ahead run in the seventh, in which the Yankees scored four times, capped by Ellsbury’s two-run triple.“You definitely notice the zeros, but there’s no sense of panic,” Refsnyder said.Girardi did some mild juggling of his lineup, moving Castro to shortstop to give Gregorius a day off and playing Refsnyder at second base. Girardi also kept the slumping Brett Gardner (0 for 24) and Brian McCann (1 for 26) on the bench.AdvertisementIt was an encouraging night for Pineda, a beleaguered right-hander who may have saved his spot in the rotation by allowing one run on seven hits in five and two-thirds innings. He struck out eight and walked none, and kept his composure after the Tigers took the lead in the fourth when Upton’s bloop single fell in front of Beltran in right.“That’s what you want to see,” Girardi said.Asked earlier this week how close Pineda was to being removed from the rotation, General Manager Brian Cashman said: “We’re certainly talking about it. He’s got another start, so we’ll see.”As poorly as the Yankees have played this season, they entered Thursday only three games worse than their mark last season. But a year ago, a 27-25 record was good enough to be in first place in the American League East. The Yankees entered Thursday’s game in fourth place, and the division-leading Red Sox look formidable.Asked if the strong start by the Red Sox had created a sense of urgency that might not have existed at the same point last year, Girardi seethed.“There wasn’t urgency for us last year?” he said. “There’s urgency here every day. You don’t take anything for granted. Perception is not reality. That’s one of my least favorite statements in life. Perception is perception. There is urgency in me every day. There is urgency in that clubhouse every day. And if there isn’t, they should go home.”A version of this article appears in print on June 3, 2016, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: Yankees Spring to Life With a Late Spurt, Then Hold On for the Victory.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.