By CHRIS GORDONJUNE 2, 2016
PITTSBURGH — The San Jose Sharks waited 24 seasons to make their first Stanley Cup finals. The matchup against the Pittsburgh Penguins promised to be a close series between two of the N.H.L.’s fastest and most aggressive teams.But after the Sharks’ 2-1 overtime loss in Game 2 on Wednesday night, they are headed home outshot, outplayed and down by two games to none in the best-of-seven series.Game 3 is Saturday, and the Sharks have put up a brave front, pointing out that each game has been decided by a single goal and vowing to turn things around at home.“They took care of home ice here, and now it’s our turn,” Sharks defenseman Marc-Edouard Vlasic said after Wednesday’s game. “You’re only out when you lose four.”AdvertisementDuring the regular season, San Jose won only 18 of 41 games at home. But in the playoffs, the team’s record at the Shark Tank, as its home arena is known, is 7-2.AdvertisementDespite the stinging defeats, the Sharks have had some bright spots. The play of goaltender Martin Jones, whom the Sharks traded for last off-season, has been unassailable. Although this is his first season as a starter, he has seen the finals up close before and has his name on the Cup to prove it.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Undrafted out of junior hockey, Jones, 26, played in the minor leagues for parts of four seasons before becoming Jonathan Quick’s understudy with the Los Angeles Kings in 2013-14, when they won the Stanley Cup. Jones did not play in the finals that year, but he saw what it took for Quick, one of the best goalies in the league, to accomplish hockey’s ultimate goal.Jones has been calm and composed in net, with an impressive .930 save percentage in the finals. While some of his teammates appeared frustrated after their Game 2 defeat, it was hard to tell by Jones’s demeanor whether the Sharks had won or lost.“He’s been outstanding,” Sharks Coach Peter DeBoer said.He has had to be: Pittsburgh outshot San Jose, 71-48, in the first two games.The Sharks’ most effective offensive weapon during the postseason has barely seen the ice. In the playoffs, San Jose has converted on 27 percent of their power-play opportunities. But in this series, the Penguins have played disciplined hockey, limiting the Sharks to only three chances on the man-advantage, one of which they converted.While the scores have been close, the Sharks acknowledged that they needed to pick up the pace in San Jose.“We know that if we play this way, we’re not going to win games,” said Sharks forward Logan Couture, who has two assists in the finals and leads the league in points this postseason, with 26.AdvertisementOn Wednesday night, the Penguins dominated the start, as they did in the series opener. While Pittsburgh skated up and down the ice with ease, the Sharks could barely exit their defensive zone, hounded by the speedy Penguins at every turn. Flustered, San Jose sent pucks into no man’s land or right onto the sticks of waiting Penguins players, fueling another Pittsburgh attack.“They just don’t stop coming,” San Jose defenseman Justin Braun said.Pittsburgh held a 23-11 lead in shots on goal after two periods. But San Jose came back in the third period after DeBoer shuffled his line combinations.Thanks to a desperate push at the end of regulation, the Sharks sent the game into overtime on a goal by Braun, only to lose in overtime when the Penguins rookie Conor Sheary scored his second goal in two games.Of the 49 teams that have gone up by two games to none in a best-of-seven finals, 44 have gone on to win the Stanley Cup.Nevertheless, the Sharks have plenty of playoff experience to draw on. Since entering the league in 1991, the Sharks have made the playoffs 18 times. Two of the team’s stars, Patrick Marleau and Joe Thornton, have played more than 1,500 games for the Sharks in the regular season and the playoffs.But over the first two games of the series with Pittsburgh, the two have combined for two penalties and only one point — Marleau’s goal in Game 1.Joe Pavelski, who leads the N.H.L. in goals in these playoffs, has not gotten on the score sheet in the finals.Even if the stars pick up their play, the Sharks have a steep hill to climb.“You look at the points of the big guys, they carried their weight,” Braun said. “Now some of us have to chip in.”A version of this article appears in print on June 3, 2016, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Outshot and Outplayed, Sharks Hope to Turn Series Around at Home.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.