By DAVID POLLAKJUNE 3, 2016
SAN JOSE, Calif. — Hockey rewards the setup and the finish equally. In individual scoring races, the crisp pass has the same value as the wrist shot to the top corner. And as events have played out, the player with the highest profile on each team in the 2016 Stanley Cup finals is a master at the art of dishing the puck.The Pittsburgh Penguins captain Sidney Crosby has had the stronger showing so far as the series shifts here Saturday, with his team holding a two-games-to-none advantage over the San Jose Sharks. Crosby, for example, needed only an almost undetectable glance over his shoulder before sending a backhand pass across the ice to the rookie Conor Sheary for a goal in Game 1.Sharks center Joe Thornton has been held without a point in the first two games, but his skills were on full display in the previous playoff round. He had seven assists, none better than the pass he threaded through the narrowest of lanes behind the St. Louis Blues’ net that led to a Tomas Hertl goal in Game 3.There are the obvious similarities in what Crosby, 28, and Thornton, 36, can accomplish.“They see plays formulate before they happen,” said Sharks defenseman Paul Martin, who played alongside Thornton this season after five with Crosby in Pittsburgh. “Sometimes it looks like they have eyes in the back of their head, making passes to places where other people think you can’t see.”AdvertisementEach center was the No. 1 overall pick in his respective N.H.L. draft, but each brings a different playing style to the ice.Advertisement“Jumbo is able to slow it down and make the game come to him,” Martin said, referring to the 6-foot-4, 220-pound Thornton by his longstanding nickname. “He’s good at making reads on plays, where guys are going to be. It just seems like he’s got a magnet on him. The puck finds his stick, and he’s able to find other people.”With the 5-foot-11, 200-pound Crosby, Martin continued, “It’s more of an up-tempo game where he’s moving with speed a little more and he needs guys who are going to be skating with him to get the job done.”Crosby is less predictable, more willing to shoot the puck himself; Thornton has been criticized over the years by figures including his father, Wayne, and past coaches for not doing the same more often.Statistics bear that out. This past season, Crosby scored 36 goals on 248 shots in addition to his 49 assists; Thornton had more assists, 63, but took only 121 shots, scoring on 19 of them. Over their careers, 64 percent of Crosby’s 964 regular-season points have been assists; assists account for 72 percent of Thornton’s 1,364 points.Thornton cited the fact he had begun playing hockey as a defenseman in explaining his preference for passing.“Starting at a young age in the back end, you got to see the ice a little more than if you were up front the whole time,” he said. “I always kind of know where people are on the ice before I get the puck.”Knowing Thornton’s inclinations and preventing him from carrying them out are two entirely different things.Advertisement“There’s no doubt that Jumbo is a pass-first guy for sure,” the NBC analyst Ed Olczyk said in a phone interview. “And even though you know that and it’s highlighted on teams’ scouting reports, he’s still able to make plays.”Olczyk had an up-close view of Crosby’s N.H.L. arrival in 2005 as Pittsburgh’s coach for the first 31 games of Crosby’s rookie season. Early on, Olczyk said, the young phenom saw his role a little differently.“He deferred to older players and tried to distribute the puck,” Olczyk said, “but as the years go on, you realize, Sometimes I may be the best option; sometimes I may be the only option. So you know what? I’m going to to do it myself.”Crosby said that passing was a learned skill that had played to his strengths as he was growing up.“Everyone has different things that they do more instinctively than others,” he said. “Some guys shoot first; some guys pass first. For me, I was probably always looking to pass a little bit more, so that probably came a little bit easier.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.It also may have helped that Crosby followed his father’s advice and used a stick with little curve on it, developing forehand and backhand strength.“When you’re a kid, if you’ve got a hook on it, you want to flick the puck,” Crosby said. “Without that,” he added, stopping midsentence to replace his words with a gesture as he began to stickhandle an imaginary puck.Thornton’s ability to use his large frame to protect the puck as if it were the Hope Diamond makes him a more effective passer.“He buys that extra second for you to get open,” said Sharks right wing Joe Pavelski, who has become the league’s second-highest goal scorer over the past three years skating on a line with Thornton. “Partly it’s good vision, and partly it comes from playing together for a while, but he’s got an eye on where people are, and it allows him time to create lanes.”AdvertisementYounger players have found they need to make adjustments — welcome ones — when playing on the same line as Thornton or Crosby.“He wants the puck more than other guys,” said Hertl, 22, a third-year player who has been skating alongside Thornton and Pavelski since January. “It’s a little bit different when you play with other guys, because this guy, he wants it right back, and every time he passes it to you right on the tape.”Sheary, the 23-year-old Pittsburgh rookie who also scored the overtime goal in his team’s 2-1 victory in Game 2, said it had taken awhile to recognize how quickly Crosby could find him on the ice and to realize that it was O.K. to shoot the puck.“It was a learning experience,” Sheary said. “I think I was shying away from shots a little too much. I think once you’re comfortable with him and you realize you can do that stuff, it made it a lot easier for me.”And, so far, a lot more difficult for the Sharks.Chris Gordon contributed reporting from Pittsburgh.A version of this article appears in print on June 4, 2016, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: For Players, a Shifty Skill That’s Quicker Than a Glance.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.