By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSAUG. 5, 2016
WATKINS GLEN, N.Y. — After missing three straight Sprint Cup races because of lingering effects of a concussion, Dale Earnhardt Jr. did something on Friday that is part of his therapy: He made his first public appearance to speak about his recovery.“I missed my team, my teammates,” said Earnhardt, Nascar’s most popular driver. “I just wanted to come see everybody. I get to hang out with my guys a little bit. This has been so weird not to be at the track. It’s frustrating, but it’s the process. We’re just taking it one evaluation at a time.“I just want to get better. Nothing else is a priority. Our intentions are to get cleared and get back to racing. I’m not ready to quit.”Doctors told Earnhardt that his latest injury had occurred June 12 at Michigan International Speedway. He was clipped in the rear by Chris Buescher’s No. 34 while racing three wide with A. J. Allmendinger and hit the wall at an angle that softened the impact. He drove three more races before the symptoms became too severe.Advertisement“The doctors feel they can make my brain stronger to be able to cope with these common events,” he said. “The event that I had at Michigan, I shouldn’t have had a concussion from. I should be able to get through events like that without having any issues.”AdvertisementEarnhardt has been keeping fans updated on his condition through weekly podcasts. Besides reconnecting with his team and his competitors in the garage, his appearance at Watkins Glen, a road course in the Finger Lakes area of upstate New York, served a purpose.Sam Manchester will guide you through the 2016 summer Olympics in Rio de Janeiro.Hey. It’s Sam from the NYT Sports desk. I’m at the Olympics in Rio (so you don’t have to be :)). Grab a limited spot and I’ll text you updates, answer your questions and share the behind-the-scenes stuff nobody else gets.Thanks! Talk to you soon.“My doctor wants to put me in situations that drive the symptoms,” Earnhardt said. “My doctor calls that exposure, and this is probably the worst situation as far as making my systems go haywire. That’s what he wants. That’s just part of the process.”Earnhardt said he was most worried about “people making assumptions of where I’m at, what I’m doing, and what I’m up to.”“To give me peace of mind and to bring down any type of stress and anxiety through the process,” he said, “is to open up and be honest about what’s going on and how we’re doing.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Earnhardt will not drive here on Sunday and will miss the race on Aug. 20 at Bristol, Tenn. The four-time series champion Jeff Gordon, who came out of retirement to fill in for Earnhardt in the last two races, will remain behind the wheel in the No. 88 Chevrolet for Hendrick Motorsports.There remains no timetable for Earnhardt’s return. That decision will be left to his doctors. Earnhardt underwent further evaluation Monday at the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center’s Sports Medicine Concussion Program and said afterward that he continued to experience problems with balance and an ability to focus on an object while moving his head.“I never anticipated being out this long,” Earnhardt said. “I didn’t have this massive accident. The symptoms crept in slowly. I didn’t think this was that serious. It’s a challenge.“I really believe and trust what they’re telling me. They’re telling me without question we’re going to get back to normal.”A version of this article appears in print on August 6, 2016, on Page D6 of the New York edition with the headline: Auto Racing; Injured Earnhardt Frustrated but Resolute.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.