By JOHN BRANCHAUG. 6, 2016
RIO DE JANEIRO — Alone in his apartment in south London, a 69-year-old man named Neil Horan watched a middle-of-the night broadcast of the opening ceremony for the Summer Olympics. Like other viewers, he wondered which Brazilian would get the honor of lighting the Olympic caldron.And when he saw that it would be Vanderlei de Lima, best known for being accosted by a spectator while leading the 2004 Olympic marathon in Athens, he was aghast.It was Horan who jumped onto the course near the 22-mile mark and shoved de Lima into the crowd in Athens — “Put him aside like a rugby tackle,” he recalled in a phone conversation on Saturday — and was blamed for de Lima finishing third.“When I actually saw him with my own eyes, I really got angry,” Horan said. “I look at Vanderlei, and I think, ‘You would be nowhere near the star if not for me.’”Horan conceded that it was a “kneejerk and selfish reaction to some extent,” but he made no apology for his feelings.Advertisement“Some of what I say won’t be very sympathetic toward Vanderlei,” Horan said. “Just like my master Christ was very offensive, if needed, in what he said, I feel like, on this occasion, I have no choice.”AdvertisementHoran has gained bursts of infamy for his public exploits. He is a defrocked Irish priest who has made an occasional habit of interrupting sports events. He frequently appears at demonstrations, wearing a green beret and a green vest — the same outfit he wore when he interrupted the Olympic marathon — claiming that the second coming of Jesus is near. In 2009, he appeared on “Britain’s Got Talent,” and his Irish dancing earned him an invitation to the second round, until executives realized who he was. He does not dispute the label as an eccentric.On Saturday, with an Irish accent and a measured pace, Horan described why he has such animus toward de Lima. He said that he has sent de Lima two letters of apology, in Portuguese, but has never had contact with him since the fateful day in Athens. (After the 2004 Games, Horan said he planned to go to Brazil to apologize in person, but he faced charges of indecency with a child. He was acquitted by a jury later that year.)Sam Manchester will guide you through the 2016 summer Olympics in Rio de Janeiro.Hey. It’s Sam from the NYT Sports desk. I’m at the Olympics in Rio (so you don’t have to be :)). Grab a limited spot and I’ll text you updates, answer your questions and share the behind-the-scenes stuff nobody else gets.Thanks! Talk to you soon.“It’s extremely sad that he never responded to my apologies, nevertheless acknowledged them,” Horan said. “I would like to meet him and his family. But absolutely no response. I condemn him for this. He miserably failed in basic manners of human decency and courtesy.”Horan said he has read and seen interviews with de Lima in which the Brazilian called him a religious fanatic in a desperate search for publicity. De Lima has said that the chapter is closed, a brushoff that rankles Horan.“As if I was just some sort of pop star looking for attention,” Horan said. “I see it as a personal attack on me, my Christian mission and Christ himself.”In 2003, laicized by the Roman Catholic Church and an outspoken believer that the end of the world was coming, Horan interrupted the British Grand Prix by running onto the racetrack, forcing cars to swerve past him. He went to Athens in August 2004, he said on Saturday, with no intention of interrupting any events.“I cannot explain why I assaulted that young man, put him aside like a rugby tackle,” Horan said. “I believe there is such a thing as destiny, things that are meant to happen, and my only feeling is that it was meant to happen. It was providential.”AdvertisementDe Lima, flustered and off rhythm, returned to the course but was passed by the eventual winner, Stefano Baldini of Italy. Meb Keflezighi of the United States won silver, and de Lima managed to grab the bronze.Horan, still impressed that de Lima was able to take third place after what he had done to him, was taken to jail, and eventually was given a suspended sentence and fined.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.These days, Horan believes that de Lima is more famous for being accosted than he would have been for winning. That is why Horan was frustrated to watch the climax of the opening ceremony.To Horan, alone in his apartment across the ocean, de Lima would not be a global hero without him.“It is certain that he would not be the star of the opening ceremony if not for what I have done,” Horan said. “He would not. How many people remember the gold medal winners of 12 years ago? Even those here in London four years ago?“The sun faded out. A gold medal winner can walk down the street, and not many would know them. Who could name a winner of the gold medal 12 years ago? I could not.”A version of this article appears in print on August 7, 2016, on Page SP7 of the New York edition with the headline: He Accosted a Runner. Now He’s Angry.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »