By JOHN BRANCHAUG. 7, 2016
RIO DE JANEIRO — Just at 10 a.m., with the waves at Copacabana Beach crashing close enough to be heard, an Italian man hit a high, spinning ball toward the sun, and the premier sport at the Summer Olympics was underway.There were not many people in the seats yet — Rio is not an early riser — but there was the Portuguese patter of the announcers, the gut-thumping beat of music, and the slow, silent slinking of a gunmetal military ship just offshore.Much, much later, with the clock well past midnight and a ship still lurking in the dark sea, visible only by a few lights, another batch of fans put a celebratory exclamation mark on the Olympics’ longest day. The three-time gold medalist Kerri Walsh Jennings and her partner, April Ross, had beaten their first opponents from Australia.But the stands, which had been filled a couple of hours before, were half-full — or half-empty. Maybe scheduling each day’s final match at midnight, as NBC had requested on behalf of its American audience, overestimated Brazilians’ will to stay up for all 15 hours of beach volleyball.Sam Manchester will guide you through the 2016 summer Olympics in Rio de Janeiro.Hey. It’s Sam from the NYT Sports desk. I’m at the Olympics in Rio (so you don’t have to be :)). Grab a limited spot and I’ll text you updates, answer your questions and share the behind-the-scenes stuff nobody else gets.Thanks! Talk to you soon.Most hours between those moments, however, were what the Rio Games were supposed to feel like, at least in the minds of the idealistic and optimistic. There was sun, sand, skin and samba. The Beach Volleyball Arena kept its promise as the place to be, and be seen, for the first 13 days of the Olympics.AdvertisementCariocas, the people of Rio, may not know much about archery, dressage, fencing or field hockey — among the other sports that took place on a sunbaked Saturday — but they know their beach volleyball.AdvertisementAnd with the top two men’s teams and the top two women’s teams made up of Brazilians, there is a sense that the enthusiasm will become deafening as the medal rounds arrive.“I am so happy to live in this moment,” said Bruno Schmidt, who is paired with Alison Cerutti on the top-ranked men’s team, a first-day victor over two Canadians.The beach volleyball venue in Rio de Janiero on Copacabana beach drew a large, enthusiastic crowd on the first weekend of the Games.The arena itself is a bit of a marvel — a temporary structure rising 70 feet off the beach, with 12,000 plastic seats resting atop a maze of metal grid work. It is part enormous Tinkertoy, part world’s largest Ikea-product construction project.It faced some construction delays over the past few months but now rises like an Olympic-bannered monolith where Avenida Princesa Isabel dives into the famous crescent-shaped promenade along Avenida Atlântica, with its iconic swirl of black-and-white stones and its coconut-water stands. The stadium is nudged just a bit off-center of the intersection to accommodate a stand of palm trees.Inside, the upper level has views of the water, obstructed only by large Olympic rings perched atop a wall of broadcast booths that back to the ocean. Copacabana is a public beach, so there is about 50 or 100 feet, depending on the tides, to walk and sunbathe on the stadium’s ocean side.Olympic organizers had enlisted an oceanographer to help them determine how close they could build to the water without risking a damaging wave. The results persuaded them to build a six-foot sand berm for a quarter-mile along the arena, practice courts and spectator entrances. Two tall wire fences, a few feet apart, and a sprinkling of straight-faced, machine-gun-toting, uniformed guards provide the promise of a secure border.The berms seemed like a brilliant idea days before the Olympics when high tides and some of the biggest waves in years hit Copacabana and washed across Avenida Atlântica. There was alarm at broadcast booths built on the other end of the beach, but the volleyball stadium, and the court inside it, remained dry.AdvertisementThe day’s schedule featured 12 matches, bunched in three sessions of four. Most men played in thigh-length trunks and tank tops. Most women played in bikinis. Many wore hats and sunglasses, even at night.There were plenty of bikinis and shirtless men in the crowd, too. And once it grew dark, there were samba dancers, in enormous feathered headdresses but not much else, to further remind people that this was Rio, not London or Beijing.The mellow start of the first match soon ignited into full-throttle energy for Alison (who is known by his first name, like some other familiar Brazilians) and Schmidt (the nephew of the former basketball star Oscar Schmidt). Soon, the arena was awash in a wave (the people kind, not the water kind).Fans jeered the Brazilians’ Canadian opponents on serves with whistles and boos until the public-address announcer admonished them in a kind tone.“Ladies and gentlemen, we are watching the world’s best players!” he shouted through the din. “Please stay positive for both sides!”Besides the four players, whose bare feet somehow avoided the kind of searing that befalls mere mortals as they cross sunbaked sand, the court had four line judges with flags and four ball people, similar to those in tennis, lurking in the corners. All of them wore shoes and socks. During timeouts, while music blared and someone with a wireless microphone persuaded the crowd to rise and dance, six young men jogged onto the court in a loose formation and smoothed the ripples from the sand. Even the rakes were fun: They were bright green, like something made by Playskool.During serves, the disciplined fans would go momentarily silent, and waves could be heard crashing on the beach. When the ball hit the sand, the place turned into a nightclub: music, D.J., dancing, clapping and colored lights.“Now, here, we have the best arena in the world,” the public-address announcer shouted at one point in English, and everyone seemed to understand.AdvertisementThe stadium was cleared after the first four matches, and a fresh batch of fans in the second session put most of their energy into supporting one of Brazil’s two female teams, Bárbara Seixas de Freitas and Ágatha Bednarczuk. They are known by everyone — or just about everyone — simply as Bárbara and Ágatha. They are seeded second, behind Larissa and Talita, the other Brazilian pair.“There is so much happiness in the air, it is contagious,” Bárbara said after a victory over a team from the Czech Republic. “It is a very intense feeling. It gives us a lot of emotions. It is really moving.”It was not just the Brazilians who felt the affection. Others were nearly as thankful for the serendipitous timing of reaching the highest levels of beach volleyball just as the Olympics came to Rio — the perfect intersection of sport and site.“This is my third Olympics, and I still got butterflies,” the 40-year-old American Jake Gibb said after he and his teammate, Casey Patterson, had beaten a team representing Qatar. (Neither Qatar player was actually from Qatar — one was from Rio — but they had moved there to find an easier path to the Olympics.)“This arena was more energy than I was ready for,” Gibb continued. “I think the Brazilian fans are the best in the world.”The arena cleared out again when the second session ended at 6:30, and everyone disappeared into the dark streets and restaurants and bars of Copacabana, leaving behind a quiet, glowing stadium with bright white seats, a modern-day lighthouse on what might be the world’s most famous beach.When the next session began at 9, the seats were still mostly empty. Cariocas are not known for promptness. But people arrived over the next two hours, bringing good will and a willingness to celebrate. Only in Rio, perhaps, would a beach volleyball tournament have an arena that was mostly empty at 9 p.m. but jammed at 11.It was 12:34 a.m. when Walsh Jennings and Ross, Californians in their 30s, started their first match together as Olympic teammates, bathed in expectation and affection. Attendance and enthusiasm had waned, but the stadium was still more full than it was when the day — by now, the previous day — had begun.AdvertisementWalsh Jennings, a mother of three, won the last three Olympic gold medals with Misty May-Treanor. But knowing that May-Treanor was retiring, Walsh Jennings turned to Ross. Ross was on the losing side of the gold medal match at the 2012 London Games, and when Walsh Jennings embraced her at the net, she whispered that they should go for gold together in Rio.They embraced this time as teammates after a 21-14, 21-13 victory over Nicole Laird and Mariafe Artacho del Solar of Australia, a match that took only 35 minutes. They punctuated their points with compliments and hand slaps, an enthusiasm shared by those surrounding the 20 or so American flags waving through the crowd.They are medal contenders, not favorites, perhaps having to fight through two Brazilian teams playing on home sand. But those anticipated matchups felt far away, especially at 1 a.m. They also sounded like fun, like the way everyone pictured these Olympics at their best moments.A version of this article appears in print on August 8, 2016, on Page D1 of the New York edition with the headline: Finding a Home in the Sand.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »