By JONAH ENGEL BROMWICHOCT. 31, 2016
After one week of the season, here is what we have learned:■ The Golden State Warriors will not be perfect. They are 2-1.■ The San Antonio Spurs and the Cleveland Cavaliers could still be perfect. The Cavaliers are 3-0, and the Spurs are 4-0.■ The Orlando Magic, the Phoenix Suns and the New Orleans Pelicans all look as if they could already be in trouble. They are, collectively, 0-9, and each team has obvious weak spots that will be difficult to fix.■ Even though the N.B.A. takes two months to settle into a rhythm, we can’t help judging teams after only a handful of games. We will do our best not to draw any premature conclusions here.Let’s get into some games.Have a question or a suggestion for this column? Send an email to NBAweek@nytimes.com, or bother me on Twitter: @Jonesieman.AdvertisementChicago at Boston, Wednesday, 8 p.m. Eastern, ESPNThe Chicago Bulls were up 12 points with less than seven minutes to go in their season opener Thursday against the Boston Celtics when Isaiah Thomas, a miniature demon in green, spearheaded a comeback. Thomas, the Celtics’ 5-foot-9 All-Star point guard, hit a 3-pointer from the corner and then drove into the lane twice, cutting the Bulls’ lead to 3. The game was in Chicago; momentum was on Boston’s side.But the Celtics could not quite figure out how to handle Dwyane Wade, the Bulls’ new guard. Wade, a Chicago native in his 13th season, responded to Thomas’s drives with his usual subtlety, setting up forward Taj Gibson to score twice in a row and wrapping Thomas up when he was again on his way to the hoop. With about 28 seconds left, Wade made a statement: He hit a 3 from the corner to ice the Celtics.When Wade’s former teammate LeBron James returned to Cleveland, there was plenty of fanfare. But Wade’s return to Chicago went somewhat unnoticed. Nevertheless, if he continues to lead his new team the way he did in that first game — and there are reasons to think he will, given that he is not quite as vulnerable to injury as many think — expect the hometown hero talk to commence in a hurry.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Boston has a chance at revenge Wednesday, when the Bulls (2-0) are scheduled to meet them in TD Garden. The Celtics are 2-1, having won close games against the Nets and the Charlotte Hornets.Along with Thomas, guard Avery Bradley is off to a good start. Bradley, who was drafted by Boston in 2010, is averaging 21 points a game, compared with 15 points last season. The Celtics have a lot of weapons on offense, and Bradley’s numbers could settle down. But his improvement — the latest evidence of General Manager Danny Ainge’s scouting ability — is worth keeping an eye on.AdvertisementSome have expressed concern about Boston’s rebounding numbers. Chris Forsberg of ESPN pointed out recently that the Celtics are the shortest team in the N.B.A., with an average roster height of 78.2 inches. But I’m less convinced that it’s an issue. The Celtics ranked sixth in rebounds per game last season, and they have added Al Horford, who has averaged close to nine boards a game during his career. With the help of their coach, Brad Stevens, a lack of effort at the glass should not be a tough problem to fix.With the Cavaliers favored to return to the finals (it would be James’s seventh consecutive appearance), some of the better teams in the Eastern Conference are overlooked. But even for a great team, nothing is easy. Thus far, the Celtics and the Bulls look as if they could be positioned to take aim at the throne. We’ll know more after seeing them play each other for the second time in less than a week.Oklahoma City at Golden State, Thursday, 10:30 p.m., TNTThe Thunder’s Russell Westbrook — who is averaging  38.7 points, 12.3 rebounds and 11.7 assists a game entering Monday — is set to travel to Oracle Arena to play against his old war buddy Kevin Durant for the first time since Durant signed with the Warriors in the off-season. After three games, the Warriors are 2-1, and Durant has been their best player, averaging 28.5 points and 13.5 rebounds a game. But while the game can be framed as a face-off between the former teammates Durant and Westbrook, it is more a question of superstar versus team ball. Can Westbrook provoke Durant into a shootout? Or will the Warriors simply overwhelm the Thunder with their superior roster?Los Angeles Clippers at San Antonio, Saturday, 8:30 p.m., NBATVY’all forgot about Blake, huh? The Clippers imploded in April after Blake Griffin left the postseason in the midst of their second-round series against the Portland Trail Blazers. In his first game back, Griffin reminded everyone just how special he is. His team faces the mighty Spurs this weekend.League Pass Game of the Week: Sacramento at Atlanta, Monday, 7:30 p.m.The Hawks are 2-0 and have looked sharp, with Dwight Howard starting at center. Howard has not been scoring much but he is rebounding well, and his teammates have plenty of offensive firepower. The Kings are 2-1, and DeMarcus Cousins is averaging 30 points and close to 10 rebounds a game.We already told you about the insane numbers that Russell Westbrook has been putting up. Others are doing the same.After two games, Anthony Davis was averaging 47.5 points, 16 rebounds,4 assists, 3 blocks and 3.5 steals. His team was 0-2. (They lost a third game Saturday and Davis’s numbers dipped a bit.) The Rockets’ James Harden came out of the gate Wednesday with 34 points and 17 assists in a loss to the Los Angeles Lakers. Rockets Coach Mike D’Antoni told Bleacher Report that he wants Harden to double his assist total from last season. If Harden were to do so, he would average 15 assists per game, a league record.Westbrook, Davis and Harden are superstars on teams that are probably not of championship caliber. It may be difficult for them to continue producing at this level. And if the Pelicans and Rockets keep losing, Davis’s and Harden’s production may drop with their morale. Or their extra effort could lead to injuries.AdvertisementVine, the Twitter-owned app that allowed its users to create six-second looping videos, announced Thursday that in the coming months, it would shut down, a significant loss for basketball fans.Vine was beloved by those of us who use Twitter to keep up with the league. It was the perfect vehicle for highlights: A user could see two passes and a monster dunk, and even a celebration, all within six seconds. And it also helped to further expose the personalities of the players, whether they were doing warm-up dances or just fooling around on the bench.In the first week of the season, the app had already produced plenty of goodies:
            Dude. Bron.....dude. https://t.co/7maXKa5Dpr So goodbye, dear Vine. We’ll miss you.And that’s it for us. See you all next week.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.