By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSOCT. 30, 2016
NEW ORLEANS — Saints Coach Sean Payton had a surprise in store for a Seattle defense that thrives on harassing quarterbacks and physically intimidating receivers.Payton dialed back New Orleans’s prolific passing game and challenged his running backs and offensive line to deliver as much punishment to Seahawks defenders as they could.Drew Brees wound up well short of his typical passing numbers in the Superdome — finishing with 265 yards and one touchdown on Sunday — but the Saints (3-4) pulled out a 25-20 victory they sorely needed to improve their prospects for climbing back into the N.F.C. playoff picture.“It doesn’t really have to be aesthetically pleasing to be effective,” Payton said. “The key is winning.”AdvertisementThe victory was not ensured until New Orleans’s much-maligned defense, which entered the game ranked 29th in the N.F.L., came up with a stop on the Seahawks’ final drive, which started on the Seattle 32-yard line with 1 minute 50 seconds left. Russell Wilson took the Seahawks (4-2-1) to the New Orleans 10, where he had one final play. He lofted a pass toward the corner of the end zone, where Jermaine Kearse caught the ball but landed out of bounds.Advertisement“It was close; I tried to give him a shot,” Wilson said of the throw to Kearse, adding that cornerback B. W. Webb “did a good job of trying to drive him out of bounds.”“I think he got one in and was trying to get the second one down,” Wilson said. “The last drive was a testament to our resilience.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Saints rushed 35 times and passed 35 times — certainly not the typical approach of a team that entered the game with the second-ranked passing offense and the 28th-ranked running game. But it was effective. New Orleans gained 123 yards on the ground, with Tim Hightower gaining 102, making him the first Saint this season to rush for 100. New Orleans also kept possession for 36:12 to Seattle’s 23:48.“We knew coming in here it was going to be a physical game,” Hightower said. “In that fourth quarter, I looked over on their sideline and saw a couple of those guys on their knees, and I said, ‘This is exactly where we want them.’”Wilson finished with 253 passing yards and was intercepted once by linebacker Nathan Stupar, whose diving snag set up the Saints’ first touchdown, on a 1-yard dive by Brees over a pile of players. Brees’s lone touchdown pass went to Brandin Cooks on a 2-yard slant, which gave the Saints the lead for good early in the fourth quarter.Wil Lutz kicked field goals of 22, 53, 21 and 41 yards for the Saints, the final one coming with less than two minutes left to put Seattle down by more than a field goal.Seattle has gone two straight games without a win, having tied Arizona last week, but the Seahawks hardly seem concerned.Advertisement“The great thing is, we have all the players, we have the right system, we have the right guys,” Wilson said. “We are going to be able to do it. This is nothing that we haven’t faced before.”While the Saints held statistical advantages in several categories, big plays on both sides of the ball helped Seattle lead, 14-13, at halftime and keep the game close.Seattle defensive end Cliff Avril forced a fumble by Mark Ingram in the first quarter. It popped straight to safety Earl Thomas, who sprinted into the open field for a 34-yard touchdown.Ingram was benched afterward. It was his second fumble in two weeks while he was trying to fight for extra yards after contact. A week earlier, Ingram’s fumble inside the Kansas City 10 contributed to a 6-point loss.A version of this article appears in print on October 31, 2016, on Page D6 of the New York edition with the headline: Saints Switch Gears and Grind Down Seahawks With Run.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.