By DAVID WALDSTEINOCT. 31, 2016
CHICAGO — Shortly after the Cleveland Indians lost Game 5 of the World Series, the team’s starting pitcher in the game, Trevor Bauer, dutifully came back onto the field to conduct interviews. As he spoke in front of the visitors’ dugout at Wrigley Field, a loud fan yelled at Bauer, sarcastically thanking him for helping the Chicago Cubs to win.Bauer turned around and said: “Be sure to thank me when you lose in six.”It was a brash retort from a pitcher who is 0-2 in the World Series with a 5.87 earned run average. But Bauer represents the confidence that the Indians still exude, even after they lost, 3-2, to the Cubs on Sunday night.The Indians still lead the best-of-seven-game series, three games to two, and Game 6 will be back in Cleveland, on Tuesday.“We’re in a good position, still,” said Mike Napoli, the Indians’ first baseman. “We’re up, three to two, heading home. We did what we had to do here. We put ourselves in a position to win it in a crazy atmosphere. We’re happy what we did here, and now we’re going home to play in front of our fans.”AdvertisementPart of the Indians’ confidence is derived from their Game 6 starter, Josh Tomlin, who shut down the Cubs in his four and two-thirds innings in Game 3 at Wrigley. Tomlin, after a shaky August, is 2-0 in the postseason with a 1.76 earned run average. The Cubs did not score off him in Game 3.Advertisement“He knows it’s his last start of the year,” said Mickey Callaway, the Cleveland pitching coach. “He’s going to give everything he has. Having him on the mound makes us happy.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Cleveland has other things to make them feel good about the next two games, if there are two. Andrew Miller, their versatile bullpen ace, was not used in Game 5, although he did warm up. And should the Cubs win Game 6, the Indians will have Corey Kluber, their ace, available for Game 7. Kluber has been almost untouchable in the postseason, although a Game 7 would again require him to pitch on short rest.Bauer, despite taking the loss in Game 5, pitched far better Sunday than he did in Game 2. He threw three scoreless innings and then gave up three runs in the fourth. He threw only 74 pitches, and Callaway said the Indians would not hesitate to use him in relief — probably not unless there is a Game 7 — based on how much better he looked Sunday.But while most of the Indians said they felt good about returning to Cleveland to play at their home stadium, Progressive Field, Bauer said it stunk.“I wanted to win tonight,” he said. “We’ll evaluate when we get back to Cleveland and we need to be ready to go. We’ve got to win one more game.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.