AdvertisementSupported byIndians 7, Cubs 2 | Cleveland leads series, 3-1By David WaldsteinCHICAGO — All day long on the North Side of this baseball-obsessed city, fans in blue Cubs sweatshirts and caps moved nervously about town. There was still a festive buzz and a sense of excitement, but it was cut with a palpable edginess.A night earlier, their team had lost the first World Series game at Wrigley Field in 71 years, and a sobering realization had sunk in. Getting back to the World Series after several generations was a joy, but it carried with it the risk of more heartbreak.On Saturday night, the Cleveland Indians provided a glimpse of that agony as they defeated the Cubs, 7-2, to take a three-games-to-one lead in the best-of-seven series, casting a pall over Wrigley Field and its environs.This is supposed to be the year that the Cubs shed their lousy history and break their century-long hex with, finally, a World Series victory. They won 103 games in the regular season, and before Saturday, at least, there had been no signs of billy goats, black cats or headphone-wearing fans reaching for foul balls.“It Is Happening” had become the fans’ motto, replacing the less definite “It’s Gonna Happen.”But with one more loss, the Cubs, who last won the World Series in 1908, will again be cast in the role of lovable losers — and retain their ownership of baseball’s longest championship drought. Their motto might soon have to be changed once more, to “It Is Happening Again.”“If they are frustrated,” catcher David Ross, the Cubs’ elder statesman, said of the fans, “well, we want to win just as bad as they do, if not more. This is our job. This is a goal we set out two years ago. But we knew it wasn’t going to be easy. There’s no way you thought winning the World Series would be easy.”There are Cubs fans who have waited a lot longer than two years, but for now, their wait will continue, and their anxiety will grow.This World Series was supposed to be different. The Cubs were no longer scrappy underdogs but a dominant team of talented young stars that won 103 games in the regular season. Some saw the World Series as a coronation, and seemingly all of Chicago’s North Side was along for the ride.They came to Game 4 with hopes to even the series. But Corey Kluber, the Indians’ ace, pitched well on three days’ rest, and Jason Kipnis, who was a Cubs fan while growing up in the Chicago suburbs, blasted a three-run homer in the seventh inning to put the game — and perhaps the series — out of reach.Terry Francona, Cleveland’s manager, has put on a master class in game and series tactics, leaving the Indians one win from a historic achievement.Of the 44 previous teams to have fallen behind by three games to one in a best-of-seven World Series, only five came back to win it. The last was the Kansas City Royals in 1985, and since then, teams with a 3-1 lead in the World Series have gone on to win all 10 times.Numbers like that are not lost on Kipnis, who also had a double and scored two runs. The Indians, after all, are looking to shatter a decades-long championship drought of their own: The team last won the World Series in 1948.In the Indians’ last appearance in the World Series, in 1997, they lost a ninth-inning lead in Game 7, falling in 11 innings, so their fans, too, know crushing failure. But this year the city of Cleveland gained new hope when the Cavaliers won their first N.B.A. championship, and now anything seems possible.For Kipnis, who grew up fantasizing about winning the World Series at a pretend Wrigley Field during backyard whiffle ball games, the thought of doing it for real in Game 5 on Sunday is tantalizing.“I try not to, but the thought is creeping into my mind,” he said. “We still have a very tough victory to get.“They have their stud on the mound,” Kipnis continued, in reference to the Cubs’ Game 5 starter, Jon Lester, “and he’s not going to make things easy for us. The fact that we are one win away, can’t ask for a much better position. We’re close. We’re almost there.”The Cubs scored first, giving their supporters hope. But facing John Lackey, Carlos Santana blasted a home run into the right-field bleachers in the top of the second inning to even the score at 1-1. It was the first World Series home run at Wrigley Field since the Hall of Fame slugger Hank Greenberg of the Detroit Tigers homered in Game 6 in 1945.Cleveland added to its lead against the sloppy Cubs defense in the third inning as Kipnis rapped a double into the right-field corner and scored on a Francisco Lindor single.Wrigley Field fell eerily quiet, and it struggled to find its voice for the rest of the game. After Kipnis homered in the seventh, the only discernible sounds emanated from his teammates in the dugout.“A crooked number could do that,” Kipnis said of the silence that spread through Wrigleyville as a result of the three runs the Indians scored on his homer. “It was a big swing, and it meant a lot to me, and it meant a lot to the team. A Wrigley home run, a World Series home run — there are so many things I could check off that makes it special for me.”Despite the big lead, Francona elected to use his elite reliever Andrew Miller for two innings to ensure the victory. Francona said that on Sunday, closer Cody Allen might pitch earlier in the game, leaving Miller available for the ninth inning.Miller allowed an eighth-inning home run to Dexter Fowler on Saturday, but nothing else. He did not complain about being used in a blowout and said it would certainly not preclude him from pitching in Game 5, if needed.“It’s definitely worth it if it means winning the World Series,” he said. “I’ll find a way to get ready.”If the Cubs are finally going to win the World Series, they will have to win three consecutive games, including two in Cleveland and one against Kluber, who has allowed one total run in two World Series starts. On Sunday, they will turn to the battle-tested Lester, their ace.“Jon will be ready to go,” Lackey said. “We have nothing but confidence in him. It should be fun to watch.”Nervous Cubs fans with long memories may not find it so fun. It is not as if they can wait another 108 years.Advertisement