By DAVID WALDSTEINOCT. 30, 2016
CHICAGO — The boy stood on the corner of Division and Oakley on Chicago’s North Side, tears trickling down his cheeks as his three older brothers boarded a streetcar bound for Wrigley Field.It was Oct. 6, 1945. Frank Colletti was 11, deemed too young by his protective siblings for the adventure on which they were setting out. They planned to sleep on the street that night, scare up tickets the next morning and go to Game 5 of the World Series, Cubs vs. Detroit Tigers.Little Frank would be left behind. But one of his brothers, Ned, then 15, told him not to worry.“He said, ‘We promise to take you to the next one,’” said Frank, now 82. “But the next one never came.”The Cubs were never very good about promises, except perhaps the promise of a century of torment and misery. But Ned Colletti Jr. — a Los Angeles Dodgers executive and Frank’s nephew — grew up hearing about the time Frank was left in the dust of a streetcar, the World Series out of his young reach.AdvertisementAnd 71 years later, on Friday night at Wrigley, Ned Colletti took his uncle to that “next one’’ — Game 3 of the World Series between the Cubs and the Cleveland Indians.Advertisement“Thank you for keeping your father’s promise,” Frank said to his nephew as they met before the game at the Ron Santo statue on the corner of Sheffield and Addison.“This is the best nephew you could ever have,” he told a visitor.In the end, the Cubs did not win Game 3, nor did they win Game 4 on Saturday, with Frank and Ned again in attendance. But Frank finally got to see his team win in Game 5.“He was over the moon,” Ned Colletti said. “He’s been waiting a long time for that.”Luigi Colletti, Frank’s father, came to the United States from Sicily at the turn of the last century. He was 8 years old. His family settled in New Orleans but moved north to Chicago, where Luigi went to work for the Democratic Party.He and his wife, Louise, had eight children; Frank was the youngest. When Frank was 5, his father died, and the older siblings essentially became parents to the younger ones, especially Frank, who adored the Cubs.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Box seats, back then, cost all of $2. The bleachers were even less.“We used to go to the games all the time,” Frank said.Well, not all the time.In 1944, with World War II raging on two fronts, the Cubs finished in fourth place, four games under .500. In 1945, they won 98 games and captured the National League pennant. (There were no playoffs back then, just the World Series.) The Cubs were led by Hank Wyse, a right-handed pitcher from Lunsford, Ark., and Andy Pafko, an outfielder from Boyceville, Wis., who had hit a dozen home runs and batted .298.Frank and his older brothers followed the team diligently that season. Frank collected yearbooks and newspaper clippings about the team. (Ned Jr. still has those.) When the Cubs made it to the 1945 World Series, the older Colletti brothers decided they would go to Game 5 at Wrigley.Advertisement“It was my brother Joe, Oscar and Ned,” Frank recalled. “They kept telling me I couldn’t go, I was too young, that it was going to be cold outside and we would have to sleep on the sidewalk.“But I tagged along up Oakley. I thought at the last minute they would say they were kidding and take me along. But they didn’t. I stood there on the street crying as I watched them go.”Frank listened to Game 5 on the radio the next day. The Tigers won, 8-4, and the Cubs went on to lose the Series in seven games. The next year, the Cubs finished third in the eight-team N.L. In 1947 they finished sixth, then last, last again, seventh and last.There is a reason they became known as lovable losers.But in 1945, the Cubs were playing in their 10th World Series, a frequency of one every four years in the era of modern baseball that began in 1901. There was every reason to think that in a handful of years they would be back in the World Series.But a handful turned into 71, and all Frank had was a promise in his back pocket.Nevertheless, Frank got on with his life. He married and got a good sales job at Panasonic, the electronics outfit.“They used to call me Mr. Panasonic,” he said.He had children, including Frank Jr., who attended Friday’s Game 3 along with him and Ned Jr.Born in Chicago, Ned inherited his family’s loyalty to the Cubs. He went to Wrigley for the first time in 1961 as a 5-year-old, and from 1969 through the early 1970s he attended several dozen games every season. Cubs tickets were easier to come by then, even though the team featured stars like Billy Williams, Ernie Banks, Ferguson Jenkins and Santo.Ned began working in the Cubs’ public-information department in 1982 and was there when they won the National League East in 1984. He took Frank to the two playoff games against the San Diego Padres at Wrigley, both of which the Cubs won before managing to be eliminated in five games anyway. So, still, no World Series.AdvertisementIn 1994, Ned became director of baseball operations for the San Francisco Giants, and he took his uncle to their 2002 World Series against the team then known as the Anaheim Angels. Nice, but it was not the Cubs. And the Giants lost the Series.The next year, in 2003, the Cubs made it to the National League Championship Series, against the Florida Marlins. Ned took Frank to those playoff games at Wrigley, too.“I was at the Bartman game,” Frank said with a sigh, referring to Game 6, when the Cubs were just five outs from the World Series, but a Cubs fan named Steve Bartman got in the way of a foul pop and everything proceeded to go downhill.Ned was hired by the Dodgers after the 2005 season and assembled five playoff teams in nine years. When new ownership came in and hired Andrew Friedman to lead the baseball department, Ned was relegated to being a special adviser to the owners.During the N.L.C.S. this month, Ned sat with his uncle at Wrigley and watched as the team he helped to assemble played against the team he grew up rooting for, and that his uncle still did.“It was bizarre,” Ned said. “Frank kept leaning over to me and saying, ‘Don’t you mess this up.”’Once the Dodgers lost, Ned could go back to cheering for the Cubs. More important, with a job in baseball, he could get tickets to the Series.Ned’s father died in 1982. His uncle Joe died in 1975, and his uncle Oscar in 1986. Of the four who walked to the corner of Division and Oakley that autumn day 71 years ago, only Frank survives.“They were all taken by cancer,” Ned said. But someone, he added, had to take Frank to a World Series game at Wrigley.AdvertisementAnd by 2016, Frank Colletti was old enough to go.A version of this article appears in print on October 31, 2016, on Page D2 of the New York edition with the headline: Cubs Fan Gets His Series Ticket, 71 Years After He Was Promised One .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.