By PAT BORZIJUNE 18, 2016
MINNEAPOLIS — Since the start of 2014, the Minnesota Twins right-hander Ricky Nolasco had a 5.49 E.R.A., the highest mark of any starting pitcher in the major leagues with 250 or more innings. That Nolasco held the Yankees scoreless for six innings on a steamy Saturday afternoon counted as a significant surprise.But anyone with even a passing knowledge of the Twins’ woeful history against the Yankees at Target Field could have anticipated what unfolded next.With the Yankees losing, 4-0, in the seventh inning, Alex Rodriguez cracked Nolasco for a two-run homer. Carlos Beltran added a tying two-run homer in the eighth off reliever Kevin Jepsen. The Yankees cobbled together three more runs in the ninth, the first two on a bases-loaded single by Jacoby Ellsbury, and then sweated it out as reliever Aroldis Chapman served up back-to-back homers with two outs before finishing with a wild 7-6 victory.Besides lifting the Yankees back to .500 at 34-34, the victory represented the team’s third straight and its 19th in 24 regular-season games at Target Field since it opened in 2010. Going back to the Metrodome days, the Yankees are 37-16 in Minneapolis since 2002.Advertisement“We were fortunate, because Nolasco was rolling,” Yankees Manager Joe Girardi said.Minnesota’s bullpen has not been reliable, a major reason the Twins, at 20-48, own the worst record in the majors. But the Twins showed some life at the end as Eduardo Escobar and pinch-hitter Kurt Suzuki homered off Chapman, leaving Girardi to wonder whether he needed to have somebody else warm up.Advertisement“When you have three runs and you give up two and still get the save and get the win, you feel like you didn’t fail,” Chapman, who registered his 13th save in 14 chances, said through an interpreter. “I didn’t put up zeros, but we won the game. Very fortunate.”Yankees starter Michael Pineda struggled even as he struck out nine over five and a third innings, but the Yankees’ bullpen excelled. The former Twin Anthony Swarzak and Andrew Miller, the eventual winner, teamed for two and two-thirds scoreless innings.“Before we ever came here, I felt pretty fortunate, thinking about the bullpens I’ve had, whether I was a player here, a coach or a manager,” Girardi said. “They’ve been good for a long time. You feel good about the back end of our bullpen. It can really shut people down.”Nolasco had posted three quality starts in his last four appearances before Saturday, when he pitched well again, lasting seven innings, striking out five and allowing two runs.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“He had us on our heels,” Rodriguez said. “We didn’t have anything going, down, 4-0, and kind of sleepwalking through the first six innings.”Pineda’s late-breaking sinker and slider appeared sharp early, but he made some mistakes against the light-hitting Twins that led to runs. Escobar stayed with a 1-2 slider in the second, punching a run-scoring single up the middle. The rookie Byung Ho Park homered with a runner on in the fourth. An error by Pineda in the sixth, with his right foot slipping off first while he was covering on a Max Kepler grounder, led to another run.Twins Manager Paul Molitor occasionally lets his starters try to work out of jams in the sixth or seventh. Molitor stuck with Nolasco in the seventh with two runs in, two runners on and two outs, and Nolasco rewarded him by retiring Ike Davis on a tapper to the mound.AdvertisementBut in the eighth, with Buddy Boshers in for Minnesota, Brett Gardner beat out an infield hit. Jepsen, a right-hander who replaced the injured Glen Perkins as the Twins’ closer but lost the job through ineffectiveness, entered to face the switch-hitting Beltran.Jepsen jumped ahead in the count, 1-2, but Beltran stayed back on a changeup and drove it to the opposite field for his 18th home run of the season and his second in two days. It was the sixth homer allowed this season by Jepsen, a career high.“I’ve faced that guy before,” said Beltran, who hit 19 homers last season. “Hard fastball, good slider, good curveball. I was basically looking for off-speed, more a slider, not a changeup. I didn’t think it was going to leave the ballpark because I didn’t think I hit it so great, but it was good enough.”The Twins bunted the go-ahead run into scoring position in the eighth, but Miller struck out Joe Mauer and Brian Dozier swinging.The winning rally in the ninth featured a clever bunt single by Didi Gregorius, disguised until the last moment and punched past the first-base side of the mound, opposite where the Twins left-handed reliever Fernando Abad falls off on his follow-through. The Twins were playing the infield halfway when Ellsbury, facing the hard-throwing Ryan Pressly, threaded a single into right.“Al hit that two-run homer that gave us life to come back in that game,” Ellsbury said of Rodriguez. “In the ninth, the guys ahead of me did a tremendous job of just getting on and allowing that inning to happen.”And winning in Minnesota yet again.INSIDE PITCHJOE GIRARDI said MARK TEIXEIRA (right knee cartilage tear) remained on schedule to begin a rehabilitation assignment Tuesday. Teixeira took batting practice and ran the bases the last two days.A version of this article appears in print on June 19, 2016, on Page SP4 of the New York edition with the headline: Ninth-Inning Rally Lifts Yankees Over the Twins and Back to .500.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.