By BILLY WITZAPRIL 10, 2017
As Michael Pineda cut through the Tampa Bay Rays’ lineup Monday afternoon, stacking one out on top of another on top of another, an uncommon energy percolated throughout Yankee Stadium.Outs began to be punctuated by increasingly enthusiastic cheers. Fans began to rise whenever Pineda reached two strikes on a hitter. When Brett Gardner raced toward the left-field line to snag Kevin Kiermaier’s seventh-inning liner, the sellout crowd for the Yankees’ home opener let out a roar, acknowledging what was generally unspoken: Pineda was only seven outs from a perfect game.“You’re thinking it’s going to be another special day here at the Stadium,” Manager Joe Girardi said. “I thought he had a shot.”The dreams of a perfect game — or even a no-hitter — vanished on the next at-bat, however, when Evan Longoria hooked a belt-high slider into the left-field corner for a double. And a shutout disappeared on Logan Morrison’s solo homer in the eighth. But those did little to dampen the enthusiasm surrounding the Yankees’ 8-1 victory over the Rays.For a team that lost four of its first six games and that had already endured its share of dispiriting injury news, a performance like Pineda’s had a buoyant effect.AdvertisementIf the Yankees, who found out Monday that they would be without catcher Gary Sanchez for four weeks with a strained muscle in his arm — in addition to missing shortstop Didi Gregorius (shoulder) until May — are to stay afloat, they will need to see this type of Pineda more often.AdvertisementPineda, a 6-foot-7 right-hander with loose limbs and an ample paunch, has been a confounding presence in the Yankees’ rotation for the last three seasons. Blessed with the arsenal of an ace, Pineda has been consistently undone by head-scratching meltdowns. Two years ago, he struck out 16 Baltimore hitters in a game. But he entered Monday with a 23-28 record and a 4.15 earned run average with the Yankees. Last season, opponents batted .328 against him with two outs.Pineda pledged to improved his focus this season, but in his first start, at Tampa Bay last Wednesday, his third pitch was hit for a home run, he allowed two run-scoring hits with two outs in the second, and he was gone before the fourth inning was finished.He looked like a different pitcher Monday.On a 76-degree, sun-kissed afternoon — a far cry from last year’s shivering 36-degree home opener — Pineda was constantly ahead of hitters. He walked none; his slider was devastating, responsible for 10 of his 11 strikeouts; and he used his changeup more frequently and with great effect.“The last time we faced him, some of the fastballs were just sprayed — weren’t really close to the zone — and a lot of the sliders that he threw weren’t really close, either,” Longoria said. “Early on he established he was throwing strikes and really made us kind of try to attack him. He was just throwing the ball where he wanted to.”The Yankees gave Pineda a 1-0 lead in the third when Gardner struck out but reached on Alex Cobb’s wild pitch, then raced home on Jacoby Ellsbury’s double into the right-center gap. Aaron Judge hit a solo homer in the fourth, and Chase Headley added another in the seventh before the Yankees turned the game into a rout with five runs in the eighth — two on Starlin Castro’s homer.But the offense served only as a complement to Pineda, who by the fourth inning had the crowd anticipating the chase for what would have been just the fourth perfect game in Yankees history. The last do it, David Cone, was in the broadcast booth Monday. Cone’s perfect game in 1999 was also the last time a Yankee threw a no-hitter. His catcher that day was Girardi.“I’m thinking the fourth inning, I look at the scoreboard and say, ‘Oh, a zero,’” Pineda said. “I’m not really thinking of a no-hitter or a perfect game, but I’m thinking about giving a good outing and giving an opportunity to my team.”AdvertisementBut the drama was punctured in the seventh. Longoria laced the first pitch he saw into the left-field corner, and this time Gardner did not have a chance. With the Yankees clinging to a 2-0 lead, the pitching coach Larry Rothschild, who has been befuddled by Pineda’s inconsistencies, visited Pineda to make sure he stayed composed.Pineda did so, striking out Brad Miller on four pitches to end the inning.When Pineda walked off the mound an inning later to a standing ovation, he stayed in character for the day: He used his uniform to wipe sweat from his face but showed little emotion.“Very calm and reserved, and he showed that out there,” said catcher Austin Romine, who filled in for Sanchez. “There was no moment where it got out of hand. There was no moment where he missed a pitch and it was frustration. It was just: ‘Give me the ball. I’m going to make another pitch.’”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Romine was an unlikely partner during Pineda’s gem. He had caught him only six times and not since last July 25, when Pineda pitched one of his best games of the season: a 2-1 victory over Houston’s Dallas Keuchel, a Yankees tormentor.The moment was also special for Romine, who was drafted by the Yankees 10 years ago but is still seeking to establish himself in the major leagues. He was a capable backup last season and figured to do the same until Sanchez was injured. But Monday, he was introduced with the starting lineup, and afterward, as he answered questions at his locker, his son stood nearby.“I’m going to remember we were pretty close,” Romine said when asked what he would remember about the day. “I’m not going to be in a position too many times to catch on opening day – it’s not the gig of a backup to get those opportunities, so I was taking it in. It was fun.”A version of this article appears in print on April 11, 2017, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: On Perfect Day, a Dazzling Performance.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.