AdvertisementSupported byBy Allan KredaEAST MEADOW, N.Y. — The feeling for the Islanders after they narrowly missed out on the playoffs was not the angst-laden exhaustion they showed in recent springs after grueling ousters from the postseason.But after missing out on a berth for just the second time in the past five seasons, the Islanders searched for the right words as a summer of uncertainty arrived earlier than expected.It stung even more knowing that they were just 1 point behind the Toronto Maple Leafs, who snared the second Eastern Conference wild-card spot with a win over the Pittsburgh Penguins on Saturday, even though the Islanders won their final six games to finish with 41 victories and 94 points.“Obviously, over all as a team, it’s disappointing not making the playoffs,” said the Islanders’ captain, John Tavares, who missed the final five games after injuring his hamstring at home against the Devils on March 31. “They fought until the end to give us the best chance possible.”The Islanders, who were coming off two straight 100-point seasons, struggled early after the departures of Frans Nielsen, Kyle Okposo and Matt Martin in free agency and were slogging along at 17-17-8 until Doug Weight became their interim coach, replacing Jack Capuano on Jan. 17.Re-energized behind Weight, a veteran of more than 1,200 games and a Stanley Cup winner with Carolina in 2006, the Islanders surged from last in the Eastern Conference and were briefly in playoff position in late March.But three straight defeats to Boston, Nashville and Philadelphia cost them dearly, and the late run of wins was not enough to catch up. The Islanders’ first-half malaise — losing close games and squandering late leads — proved agonizingly decisive.“We gave away too many points early in the season,” said Anders Lee, who led the Islanders with 34 goals after missing the playoffs last season with a broken fibula. “You want to bank those points, put them away early in the season, or it’s detrimental later when you really need them.”The Islanders also had to deal with a bizarre three-way goaltender rotation among Jaroslav Halak, Thomas Greiss and Jean-Francois Berube for the first three months of the campaign. That confusion ultimately led to Halak, the team’s highest-paid goaltender, being waived and sent to Bridgeport in the American Hockey League in late December.Greiss was mostly steady as the starter, notching a career-high 26 wins. Halak returned to the Islanders in late March, winning six times down the stretch, with only one loss.Halak’s success after the demotion made General Manager Garth Snow’s decision to send him down all the more curious, since Berube struggled with the Islanders in limited action. As the season concluded, the future was murky for Halak, who won a team-record 38 games for the Islanders two seasons ago and is owed $5 million next season in the final year of his contract.“It’s been a lot of ups and downs,” Halak said. “The first half of season was kind of weird. I love to play here. I’m committed to be ready next year. If it’s somewhere else, that’s not up to me. Wherever I am, I will try to do my best.”Both Snow, who has been the general manager since 2006, and Weight were unavailable for comment on Monday.Tavares is also at a crossroad this summer. He is entering the final year of a six-year, $33 million contract, and with unrestricted free agency looming in 2018, his situation will be a challenge to resolve for the franchise and the majority owners Jon Ledecky and Scott Malkin.Tavares, 26, who led the team with 66 points, including 28 goals, has already played eight N.H.L. seasons. Tavares, the first overall pick in 2009 by the Islanders, is clearly a foundation player for the team, which has won just one playoff series since 1993, last spring’s six-game first-round win over Florida. He seemed more eager for a mental respite before dealing with thoughts of his future.“I don’t think my situation needs to be rushed or taken care of tomorrow,” he said.The Islanders also have to contend with rumors surrounding their future home — wherever it may be. Will it remain Barclays Center in Brooklyn, where they have played the past two years after they left Nassau Coliseum in 2015? Or will the team move to a new arena — yet to be built — in Queens or near Belmont Park? The team has not publicly commented.The positives, beyond Lee’s breakout season, included the veteran forward Josh Bailey’s career-high 56 points and the spirited play of the rookies Anthony Beauvillier (nine goals in 66 games) and Josh Ho-Sang, a flashy forward who had four goals in 21 games after his recall from Bridgeport in early March.The 21-year-old Ho-Sang brought offensive verve and excitement that bodes well for a team in need of star power beyond Tavares and Lee.He spoke like a seasoned veteran.“We had a little hiccup,” he said. “We lost a couple of games, and it hurt us in the end because we lost out by 1 point. You look back at those 2-to-1 games since I’ve been here, and they really hurt.”Ho-Sang also spoke of the hard work ahead.“I’m happy with the things that translated in my game and want to work on the things that didn’t,” he said. “It’s about pushing myself in all aspects. There’s another next year, and I have to start over again.”Advertisement