By JAMES WAGNERAPRIL 10, 2017
During spring training, Mets outfielder Jay Bruce gave his boss a message of what he hoped was to come. The Mets acquired Bruce at the trade deadline on Aug. 1 last season, hoping he would help save an injured and sluggish offense. Instead, in the midst of an All-Star season, Bruce struggled himself.It earned him a few days off to clear his head. It also brought some scorn from fans, even after his production improved over the final few games of the season. Those fans were not placated in the off-season when the Mets, after trying to trade Bruce, decided to increase their payroll to keep him in their high-earning outfield with Yoenis Cespedes and Curtis Granderson.So before the 2017 season began, Bruce made his intentions clear to Mets Manager Terry Collins: “Listen, I am the guy you traded for,” Collins recalled Bruce saying. “I had the worst month of my career in New York. I understand that, but I’m a run producer.”Although seven games is a small sample size, Bruce’s play has probably won him back some fans, if not attracting even more. While most of the Mets’ offense has yet to find a consistent rhythm, Bruce has been its shining beacon. The Mets defeated the Philadelphia Phillies, 4-3, on Monday almost entirely because of him.Advertisement“I want to be a good player,” Bruce said. “I want to help this team win. I think we have a legitimate chance to win a World Series. I just want to be one of the pieces to the puzzle.”AdvertisementBruce hit his third and fourth home runs of the season, the latter a two-run, second-deck shot that gave the Mets the lead in the eighth inning. An errant pitch by a Phillies reliever, which may have been intentional, and a shaky Mets bullpen injected drama into the game.“I’m glad that he’s doing what he’s doing, because we certainly need him,” Collins said of Bruce.Having moved up to the cleanup spot in the lineup during the weekend, Bruce had three R.B.I. and played a part in all of the Mets’ runs on Monday. He scored the game-tying run in the seventh inning, a rally that he began with a walk, his sixth of the season.Bruce, 30, a free agent after this season, entered the year with specific goals in mind. Even though he was selected to his third All-Star Game in 2016 and finished with 33 home runs and 99 R.B.I., he was certain he could do more. He wanted to hit more fly balls, especially in his power alley, right-center field, and hoped to draw more walks. He was not satisfied with his .309 on-base percentage last season.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Throughout his hot first week, Bruce said, his secret has been simple: Swing at strikes and remain calm. It has worked, and it has buoyed the Mets while players like Jose Reyes, Neil Walker, Cespedes and Granderson slog through slow starts.“I’ve got the F.B.I. out looking for the real Jose Reyes right now,” Collins said, laughing, as Reyes has gone 1 for 27. “He’s being held somewhere.”Even with Bruce’s hitting, the Mets walked a razor-thin line for much of the game on Monday.Normally dominant against the Phillies, Jacob deGrom stumbled at first. Philadelphia benefited from some bloop hits, and deGrom walked two and gave up two runs in the first inning. He regrouped, and the following five innings were spotless, giving the Mets a chance to jump back into the game. And in the fourth, they did.AdvertisementAfter Phillies starter Jerad Eickhoff baffled the Mets with his curveball, he hung one to Bruce, who smashed it into the seats in right-center field for a solo home run. The Mets tied the game in the seventh when, with Bruce’s help, they took advantage of several Phillies blunders on the night.Bruce drew a leadoff walk, moved to second base on a single by Granderson and to third on a Phillies fielding error. On the next play, the Phillies committed another fielding error that allowed Bruce to score.“Last year, he started a little bit slow with us, but I know what kind of player he is, and what player we see right now is the player he’s been all his career,” said shortstop Asdrubal Cabrera, who played a role in the go-ahead rally.An inning later, Cabrera drew a walk after jawing with Edubray Ramos, the Phillies reliever off whom Cabrera hit a memorable home run last season: an extra-inning, game-winning shot that he celebrated with a bat flip on Sept. 23. Ramos’s first pitch to Cabrera on Monday, a 96-mile-per-hour fastball, was high and behind him, a move that surprised the Mets’ dugout. Phillies catcher Cameron Rupp stepped in front of an angry Cabrera, who yelled at Ramos.“I didn’t even know that was the same guy,” Cabrera said after the game.Two batters after that minor dust-up, Bruce hit the shot that gave the Mets the lead.Mets relievers Jerry Blevins and Hansel Robles each inherited, and escaped, potential game-changing jams in the seventh and eighth innings. Addison Reed coughed up a home run in the ninth but completed the save, protecting Bruce’s best efforts to carry the Mets.INSIDE PITCHOutfielder Juan Lagares, who is recovering from an oblique strain, played his first minor league rehabilitation game on Monday for the Class A St. Lucie Mets in Florida. Manager Terry Collins said the team hoped Lagares could rejoin the parent club by the end of this weekend. … Closer Jeurys Familia has been throwing at the Mets’ spring training complex in Port St. Lucie, Fla. to keep his arm active while he serves his 15-game suspension in connection with domestic-violence accusations last year. Collins said Familia might appear in minor league games by this weekend.A version of this article appears in print on April 11, 2017, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: His Slump in the Past, a Met Ensures His Teammates’ Struggles Matter Less.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.