AdvertisementSupported byRaptors 110, Knicks 97By Mike VorkunovMarkelle Fultz sat courtside Sunday afternoon at Madison Square Garden, the latest stop on an arena tour by a player who is considered the presumptive No. 1 pick in June’s N.B.A. draft. A former N.B.A. star, Stephon Marbury, sat in a baseline seat the length of the court away. It was a ready-made juxtaposition of the Knicks’ past and what they fervently hope will be their future.As those two star guards watched, the Knicks hardly put on a show.Instead, they sent forth a team bereft of its top-line players: Kristaps Porzingis sat out his fourth straight game with a lower-back injury, Derrick Rose will not play the rest of the season after knee surgery, and Carmelo Anthony had the day off.In their absence, the leftover Knicks lost to the Toronto Raptors, 110-97. There were bright spots, but not enough to overcome one of the best teams in the Eastern Conference.Ron Baker had perhaps his best game of the season, finishing with 11 points, 8 rebounds and 8 assists. And the rookie center Willy Hernangomez was an offensive force, scoring 24 points and grabbing 11 rebounds. Without any of the frontcourt stars who usually surround him, Hernangomez more than capably served as the hub of the offense.“He has gotten a great opportunity to play and made the most of it,” Coach Jeff Hornacek said. “He’s got moves inside and he can score.”It was the continuation of a trend confounding the Knicks: Without Anthony and Porzingis, the team has played competently, even commendably. Hernangomez has emerged as a viable building block for the future, displaying offensive flair, although with growing pains on the defensive end of the floor. Baker and Justin Holiday have forced the Knicks to question how they will spend their precious cap room in free agency this summer.But that newfound aptitude has a price. Fultz was scouting one of the many teams that could be his future employer, but the more the Knicks win, the longer their odds of landing him.At this point, the Knicks, with the sixth-worst record in the league, hold a 6.3 percent chance of winning the draft lottery. No matter where they pick, they hope to select a potential savior to pair with Porzingis after so many others failed to resurrect the franchise.Anthony has brought the Knicks star power but just one playoff series victory in seven seasons. Phil Jackson, the team president, has yet to build a squad capable of even reaching the postseason. And at 30-51, the Knicks have lost more games than they did last season.And if the Knicks were to get Fultz, there would be no guarantee he could turn the team around.Marbury is a reminder of how such plans can go awry. He, too, was once considered the future star who could restore the Knicks’ winning ways. Instead, he was involved in one of the messiest times in the team’s history. He played five seasons here before an early exit from the N.B.A. altogether — he is now finishing his career in China, having built a legacy there.Marbury has continued to watch the Knicks from afar. He is a supporter of the triangle offense — Jackson’s beloved system — and said Anthony has handled the controversies he has faced this year with aplomb. And despite the difficulties the Knicks have had, Marbury remains bullish on their future.“It can change; it’s just going to take some commitment and some time,” Marbury said. “It’s the culture, really. You’ve got to continue to change the culture.“When you get a guy like Phil Jackson, you expect the culture to change right away, and things to change right away. But ultimately, it takes a lot of time. But with him as the leader, him being the person that’s making the decision, I think they’re in a great space in having somebody like that.”Advertisement