By KAREN CROUSEAPRIL 10, 2017
AUGUSTA, Ga. — The 81st Masters began with a look back at the life and legacy of Arnold Palmer, a four-time champion whose death last September hung over Augusta National like the dark rain clouds that burst and wiped out the par-3 contest. It ended with the sun shining luminously on Europe.During Sunday’s concluding round, the final twosome of Sergio Garcia of Spain and Justin Rose of England lived up to its marquee billing, with the pair wielding their putters like daggers until Garcia delivered the fatal blow on the first playoff hole. Led by Garcia, players from Europe, which will try to take back the Ryder Cup in France next year, occupied five of the first eight places. Thomas Pieters of Belgium was tied for fourth, the Englishman Paul Casey was sixth and the Northern Irishman Rory McIlroy was tied for seventh.The top American finisher was Matt Kuchar, who tied for fourth. The only other American player in the top eight was Kevin Chappell. Conspicuous by their absences from the first page of the leader board were Rickie Fowler and Jordan Spieth, who teed off Sunday directly ahead of Garcia and Rose in a pairing that failed to live up to its advance billing.Fowler, who began the day one stroke off the lead, carded a four-over 76; Spieth, on his way to a 75, hit his third water ball in his last two Sunday visits to No. 12. They finished in a group at 11th, eight strokes out of the playoff.AdvertisementSpieth’s Sunday round called to mind the final straightaway of a horse that got spooked out of the gate and had to exert so much energy catching up to the field that it had nothing left for the final push. There’s a reason no man has won a major with a quadruple bogey, the score posted by Spieth on the par-5 15th in the first round. Imagine needing four birdies at Augusta National to erase one mistake.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“It was the most free that I’ve ever felt at Augusta National,” said Spieth, who had played in the final pairing on Sunday in his first three starts here. “And so be it that I end up shooting one of my worst rounds. Not going to beat myself up whatsoever over today.”AdvertisementSpieth, the 2015 champion, did well to catch up to the pacesetters by the end of Saturday. The surest sign that Spieth was spent came on the 12th hole, when he didn’t yell at himself or the ball as it headed for its bath. It was as if he didn’t have the energy to wind himself up.To Spieth’s credit, he birdied three of his last four holes to make his score respectable. And as he said in a television interview afterward, his first finish outside the top 2 in four trips is hardly the end of his run here. “Fortunately,” he said, “I get to come back for another 50 years.”More curious was Fowler’s collapse, for which Spieth unnecessarily took some of the blame. “If I was able to hang in there and we were able to feed off each other, then we would have been able to push through like you saw Sergio and Justin able to do today,” Spieth said afterward. “The stage wasn’t too big, it just didn’t quite happen.”The stage might have not been too big, but Fowler putted as if the hole had shrunk two sizes. On Saturday, he made all six of his attempts between 5 and 10 feet. On Sunday he lost his feel with his putter, making 2 of 5 from that distance.“Really, chipping and putting went sideways on me,” Fowler said. “Every time I chipped it close, I missed the putt or I didn’t chip it close enough and I’d miss the putt.”The reason it took Garcia 74 starts to win his first major was because when the pressure was cranked to high, his putts fell short. Now that Garcia has a green jacket, the label of “best player not to have won a major” has been passed like a favorite self-help affirmation to Fowler. There’s no reason to believe he will hang on to the title for long.A version of this article appears in print on April 11, 2017, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: A Leaderboard With European Panache.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.