By FILIP BONDYAPRIL 10, 2017
It would be hard to convince any Yankees fan in attendance at the team’s home opener that this was not a perfect game.In splendid, nearly cloudless weather, the crowd enjoyed fresh stadium enhancements, an 8-1 laugher over Tampa Bay, and an electric performance by the brilliant enigma Michael Pineda.Pineda was so close to a historic achievement that Marc Chalpin of Manhattan was counting down the outs in Section 203 of the bleachers, refusing to use those two words — “perfect” and “game” — in conjunction.“But we are well aware,” he said.His faith and superstition were not entirely rewarded. Pineda mowed down the Rays — 20 in a row — until Evan Longoria took off a bit of the sheen with his two-out, seventh-inning double. Everyone in the stadium took a seat and became resigned to enjoying a more conventional triumph.AdvertisementFrom the start on Monday, Yankees fans were in a generous mood, enjoying some new perks while forgiving the long security lines outside the building and the slow April start by the club that threatened to sabotage another season.AdvertisementCautious optimism has replaced haughty supremacy in the Bronx, a result of four seasons without a playoff victory.“No expectations,” said Steve Tipa of Queens, also known as Statman. “A development season. Pitching is the problem, of course. With Pineda, he’s got the talent, obviously. It’s all in his head.”Even if Pineda never duplicates his extraordinary Monday start for the rest of the season, the Yankees fans will still be able to enjoy new outfield terraces, picnic areas and a children’s playground inside the stadium. All those areas were jammed on Monday and received positive reviews.Better late than never, most agreed.“Up until now, the Yankees didn’t have anything for the kids, one of the few major league clubs that didn’t,” said Pete Mancinelli of Mahopac, N.Y., who was watching his four children climb and slide around the Kids Clubhouse. “The kids can stay here as long as they want.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Then there were the outfield terraces, where fans lined up four deep and balanced their drinks on railings overlooking the action.“They’re finally catching up with the times,” said Rich Garbarino of Old Bridge, N.J. “They don’t have to sell me — I’m a Horace-Clarke-era guy. The real Yankee fans can endure anything. But the younger fans, they might need some selling.”One crowded terrace drew a cautious warning from Margaret Thompson of Pearl River, N.Y.“It looks like trouble,” she said.AdvertisementThompson soon warmed to the place, however.“I don’t want to be a Debbie Downer,” she said. “I’m enjoying the newness.”Before the game began, Tina Lewis polished the small copper plaque on a bench in Section 203 celebrating the original Bleacher Creature, Ali Ramirez. Then the fans in right field performed their first roll call of the season. Vinny Milano, the roll call’s longtime leader, is no longer part of the ritual. The ceremony survived intact, however, and the Yankees players on the field fulfilled their roles Monday, saluting the crowd at the sound of their names.In the end, of course, this team will not be judged by stadium amenities or Yelp ratings. The won-loss record will matter above all, especially if it re-establishes dominance over the Mets, the Yankees’ interborough rivals.The Yankees’ starting lineup Monday included several new faces and excluded some longtime presences like Mark Teixeira and Alex Rodriguez.“We’re on the rise this season, instead of being an 82-to-88-win team that can’t get any better,” Chalpin said.Chalpin liked the fact that 1,300 obstructed-view bleacher seats had been replaced by the terraces, but he still could not see the bottom of the electronic scoreboard from his seat. He was not tempted by the terraces and the $15 drinks there.“Maybe I’ll take out a second mortgage so I can buy a drink with an umbrella,” he said.An article on April 11 about fans at the Yankees’ home opener misidentified the state in which the town of Pearl River is located. It is New York, not New Jersey.A version of this article appears in print on April 11, 2017, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Fans Turn Out in Full, Forgiving Force for Yankees’ Home Opener.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.