By SETH BERKMANAPRIL 10, 2017
As they embark on their 20th season, the Tampa Bay Rays have enjoyed fairly prosperous results over the last decade. They have made the postseason four times in the last nine years, highlighted by a 2008 World Series appearance, with consistently strong young pitching and third baseman Evan Longoria anchoring the offense.Yet, within the Rays’ DNA also exists a strange propensity for reaching nadirs; five times since 2002, Tampa Bay has been no-hit, the most in baseball over that period. The Atlanta Braves, the Los Angeles Dodgers and the San Diego Padres have been no-hit three times in that span.So Monday afternoon, on a picturesque spring day for baseball, it was understandable if Rays fans were feeling a familiar sensation of doom hovering over their franchise. For six and two-thirds innings, Yankees starter Michael Pineda was perfect, displaying the dazzling repertory of fastballs and sliders that have occasionally electrified Yankee Stadium since he arrived via trade in 2012.Longoria was in the lineup the last four times the Rays were no-hit, three of which were perfect games. As Pineda continued to put the Rays away with ease, Longoria said he began to think, “Not again.”AdvertisementBut with two outs in the seventh inning, it was Longoria who drove a first-pitch slider into left field for a double, preventing his fifth experience on the wrong side of a no-hitter.Advertisement“I’ve been there a couple of times — more than a couple of times — more than I’d like to mention,” said Longoria, who struck out in his first two at-bats against Pineda on Monday.Longoria added: “It’s kind of a battle when you’re in those situations to calm yourself down, because it seems like there’s so much more riding on each pitch. When he got to two strikes, he just did a really good job of putting guys away, too. We were definitely trying to swing early and didn’t have a whole lot of success trying to do that.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Longoria’s extensive history in no-hit games, as well as near-no-hit games, may have helped him stay composed. In August 2010, he broke up a no-hitter by Toronto Blue Jays pitcher Brandon Morrow with two outs in the ninth inning.That year, the Rays were no-hit twice, though they still managed to finish in first place in the American League East with 96 wins. That May, Longoria unsuccessfully attempted to end Oakland A’s pitcher Dallas Braden’s perfect game by bunting for a hit, which some considered a violation of baseball’s unwritten code. However, given Longoria’s history with being no-hit, perhaps the bunt should have been forgivable. (That July, the Rays achieved their first and only no-hitter, thrown by Matt Garza.)Monday’s situation was a bit different, though. Several Rays players said there was an added sense of difficulty with an announced crowd of 46,955, a sellout for opening day at Yankee Stadium.“I think it really makes it harder when you’re in an environment like that because you end up swinging at pitches you probably wouldn’t end up swinging at,” Longoria said. “You’re just a little bit more tense in the moment versus if there was nobody in the stands — your heart probably wouldn’t be racing as much.”When Longoria entered the batter’s box in the seventh inning, he said, he was hoping for a mistake pitch by Pineda. At that point, he was 6 for 37 in his career against Pineda, having struck out 14 times.AdvertisementAfter one of his earlier at-bats, Longoria went to watch tape and saw a stat that Pineda was overwhelmingly throwing first-pitch strikes.But Longoria recalled that during his first at-bat, Pineda had opened with a slider. The second at-bat was a first-pitch fastball. So in the seventh, Longoria guessed Pineda would lead with a slider. He was correct.“It was a sense of relief,” Longoria said of his hit.A version of this article appears in print on April 11, 2017, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Star Helps Rays Avoid Yet Another No-Hitter.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.