AdvertisementSupported byBy Billy WitzTAMPA, Fla. — Dellin Betances, who has been to the All-Star Game in each of his first two seasons, no longer comes to spring training with the same intensity — or anxiety — that he did several years ago. Betances is simply trying to prepare for the start of the season, not win a job.“I’m enjoying spring training a lot more,” Betances said recently. For the previous 14 years, C. C. Sabathia took a similar approach. One of baseball’s best pitchers, he needed only to concern himself with being ready for the start of the season. But not now. After three consecutive seasons of declining velocity and diminished performance, hobbled by a degenerative right knee and coming off a 30-day stint in an alcohol rehabilitation clinic, Sabathia is fighting to stay in the rotation.Though Manager Joe Girardi said he would wait another two weeks to make his decision, it appears that only circumstance — an injury or a trade — can spare Sabathia, and his $25 million salary, from relegation to the bullpen.Sabathia was rocked for the second consecutive start on Friday, this time in an 11-2 loss to the Baltimore Orioles. Sabathia allowed seven runs (four earned), three on a home run by Mark Trumbo that gave the Orioles a four-run lead before Sabathia had recorded an out.In three spring starts, Sabathia has a 7.36 E.R.A.Ivan Nova, the other competitor for the fifth spot in the rotation, has been sharp, allowing two runs and eight hits in nine innings over three starts. Nova will start Sunday against the Minnesota Twins.“We’re trying to take the five best starters,” Girardi said before Friday’s game. “But we know there’s six pegs and only five holes. He’s competing, and these are important starts.”A case could be made that Sabathia was unfortunate Friday night. The Yankees had third baseman Rob Refsnyder playing well off the line, and two changeups were grounded past him for doubles. Shortstop Didi Gregorius cost Sabathia a certain out by foolishly trying to peg Joey Rickard going from second to third. And Refsnyder was charged with an error when he could not cleanly backhand Paul Janish’s sharp grounder down the line.But the same thing happened in Sabathia’s last start, when he failed to pick up a dribbler in front of the mound and it opened the way for a big inning. It was reminiscent of last season, when it became clear that Sabathia, with a diminished fastball, could no longer pitch around his mistakes, or those made by others. He surrendered 28 home runs last year, one off the American League lead, in just 1671/3 innings. “As a pitcher, you can still pitch out of mistakes, but you’ve got to make pitches,” Girardi said afterward. “He doesn’t have the ability to blow people away, so your stuff has to be commanded better, and you have to change speeds more.”Sabathia said he had struggled to locate his changeup, which he changed from a two-seam grip to a four-seam grip in the hope of improving his feel for the pitch. He will have two more chances to show improvement.Sabathia shrugged when he was asked if the last two starts would hinder his case. “We’ll see,” he said. He noted that he was notoriously poor in spring training and said he would not — and could not — change his approach now that he was trying to win a job. “I can’t,” he said. “I’m just not wired like that.”Nova, who will most likely have three more starts, said he was not motivated by last season — in which he was demoted to the bullpen — or by his impending free agency after this season.“It’s nothing about the contract,” he said. “I just want to do it for myself; I don’t want to be the guy with the worst season.”Asked if he would be evaluating the entire spring or only where each pitcher was at the end of the month, Girardi said he would consider everything.“It’s going to be a tough decision,” he said. “I’m sure there’s going to be a lot of time talking about it.”INSIDE PITCHJacoby Ellsbury was taken to a nearby hospital Saturday after being hit on the right wrist by pitch from Atlanta’s Julio Teheran; X-rays and a CT scan were negative. ...After the Yankees’ 3-2 victory, the team reassigned outfielder Ben Gamel, infielders Jonathan Diaz and Donovan Solano, and pitchers Tyler Cloyd, Mark Montgomery, Vinnie Pestano and Richard Bleier to their minor league camp.Advertisement