By PAT BORZIMARCH 19, 2016
DES MOINES —  So why, exactly, don’t these teams schedule each other anymore?Kentucky and Indiana, two of college basketball’s most storied programs, gave a near-capacity crowd at Wells Fargo Arena on Saturday the kind of exciting back-and-forth game that both sides will talk about for a while. Until they meet again. Whenever that might be.Indiana’s freshman center Thomas Bryant, who rejected a scholarship offer from Kentucky — how is that for intrigue? — scored 15 of his 19 points in the final 7 minutes 32 seconds to lead the Hoosiers past the Wildcats, 73-67, in a second-round East Region game. It was Bryant, not the standout guard Yogi Ferrell, who provided the spark for Indiana, starting and finishing a 12-2 run in the second half that decided the game.“I spent a lot of time recruiting him,” Kentucky Coach John Calipari said of Bryant. “His family should be proud of how much better he’s gotten. I’m going to be honest — I didn’t realize he was that good.”The Hoosiers (27-7) will face North Carolina in the round of 16 next weekend in Philadelphia. Kentucky finished 27-9.AdvertisementDuring a media timeout with 7:44 to play and the score at 50-50, Indiana Coach Tom Crean asked the 6-foot-10 Bryant, who is from Rochester, N.Y., for something offensively.“Coach told me that he wanted me to attack more, get a quick bucket down on the block when I can,” Bryant said. “He believes in me, and I just went with Coach’s plan.”Crean called a play for Bryant, who scored inside and drew the foul, completing a 3-point play. That started the run, and Bryant finished it with a thunderous dunk to put Indiana up by 62-52 with 4:10 to play. In between, Bryant screamed and flexed to celebrate OG Anunoby’s 3-pointer, which gave Indiana a 6-point lead and prompted Calipari to call a timeout.“Sometime it’s important that Thomas shuts out all the other voices and just hears one, and then we get back to business,” Crean said. “He did a great job of responding at the timeout and carrying out the play.”Kentucky cut the lead to 69-67 in the final minute as Indiana struggled from the foul line, making only three of six in one stretch, with Bryant going 2 for 4. The Wildcats needed to foul with 10 seconds left, putting Bryant back on the line, where he made both.Advertisement“What was mostly going through my mind was staying calm, breathing, and not letting my adrenaline pump so much where it was too much for me,” Bryant said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Ferrell finished with 18 points for Indiana, which shot 54.2 percent in the second half. Tyler Ulis had 27 points for Kentucky, and Jamal Murray added 16.Indiana won even though guard Robert Johnson aggravated a left ankle sprain in the first half and did not return, and forward Juwan Morgan reinjured a balky left shoulder in the second half. Two months ago, Indiana lost the starting forward James Blackmon Jr. for the season after he had an operation on his right knee.The game brought together two legacy programs: Kentucky, the eight-time national champion and the leader in N.C.A.A. tournament appearances (55) and games won (121), and the Hoosiers, winners of five N.C.A.A. titles — one for each star on the back of their red uniform shorts. (That is not a unique idea. The Boston College men’s hockey team wears five stars on its sweaters for the same reason.)This was their first meeting since March 2012, when Kentucky posted a 102-90 victory in an N.C.A.A. regional semifinal. They played a nonconference game every year from the 1969-70 season to the 2011-12 season, a series fans of both teams would love to see them resume.Calipari ended the series after a December 2011 incident at Assembly Hall in Bloomington, Ind., in which Indiana fans stormed the court after Christian Wafford’s buzzer-beater defeated the top-ranked Wildcats, 73-72. From then on, Calipari demanded that the games be played at neutral sites. And Calipari has not budged. Asked Saturday if he would like to resume the series, Calipari said he would — “in Indianapolis.”Kentucky entered the game second in Division I in offensive efficiency, behind Michigan State, according the website KenPom.com. But on Saturday, the Wildcats shot 42.1 percent from the field, picked up only eight assists on 24 baskets while committing 16 turnovers, and managed only 2 second-chance points. Murray, known for celebrating 3-pointers with an elaborate bow-and-arrow routine that involves several Wildcats reserves, made only 1 of 9 from beyond the arc.“Indiana deserved to win this game,” Calipari said. “We didn’t play our best, but maybe it’s because of them that we didn’t play our best. We missed a ton of open shots we normally don’t miss.”And Bryant, who sank 6 of 8 from the field, did not miss much when Indiana needed him late.A version of this article appears in print on March 20, 2016, on Page SP1 of the New York edition with the headline: Forced to Renew an Old Rivalry, Indiana Prevails.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.