By PETER MAYMARCH 19, 2016
PROVIDENCE, R.I. —  At some point in every tournament game, the outcome becomes obvious and the focus for the loser invariably turns to the journey. Yale being Yale, that moment was bound to come sooner rather than later in the N.C.A.A. tournament, especially with a second-round matchup Saturday against Duke at Dunkin’ Donuts Center.On paper, this was every bit a basketball mismatch as it was an academic pick ’em. Duke (25-10) played like a potential N.C.A.A. champion in the first half. Yale (23-7) played the role of consummate spoiler in the second.In the end, overcoming a 27-point deficit proved too much for the Bulldogs. They fought back valiantly, cutting the Duke lead to 3 points in the final minute, but succumbed in the end, 71-64, ending their most successful basketball season in more than a century.“It has been an incredible experience,” said guard Anthony Dallier, a junior who took over last month for Yale’s captain, Jack Montague, who left the team and was eventually expelled after allegations of sexual misconduct.Advertisement“I’ll never forget it,” said Dallier, who scored a career-high 12 points. “It was an honor to be part of such a special team.”AdvertisementBrandon Sherrod, who led Yale with 22 points, said of the season: “It’s been unbelievable. Historic.”By almost any Yale yardstick, this season represented the gold standard of Bulldog basketball. Yale’s 23 victories were the most since the 1906-7 team won 30. The stunning upset of Baylor in the opening round, a victory that galvanized Yalies everywhere, was the first N.C.A.A. tournament victory in program history. Yale, which has played basketball for 121 years, had not even been to the tournament since 1962, and it had stormed through the increasingly competitive Ivy League, going 13-1, and had won 18 of 19 games over all heading into Saturday’s game.Duke, meanwhile, had struggled mightily against U.N.C. Wilmington in its tournament opener and was basically down to six players. But two of those are Grayson Allen and Brandon Ingram, and they collaborated for 54 points with eight 3-pointers. Ingram is widely viewed as one of the top two prospects in this year’s N.B.A. draft. Allen shot like Ray Allen in the first half (8 of 11.)If Yale was looking for any carry-over from the Baylor game, Duke, in general — and Allen, in particular — ended that thought in a hurry. Allen was sensational in the first half, scoring 22 points. Duke made nine of its first 11 3-point attempts, and 3-point plays accounted for 30 of its 48 first-half points.“They hit us with a heavy haymaker,” Yale’s Justin Sears said.The Bulldogs had no answer to the barrage. Trailing, 13-12, Duke shifted into overdrive, going on a 34-6 burst, including an 18-0 run to close it. That made it 46-19. It was 48-25 at the half, the largest deficit Yale faced all season at halftime.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Inside the Yale locker room, the talk was of chipping away. There was an overwhelming sense that Yale could not play any worse, and that Duke could not shoot any better.“The last thing you want to do is go out in your last game losing by 40,” Yale Coach James Jones said. “No one likes the way that tastes. We talked about getting it to the point, with five minutes to go, having a chance to win the game.”To the astonishment of many in the crowd of 11,679, Yale did just that. The Bulldogs trimmed the lead to 56-49 with 9 minutes 29 seconds left on a Sherrod layup. They did not get any closer until the final two minutes, which is when things got really interesting.AdvertisementWith 41.4 seconds left, Sherrod missed the back end of two free throws, but Sears, the Ivy League’s player of the year, who had gone scoreless in the first half, tipped in the rebound to get Yale to within 67-64. But Ingram (25 points) and Allen (29) combined for the game’s final 4 points from the free-throw line as Yale missed its final three shots.Sears finished with 12 points and 11 rebounds, while Makai Mason, the hero of the victory over Baylor, had only 8 points and shot 2 of 12 from the field. Yale lived up to its rebounding image, pounding Duke on the glass (42-28), and held the Blue Devils to 23 points on 27 percent shooting in the second half.It just was not enough.“We knew going into the game, we’re playing a championship-level team, a team that’s old, extremely well coached and together,” said Duke Coach Mike Krzyzewski, whose team advanced to its 25th round of 16.Krzyzewski added, “We beat a heck of a team.”When it was over, Sears called the players together, and they walked across the floor to thank the many fans for their support. It was not a case of unrequited love; the fans were with them for all 40 minutes as well as for this postgame show of appreciation.“We wanted to give them what they bought their tickets for, wanted to give them their money’s worth with the effort that we put in the second half,” Sherrod said.No one was asking for money back.A version of this article appears in print on March 20, 2016, on Page SP5 of the New York edition with the headline: After Trailing Duke by 27, Yale Musters a Last Thrill on Its Way Out .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.