By KEN BELSONMARCH 18, 2016
PORT ST. LUCIE, Fla. —  With a stocked pitching staff and a solid lineup, the Mets are poised to build on their success last year.The biggest question mark, though, has been their captain, David Wright, and how his spinal stenosis will affect his ability to play third base regularly.Wright took a baby step toward answering that question on Friday when he appeared against the Washington Nationals in his first spring training game.While Wright did not hit a home run in his first at-bat — something he did last season in Philadelphia when he came off the disabled list — it was as good a start as could be expected.AdvertisementHe hit two solid singles in three at-bats, cleanly fielded a ground ball at third base and sprinted from first to home on a double, sliding safely across the plate.Advertisement“You’re a little nervous, you have the butterflies, you want to go out there and produce, as funny as that sounds,” Wright said after leaving in the fifth inning of the game, which the Mets lost, 12-7. “Getting that first hit, you kind of take a deep breath, and work on some things.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Wright said the warm weather had helped him keep his back loose. The determining factor, he added, was how his back would feel on Saturday after a night’s rest. If there were no issues, he expected to play in back-to-back home games on Sunday and Monday.During spring training, the Mets have the luxury of letting Wright skip road games and play in simulated games to get extra at-bats. That, of course, will be harder to do when the regular season begins and Wright will have to play in colder weather — and in game after game with many flights and bus rides in between.How Wright withstands the rigors of the season will help determine how many games Wilmer Flores and potentially Eric Campbell play at third base. Before Friday’s game, Flores was batting .500 with three R.B.I.For now, Flores and Campbell will remain Wright’s understudies until the captain figures out how his back reacts to the stress of playing, a process that, for now, remains a day-to-day affair.“The interesting thing is rebounding and seeing how it feels the next day,” Wright said.A version of this article appears in print on March 19, 2016, on Page D5 of the New York edition with the headline: Wright Seems Unbothered by Spine in First Game Back.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.