AdvertisementSupported byBy Dave CaldwellVOORHEES, N.J. — Brayden Schenn’s teammate, roommate, summer workout partner and regular dinner companion left town for good Jan. 6, headed on a plane to Los Angeles. That person also happened to be Schenn’s older brother, Luke. “When you’re tight with somebody, close to somebody, and he gets traded away, it’s not fun, and I can’t imagine if it was your brother,” Claude Giroux, the Philadelphia Flyers’ captain, said after practice Friday.“I think Brayden understood it was good for his brother, but he’s been great since, too,” Giroux said. “His attitude has been the best. He’s played well on the ice, but his attitude off the ice has been really good, too.”Luke Schenn, a 26-year-old defenseman, is to become an unrestricted free agent after the season, and his physical style of play did not fit well in the system installed by the Flyers’ new coach, Dave Hakstol. When he was traded with Vincent Lecavalier to the Kings for center Jordan Weal and a third-round choice in the 2016 draft, Schenn had five points.Since then, Luke Schenn has seven points for the Kings, who are in first place in the Pacific Division. But Brayden Schenn’s statistics have also improved since Luke left town, helping the Flyers, who play a big game Saturday against Pittsburgh, make a furious push for a Stanley Cup playoff berth.At the time of the trade, Brayden Schenn had 10 goals and 10 assists, and the Flyers had a 16-15-7 record. Since the trade, Schenn, a center, has 15 goals and 14 assists, and the Flyers have gone 18-8-5.Schenn, 24, smiled when he said the timing of his improvement in relation to his brother’s trade was “just coincidence.” He said he had no good answer, but then gave one anyway.“I guess you come to the rink, with your brother there, and maybe you tend to worry about him a little too much,” Schenn said. “So maybe you just come here to focus on yourself and worry about yourself.”The Schenns had been teammates for three and a half years, and because they also spent the summers in their hometown, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, Brayden said, “We were with each other year around.”Luke arrived in Philadelphia in a June 2012 deal that sent the high-scoring forward James van Riemsdyk to Toronto. The trade never worked for the Flyers, who missed the playoffs twice. Brayden, the fifth overall pick in the 2009 draft, arrived with the pugnacious winger Wayne Simmond in a 2011 trade that sent Mike Richards to the Kings.When Jakub Voracek sustained an injury to his left foot late last month, Schenn joined Giroux and Simmonds on the top line. Voracek practiced Friday in hopes of returning Saturday, but the Flyers went 7-1-1 while he was gone, and Hakstol is keeping Schenn on the line.“I think I’ve got to buy them beer when we make the playoffs,” Voracek said of his teammates.Schenn had the first hat trick of his career in a Feb. 29 victory at home over Calgary, and he took a magnificent pass from Giroux to score a critical tying goal in a 3-2 win Wednesday over the defending Stanley Cup champion Chicago Blackhawks at Chicago.When asked why Schenn had clicked with Giroux and Simmonds, Hakstol referred to their defensive effort. “It starts with them working 200 feet,” he said. “That’s been a huge part of our success here — every one of our forwards plays a 200-foot game and taking pride in that. All three guys have done it.”Hakstol added: “They’ve played a lot of hockey together. They’ve got some cohesion, and they’re going at a pretty good clip.”Philadelphia (34-23-12) opens Saturday a point behind the Detroit Red Wings (35-25-11), who hold the second wild-card playoff berth in the Eastern Conference, and three behind the Penguins (38-24-8). But Detroit is 5-5 in its last 10 games, and the Flyers have played two fewer games than the Red Wings.The Flyers have also been getting clutch saves from their goaltenders, Steve Mason and Michal Neuvirth, whom Hakstol called “the strength of our team.” A night after Mason helped the Flyers beat Detroit, Neuvirth helped them beat Chicago.“We’ve been playing some playoff hockey pretty much here for the last month and a half,” Schenn said. “There’s always some scoreboard-watching that goes along with it. But these are the games you like to play. Everyone is buying in. Everyone’s on the same page. There’s no selfishness at all. It’s resulting in wins.”Brayden Schenn said his brother’s trade had not been a shock; Luke had been talking to his agent for a couple of weeks about the possibility of being traded before it was announced. Brayden Schenn thought Luke might have stayed until Feb. 29, the trade deadline.But it happened sooner, and Brayden said the brothers had to find “different ways of communication” rather than just practicing, playing, working out or eating together. Now the only way they could meet is in the Stanley Cup final, and, Brayden said, “That would be nice.”Advertisement