AdvertisementSupported byBy Marc TracyST. LOUIS — After Syracuse beat Dayton, 70-51, on Friday, several of the Orange’s coaches watched the Midwest Region game between No. 15-seeded Middle Tennessee State and No. 2-seeded Michigan State at Scottrade Center. They knew they would be playing the winner.And so when Middle Tennessee State won, setting up a matchup Sunday against Syracuse, Griff Hopkins, the adolescent son of the Syracuse assistant Mike Hopkins, turned to another Syracuse assistant, Adrian Autry, and said, “It’s going to be a long night.”After all, No. 10-seeded Syracuse (20-13) could not possibly have already prepared for a team that had just pulled off one of the biggest upsets in N.C.A.A. history. Right?Wrong.“No, man, it’s done,” Autry told Griff Hopkins.The N.C.A.A. tournament requires teams that win their first game to play again with just a day of preparation. Losing means an end to your season.Which is why, when the bracket came out last Sunday, Syracuse Coach Jim Boeheim assigned one assistant to scout Michigan State and another — Autry — to begin to prepare for the Blue Raiders (25-9).“We come in and both guys prepare like we’re going to play that team, up until the game’s over,” Boeheim said Saturday.To Boeheim and Autry, the practice seemed as natural as breathing.When a fan hears a coach or a player say that a team is “just taking it one game at a time” or that a competitor “was a really good team, with weapons that can beat you,” an eye roll is all but a reflex.But as Syracuse prepares to play a team that few people outside Murfreesboro, Tenn., expected would be playing in the tournament’s second round — and probably few in that town, near Nashville — it is worth considering that coaches repeat those truisms because they believe them.Autry said he did not see scouting Middle Tennessee State as a moot assignment last Sunday night.“I went upstairs, got right back on the computer and just started getting after it,” he said.What he found was what the rest of the world saw in Middle Tennessee State’s 90-81 victory over the Spartans: The Blue Raiders, this season’s Conference USA champion, were for real.“After Day 2 or Day 3 of watching tape, I said, ‘You know what? This team — the seeding may be a little off,’ ” Autry said.Boeheim, too, seemed to have figured this out. “I had talked to a pro scout,” he said, “and he had told me, and some people had told him, that this was a very, very good team. And when you watch them play, it’s pretty obvious.”As evidenced in their 55.9 field-goal percentage against Michigan State’s stout defense, the Blue Raiders have several sharpshooters. On defense, they are aggressive and deploy multiple looks.“We’ve played against all those defenses,” Autry said, but, he added, “I don’t think we’ve played against a team that actually plays all those defenses in one game.”Doyin Akintobi-Adeyeye, a reserve sophomore forward for the Orange, compared Middle Tennessee State’s physical defense to Pittsburgh’s and likened its penchant for 3-pointers to Florida State’s. Syracuse went 1-4 against Pittsburgh and Florida State, Atlantic Coast Conference rivals, including in the conference tournament.“We just pay attention to everybody,” Akintobi-Adeyeye said. “You have to respect everybody. It is the tournament.”Advertisement