By BEN ROTHENBERGMARCH 19, 2016
INDIAN WELLS, Calif. —  Even for the sport’s best, any success against top-ranked Novak Djokovic — however relative — must be appreciated.In the 48th installment of one of the longest rivalries in men’s tennis, Djokovic dispatched Rafael Nadal, 7-6 (5), 6-2, on Saturday in the semifinals of the BNP Paribas Open. Djokovic withstood an inspired start from the fifth-ranked Nadal before ultimately pulling away for his 25th victory over Nadal. He will face 14th-ranked Milos Raonic in the final on Sunday.Though Nadal, a 14-time Grand Slam champion, has now lost six straight matches and 13 straight sets to Djokovic, this match still represented progress. He was badly beaten, 6-1, 6-2, in their earlier meeting this year in the final of the Qatar Open. Nadal went on to lose in the first round of the Australian Open and entered the Indian Wells tournament 0-4 against opponents ranked in the top 50 this year.But after Nadal saved a match point against the German wunderkind Alexander Zverev in the fourth round, his game has reflected his growing confidence. His recently timid forehand has seemingly regained its bullying spirit.AdvertisementNadal struck quickly Saturday, taking a 2-0 lead, and though Djokovic immediately leveled the set at 2-2, it was played on the same level footing that has marked their rivalry for much of the past decade.Advertisement“Yeah, he was better; undoubtedly he prefers playing here comparing to Doha,” Djokovic said of Nadal. “I think these conditions played in his favor more because of the ball bounce and the speed of the court.”With Nadal’s topspin forehand accentuated by the thin desert air and gritty courts, Djokovic was forced to summon a more robust defense than in their recent matches.“He was trying to use that shot, move me around the court, and he did that at the beginning of the match,” Djokovic said. “It could have gone either way, the first set, but I managed to stay composed and serve well in important moments, and just believe that I can win.”In the ensuing tiebreaker, Djokovic raced out to a 4-1 lead with three points won on Nadal’s serve, and though Nadal was able to level at 5-5 after a timid smash from Djokovic, his backhand wilted into the net on Djokovic’s first set point.Consistently able to direct the ball down the line from both wings, Djokovic broke Nadal for 4-2 in the second set, and finished the match with a second break as a Nadal forehand sailed long.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I played well during the week,” Nadal said. “I won very interesting matches, good ones, fighting. Today was closer than the last couple of times against the best player of world, so it was a very positive week for me. That’s the way I’m going to try, to follow this way to keep going with this level. If I am able to play weeks in a row at this level, then you start to think about the chances to compete for everything.”Djokovic will face a different challenge in the final against Raonic, who booked a spot in his third Masters final with a 6-3, 3-6, 6-3 win earlier Saturday over the 18th-ranked David Goffin. Raonic, a 6-foot-5 towering server, has rounded into a more complete player this year. His only loss came in the Australian Open semifinals, in five sets to Andy Murray, when Raonic was battling a leg injury.“I feel like even when I’m not playing my best, I’m able to find the answer and the solutions,” Raonic said. “I feel like I’m competing well. I feel like I’m dealing with the situations much better. I definitely have been playing at a higher level this year, but I think also when I have had those difficult moments, or let’s say some kind of crisis throughout matches, I have found solutions better.”AdvertisementRaonic, who was forced to miss much of last season because of an injury after briefly hitting a career high of No. 4 in the ATP rankings, said time on the outside looking in brought clarity to his own game.“It allowed me to watch more tennis and understand what the more important things are for me,” Raonic said of his injury absences. “I think I have had much more of a clear — I wouldn’t say it’s a focus — I think more of a vision of what I need to do in specific situations. I try to always go back to that, and that’s what works for me.”Raonic, 25, is hardly young by traditional tennis standards, but he has been all but locked out of the upper echelon of the game in this era of dominance by Djokovic, Nadal, Murray and Roger Federer.Though 79 Masters events have been played since Djokovic won his first Masters title in Miami in 2007, none have been won by a player younger than him. Djokovic, who turns 29 in May, reflected on the lack of any breakthrough in the generation following his own.“Certainly, those guys can play very well for a tournament or two, or two months,” Djokovic said. “But can they play throughout the year at a very high level? That’s a question mark. But it certainly is good for tennis to have young players coming up and challenging the best.”A version of this article appears in print on March 20, 2016, on Page SP8 of the New York edition with the headline: Djokovic Makes Final at Indian Wells After Beating a More Confident Nadal.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.