AdvertisementSupported byVirginia 77, Butler 69By Ray GlierRALEIGH, N.C. — Virginia added to an unconventional N.C.A.A. men’s basketball tournament on Saturday night, but not in the manner of the upset stories that have ruled the first four days. The Cavaliers, regarded as a ferocious defensive team, turned themselves into an offensive locomotive against Butler. The Cavaliers shot 73 percent in the second half (19 of 26) and beat the Bulldogs, 77-69, in a round-of-32 game at PNC Arena. Virginia, the No. 1 seed in the Midwest Region, has made a reputation with its pack-line system of defense and not allowing opponents to get into the lane. The Cavaliers (28-7) were decent on defense against No. 9-seeded Butler, but five players in double figures, led by guard Malcolm Brogdon’s 22 points, were the key to avoiding an upset.The Cavaliers next will play Iowa State in Chicago. Virginia had a stretch early in the second half when it made 12 of 13 shots. The Cavaliers had to be sharp, because Butler’s Andrew Chrabascz captivated the crowd with his shooting on the way to a game-high 25 points.“Sometimes that’s what happens at this level — these games are not very conventional,” Virginia guard Devon Hall said.Butler (22-11) led by 25-23 at the half, but Virginia came out in the second half and made five straight shots and threatened to put away the Bulldogs. Chrabascz, a 6-foot-7 junior, had other ideas. He hit three 3-pointers and scored 12 points in the first three and a half minutes of the second half. Butler led, 39-34. “Kellen and Rose free up so much space on the offensive end, it was open areas and finding me in sweet spots,” Chrabascz said of guards Kellen Dunham and Roosevelt Jones.Virginia adjusted to Chrabascz after a timeout with 15 minutes 16 seconds left. The Cavaliers went to a four-guard lineup around the post man Anthony Gill to better deal with Chrabascz.Virginia was able to trap Chrabascz in the post, and with a more athletic lineup, it could switch on all screens, instead of trailing shooters. Chrabascz scored 1 point in the final 16:30.“There was somebody in my lap the entire time,” Chrabascz said.Virginia debated whether to guard Chrabascz with the 6-foot-8 Anthony Gill or the 6-5 Brogdon. Brogdon, the Atlantic Coast Conference defensive player of the year, drew the assignment and took him out of the game.“He’s a tough guard because he’s not quite 6-8, but he’s not quite a guard,” Brogdon said. “You just have to match his physicality.”He talked to his coaches about a defensive switch. “I definitely did lobby; I wanted to guard him a little bit, disrupt him,” Brogdon said.The other stellar defensive effort was by the junior London Perrantes on Butler’s Dunham, a sharpshooter who was averaging 16.5 points per game. Dunham made just 3 of 8 shots and finished with 8 points.“I didn’t want him to get any open shots and get rolling early so he had a lot of confidence,” Perrantes said. “I wanted to make it as hard for him as I could, and I felt I did a pretty good job.”The first five minutes were as expected as both teams showed their ferocious defenses. Virginia was especially stingy with Dunham, a 6-foot-6 swingman who took his first shot with 3:56 left in the first half. Butler committed four turnovers and stayed in contention in the second half with 17 points from Jones, a redshirt senior who has endured an emotional second half of the season with the death of a close friend, the former Butler player Andrew Smith. Jones played a spirited game in the second half, but Virginia’s balance was too much for Butler in the end. Gill made 7 of 9 shots and finished with 19 points.“The emphasis was to go inside because Gill was playing really well,” Hall said.Advertisement