AdvertisementSupported byBy Karen CrouseORLANDO, Fla. — Anyone who wandered in out of the rain to catch the tail end of Jason Day’s news conference on Saturday might have thought he was describing having to drive home in clothes that were soaked to his skin. Day’s discomfort was a theme he kept returning to, but it had nothing to do with the awful weather that turned Bay Hill Golf Club into a sodden sponge in the afternoon. He was forecasting an uncomfortable 24 hours because of his standing as the tournament’s 54-hole leader.Day carded a two-under-par 70 for a two-stroke advantage, at 15 under, over Troy Merritt (67) Kevin Chappell (67) and Henrik Stenson (70) at the Arnold Palmer Invitational. The pacesetter after every round, Day will go out Sunday to try to become the PGA Tour’s first wire-to-wire winner since he pulled off the feat at the BMW Championship last September. With a victory, Day, the world No. 3, would become the first player to hold the outright lead after every round of this event since Fred Couples in 1992.He described trying to close out a golf tournament as a “good, uncomfortable feeling” and said: “You have to leave the course knowing that you have the lead every day. You also have to sleep on it, you have to come to the course knowing that you have the lead and you have to go out there and — even though you’re going, ‘O.K., I’m in a good position,’ it’s different pressure.”Day was speaking the afternoon after a Friday night that featured eight N.B.A. games, seven of them won by the team that was leading after the third quarter. The lone exception was the Cleveland Cavaliers, Day’s favorite team, which came from 3 points down against the host Orlando Magic to prevail by 6.But if momentum can be the wind at the back of a basketball team, it is not always a slam dunk in golf. In the first 17 events of this wraparound season, seven players who held at least a share of the third-round lead have gone on to victory. The last 54-hole leader to win this event was Tiger Woods in 2013. It was his eighth title in this event. Last year, Stenson took a two-stroke advantage into the final round and finished second. In 2014, Adam Scott was ahead by three and finished tied for third.In basketball, if a player loses focus or his shot deserts him, he can take a seat on the bench or lean on a teammate to pick up the slack. If it’s a tough day in golf, Day said, “you have to keep grinding out and fighting until it’s done.”It is easier to ride momentum in a sport like basketball that is reactive and instinctive. Golf is like four hours at the foul line, with time to think between each shot. Day, 28, has a preshot routine that includes closing his eyes and visualizing the flight of the ball. On his back nine, as the rain intensified, Day had to fight the inclination to rush.“It was tough to get momentum,” he said, adding: “I wasn’t able to get deliberate with my preshot routine, and I was standing over it and I see a draw, and then I see a fade, and then I see all sorts of shots. I had to make sure to pull myself back and try to refocus.” In the final round last year, Stenson and his playing competitor, Morgan Hoffmann, were too deliberate. They were put on the clock early and then again on the 15th hole. Stenson began to rush and made a costly three-putt at the 16th to let the victory slip out of his grasp. He finished one stroke behind Matt Every.On Saturday, after his third round, highlighted by an eagle on the par-5 sixth before the rain came, Stenson was asked what he learned during last year’s final round that would prove helpful this time. “Maybe take a little bit more time if you get on the clock,” Stenson said with a laugh. He added, “When you’re in contention, you’ve got to go out and play a solid round of golf.”Bay Hill is a reflection of its host, Palmer, who during his playing career viewed all risks on the course as there for the rewarding. There are aggressive lines to be taken, but also those that are best avoided. “Especially on the last three holes, it’s a lot of things that can happen,” Stenson said. “You can go eagle-birdie-birdie finish, and you can go par, bogey, bogey. It could be a big swing coming in.”Day has played Nos. 16, 17 and 18 in five under this past week. He is receiving counsel from Woods, with whom he has exchanged texts. “Patience and aggression is what he says,” Day said, adding, “And pretty much if it’s not going your way, suck it up and just get it done somehow.” He laughed. “And that’s just a typical Tiger Woods comment right there.”Woods’s words go a long way toward explaining his success as a front-runner. Merritt, who won his first PGA Tour title last year after holding the 54-hole lead, put it differently. “There’s a certain fear factor that I’ve always played with when I’ve had the lead, and that’s the fear of being caught.” He was smiling as he spoke. Those good, uncomfortable feelings are hard won. Advertisement