By VICTOR MATHERJUNE 3, 2016
Ten athletes were chosen on Friday for a team that will represent the world’s refugees at the Olympic Games in Rio de Janeiro.The team will march behind the Olympic flag in the opening ceremony on Aug. 5, taking a place just in front of the host country, Brazil.The group would be “a symbol of hope for refugees worldwide and bring global attention to the magnitude of the refugee crisis,” the International Olympic Committee said in announcing the team’s members.The I.O.C. had identified a pool of about 40 potential Olympians and narrowed it down “based on sporting level, official refugee status verified by the United Nations, and personal situation and background,” the committee said.AdvertisementSome of the athletes were discovered at the Kakuma refugee camp in Kenya, near the border with South Sudan, where tens of thousands have fled war.AdvertisementFive South Sudanese, all runners, were chosen: three men (James Nyang Chiengjiek, 400 meters; Yiech Pur Biel, 800 meters; Paulo Amotun Lokoro, 1,500 meters) and two women (Rose Nathike Lokonyen, 800 meters; Anjelina Nada Lohalith, 1,500 meters).The South Sudanese have been training in Nairobi with Tegla Loroupe, a two-time New York City Marathon champion and three-time Olympian from Kenya who was named the leader of the refugee delegation.Popole Misenga and Yolande Bukasa Mabika, two judo practitioners who defected from the Democratic Republic of Congo at the 2013 world championships in Brazil, were also chosen for the team.The other athletes selected for the team were Rami Anis and Yusra Mardini, two Syrian swimmers living in Europe, and Yonas Kinde, an Ethiopian marathoner living in Luxembourg.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.None of the athletes selected appears to be a likely medal contender. For example, the South Sudanese runners, while said to be promising, are untested in top competition.Misenga was eliminated in the first round at the 2013 world judo championships, and Anis placed 14th of 30 swimmers in the 100-meter butterfly at the 2010 Asian Games. Kinde’s time of 2 hours 17 minutes 31 seconds was good for 29th place at the Frankfurt Marathon last year, and dozens of potential Olympians can break 2:10.Athletes have marched behind the Olympic flag before, usually as a result of geopolitical conflict. In 1992, athletes from Yugoslavia competed under the Olympic banner because of sanctions against the country related to the war in the Balkans. Athletes from the new nations of East Timor in 2000 and South Sudan in 2012 competed under the flag because those countries’ formal Olympic committees had not yet been formed.But this will be the first team of refugees at an Olympics.“You’re an athlete; you don’t think like you’re Syrian or from London or from Germany,” Mardini, 17, said in a video produced by the I.O.C. “You will just think about your race. You have your lane, your swimming cap, your swimming lesson. That’s it.”A version of this article appears in print on June 4, 2016, on Page D6 of the New York edition with the headline: Refugees to March Behind Olympic Flag.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.