AdvertisementSupported byColombia 2, United States 0By Andrew KehSANTA CLARA, Calif. — Eight minutes into the first match of Copa América, the Colombians started to dance.They needed only that little time to notch a precipitous opening goal against the United States, which moved them to perform a coordinated, swaying celebration near the northwest corner flag at Levi’s Stadium. Their rhythm and spirit barely wavered as they cruised to a 2-0 victory on Friday night.The match opened the South American championship, which is being played in the United States this year to mark its 100th anniversary. It also represented an early setback for the United States and Coach Jurgen Klinsmann, who had said the team’s goal in the tournament was to emerge from the group stage. The road ahead is somewhat easier for the Americans, who play Costa Rica on Tuesday and Paraguay on June 11.They were always expected to face a steep challenge from Colombia, the world’s No. 3 team, according to the FIFA rankings.Within the first five minutes, center back Geoff Cameron, facing heavy pressure on the ball, executed a 360-degree evasive dribble to escape trouble near the United States goal, drawing appreciative shouts from the crowd.But Cameron was far less composed three minutes later when defending the corner kick from which Colombia notched its first goal. As the ball floated in from the right corner, Colombia defender Cristián Zapata cut inside and around a screen from the far post, and Cameron, who tried ducking under the screen, was too slow. Zapata, unattended, pounded a leaping volley into the net.The American defenders aggressively aligned themselves high on the field from the start, inviting trouble from Colombia’s collection of talented attackers. But the damaging plays ended up coming from set pieces.Colombia doubled its lead in the 42nd minute, when the captain James Rodríguez — who came off in the second half with an apparent injury — rolled a penalty kick firmly into the bottom right corner. It was an unfortunate turn of events for the Americans, who had been penalized when a ball crossed from left back Farid Díaz struck the outstretched right arm of right back DeAndre Yedlin while his back was turned.The Americans have much room to improve as the tournament takes shape.It was not until the game’s final half-hour that the United States tested the Colombia defense. In the 60th minute, Colombia midfielder Sebastián Pérez splayed his legs out to block Clint Dempsey’s goal-bound header off the line. Four minutes later, Dempsey forced Colombian goalkeeper David Ospina to make a leaping save when he spun a free kick toward the upper right corner of the goal.For all of Copa América’s prestige and historical importance, Klinsmann has seemed to most appreciate its value as a testing ground and measuring stick, not only for his team but also for the state of the game in the country.“This is a big benchmark: We want to see where we are between two World Cups,” Klinsmann said Thursday.The 16-team tournament will unfold in 10 cities across the country over the coming weeks, and American soccer officials will have their eyes on each game as they try to emphasize the country’s suitability to host a future World Cup tournament.In 2010, the United States lost its bid to host the 2022 tournament. It last hosted the tournament in 1994.“We want to get as far as we can in the tournament, but we also want to showcase our game to the rest of the world, because down the road, we would love to host the World Cup again,” Klinsmann said on Tuesday. “This is a huge opportunity for all of us to show everybody outside the U.S. that we are ready for a World Cup.”In that regard at least, the game, which drew an announced sellout crowd of 67,439 fans, seemed like a promising start.Advertisement