By CARLA CORREAJUNE 3, 2016
HAMILTON, N.J. — For about as long as Lauren Hernandez can remember, Maggie Haney has guided her through the daily rituals that gymnasts know well. The early drives to practice, six days a week. The hours of conditioning. The pep talks and the hugs, when things go right and when they do not.Hernandez, who goes by Laurie, has never competed without Haney by her side. Haney had never coached an elite gymnast before Hernandez. In a sport in which top coaches often turn out multiple elite athletes, in which families sometimes traverse the country to work with those coaches, these two share an uncommon bond.Each new experience has been experienced together.“She’s kind of like my firstborn,” Haney said as Hernandez, the reigning national junior champion, trained in a gym here on a recent Friday. “She’s not just a regular kid. I don’t say that just because I’ve had her forever.”If Hernandez, who will be 16 on Thursday, is a member of the United States Olympic team in Rio de Janeiro, teacher and student will share another first: as underdogs at the Summer Games.AdvertisementIt seems that turning 16 in an Olympic year could be a good thing. The past nine United States Olympic gymnastics squads have included at least one girl who was 16 or younger. Among the four American women to win an all-around Olympic gold medal, three — Mary Lou Retton, Carly Patterson and Gabby Douglas — were 16.AdvertisementBut because Hernandez was not 16 by Jan. 1, she was ineligible to compete last year against older peers who incorporate tougher skills. Other younger gymnasts are in a similar position, including Jazmyn Foberg, the surprise 2014 national junior champion, who is Hernandez’s best friend and training partner.And the American talent pool may be the deepest it has ever been. Simone Biles, 18, the runaway favorite to win the all-around event in Rio, is the only woman with three consecutive world all-around titles. Douglas, now 20, could be the first female all-around champion since Nadia Comaneci of Romania in 1980 to compete in the subsequent Olympics. Aly Raisman, the most decorated American gymnast at the 2012 Games, is back at 22.There are only five spots on the American team. At the Olympic trials in July, Hernandez needs to be lucky.“She’s going to be the fourth or fifth in, or the first or second out,” Haney said. “There’s only one position that’s a lock, and that’s Simone. If she’s walking, she’s going.”Hernandez thinks now is her time but maintains that “Rio’s just another meet.”“I’m just taking it day by day,” she said between laughs. “I can’t even tell you what I’m doing in September or something. Or tomorrow. I don’t even know what I’m doing tomorrow.”She said she had not given the 2020 Tokyo Olympics much thought. There is so much to do before then: going to prom, graduating from high school, enrolling in college. She and Foberg have tentatively committed to the University of Florida; their Twitter bios include “future Florida Gator.”Hernandez has built a strong résumé at her young age, especially after sitting out 2014 after she injured her right knee and tore a patellar tendon.Advertisement“I got a piece of a dead person’s ligament in my body,” she said.In 2015, Hernandez won all-around titles in every major national and international competition she entered. She has also finished second to Biles in closed-door training camp competitions.Hernandez has been called a human emoji. Charisma oozes from her muscle-packed, 5-foot frame. She makes funny faces. She likes to color. She loves to paint her nails. She enjoys “ooh, so many” kinds of food, she said, but especially ice cream. She eats it in moderation, of course.“Secretly,” she said, “I’m a 5-year-old.”Haney, a former gymnast at North Carolina State, funnels that energy into her pupil’s routines. Hernandez does not have the most difficult or powerful tumbling, Haney said, but her dance ability makes her a crowd pleaser on beam and floor exercise.Martha Karolyi, who oversees elite women’s gymnastics in the United States and has an outsize influence on who makes the Olympic team, is vocal about artistry and execution. Every turn and leap, every pointed toe and eyebrow raised, could bolster Hernandez’s chances.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But what about the emoji faces?“If it’s a good idea, then Maggie will put it in my routine,” Hernandez said. “If it’s not, she’ll be like, ‘No, don’t do that.’ Most of the time, she’ll say: ‘Add a face here; do this face here. No, no, no, that one’s too expressive. You’ve got to tone it down a bit.’”Haney said: “I’ve definitely had to learn over the years to calm her down, to keep her more focused. Not to just always be so fun, fun, fun, but to really be calm and in control of her body.”Hernandez began gymnastics when she was enrolled in group lessons in her hometown, Old Bridge, N.J. When Hernandez was 6, Haney’s sister, who teaches recreational classes, singled her out as a child with potential. A child “so cute,” Haney recalled her sister saying, “you’re going to love her.”Since then, Hernandez’s parents, Anthony and Wanda, a court clerk and a social worker, have trusted Haney to be a chauffeur, advocate, cheerleader and disciplinarian for their youngest child.Advertisement“Her family supports her, and they trust me,” Haney said. “Until, I’d say, the past year, the past six months, we never even talked about the Olympics or the goal of the Olympics. So her family’s been a bit in the dark on what we’ve been doing every day.“But now with social media, you can find everything out there. They started seeing ‘Rio hopeful,’ so then it kind of had to become a topic of conversation.”Before the Olympics were in the picture, Foberg joined Haney and Hernandez, and the duo became a trio. Foberg did not compete in early 2016 because of an ankle injury, but she and Hernandez will be at the Secret Classic meet on Saturday in Hartford, one of the last showcases before the Olympic trials next month. Karolyi will be watching, closely.“I don’t want to mess it up,” Haney said, looking at Hernandez across the gym. “I want to make sure I get everything right for her. So, it’s stressful. You never know. Maybe when she’s 20, we can do this again, but there’s no guarantee. So you just want to get it right the first time.”Haney and Hernandez have a deal if they spend August in New Jersey.“Stick around for 2020,” the coach told the student, “and I’ll make sure you get a really cute prom date.”An earlier version of a photo caption with this article misstated the age of Lauren Hernandez. She is 15, not 16.A version of this article appears in print on June 4, 2016, on Page D7 of the New York edition with the headline: Fun and (Maybe) Games.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.