
On Baseball By                     
 TYLER KEPNER
 
JUNE 3, 2016
BALTIMORE — David Price signed with the Boston Red Sox last winter for the most lucrative contract ever given to a pitcher. The terms of his deal — $217 million for seven years — tend to eclipse any other reason people will accept for his decision.“It’s the youth that we have, the core group of guys that we have,” Price said. “People don’t care — it’s just 217; it’s a number, but that’s why I’m here.”Price was speaking in the visitors’ clubhouse this week at Camden Yards, where the Red Sox scored 29 runs in splitting a four-game series with the Orioles. He could have pointed to all corners of the room to illustrate his point. Dynamic young hitters surround him, and they should for years to come.The Red Sox had the best record in the American League through Thursday, at 32-22, and led the majors in runs, with six per game. Through the first third of the season, they have scored far more runs than they had at the same point in each of their recent title years (2004, 2007 and 2013). Only one A.L. team comes within a run of Boston’s per-game average, and the Red Sox are hitting .296.Advertisement“Offensively, this team puts up numbers every night,” Manager John Farrell said. “If you keep the game under control, minimize damage and stay away from the big inning, you’ve got a chance for quite a bit of success.”AdvertisementFarrell was speaking on Wednesday after Mookie Betts had homered twice, giving him five in two days, something no other leadoff man had ever done. But the Red Sox lost the game, 13-9, and the team reacted swiftly to starter Joe Kelly’s failure to protect the lead: They shipped him to the minors.Kelly, a five-year veteran, had only recently left the disabled list and had struggled for just two starts in a row. But the Red Sox are operating with urgency after successive last-place finishes in the A.L. East.With Betts, Xander Bogaerts and Jackie Bradley Jr., their next generation of hitters seems ready to win big, as David Ortiz — who smashed his 16th homer of the season on Thursday — faces retirement. Bogaerts had a 26-game hitting streak through Thursday, and Bradley finished a 29-game streak last week.“You look at the amount of success we had in the minors,” said third baseman Travis Shaw, another young cornerstone. “I know they don’t really preach or care about winning in the minor leagues, but it seemed like any time we were all together, we always won, we always clicked. We have an extremely tight-knit group, on and off the field.”The Red Sox discovered Bogaerts in Aruba in 2009, when he was 16 and they were scouting his twin brother, Jair. Bogaerts had chickenpox, but the Red Sox asked to see him, too, and signed him for $410,000. They later traded Jair Bogaerts to the Chicago Cubs as part of the compensation package for the departure of General Manager Theo Epstein.The 2011 draft was Epstein’s last with the Red Sox, and the last under the old collective bargaining agreement, when teams could spend whatever they wanted, without penalty, and stockpile high picks by losing free agents.The Tampa Bay Rays had 11 of the first 75 picks that June, yet they found only two players who have appeared in a game for them: outfielder Mikie Mahtook and Blake Snell, a top pitching prospect. The Red Sox found Bradley, from the University of South Carolina, with the 40th overall pick; Betts, from a Tennessee high school, in the fifth round; and Shaw, from Kent State, in the ninth. Left fielder Blake Swihart, from a New Mexico high school, and three pitchers were also part of the haul.“It’s encouraging and exciting when you can get players the area scouts and cross-checkers really like, and they’re premium position guys,” said Gus Quattlebaum, Boston’s pro scouting director, who was the assistant amateur scouting director in 2011. “But there’s a lot of luck involved. We’re betting on human beings.”AdvertisementThe Red Sox drafted three players before Bradley and seven before Betts. But the process of selecting them — including a computer-simulation game that tests pitch recognition and plate discipline — put Boston in position to find gems.Bogaerts has already contributed to a title, winning the third-base job during the 2013 postseason, when he hit .296. (He became the full-time shortstop last year.) Epstein’s successor, Ben Cherington, held tight to Betts, Bradley and the rest while the team struggled during the past two seasons.While the Yankees try in vain to develop position players — leaving them with an aging and feeble lineup — their rivals are well positioned for the future.“We lived the growing pains and are reaping the rewards of them finally getting established in being productive, everyday players,” Farrell said. “On any given night, it’s a proud moment for the Red Sox when you look down and you’ve got nine of 10 guys in the lineup that are drafted and signed and developed in-house. I think there’s a tremendous amount to be said for that.“There’s an ownership that those players have with their original organization. As a player, you feel a certain responsibility to your organization, and I think that changes when you shift to another organization. When you’re with your original organization, there’s an intangible there that runs deep.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The fulfillment of the group’s potential happened too late for Cherington, who resigned last summer after Dave Dombrowski was hired as president of baseball operations. Dombrowski said the ownership had made two important points: Do not sacrifice the future to win now, and do not feel pressure to use certain players because of their contracts.The first directive was easy to follow because the Red Sox had so many prospects that Dombrowski was able to overwhelm San Diego in a deal for closer Craig Kimbrel and still have plenty of promising minor leaguers, like infielder Yoan Moncada and outfielder Andrew Benintendi, remaining.AdvertisementThe second point allowed the Red Sox to give Shaw the third-base job over Pablo Sandoval, who had performed poorly in the first year of a $95 million contract and had season-ending shoulder surgery in May. The team has also barely used Rusney Castillo, an outfielder from Cuba who signed for $72.5 million in 2014.The low salaries of players like Betts, Bogaerts, Bradley, Swihart and Shaw help the Red Sox survive mistakes, like Castillo and Sandoval, and afford other high salaries, like Price’s. And the athleticism of young players helps fuel the Boston offense.“Look at Betts, he’s a total package; look at Bogaerts, he’s a total package; Jackie Bradley Jr. — total package,” said Dombrowski, who went on to praise others. “Other than Big Papi,” he said, referring to Ortiz, “and our catcher, everybody can score from first on a double. Everybody can score from second on a single. Everybody goes first to third. That’s kind of fortunate.”Betts’s coordination and dexterity extend beyond baseball; he has bowled perfect games and can solve a Rubik’s Cube in less than two minutes. His power has stood out so far, but he said he was not a home run hitter.“I just think they’re going over the fence right now,” said Betts, who has 14 homers and leads the team in stolen bases and triples. “I see myself as a gap-to-gap doubles guy.”Chili Davis, the hitting coach, said Betts had a perfectionist’s mind-set and exceptionally quick hands that prevented pitchers from beating him inside. Bradley, he said, made an important mechanical adjustment last season that helped him shed his label as a strict defensive specialist.“He would load and then load up again — with his legs and with his shoulders — and he’d have to really uncoil,” Davis said. “Once we figured that out, the simplest thing for him to go back to was: ‘How did you hit in college? You were a good college hitter, how did you hit?’ Well, he had a little leg kick. He did it, and right away it was natural, and he gained ground on pitchers. He wasn’t sitting back waiting for them to get to a certain point, then deciding to swing. He was aggressive to pitches, especially fastballs.”Bogaerts, meanwhile, has benefited from agility work in Arizona the past two off-seasons — once at the team’s urging, the second time on his own. He wears No. 2 in honor of Derek Jeter and has peppered Dombrowski, a former Detroit Tigers president, with questions about Miguel Cabrera.Advertisement“Oh, man, he does it so easy,” Bogaerts said of Cabrera. “That’s me looking on the outside, but definitely, it looks easy. He knows what he’s doing. I’m sure I’m different. I’m trying to do something, and I end up doing something else. I still get a hit, but he kind of knows what he wants to do with the ball. I would love to reach that level, but that’s a high, high level.”Bogaerts, though, is almost there. From the start of the 2015 season through Thursday, only one player in the majors had a higher average than Bogaerts’s .327: Cabrera, who was two points higher. Bogaerts has the most hits in that span, with 275, yet he cannot match Betts for power and could not top Bradley, over all, in May.When Bradley was named the A.L. player of the month, on Thursday, he was home in Boston with his wife, who had given birth to the couple’s first child, a girl.“When you talk about balance of on field and off field,” Farrell said, “you’d be hard-pressed to have a better day.”The Red Sox would go on to lose another slugfest, 12-7, and they probably need another pitcher or two before the trading deadline. But life was full of promise.A version of this article appears in print on June 4, 2016, on Page D6 of the New York edition with the headline: Red Sox Hewing Rough Diamonds Into Polished Bats.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »