AdvertisementSupported byBy Karen CrouseRIO DE JANEIRO — This city pulses with an energy that compels a bus driver to fill the silence with song as he sits idly in traffic. It pulses with a rhythm that prompts a woman on a custodial crew in Olympic Park to thrum on a garbage can lid to music only she can hear as an elevator sweeps her off the ground floor. Like her Brazilian hosts, the United States Olympian Elizabeth Beisel has the music in her, too.The internal beat that serves as Beisel’s metronome in the pool, enabling her to maintain the right tempo and rhythm in all her strokes in the 400-meter individual medley, also moves her toward any piano she spots, be it in an Omaha hotel lobby or an Amsterdam train station. She will sit down and play a concerto by memory.After all, before she was a 15-year-old Olympian in 2008 or a 2012 silver and bronze medalist, Beisel was a violin and piano prodigy with lofty aspirations.“It was always a dream of mine to play in the Boston Pops and to do stuff like that,” Beisel said. “Maybe one day.”First things first. Beisel, 23, will try to improve upon her second-place finish at the London Games in the 400 I.M. when she races on Saturday at Olympic Aquatics Stadium. At the United States trials in June, Beisel finished second to Maya DiRado despite being hospitalized with a stomach ailment in the days leading up to the event.Her premeet illness, and a broken left pinkie finger she sustained in a collision in the warm-down pool during the trials, reminded Beisel that her sports career, like a piano chord, is sweet but short. It eventually will peter out. But not her love for music.“The longevity of playing an instrument is your entire life,” Beisel said, adding, “I always knew that if anything went wrong, I could go back to the violin or the piano. I have such a passion for the arts that not many people know about.”Beisel, a Rhode Island native, began playing the violin at the age of 3 after being drawn to the instrument at a birthday party that featured a musical troupe. She began swimming a year later, and she was introduced to the piano as a 5-year-old.She became the youngest student of a violin teacher who followed the Suzuki method, a form of instruction that values nurturing a love of music. Early on, Beisel’s mother, Joanie, said, “She was a better musician than swimmer.”She added, “She was always tapping on something with spoons; she never sat still. And she had amazing rhythm. Anything she picked up, she could play.”Beisel’s musical training and her swimming development were in perfect harmony. At Bluefish Swim Club, where she trained under Chuck Batchelor, Beisel valued her team relationships as much as she did her individual results. At 13, she separated herself by making the United States national team. Two years later, as the youngest member of the United States Olympic swim team, Beisel finished fourth in the 400 I.M. and fifth in the 200 backstroke. She improved two places in both in 2012 to twice grace the awards podium.As her swimming career took flight, Beisel continued to play in her high school orchestra. It appealed to her that everybody took a turn in the first chair. For Beisel, that was a welcome respite from the rigors of international swimming competition.“I just loved that because I just put a lot less pressure on myself in the violin,” she said. “I think in swimming, I was always ultracompetitive, but violin, it was more to have fun.”After high school, Beisel had to make a tough decision. Did she want to try to juggle a major in music and Division I swimming? After much thought, Beisel decided to set aside her violin and instead major in telecommunications at the University of Florida. Beisel joined Gators quarterback Tim Tebow as the only Florida student-athletes to earn academic all-America first-team honors each year they were eligible.Traveling the world for swimming, and living out of a suitcase, has given Beisel a sense of what her life might have been like if she had chosen music over sport as her means of expressing herself and entertaining others.To have both talents is to be crazily blessed with gifts “that not many people have,” Beisel said, adding, “I remember being in the Amsterdam train station, and they just had a piano sitting there and I started playing it, and it’s cool things like that that not everybody can do.”One of Beisel’s prized possessions is a violin made in 1898 by her great-great-grandfather.What if her house was engulfed in flames and she had time to save either her two Olympic medals or her violin? Which would she grab?Beisel was silent for several seconds before answering.“Probably the Olympic medals, honestly, just because I put so many more hours into those and so much more work,” she said. “That violin does hold so much in my heart, but I could get another violin that would give me the same joy as playing my great-great-grandfather’s violin. I feel like an Olympic medal, once you lose it, it’s gone. You can’t go out and buy another Olympic medal.”Advertisement