By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSOCT. 30, 2016
Matteo Mancosu scored in the second half as the Montreal Impact beat the visiting Red Bulls, 1-0, on Sunday in the opening match of their M.L.S. Eastern Conference semifinal.The second leg of the semifinal, a two-match, aggregate-goals series, is next Sunday at Red Bull Arena. The Red Bulls will be without forward Omer Damari, a substitute who received a red card in injury time after a hard slide into Calum Mallace.“At times we played well and were organized, and then one play cost us, even though we had pretty good control of the match,” Red Bulls Coach Jesse Marsch said. “And even when we had good chances, we couldn’t convert them. So we walk out of here without a goal, but we know it’s only halftime. There’s a lot more to go in this series.”The Impact’s counterattacking game clicked in the 61st minute when Marco Donadel lofted a high pass over the Red Bulls’ defense. Without breaking stride, Mancosu drilled a high shot under the crossbar for his third goal of the postseason.AdvertisementThe Red Bulls, who finished first in the Eastern Conference with a 16-9-9 record, were held scoreless despite the presence of Bradley Wright-Phillips, who led the league with 24 goals, and Sacha Klejstan, who led the league with 20 assists.AdvertisementThe Impact were without striker Didier Drogba, who was recovering from a sore back, for the third straight game. They were playing on only three days of rest after beating D.C. United, 4-2, in the knockout round.“They wanted to play fast to get us unbalanced and tired, because we played on Thursday,” the Impact captain Patrice Bernier said. “And I’m pretty sure they knew they were playing a team that’s a bit older, but our will is a lot stronger than our fatigue. We weathered the storm, and we waited to pounce when we had a chance.”TORONTO 2, N.Y.C.F.C. 0 Jozy Altidore scored in the 84th minute to break a stalemate and the substitute Tosaint Ricketts added a stoppage-time goal to lift host Toronto F.C. in the first match of the teams’ Eastern Conference semifinal.The second leg of the two-match semifinal is next Sunday at Yankee Stadium.“It wasn’t an easy game at all,” N.Y.C.F.C. Coach Patrick Vieira said. “The atmosphere in the stadium was electric. And I think the fans were incredible.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The go-ahead goal came after N.Y.C.F.C. failed to clear a Michael Bradley free kick. The ball bounced around the penalty box, with Ricketts taking a swing before it went to Altidore.“It was cool, man,” Altidore said. “Look, the fans have waited for moments like this for so long, to feel the importance of a team that’s trying to build something, that’s trying to win trophies. This is all for them. We play for them, and we feed off their energy.”Ricketts, who entered in the 83rd minute, made it 2-0 in injury time on a windy night by poking in Nick Hagglund’s cross.AdvertisementLOS ANGELES 1, COLORADO 0 Giovani dos Santos scored his first career playoff goal in the 55th minute and the host Los Angeles Galaxy recorded their 10th shutout of the season to beat the Colorado Rapids, in the first match of a Western Conference semifinal.Colorado will host the second leg of the two-match semifinal on Sunday.Jelle Van Damme keyed the goal when he cut past his defender at the edge of the box and found Dos Santos at the penalty spot. Dos Santos headed it down and it deflected off the head of Colorado defender Daniel Steres.Tim Howard made several quality saves in the first half for Colorado. He guarded the near post on Alan Gordon’s open header in the 17th minute and got a hand on Sebastian Lletget’s breakaway opportunity in the 22nd.Colorado’s best scoring chance came in the 59th minute when Jermaine Jones’s long-distance strike was knocked wide by Brian Rowe.SEATTLE 3, DALLAS 0 Nicolas Lodeiro scored twice and Nelson Valdez added a goal in an eight-minute span early in the second half as the Seattle Sounders rolled past visiting F.C. Dallas in the first leg of their Western Conference semifinal.Dallas won the Supporters’ Shield with the league’s best regular-season record, but to keep its season alive, it must score at least three times when the teams play the second leg of the two-match semifinal in Texas next Sunday.Valdez, whose late goal beat Sporting Kansas City in a knockout game Thursday, scored Seattle’s first goal in the 50th minute. After a Joevin Jones cross into the penalty area, Valdez went up and over Dallas defender Maynor Figueroa and headed the ball into the back left corner.Lodeiro ran onto Jordan Morris’s short crossing pass in the 55th minute, blasting it into the back right corner from 6 yards out. Lodeiro then took a through ball from Jones, streaked down the left side and fired to the far corner in the 58th minute.A version of this article appears in print on October 31, 2016, on Page D7 of the New York edition with the headline: Red Bulls and N.Y.C.F.C. Each Held Scoreless.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.