
On Pro Basketball By                     
 HARVEY ARATON
 
OCT. 30, 2016
Hey, Derrick Rose: Forget about Stephen Curry, Russell Westbrook, Damian Lillard and the other volume-scoring point guards. At this stage of your career, on this particular team in New York, the guy you really want to be like is Mike.That would be Mike Conley Jr., he of the 13.6-point career scoring average on 11.3 shots a game and the five-year, $153 million contract.For total value, that is the richest deal in N.B.A. history. For single-season compensation, Conley joins that other Mike (Jordan), Kobe Bryant and LeBron James as a player to have cracked the $30 million barrier.Political sloganeering notwithstanding, is this a great country, or what?Playing 24 minutes as he eased his way back from last season’s Achilles’ tendon injury, Conley scored 11 points and had five assists for Memphis in the Knicks’ 111-104 victory over the Grizzlies on Saturday night. You, Derrick, had 13 points (and 3 assists) in your Madison Square Garden debut for the Knicks, although several explosive bursts to the lane electrified the crowd and aroused memories of your vintage, pre-three-knee-operations self.AdvertisementStill, the Knicks’ varied, versatile attack underscored that this team does not need you to be the league most valuable player you once were.AdvertisementThis is where the defensively sturdy and stylistically understated Conley, your new role model, becomes an interesting case study. He has never been mistaken for a shoe-company darling, as you instantly were when you took your hometown, Chicago, by storm in what feels like a basketball eternity ago.After the game, I found Conley wandering the Garden’s bowels, searching for the Grizzlies’ team bus. He was wearing jeans and a “Black Panther” backpack — no social statement, just a tribute to a Marvel Comics character — and carrying a small food container.Had he been strolling down Eighth Avenue, he could easily have been taken for another anonymous soul heading to the Port Authority terminal to catch a late bus.Fine by Conley, it appears. Memphis is a long way from the hot lights of Broadway, but when I asked him to explain why his mega-contract would not become a burden as comparisons to other players are inevitably made, here is what he said:“People expect me to score 40 points a game? Well, I’m not going to score 40 points a game because I want to make sure our team wins. If that means scoring 25 one night, getting 15 assists, then that’s what it’ll be. If it means scoring 10, that’s O.K.“Guys get caught up in the numbers nowadays, in the game within the game. I do see that the point guards are getting a lot of the attention, so you can call it whatever you want — a guard’s league — but at the end of the day, it’s the teams that play together that are going to win.”Is it really a guard’s league, though, when James, the sport’s most formidable power player, is its undisputed king? When a trove of freakishly skilled young giants — from Anthony Davis to Joel Embiid to Karl-Anthony Towns to the Knicks’ own Kristaps Porzingis — has been unleashed?Not to be overlooked through your rosiest-colored glasses, Derrick, is that before you scored your first basket on Saturday, midway through the second quarter, the Knicks, with an offense powered by Porzingis and Courtney Lee, had already built a 45-30 lead.AdvertisementYour new coach, Jeff Hornacek, loved the first-half ball movement but complained mildly about the team’s reliance on you and Carmelo Anthony as the Grizzlies closed the gap to 87-85 with less than 10 minutes to play.Here is what happened next:Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.After Joakim Noah’s defense denied the Grizzlies’ Zach Randolph in the lane, Noah threaded the needle on a backdoor pass to Anthony for a conventional 3-point play. You, Derrick, hit a floater in the lane and then set a screen at the elbow for Porzingis to step out and hit a long 3-pointer. Porzingis set another screen to free Justin Holiday for a jump shot before you wrong-footed Marc Gasol for a pull-up jumper in the lane.It was a decisive 12-0 run to which all five Knicks players contributed, leaving the team’s president, Phil Jackson, feeling like the N.B.A.’s executive of the night.And you, Derrick, modestly said, “I’m not worried about my stats as long as we win.”Except you said such things repeatedly in Chicago last season while speculation abounded that teammates — most notably Jimmy Butler — were unhappy with your ball-stopping and your shot selection. After the Knicks’ season opener, against Cleveland on Tuesday, you gave the back of your hand to the triangle even as early evidence suggests that offense can run through Noah — the team’s best passer — and put you (and Anthony) in what should be your preferred midrange scoring positions.No one is asking you to be as ornamental as your Knicks predecessor Jose Calderon, but more like Mike (Conley) would be fine, and frankly, your reputation could use the lower-key approach after that unseemly civil trial in Los Angeles.We know you are playing for a new contract. Talk to Conley about how it worked out for him in this league of recently realized television riches. Listen to Gasol explain why.The Conley deal, Gasol said, was not about star power; it was solely a reflection of “how important he is to us.”You, Derrick, can be that guy for the Knicks. Just remember: In order to be good, they don’t need you to be great.A version of this article appears in print on October 31, 2016, on Page D4 of the New York edition with the headline: Knicks Need Their New Star Guard, but Not as a Star.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »