AdvertisementSupported byIslanders 5, Maple Leafs 1By Allan KredaAuston Matthews skated onto the Barclays Center ice Sunday, and Toronto fans — braving the pulsating pregame music and wearing his No. 34 — broke into big smiles when they saw the teenage visitor.It wasn’t hard to decipher why as Matthews, the first overall pick in the June draft, made his initial visit to the New York area.“He’s a generational talent,” said Taylor Palmer, 25, a lifelong Toronto fan who was visiting New York and sitting five rows off the ice with a group of friends, all wearing Maple Leafs blue. “I had to have his jersey.”In his N.H.L. debut against Ottawa on Oct. 12, Matthews, who turned 19 on Sept. 17, scored four goals. No other player had ever introduced himself to the league that way.A smooth-skating center, Matthews has the coveted combination of size (6 feet 3 inches and 216 pounds), speed and hockey savvy.“He’s the future of the franchise,” said Palmer, who said he was seeing his new favorite skater in person for the first time. “It’s really good to get his jersey in his rookie year.”Matthews and his Toronto teammates will probably prefer to forget his first New York foray. Travis Hamonic and Casey Cizikas scored first-period goals, and Shane Prince, Brock Nelson and Josh Bailey added third-period scores to help the Islanders beat the young Leafs squad, 5-1.Matthews played 18 minutes 11 seconds and had four shots on Islanders goaltender Thomas Greiss as the Leafs lost their second straight game to fall to 2-4-3.In spite of his team’s rocky night in Brooklyn, a few glimpses of Matthews in action made it clear why his fame can only grow, especially considering how desperate Toronto fans are for a savior — not to mention a winning team. The Leafs have missed the playoffs in 10 of the last 11 seasons, and they finished with a league-worst 69 points last season.“It’s been hard to wear a Leafs sweater for a while,” said Jason Brubridge, 21, who was visiting New York from Toronto and wearing a new blue Matthews sweater. “Now there’s a good reason to have one.”Matthews came into Sunday’s game tied for the league lead in goals with six, and near the top with 10 points over all. Centering on a line with the fellow rookies Zach Hyman on the left and William Nylander on the right, his swooping style is immediately noticeable.Matthews met with the news media briefly after the game and smiled almost sheepishly when asked about the growing throngs of fans wearing his No. 34.“It’s awesome,” he said. “It’s pretty cool and very humbling. We’ve always got a lot of Maple Leaf jerseys up in the stands. It’s definitely pretty encouraging.”After Toronto defenseman Jake Gardiner scored a power-play goal 50 seconds into the third period, Toronto fans started a spirited “Go, Leafs, Go” chant much to the chagrin of the home crowd.The Islanders fans answered with a “Let’s Go, Islanders.” Prince then incited much louder cheers by scoring after Toronto goaltender Jhonas Enroth mishandled the puck.The Islanders were also facing their former teammate Matt Martin for the first time since he signed a four-year, $10 million contract with the Maple Leafs in July.Islanders Coach Jack Capuano was a bit wistful before the game, talking about Martin, who was drafted by the Islanders in 2008 and became a fan favorite because of his gritty style and myriad community efforts on Long Island.“It will be different,” the coach said of seeing Martin on the opposing side. “I’m happy it worked out for him and he’s where he wants to be.”Throughout Barclays Center, plenty of No. 17 Martin jerseys were scattered among the crowd of 12,057. There also was a smattering of his new No. 15 Leaf sweater.Brayden Pellett, 23, an accountant from Toronto, said he was encouraged about the Leafs despite the loss. Witnessing the size and scope of Matthews up close, he said, had made his visit to Brooklyn more than worthwhile.“Matthews had a couple of rushes where you can really see where our future is going,” he said.Martin’s early popularity in Toronto affected Pellett’s jersey-purchasing timeline. He paid $70 Canadian for a blue Matthews sweater.“I’m a Martin fan, too, but his jerseys are all sold out,” Pellett said. “So I bought the Matthews one first. I’m definitely glad I did.”Advertisement