By PAT BORZIJUNE 17, 2016
MINNEAPOLIS — C. C. Sabathia was surprisingly upbeat Friday. His beloved Golden State Warriors had lost to the Cleveland Cavaliers in the N.B.A. finals on Thursday night, but that could not tarnish his sense of accomplishment in having thrown six demanding innings to beat the Minnesota Twins, 4-1.Besides, it was only Game 6. One more to go.Sabathia grew up in Vallejo, Calif., in the Bay Area. He attended Warriors games as a child and held season tickets for several years as an adult. But he has also been friends with LeBron James since Sabathia was pitching for the Cleveland Indians. Yet ask Sabathia which team he is rooting for in Game 7 on Sunday, and the answer comes without hesitation.“Warriors,” he said. “Got to go with the home team. I know what it means to the Bay Area. It would be good to see them to be able go back to back.”Sabathia stole peeks at Game 6 in the visitors’ clubhouse at Target Field on Thursday after the Yankees won. Much of the team watched the final minutes (and Stephen Curry’s ejection) in the lunchroom during the postgame meal.But the timing for Game 7 for the Yankees and Sabathia is not good. Their charter back to New York is scheduled to be airborne when the game tips off. The team’s travel director, Ben Tuliebitz, said the plane could not pull in the television feed, though players might be able to watch the live stream on laptops and personal devices. Some could get home in time to catch the final minutes.James, of course, is a well-known Yankees fan who caused a commotion in Cleveland by wearing a Yankees cap to Game 1 of a 2007 American League division series game at Jacobs Field. (Sabathia, pitching for the Indians, won, 12-3, though James left the park before the final out; the Indians went on to win the series.) The following year, James correctly predicted that Sabathia would sign with the Yankees as a free agent.Sabathia, in turn, entertained the notion of enticing James to sign with the Knicks in 2010 as a free agent. James landed in Miami before returning to Cleveland two years ago.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“When I see him, it’s always friendly, for sure,” Sabathia said.Thursday, Sabathia continued his seven-start run of effectiveness, reinventing himself by relying more on his cut fastball than a diminished four-seamer. Since May 4, he is 4-2 with an 0.86 E.R.A.Eduardo Nunez, a former teammate, singled in the only run Sabathia allowed, punching a fastball off the plate to right field in the fourth. Sabathia could not spot his sinking fastball where he wanted, but worked out of jams with a cutter and a backdoor curve. While Sabathia pitched, the Twins left nine runners on and went 2 for 9 with runners in scoring position.Manager Joe Girardi said Sabathia looked like an All-Star.“I thought it took him a little bit to get going, but he’s been consistent the whole year,” Girardi said. “And it’s really been since last September. Him putting some good months after September of last year back to back, you feel really good about C. C. He seems to have command of everything. You know the guys every once in a while aren’t going to have it, but he’s been as consistent as any guy we’ve got.”A version of this article appears in print on June 18, 2016, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: Sabathia’s Rooting Interest Stays Home.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.