By MIKE VORKUNOVOCT. 29, 2016
The feting of the Knicks began early during their home opener against the Grizzlies at Madison Square Garden. As Joakim Noah celebrated and sneered in the second quarter, the fans chanted his name, prolonging each syllable. After a highlight-worthy dunk in the third, Kristaps Porzingis was met with a rousing ovation. When, moments later, Derrick Rose crossed over Mike Conley and then bounced off contact at the basket to finish a layup, there was ample applause.For much of Saturday evening, it seemed as though the Knicks would wipe away their many sins from a season-opening defeat in Cleveland, a loss they had stewed over for nearly four days.“The guys want a little redemption from the other night,” Knicks Coach Jeff Hornacek said before the game.But in a 111-104 win over Memphis, the Knicks turned what appeared to be a triumphant homecoming into a white-knuckle affair as an 18-point lead wasted away.AdvertisementFor much of the game, the Knicks looked something like the best version of the team they can be. With spry ball movement, aggressive play by Rose and Porzingis, and Noah healthy and making plays, the Knicks were dominant early on.AdvertisementYet a bout of malaise nearly undercut all that as the Grizzlies trampled over them in a comeback that fell just short.Porzingis was the hub of the offense. He scored 21 points and grabbed 5 rebounds. He displayed his skill set, a vast and bemusing collection of talents for a 7-foot-3 21-year-old who moves more like a versatile guard than a plodding big man. In one moment, he was leading the break in transition and finishing with a floater; in another, he was crossing over a defender in the halfcourt; and in another — the slam dunk that won him the crowd’s approving roar — he took off from just outside the paint and was fouled on the way.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.He provided the consistency the Knicks otherwise lacked at times, with their other stars struggling but not lacking for attention.Noah, especially, was an attraction. After many seasons with Chicago in which he agitated the Knicks, he made a true homecoming. Before the game, he was introduced as being from Hell’s Kitchen, choosing to make himself known as a product of that Manhattan neighborhood rather than a college, as is the norm. He also took the microphone and addressed the members of the crowd, thanking them and then ending his remarks with a simple message: “Let’s get it.”Noah later said: “It was very emotional. I got nervous.”It was already well known that Noah was excited for his regular-season home debut. Carmelo Anthony singled out his enthusiasm Friday, saying it would be incumbent on the team to keep Noah’s energy well tuned, joking that perhaps Noah should meditate simply to calm himself down.Noah finished the game with 6 points but also 10 rebounds and 7 assists before fouling out. Having gone scoreless in his Knicks debut, Noah operated as a playmaker out of the high post, and the Knicks’ offense flowed with tight coordination. After struggling to move the ball in Cleveland, the Knicks matched their assist total from that game before the half.“We looked like we know what we were doing more often tonight,” Hornacek said.Their other new additions showed signs of gelling, too. Courtney Lee, also without a point against Cleveland, scored 16 points. And Rose flashed moments of intrigue as he scored 13 points. In the second quarter, he went the length of the court after a Grizzlies miss, swerved by Andrew Harrison, and finished with a layup.Advertisement“I was kind of nervous at first,” Rose said. “I can’t lie, but I got over it.”And yet the Knicks fell into a familiar rhythm. Strong in the first half, they fell flat after intermission, repeating the pattern from Cleveland.With 8 minutes 48 seconds remaining, the Grizzlies drew to within 2 points and appeared poised to steal away the victory even as they allowed the Knicks to hit more than half of their shots and received only 16 minutes from Conley, who signed the richest contract in the N.B.A. in July.That momentum, however, was fleeting. Anthony converted a 3-point play and Rose hit a runner to give the Knicks breathing room. In just over two minutes, their lead grew to 14 again, and although the game’s final stanza was at times discordant, the Knicks had notched their first victory of the season.A version of this article appears in print on October 30, 2016, on Page SP13 of the New York edition with the headline: Knicks Let Lead Slip, but Still Hold On.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.