AdvertisementSupported byJets 31, Browns 28By Ben ShpigelCLEVELAND — The Jets have treated crowds around the country to some hideous football, and after one of their most hideous halves of the season, played in a stadium that has hosted more hideous football than any other, they retreated to their locker room for a scolding — several, actually.Darrelle Revis fumed, admonishing teammates not to return after the game unless the Jets had won. The team’s wide receivers coach, Karl Dorrell, addressed the offense, demanding that someone make a critical play, a long run, a sharp pass. Coach Todd Bowles, some players said, was as angry as they had ever seen him.“We needed an attitude check,” Bowles said.The impact of all that fury unleashed and frustration expressed is unquantifiable. The Jets did not just start catching the ball instead of dropping it, or finding creases in the Cleveland Browns’ defense instead of slamming into it, because of a few words.But those words resonated, and as a team searching for a reason to believe in a season hurtling toward irrelevance, the Jets seized motivation where they could.Sparing themselves the indignity of delivering the Browns’ first victory, the Jets upheld the bond they had made to Revis by scoring 24 second-half points on Sunday at FirstEnergy Stadium to win their second straight game, 31-28.It was the first time in 72 games that the Jets had won on the road after trailing by at least 13 points (20-7) at halftime, according to ESPN Stats & Information. Afterward, Bowles stood at a lectern and used two expletives to describe his halftime charge.Even then, the emotions were still visceral for Bowles and his players. They bristled at suggestions that slipping past a winless team cheapened the victory.“We’re a good team regardless of what the record shows,” receiver Quincy Enunwa said.The record shows the Jets are 3-5 heading into a divisional game next week at Miami, where the Jets would be thrilled to replicate their second-half performance — three touchdowns scored, 287 yards gained, two turnovers forced — across a full 60 minutes.Asked whether the Jets had made any noticeable adjustments at halftime, Cleveland Coach Hue Jackson reacted in disbelief.“No, oh my Lord, no,” Jackson said. “We had the chance to make the plays.”This the Browns did, especially in the first half, when the Jets’ Ryan Fitzpatrick completed all of three passes, for 30 yards. Then came the chance to make more plays.Cleveland cornerback Jamar Taylor nearly intercepted Fitzpatrick’s first pass after halftime, but Enunwa broke it up. At least four Browns defenders had an opportunity on that drive to thwart Enunwa on his 24-yard touchdown catch, but he evaded them all. Taylor could have prevented Enunwa from gaining 57 yards on the Jets’ next series, but he did not. The Browns could have stopped Matt Forte from scoring from 4 yards out on a fourth-and-1 — giving the Jets their first lead, at 21-20, with 2 minutes 11 seconds left in the third quarter — but they buckled.“That’s why you got four quarters,” said Jets receiver Brandon Marshall, whose block sprung Bilal Powell on a 35-yard scoring run in the second quarter. “You get time to figure it out. And the good teams figure it out at halftime.”People can disagree on whether the Jets are a good team. But they can surely agree that the Jets did not want Fitzpatrick to start on Sunday.Only because Geno Smith, who replaced Fitzpatrick late in the team’s Oct. 17 loss at Arizona, tore a knee ligament last week against Baltimore did Fitzpatrick regain his starting job, a job he could not fathom had been taken from him.Fitzpatrick had obliterated Jets management for what he perceived as a lack of belief, as if being the league’s most ineffective regular quarterback by at least a few statistical measures — lowest completion percentage (57.4) and passer rating (66.4) and most interceptions (11) entering Sunday — merited not a benching but a fruit basket and a raise.Maintaining his defiance, Fitzpatrick said Wednesday that he recalled how he had played after the last time he was benched, two years ago with Houston, when he responded to throw for six touchdowns against Tennessee. “Again,” Fitzpatrick said, “that goes back to belief.”If he felt that belief had vanished, his objective Sunday was to restore it. Asked if he felt vindicated, Fitzpatrick, who completed 16 of 34 passes for 228 yards and a touchdown, said he did not. “I’m just here to try to win football games for these guys,” he said.The previous week had already indulged Clevelanders beyond reasonable comprehension, what with the raising of the Cavaliers’ N.B.A. championship banner and the cursed Indians edging to the verge of a World Series triumph.This city had not won a major title in 52 years; after Saturday night’s World Series game, it stood one baseball victory from hosting two parades in five months.But then came the day reserved for football, the day synonymous around these parts with dejection and despair, because on Sundays, the Browns lose. They are now 0-8 for the first time since 1975.How disorienting that first half must have been, then, with the Browns soaring and the Jets flailing.Against a defense that last week gave up 559 yards to Cincinnati, the Jets gained 21 in the first quarter and 106 in the first half. Against a team that had yielded an average of 29.6 points per game, the Jets scored 7 in the first half. Against a defense that had allowed a touchdown on six of seven opening drives this season, the Jets did not record a first down until their third series.But by the time the Jets ran out onto the field after halftime, energized and emboldened, those struggles had faded. It was time to play better, and the Jets did.“The offense fed off the defense, and the defense fed off the offense,” Fitzpatrick said. “That is the kind of team we want to be.”Advertisement