By JEFF ARNOLDAPRIL 9, 2017
CHICAGO — As the stretcher carrying Tariq Hammond was wheeled away, members of the Denver University men’s hockey team stood on the ice nearby, determined, more than ever, to finish what they had started.Hammond, the Pioneers’ most bruising defenseman, had collapsed Saturday night after his leg was pinned awkwardly against the boards early in the third period of the N.C.A.A. championship game.Watching a teammate carted off with what Coach Jim Montgomery later said was most likely a broken ankle could have curtailed Denver’s season-long mission for an eighth national title.Instead, Denver held off a late Minnesota-Duluth rally for a 3-2 victory that moved the Pioneers closer to Michigan’s record nine N.C.A.A. Division I men’s hockey championships.AdvertisementAs the Pioneers celebrated on a rink covered with discarded helmets, gloves and sticks, Hammond, still in full uniform, hobbled on crutches in Denver’s dressing room, eager to be reunited with his teammates.Advertisement“I’m just proud of these guys; I just love them to death,” a tearful Hammond said on the ice afterward. “I’m so happy right now.”Hammond was injured with 16 minutes 50 seconds remaining in the third period, when Denver led by 3-1. The sophomore Jarid Lukosevicius had scored three goals, including two in 16 seconds, in the second period.As medical personnel attended to Hammond, wrapping his lower right leg in a towel and lifting him onto the stretcher, the Pioneers used the long delay to prepare for what they knew was coming.Minnesota-Duluth, seeking its second national championship, had become accustomed to playing in tight games, winning four straight one-goal contests during its N.C.A.A. tournament run. None of Denver’s tournament games had been decided by fewer than three goals.“We knew they were going to come with a push,” said the senior defenseman Will Butcher, who a night earlier won the Hobey Baker Award, given to the nation’s top collegiate hockey player. “It was the last game of the season. So everybody was going to come with a push in that kind of situation.”The Bulldogs cut the margin to a goal when Riley Tufte scored with about five minutes remaining, and Minnesota-Duluth Coach Scott Sandelin pulled goalie Hunter Miska to gain an extra attacker for the final 1:44.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I think we had a lot of belief in our team,” Bulldogs right wing Karson Kuhlman said. “I mean, nobody doubted for a second that we couldn’t come back and tie that game and eventually win it.”AdvertisementBut Denver, playing without a key defender, withstood the late charge. Tanner Jaillet preserved the victory with 38 saves, including 16 in the third period.As the final seconds ticked away and players poured from the Denver bench, Hammond prepared to travel from the Pioneers’ dressing room through the narrow passageway that leads back to the ice.Montgomery, Denver’s coach, had won an N.C.A.A. title as a player with Maine in 1993, when he scored a hat trick against Lake Superior State. Now in his fourth year at Denver, Montgomery found himself in the midst of ecstasy as players embraced one another.When he saw Hammond, a junior who will be considered for the team’s captaincy next season, making his way back toward the ice, he was overwhelmed with emotion.“We did it,” Hammond kept telling Montgomery as he approached his coach. “We did it.”Montgomery said it was a major effort to repair Hammond’s ankle enough for him to join the postgame celebration.“It wasn’t easy for the three orthopedic surgeons that were here to put it back in place,” Montgomery said. “But I guess that’s how tough of a kid he is. Once it was back in place, he just wanted to hop out on the ice.”A year ago, Denver’s season ended with a crushing national semifinal loss to North Dakota. On Saturday night, Denver celebrated its first N.C.A.A. title since 2005.In the middle of it all was Hammond, ready to participate in a moment that Lukosevicius, Hammond’s best friend, could not fully put into words.Advertisement“Beep. Beep. Beep. Beep. Championship,” said Lukosevicius, the tournament’s most outstanding player, in describing the expletive-filled private moment. “That’s the truth.”Hammond refused to allow an ankle that had absorbed so much pain keep him from the on-ice celebration he longed to be part of.“The injury’s nothing right now,” Hammond said as the tears flowed. “I’m just so happy we won. I just love this team, love this program.”A version of this article appears in print on April 10, 2017, on Page D3 of the New York edition with the headline: Galvanized by a Key Defender’s Injury, Denver Stands Firm in a Title Win.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.