By ALLAN KREDAAPRIL 9, 2017
When Patricia Ann Norris-McDonald and Conor McDonald stepped onto the Madison Square Garden ice before the Rangers’ regular-season finale against the Pittsburgh Penguins on Sunday night, their annual moment was accompanied by swirls of emotion.For the first time since the Steven McDonald Extra Effort Award was created in 1988, it was presented without its eponym.McDonald, a New York City police detective, died in January at 59, more than 30 years after he was shot in Central Park and left paralyzed from the neck down. He publicly forgave the teenager who shot him, and despite persistent physical struggles, McDonald became a smiling symbol of grace, generosity and determination during the next three decades.His enthusiasm for the Rangers, as much as any other element of his busy life, also helped him thrive.Advertisement“The two events Steven looked forward to the most were the St. Patrick’s Day parade and the night he would present his award at the Garden,” said Norris-McDonald, who is known as Patti Ann and was at her husband’s side for every ceremony. “And the Rangers enabled Steven to share so many special times at games with Conor. That father-son bonding meant everything.”AdvertisementAfter the stirring ceremony during which the Rangers’ captain, Ryan McDonagh, presented the McDonalds with a No. 104 jersey — Steven’s badge number — signed by the entire team, the Rangers defeated the Penguins, 3-2, to finish the regular season with 102 points. They will play the Montreal Canadiens in the first round of the playoffs.Jimmy Vesey scored the winning goal at 7 minutes 23 seconds of the third period, and goaltender Magnus Hellberg made 22 saves in his first N.H.L. start.The Extra Effort Award — originally suggested by Phil Esposito when he was general manager of the Rangers — is chosen through fan voting and is presented to the Ranger who goes “above and beyond the call of duty.”The winning player finds out when fans do, right before the final home game of the regular season. Mats Zuccarello, the popular Norwegian forward who led the team in scoring this season with 59 points, won for the third time in four years. He skated from the Rangers’ bench to the presentation carpet with a huge smile, then heartily hugged both McDonalds.“It was really hard not having Steven there, but we could feel the hug from everyone at the Garden tonight,” a teary Norris-McDonald said after a ceremony during which she rested her head on her son’s shoulder.After Jan Erixon accepted the first award, Tony Granato was next in 1989. Kelly Kisio and John Vanbiesbrouck shared the 1990 honor. Adam Graves holds the record with five, and the former captain Ryan Callahan was a four-time honoree.Mark Messier won twice, as did Sandy McCarthy, Jed Ortmeyer and Erixon.Wayne Gretzky has an Extra Effort Award among his many accolades, and so does Henrik Lundqvist.AdvertisementLundqvist won the award at the end of his rookie season in 2006. He was not in uniform that night, and he recalled the powerful feeling of stepping onto the ice in a business suit to meet the McDonalds for the first time.“So much happened to me that first year in New York, but I remember being really, really proud to go out there,” said Lundqvist, who won his 400th career game this season. “Over the years, I have understood more and more the impact that Officer McDonald had. We all feel for his family and appreciate everything he did.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The highlight of the ceremony has always been the short speech McDonald delivered. He would thank the opposing team for participating and exhort the Rangers to play on into June, when the Stanley Cup finals occur. He would invariably include a memorable quip.When the backup goalie Cam Talbot won in 2015, the award presentation took place the same night as the N.C.A.A. men’s basketball championship game and opening day of the baseball season.McDonald said to the packed house, “Where would you rather be?” — prompting a cascade of loud cheers.Now the onus of finding stirring words is on Conor, who turned 30 in January and is a New York Police Department detective like his father.“It’s going to be the hardest thing I’ve ever done,” McDonald said before delivering his speech. “To go out there and do this without him is going to be so, so hard. It’s his award.”Steven McDonald’s son found the right words to match the gravity of the moment.“Our greatest memories were in this Garden as Ranger fans,” he said. “It’s not supposed to be easy, but I’m telling the boys in blue to get the job done.”Zuccarello brought humanity to the moment, too.“He thanked us and said, ‘I hope I see you guys more,”’ said Norris-McDonald, the mayor of Malverne, N.Y. “It was real. You could feel it. It was beautiful.”AdvertisementAfter the game, gratitude was evident from the soft-spoken Zuccarello.“To have the fans vote for me, I’m honored and humbled,” he said. “It’s something I will always cherish.”A version of this article appears in print on April 10, 2017, on Page D3 of the New York edition with the headline: Rangers Award Takes On New Poignancy After a Hero’s Death.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.