AdvertisementSupported byMets 5, Marlins 2By James WagnerTwo and a half hours before the start of the Mets’ game against the Miami Marlins on Sunday, the team’s assistant athletic trainer, Brian Chicklo, strolled through the home dugout with a large box of hand warmers.The reason was obvious: Spring training in Florida and April in Flushing have little in common.In an uneven first week of the regular season, the Mets played six games and all but one were at night. Early April in New York often means cold weather, and Citi Field sits right off Flushing Bay, which means there is often a breeze to make it feel even colder.“Baseball in the Northeast,” Mets Manager Terry Collins said before the game.Or more accurately, baseball in New York. But on Sunday night at least, a strong performance by Noah Syndergaard gave the Mets a 5-2 victory that allowed them to finish their opening homestand with a .500 record and head out of town to a series in Philadelphia just as the cold weather also departs.It is far too early to draw any conclusions about these Mets, but they have already displayed a familiar up-and-down offense that loves home runs and a bullpen that has not seen the same success as the starting rotation.“We’re going to hit,” Collins said before the first pitch. “You combine that with pitching I still think is going to be dominant, I think we’ll be just fine.”Sunday provided a good model for the way the Mets will have success this season, on the mound and at the plate.Syndergaard pitched seven sturdy innings, surrendering only one earned run and striking out nine with his surreal arsenal of pitches, including 98-mile-per-hour sinking fastballs that induced ground balls.“I feel good with my two-seamer, and with all my pitches right now,” he said.And the Mets’ offense produced enough firepower to overcome the nighttime chill. They took advantage of the Marlins’ mistakes to take a 3-0 lead in the first inning. After the Marlins narrowed the margin to one run, Jay Bruce and Michael Conforto, who was making his first start of the season, each smashed long home runs to restore the three-run cushion.Up until Sunday, the Mets seemed to be feeling the effects of the cold weather. Aside from a 1 p.m. game on a comfortable opening day, the first-pitch temperatures of this week’s night games were, in order, 55 degrees, 44, 47, 55, and 52 on Sunday. And it only got colder as the games went on.“Every year coming from spring training, especially here in New York in April, you know it’s going to be a cold month,” said third baseman Jose Reyes, who has started the season 1 for 23. “You know it’s not comfortable. You’re cold on the field, but at the same time, it’s not an excuse for why you’re not doing your job.”The issue for Reyes, who at 33 is of a similar vintage as most of the Mets regulars, is staying warm. He loosens his muscles and joints before the game, but that feeling can be lost quickly while standing in the infield on defense.For pitchers, loosening up is not the problem — it is gripping and controlling a ball that feels drier in cooler and windier conditions.Nothing seemed to bother Syndergaard, however, including the blister on his right middle finger that forced him to leave his opening-day start earlier than he had intended. He said the blister may have originally flared up because of the chilly weather but had not been an issue for a few days.He became the first Mets starter to complete seven innings this season and saved an already-taxed bullpen from extra work.“Noah is a special guy,” Collins said.But Syndergaard was never the issue this week; the Mets’ offense was. The team felt the cool weather had been undermining one of its biggest offensive strengths: fly balls. The Mets are a power-hitting team that is dependent on the home run. Last season, they hit the second-most home runs (218) in the National League and had the second-highest fly-ball rate (38.5 percent) in the major leagues.“We live with the long ball, and nights where it’s cold and windy, it’s tough to do that,” Collins said.Collins raised the issue of the night games earlier in the weekend. He suggested that the chilly weather had stiffened players during a loss on Friday, then questioned the scheduling of a game for Saturday night. The Mets, in recent years, have increasingly played Saturday home games at night, believing they can draw more fans that way.As for Sunday’s game, it was played at night because ESPN had selected it for its national broadcast. So instead of a day game on what was the nicest day so far this year, the first pitch was at 8:10 p.m.In any case, the weather looks more promising in Philadelphia, and from there the Mets travel to Miami, where there is a retractable roof over the stadium and a distinct lack of cold weather.“We’re definitely excited for it to be a little warmer,” Conforto said. “It’s easier to be up there at the plate swinging the bat when it’s nice and warm, and the ball is carrying a little bit better.”Advertisement