By DAVE CALDWELLJUNE 18, 2016
Besides learning how to race a stock car in much faster traffic, Daniel Suarez was confronted with another considerable challenge — the English language — after moving to the United States from Mexico in 2012. So he watched movies with subtitles, plus lots of cartoons.“In cartoons, they speak slow and clear, because they are for kids,” Suarez said.Suarez, a 24-year-old driver from Monterrey, can now say in more than one language that he is mastering his trade and American culture. By beating the formidable Kyle Busch in the final laps of a 250-mile race on June 11 at Michigan International Speedway, Suarez became the first Mexican-born driver to win a Nascar national series race.The victory came in the Xfinity Series, one level down from the Sprint Cup Series, the big leagues of stock car racing. But Suarez, who drives for the powerful race team overseen by Joe Gibbs, the former Washington Redskins coach, now has both the Xfinity Series lead and a spot in the playoffs, which is similar in format to the Chase for the Sprint Cup.Suarez, who won 10 of 58 races in the Nascar Mexico Series, is in his second full season in the Xfinity Series, and Gibbs said in a telephone interview last week that it was not out of the question that Suarez could be racing in the Sprint Cup Series in a year or two.Advertisement“You can’t talk your way up, and you can’t buy your way up,” Gibbs said. “You’ve got to race your way up.”AdvertisementHe added: “It’s a growth process, and there’s a lot that goes into developing a driver. The one thing about Daniel is that he doesn’t tear up stuff. Some guys are prone to wreck. He doesn’t do that.”Heading into Sunday’s Xfinity race at Iowa Speedway, Suarez has completed all 13 races this season, with 11 finishes in the top 10. He really earned his victory, overcoming a pit-road penalty early in the race and a failing clutch later to outrace Busch, the reigning Sprint Cup champion.Busch, who also drives a Toyota for Gibbs’s team, was gracious after the race, saying it was actually “cool to get beat fair and square.” Busch said Suarez passed him cleanly and did what he had to do to protect the lead.Scott Graves, Suarez’s first-year crew chief, said, “If you can take what he did at the end of the race in Michigan, we’ve got to find a way to replicate that more often.”Although he spent a lot of time at the shop where his father restores cars for a living, Suarez has been racing only since he was 11. His first ride was in a go-kart, and even though he knew nothing about racing, he liked driving enough to persuade his father, Alejandro, to let him enter races throughout the country.As a teenager, Suarez progressed through the steps of the much-lower-profile Nascar Mexico Series and was successful enough that he wanted to pursue a career. He had two options: open-wheel racing in Europe or stock car racing in the United States. He chose the first.“They thought I was good enough to move along to something else — something bigger,” he said.According to Steve O’Donnell, a Nascar executive vice president who is the organization’s chief racing development officer, Mexico was, until about five years ago, primarily an open-wheel market, with fans who have been devoted more to Formula One and Indy cars.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.At first, Suarez decided to pursue an open-wheel career in Italy. After a year in which he had some success, he moved to the United States to drive stock cars.AdvertisementHe became a two-time participant in Nascar’s Drive for Diversity program, founded in 2004 to attract minority members and women to the sport, as well as a three-time participant in the Nascar Next initiative, which tries to identify the sport’s rising young stars. After Suarez won seven of 28 starts in two lower series in 2014, Gibbs hired him last year to drive in the Xfinity Series.“He’s come up the hard way and paid his dues,” O’Donnell said of Suarez. “He’s an extremely likable guy — always smiling, always wants to learn.”Just as important, Suarez also carried the multiyear backing of a corporate sponsor: Arris, a company that manufactures telecommunications equipment.“The problem is, over here, our sport is different than football, baseball or basketball, in that you’ve got to have a sponsor, and a sponsor needs to be sold before you go to Cup,” Gibbs said.Suarez drove in all 33 Xfinity Series races last year and in 13 of 23 Nascar Camping World Truck Series races, compiling 15 top-five and 28 top-10 finishes. But he had not won a national series race until Michigan.“It was super important to me; I was working super hard to get to this point,” Suarez said. “If you tried to put a pen to paper on how you would like the weekend to go, it would be just like that.”Maybe not exactly. A penalty for speeding on pit road put him at the back of the pack, and his clutch stopped working. Graves told his crew members that they needed to give Suarez’s Toyota a hard shove after he made his final pit stop of the race, which they did.Advertisement“He was able to pop it in gear and get it rolling,” Graves said.Besides that, Suarez beat Busch. Graves said: “In this case, it couldn’t be any better than beating him. Daniel beat arguably the best driver out there. The clutch thing could have been a huge distraction. He could have been focusing all on that and given up at that point.”Graves said Suarez’s English had improved even since the start of the season. Communication on the radio during races is still quite a challenge, simply because of the background noise generated by stock cars hurtling around a racetrack.“Even with someone who speaks perfect English, it’s hard to understand them sometimes,” Graves said, laughing.But Graves said that Suarez was easy to work with, and that they had gotten used to each other. Now, they are looking to become regular visitors to victory lane. Suarez said he was now being tapped for advice from younger aspiring drivers in Mexico.“It’s really cool for me to give all these kids a hand,” Suarez said. “When I was in that position, I didn’t have a lot of people helping me.”A version of this article appears in print on June 19, 2016, on Page SP8 of the New York edition with the headline: Navigating With Aplomb, Driver Sets a Pioneering Nascar Course.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.