By TAL PINCHEVSKYAPRIL 8, 2017
EL SEGUNDO, Calif. — During Eastern trips, N.H.L. teams occasionally take the train from one city to the next. It is an opportunity for teammates to bond while paying homage to the league’s olden days, when players sporting trench coats and fedoras rode the rails in an era predating charter flights.During a January train ride from Montreal to Ottawa, the Calgary Flames were forced to reflect on a 2016-17 season that was beginning to slip away.“It was quiet,” the veteran forward Matt Stajan said of the 124-mile train ride. “We lost, and we didn’t play well. We had a rough four-game stretch where confidence was low. Coaches told us to figure it out. We had a night together and figured it out.”A 5-1 loss to the Montreal Canadiens on Jan. 24 had just extended Calgary’s losing streak to four games and left it in danger of dropping out of the Western Conference playoff picture with a 24-24-3 record.“That was a pathetic display,” Coach Glen Gulutzan said after the game. “No biteback, no kickback. Our top guys didn’t do anything, and we need somebody to step up.”AdvertisementAfter the train ride, Calgary won its next game, beating the Ottawa Senators, 3-2, in overtime with its star forward Johnny Gaudreau scoring the winner. That victory started a 21-8-1 run, entering Saturday, that helped the Flames clinch a wild-card spot and has left their coach singing a decidedly different tune.Advertisement“I think the biggest thing that sparked the turnaround was we fully grasped the concepts of a different style of play,” Gulutzan said. “The coaches never changed their message, and the players stayed with it. They never tried to go in a different direction.”After being hired in June, Gulutzan began implementing a speed-based approach that contrasted sharply with the grinding game plan of Bob Hartley, who was fired last summer after four seasons behind Calgary’s bench.Hartley was a notorious taskmaster, and the congenial Gulutzan was not yet a known entity as an N.H.L. coach. After earning an education degree from the University of Saskatchewan, he was 39 when the Dallas Stars named him their coach in 2011. He was fired after two mostly uneventful seasons. With the Flames plodding through a 5-10-1 start this season, Gulutzan knew he might soon be contending with his own mortality as a N.H.L. coach.“In this league, they’ll make changes,” Gulutzan said. “It’s a business. I understand that. But I truly believed in what I was doing, so I didn’t let any of that noise get to me.”After piecing together some wins following their tight-lipped train ride through Eastern Canada, the Flames won 10 straight games in February and March, tying a franchise mark established in 1978 when the team was in Atlanta.Calgary’s best players have led the charge. After struggling alongside his teammates and dealing with a fractured finger, Gaudreau had 32 points in his past 30 games entering Saturday. The Flames’ other young star forward, Sean Monahan, overcame similar early-season struggles and had 12 goals and 28 points in his past 30 games entering Saturday.“It’s a long season,” Monahan said. “We weren’t getting the results at the start, but we kind of stuck with the process all year here. Once you do that and everyone has bought in, that goes a long way.”AdvertisementA number of players, including Mikael Backlund, Michael Frolik, Micheal Ferland and Dougie Hamilton, have established career highs in several offensive categories.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“We wanted to play fast, and we wanted to stay a connected team,” Gulutzan said. “We never wanted to slow the game down like we did in the past. They played that style of game and it really benefited them.”For all the speed they have demonstrated on the ice since January, the Flames made an important late-season alteration by taking on a playoff-like physicality. That transition started with the team’s youngest player.Selected sixth over all in the 2016 draft, Matthew Tkachuk, 19, has played with a physical edge much of the season on a line with Backlund and Frolik. But his reputation shifted leaguewide when he was suspended for two games for an elbow to the head of Los Angeles Kings defenseman Drew Doughty on March 19. Tkachuk, whose father is the former N.H.L. star Keith Tkachuk, returned to the lineup in time for the rematch against Los Angeles on March 29 and defended himself in a first-period fight against Kings defenseman Brayden McNabb.“He plays a hard game,” said Monahan, who invited Tkachuk to live in his house for the first two months of the season. “It’s a style not a lot of guys play nowadays. He’s a huge part of our team, and he’s going to be for a long time.”The Flames followed Tkachuk’s lead in that 4-1 loss to the Kings, with the teams combining for 74 penalty minutes. That combative bonding process continued when the Flames returned to Southern California to play the Ducks in Anaheim on April 4. In a 3-1 Ducks win, an injury to Anaheim defenseman Cam Fowler following an incidental knee-on-knee hit from Mark Giordano set off a series of fights. When the final horn sounded, the teams had combined for 110 penalty minutes, with Flames players collecting five misconduct penalties, all in the third period.“I’m proud of the way we played,” Gulutzan said of the loss in Anaheim. “Sometimes the way we stand up for each other is as important as the win, especially going into the playoffs.”A version of this article appears in print on April 9, 2017, on Page SP4 of the New York edition with the headline: After Bonding on Train Trip, Flames Ride Speedier Style to the Playoffs.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.