AdvertisementSupported byBy Mike TierneyARCADIA, Calif. — In the paddock and the walking ring before the Santa Anita Derby, the ratio of trainers to horses has rarely been smaller than it was Saturday. Animals outnumbered their human coaches by nearly two to one.After applying saddle clothes, Doug O’Neill dashed around, shaking hands and kissing cheeks with the connections of his four contestants. “You got the 5,” he shouted to an assistant, unable to attend to the horse bearing that digit himself.Bob Baffert hustled among his three entries while scrambling to convey final instructions to their jockeys.By comparison, John Shirreffs was thumb-twiddling. He sent out only two horses.The oddity could be traced largely to the absence of the Baffert-trained Mastery, whose campaign as a prime Kentucky Derby contender collapsed last month when a leg fracture shelved him indefinitely — if not permanently.So West Coast horsemen scoured their barns for capable 3-year-olds, and 13 were entered, resulting in the most crowded starting gate for this event in 36 years. O’Neill suggested that he might have dispatched just one of his foursome against Mastery, and Baffert would have reduced his own workload.Neither man ultimately made his way to the winner’s circle. Instead, it was Shirreffs, whose Gormley ran down three pacesetters and hit the finish line two and a half lengths ahead of Battle of Midway.Shirreffs’s other candidate, Royal Mo, was third — in front of the entire O’Neill-Baffert armada.Though the reserved Shirreffs, 71, carries a low profile outside the industry, having won his lone Kentucky Derby a dozen years ago with Giacomo at odds of 50 to 1, Gormley’s pilot is a celebrity of the first rank. Victor Espinoza steered American Pharoah to a Triple Crown in 2015 and rode California Chrome to victory in the Derby and the Preakness in 2014.Espinoza was second to last at Churchill Downs last year, a reminder that a jockey’s success ebbs and flows. Yet he said he had not given up on hopping aboard a legitimate Derby challenger.“I never think that,” he said. “I will only think that when I don’t have a horse in that race.”Now Gormley could become the betting public’s preference.Espinoza equated Gormley’s opening strides Saturday to a rocket launch and, fearing that he might become locked into an overly fast pace, elected to jerk the horse back — “a bit harder than I wanted,” he said — to the second flight.“You have to wonder how the horse is going to react to that,” Shirreffs said, acknowledging that the tactic can backfire. “But Gormley is a tough guy.”Espinoza detected a relaxed horse beneath him, which soon translated into a relaxed rider.“I knew I was in a good position,” he said of biding his time in fourth or fifth. “And I knew all the horses in front of me were going to stop.”In the smallest of consolations for Baffert, one of his horses, Reach the World, placed fourth, one spot ahead of O’Neill’s Iliad; they had started as 3-to-1 favorites. Iliad belonged to Baffert until a longtime affiliation with the stable owner Kaleem Shah disintegrated last December, and Shah handed off the horse to O’Neill.Baffert’s floppy white mane and ever-present sunglasses, images ingrained in the Kentucky Derby scene, may be absent from Churchill Downs for only the second time in 10 years, his record in the Derby frozen at four wins out of 26 starters. The field is determined by points accumulated in designated races, and a long scroll down the list is required to find Baffert’s name.The lone significant prep race left, the Arkansas Derby next Saturday, will unfold without Baffert’s involvement.The Santa Anita Derby closed out a triple-header for Kentucky Derby preps on Saturday that brought a modicum of clarity to a still-blurry picture as the Triple Crown series approaches.In the Wood Memorial at Aqueduct, Irish War Cry swatted away the slightly favored Battalion Runner, a Todd Pletcher horse, after a contentious joust down the stretch. Both horses are presumably bound for Louisville.At Keeneland in Lexington, Ky., the previously unbeaten McCraken yielded possible favorite status at the Derby with a desultory showing in the Blue Grass Stakes. First to the wire was a previously winless long-shot, Irap, who is trained by O’Neill. He and the runner-up Practical Joke qualified to make the hourlong van ride to Churchill Downs.Advertisement