By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSMARCH 19, 2016
After being told that his right rotator cuff was “significantly torn” and calling 30 of his closest friends to tell them it looked as if his career was over, Washington Nationals pitcher Bronson Arroyo received some good news on Saturday.Although there is still some damage and inflammation in the rotator cuff, team doctors compared Arroyo’s most recent magnetic resonance imaging test with one taken in 2014 and said he might be able to pitch again after going through rehabilitation.The Nationals announced on Saturday that Arroyo, a 39-year-old right-hander, would be shut down for the next one to two weeks, after which he would begin a shoulder-strengthening program and a throwing program. The rehabilitation process is expected to take four to six weeks, after which Arroyo will be re-evaluated.Arroyo has not pitched in the majors since June 14, 2014, just before he had Tommy John surgery. He also had a partly torn rotator cuff repaired then.Advertisement“It was a good prognosis,” Arroyo said. “The read they made was better than the early one. The early one, I thought I was cashed out and I was coming to the ballpark to retire. They look at it now and say it’s not a perfect shoulder, but it’s not worse than what we’ve seen other guys pitch with.”AdvertisementGeneral Manager Mike Rizzo said that “the tendons are extremely inflamed right now.”“That’s giving him all the pain in his shoulder. The remainder of the shoulder is essentially normal,” as it was in 2014, he added.A 2006 All-Star with the Cincinnati Reds, Arroyo signed a minor league deal with the Nationals in January. A 15-year veteran right-hander, Arroyo has a 145-131 record with a 4.19 E.R.A.While he admitted that it was still “a coin toss” whether his shoulder would hold up under the stress of pitching in the majors, Arroyo said he was willing to go through the process to find out. If his injury had required surgery, he would have retired from a game he started preparing himself to play at an early age.“I’ve lived a strange life,” he said. “I was in the weight room as a 5- and 6-year-old kid, pounding out weights.”He said he had recordings of himself at 8 years old, weighing 50 pounds, doing squats with 250 pounds of weights.“I don’t know anything other than this,” he said. “A couple of more months is no big deal.”Nationals Manager Dusty Baker, who managed Arroyo for six seasons in Cincinnati, seemed optimistic that Arroyo would pitch for Washington.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“He’s going to have an effect on this team before the season’s out,” Baker said. “Before this season’s out, we’re going to need Bronson.”AdvertisementCARDINALS SIGN TEJADA St. Louis signed the free-agent shortstop Ruben Tejada to a one-year, $1.5 million guaranteed contract.Tejada hit .261 with 23 doubles, three homers and 28 R.B.I. with the Mets last year. The Los Angeles Dodgers’ Chase Utley broke Tejada’s right leg with a takeout slide in the teams’ National League division series, ending Tejada’s season.Tejada signed with the Mets in 2006 and spent parts of six seasons with them. But after the Mets offered him a contract on Dec. 2, they signed the free-agent shortstop Asdrubal Cabrera and acquired second baseman Neil Walker from Pittsburgh.With Wilmer Flores also on the roster, Tejada’s future with the team became uncertain, and he was released on Wednesday.UNION IN TOUCH WITH LAROCHE The head of the Major League Baseball players’ union said there had been no decision on whether to file a grievance on behalf of Chicago White Sox first baseman Adam LaRoche. LaRoche, 36, retired from the White Sox on Tuesday after he said he had been told by the team’s president to cut down on clubhouse access for his 14-year-old son, Drake.The head of the union, Tony Clark, said the union had been “monitoring the situation” and indicated that it had been in contact with LaRoche and others.MAYBIN MAY MISS OPENER Detroit Tigers center fielder Cameron Maybin will probably miss opening day while recovering from a fractured left wrist.Tigers Manager Brad Ausmus said Maybin’s wrist had not healed quickly enough for him to be ready for the April 5 opener at Miami.Maybin was injured in his first at-bat of the exhibition season when he was hit by a pitch. He hit .267 with 10 homers and 59 R.B.I. last season with Atlanta, then was traded to the Tigers.AdvertisementThe Tigers also scratched pitcher Daniel Norris from his scheduled start because of a stiff back. Norris, a 22-year-old left-hander, was traded from Toronto to Detroit last season in the deal for David Price.A version of this article appears in print on March 20, 2016, on Page SP11 of the New York edition with the headline: Nationals’ Arroyo May Pitch Again After Rehab of Shoulder .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.