By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSMARCH 20, 2016
With his team falling further and further behind against the Knicks, Washington Wizards Coach Randy Wittman told his players everything was O.K.His faith was justified.John Wall had 24 points and 10 assists, and the Wizards rallied from an 18-point second-quarter deficit to beat the Knicks, 99-89, on Saturday night for their fourth straight victory.“When we were down, 29-20, believe it or not, I told them, ‘We’re all right.’ They thought I was crazy, but I really felt that way,” Wittman said. “I liked what we were doing, and I liked the shots that we were getting.”It got worse before it got better, but eventually the shots began to fall, and the Wizards tightened up their defense.AdvertisementMarcin Gortat had 15 points and 11 rebounds, while Markieff Morris added 17 points as all five Washington starters scored in double figures.Advertisement“In the past, if we were missing shots, we would just give up in the game and not play defense,” Wall said. “We just kept talking and said, ‘’We’ve got to keep competing, shots will fall later on.’ ”It was the largest comeback win of the season for the Wizards, who are 10th in the Eastern Conference, one and a half games out of the eighth and final playoff spot.Wall, seeking his third straight triple-double, fell short with two rebounds, but he committed just one turnover after totaling 17 in his past two games.Kristaps Porzingis and Carmelo Anthony led the Knicks with 20 points each, but neither had an answer during the Knicks’ 13-point third quarter.“We couldn’t get into a rhythm,” guard Jose Calderon said. “They did, and we couldn’t stop them.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Anthony, who averaged 35 points in the teams’ first two meetings, scored 12 after the first quarter, as Wittman turned to the 6-foot-10 Morris to check Anthony.“Wanted to get more size on him, be a little physical with him and keep him away from the basket a little bit more,” said Morris, who was guarding Anthony for the first time.Anthony was not available after the game. A Knicks spokesman said Anthony had a migraine in the first quarter.AdvertisementThe Wizards’ winning streak — coming after a five-game skid — matched their season high. They are 9-1 in their past 10 home games.Washington trailed, 53-43, at halftime, but Gortat, who had 13 second-half points, scored 6 during a 9-0 run to open the third quarter.With the Wizards trailing, 60-54, Morris’s alley-oop dunk and Wall’s 3-pointer began a 20-3 run, and Washington led, 76-66, after three quarters.“They just started putting more pressure defensively on us,” Porzingis said. “We weren’t really able to execute that well. It was their defense. They raised their level.”The Knicks, who shot 30.7 percent in the second half, pulled to 89-85 on Anthony’s 3-pointer with 4 minutes 20 seconds left, but the Wizards answered.The Knicks shot 58.3 percent — 14 of 24 — in the first quarter and led, 46-28, with 4:44 left in the first half before Wall led a 12-2 run.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.