By BILL PENNINGTONJUNE 17, 2016
OAKMONT, Pa. — A wave of golfers trudged off the Oakmont Country Club golf course at midmorning Friday, looking weary but happy to have finally finished a round that for many had started 24 hours earlier. Stepping from grass saturated by a deluge the previous day, they stamped their feet on pavement near the clubhouse trying to shed the dampness from their shoes.Passing them on a path to the course for their first round of the 116th United States Open was a separate wave of golfers, a rested group that had watched Thursday’s downpours through the windows of secure shelter. Dozens of these players were doing something that would have been unfathomable a day earlier: applying sunscreen.As more than a few golfers observed, the first two days of America’s national championship were as different as night and day. Although it might have been more accurate to refer to a sodden Thursday as nightmarish and a sunny Friday as dreamy.But that described only the weather, because there was one imperative that was constant to both days: Everyone had to play the menacing Oakmont course. While the first wave — the dozens of players forced to return to the course just after dawn Friday — might have been rain-soaked and sleep-deprived, those in the second wave had to play in confounding course conditions they had never prepared for.AdvertisementAt the end of the day, with roughly half the field still waiting to start or finish the second round, the quirky, unconventional nature of the 2016 U.S. Open continued even when it came to the two-way tie at the top of the leaderboard. Andrew Landry, the PGA Tour rookie whose entire competitive contribution to Friday’s event was a single stroke of his putter, was at four under par with Dustin Johnson, who played 36 holes Friday and shot two rounds in the 60s.Landry, ranked No. 624 in the world, was approaching a birdie putt on his 18th hole when thunderstorms stopped play late Thursday afternoon. After a night’s sleep, he came back, and shortly before 7:30 a.m., he rolled in the putt, which turned out to be the stroke that gave him the first-round lead. Landry’s 66 was the lowest score for an opening round in the nine times that Oakmont has hosted the Open.AdvertisementJohnson, who finished second at the Open last year after he three-putted the final green, shot a first-round 67 on Friday and, in his second 18 holes of the day, had two birdies and a bogey for a 69.Landry will tee off for his second round Saturday at 7:11 a.m.When play was suspended shortly before 9 p.m., only 13 players were under par. That group included Lee Westwood, who trailed Landry and Johnson by a stroke after he completed his first round on Friday morning. Tied for fourth place at two under were Scott Piercy, Sergio García and Shane Lowry. Seven players were at one under, including a local favorite and former Open champion, Jim Furyk. The two-time Masters champion Bubba Watson was also at one under.Officials from the United States Golf Association, which conducts the championship, said they still expected to complete the tournament by Sunday evening. The U.S.G.A. announced that those golfers who had started their first rounds on Thursday morning would not begin their second rounds until Saturday morning. Those golfers who played their entire first rounds Friday but did not finish their second rounds would also return to Oakmont on Saturday morning to finish.After the cut, the third round for the entire field was scheduled to begin Saturday afternoon. While the leaders after the second round, who tee off last in the third round, may not complete their third rounds on Saturday, the U.S.G.A. said it expected the third round to be finished by Sunday morning, setting up the final round for later in the day.There was not much agreement about which wave of golfers had an advantage in the first two days. The golfers who played the majority of their first round on Friday were facing soft fairways that kept more tee shots from rolling into the punishing rough. They also were firing to receptive greens.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But there were hidden consequences to the spongier greens that surprised the field. Approach shots spun so much that balls ended up out of position, if not entirely off the green.AdvertisementOn the green at the par-5 fourth, a pitching-wedge shot by the defending champion Jordan Spieth spun backward 35 feet. When his shot was in the air, he said, he thought he would have a tap-in birdie; he ended up three-putting for a bogey.“I never spin it back with a pitching wedge,” said Spieth, who shot a two-over 72. “But that’s what we dealt with from one day to the next. It’s a shame, because Oakmont was so great during those practice round days when it started to firm up.“Now, you know, it’s still great, but it’s a different golf course.”Johnson, still chasing his first major victory, played with a relaxed confidence and was still at ease after his 36 holes.“I just need to stick with what I’m doing and keep this up,” he said. “I’ve got a good plan for this golf course. If I keep driving the ball like this, I’ll be tough.”A handful of prominent players were lurking near the leaders, including Ángel Cabrera, who shot an even-par 70. Cabrera won the event the last time it was at Oakmont, in 2007. Four winners of major championships were at one over: Adam Scott, Furyk, Zach Johnson and Geoff Ogilvy.Several notable players also struggled in the first two days. Phil Mickelson was at seven over. The Masters winner Danny Willett and Jason Day, the world No. 1, were both at five over.A version of this article appears in print on June 18, 2016, on Page D1 of the New York edition with the headline: One Putt and Two Rounds Both Equal Four Under.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.