By BRAD SPURGEONMARCH 18, 2016
The love-hate relationship between Renault, the French car manufacturer, and Formula One has entered a new phase, as Renault returns to the series with a team for the first time since 2011.The French company’s Formula One phases tend to go in cycles, and like many carmakers, it has made an art of entering and exiting the series at suitable moments.Last fall, Renault bought the Lotus team and renamed it Renault, hoping that its illustrious history in the series would repeat itself.Its reasons for returning are clear. First, Renault hopes to sell cars globally by spreading its name around the world via the elite racing series. But there is another motivation: Before the Mercedes team’s domination of the series in the last two seasons, Renault was the only car manufacturer to have won the Formula One constructors’ title as a full-fledged team under its own name. Now the French manufacturer wants to show its German rival that it can do it again.Advertisement“We are not here to participate,” Carlos Ghosn, the Renault chairman and chief executive, said when the new team was introduced in Paris in February. “We are here to compete at the highest level and eventually win.”AdvertisementRenault won the drivers’ and constructors’ titles in 2005 and 2006, with Fernando Alonso driving. Before that, since the first constructors’ title was awarded in 1957, the winner had always been an independent team. Of course both Renault and Mercedes have been part of many title-winning teams as engine providers — with Williams, McLaren, Benetton, Red Bull and Brawn.Renault first raced as a full team, building both the engine and the chassis, from 1977 to 1985, and it provided engines to other teams from 1983 to 1986. It then dropped out of the series completely in 1987 and 1988 before returning solely as an engine manufacturer in 1989, providing engines to the Williams team until 1996. During that period, it also provided engines at times to Ligier and Benetton, winning the constructors’ title with Benetton in 1995.Renault left the series in name in 1997, but still provided its engines to Williams the following year, under the name Mecachrome. In 2002, Renault then bought the Benetton team and returned to race again as a manufacturer of engine and chassis until the end of 2011, winning both titles in 2005 and 2006. From 2012, it again provided engines to several different teams, including Red Bull, which won the title four times with Renault engines, from 2010 to 2013.Almost every time the French manufacturer left the series, it noted that the publicity value had diminished: Victories were expected and received little positive marketing value, while not winning was held up for scrutiny by the media as a great failure. As Ghosn noted, when the team wins, credit goes to the car design; when it fails, it’s the engine’s fault.This time, Ghosn said the company would double its investment in its sporting research and development, with the goal not only of selling cars, but bringing the technology from the race car to its road cars. It is working with its Infiniti brand to develop the new hybrid technology for the Formula One car.Renault sustained constant attacks last season from Red Bull, which was using its engines, after the four-time world-champion team failed to challenge Mercedes for a second year. Renault decided to allow Red Bull to continue to use its engines this year, but under the name of a new Red Bull sponsor, TAG Heuer. Meanwhile, Renault bought back the team with which it had won its titles in 2005 and 2006.It is hoping to relive its past successes, tying together the France-based engine-producing department in Viry-Chatillon, a suburb of Paris, with the chassis-making operation in Enstone, England, as it had done before.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Despite the negative publicity last year as Red Bull blamed Renault for its lack of success, Ghosn said he recognized that there was no other marketing platform as financially viable as Formula One.Advertisement“The reason for which we decided to come back as a full team in Formula One is firstly to our marketing and sales strategy and the development and growth of the company,” he said. The automaker is particularly interested in markets where the series is present or popular, including Brazil, China, India, Russia, Southeast Asia and the Middle East.Jérôme Stoll, the new Renault Sport director, said that as a full-fledged manufacturer team Renault would operate on the same budget as it did when it was an engine provider. That is thanks in large part to a deal the team made with the series’s commercial rights holder, Bernie Ecclestone, to receive a larger share of the commercial revenues of the series.“We are confident,” Stoll said. “We have the budget, we have the talent, we have the people.”But the team has also learned from Red Bull, deciding to bring in fresh, young managers from one of the most successful teams in the lower series of GP2, which races alongside Formula One at Grand Prix weekends. Red Bull surprised the paddock in 2005 by bringing in the young Christian Horner, who had several successes in the lower series but no experience in Formula One, to run the team.Fred Vasseur, the Renault team’s new sporting director, has had more success in the lower series than Horner did. He managed a number of drivers who went on to Formula One racing, including Lewis Hamilton, Nico Rosberg, Sebastien Vettel and Romain Grosjean, when they won their titles in the lower series.During the last two seasons, the Lotus team had suffered a gutting of staff and resources. Vasseur said he would be calmly building that back up.“The head count is around 470 now and needs to be close to 650 in the long term, but it will take us up to 18 months to do it,” said Bob Bell, the new technical director, referring to the staff in Enstone.Renault has also hired a rookie driver, Joylon Palmer of Britain, and the slightly more experienced Danish driver Kevin Magnussen, who raced for the 2014 season at McLaren.As a sign that Renault knows how to work in Formula One and is serious about this new venture, Ghosn has set realistic goals for the team: To try to score top-three finishes within three years. No talk of immediate victories.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »