By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSMARCH 19, 2016
SAN JOSE, Calif. —  Joel Ward scored twice, Joe Thornton broke a tie early in the third period and the San Jose Sharks overwhelmed Henrik Lundqvist and the Rangers in a 4-1 victory Saturday.Lundqvist stopped 42 of the first 43 shots he faced before allowing three to Thornton, Ward and Joe Pavelski on four shots in a span of 3 minutes 20 seconds that sent the Sharks to their third straight home win.Tomas Hertl had three assists and Martin Jones made 25 saves to help San Jose move to a point behind second-place Anaheim in the N.H.L.’s Pacific Division.Dan Boyle, a former Shark, scored the lone goal for the Rangers, who stayed in the game for two periods because of Lundqvist’s brilliance before falling apart in the third. Lundqvist made 43 saves before being pulled after the fourth goal.AdvertisementSan Jose outshot the Rangers by 52-26 for the game.Lundqvist stymied the Sharks most of the game, including back-to-back saves on Chris Tierney and Patrick Marleau early in the third to keep the game tied. But San Jose finally broke through when Thornton sent Hertl in on a long pass. Hertl’s shot was stopped by Lundqvist, but Thornton knocked in the rebound for his 17th goal.Just 1:49 later, Marleau fed Ward for a one-timer that trickled through Lundqvist for his second goal of the game. Then 91 seconds later, Pavelski sealed the game and ended Lundqvist’s night with his 33rd goal of the season.“It was a tough game to play, so many big chances,” Lundqvist said. “There’s only one way to win hockey games, is to play hard and smart, but if you are missing that a little bit it’s going to be tough against a good team.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.After starting their three-game California swing with a win in Anaheim, the Rangers blew a two-goal, third-period lead at Los Angeles in an overtime loss Thursday and fell in San Jose. They are only 2 points ahead of third-place Pittsburgh in the Metropolitan Division.The game started with good pace, as both teams had chances early but no one beat either goalie. The teams then traded goals during a second period that was controlled by the Sharks, who had 21 shots but only one goal against Lundqvist.San Jose struck first late in a power play for too many men on the ice when Joonas Donskoi fed Ward from behind the net with a no-look pass. Ward then one-timed it into the top corner for his 18th goal of the season.AdvertisementLundqvist did a good job keeping the deficit at one goal, making strong stops against Melker Karlsson, Hertl and then a breakaway attempt by Brent Burns.The Rangers then tied the game late when Derick Brassard fed Boyle on a 2-on-1 and Boyle beat Jones with a backhander for his first goal as a visitor in his old Shark Tank home.“We have to be better,” Rangers defenseman Marc Staal said. “We’re just trying to make plays that aren’t there.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.