By SETH BERKMANJUNE 3, 2016
GREENBURGH, N.Y. — During his 14-year N.B.A. career, Jeff Hornacek barely spoke to Phil Jackson. The only recollection of a conversation Hornacek could cite on Friday was when he played for the Utah Jazz in the 1997 and 1998 N.B.A. finals against the Chicago Bulls, who were coached by Jackson.“I think probably the only words I ever said to him were, ‘Congratulations on the championship again,’ when they beat us two times,” Hornacek said.Hornacek, 53, offered up that anecdote as he was introduced as the Knicks’ 28th head coach; only one of the previous ones, Red Holzman, has ever won a championship, and his last one was 43 years ago. Whether Hornacek could become No. 2 is anyone’s guess, but if it does happen, it is not likely to be any time soon.Nevertheless, in a news conference at the team’s practice complex, Hornacek came off as confident and self-assured as he spoke about using the triangle as one element — but not the only one — of the Knicks’ offense; ruminated on his two best players, Carmelo Anthony and Kristaps Porzingis; and said the key to winning basketball was to “buckle down defensively.’’AdvertisementAs he spoke, Jackson was seated close by to his right. Until recently, Jackson said Friday, he had long been a fan of Hornacek and his basketball acumen, but from afar. Still, Jackson said, that was enough to put Hornacek at the top of the list of head-coaching candidates that he and Knicks General Manager Steve Mills drew up this spring.AdvertisementThey said that Hornacek was the first candidate they had contacted and that Jackson, after his initial six-hour meeting with Hornacek, had told Mills he thought they had the man for the job. It turned out they did.Hornacek takes over a franchise whose future is far from glistening. Anthony, whom Hornacek repeatedly referred to as a “superstar” on Friday, turned 32 last week and dealt with a number of injuries last season. Whether he might prefer to be traded to a championship contender is a continuing question despite Anthony’s periodic statements that he wants to stay put.Kristaps Porzingis, the team’s only other recognized asset, had an impressive rookie campaign but remains an unfinished product. Hornacek said it could take another four years before Porzingis reaches his potential. By then, who knows where Anthony will be.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Since Jackson was named the Knicks’ president in March 2014, the team has gone through four coaches. Jackson quickly dismissed Mike Woodson, whom he inherited when he took the job, and replaced him with Derek Fisher, who had never coached before but had played for Jackson when he coached the Los Angeles Lakers.Fisher lasted only a season and a half, compiling a 40-96 record before being fired. Kurt Rambis, a longtime Jackson ally, took over as interim coach but did not do much better, going 9-19.That is a lot of coaching turnover in a short period, and on Friday, Jackson appeared to become defensive when asked if the instability had gotten in the way of his vision for the team.“Who’s counting?” Jackson said dismissively of the coaching changes. He later added, “We’re doing what we have to do to move forward, and that’s the important part.”AdvertisementNot surprisingly, the second question at the news conference was about the triangle offense that is so closely identified with Jackson and how much Hornacek intended to use it. Hornacek’s answer was that he would use it, or at least key elements of it, but that he would employ other offensive strategies as well.In other words, Hornacek indicated that he saw the triangle as part of a larger offensive philosophy, an answer Jackson seemed fine with.“Am I going to run the triangle?” Hornacek said. “I would say I wouldn’t call it the triangle. There’s a lot of aspects of the triangle — the spacing, the cuts off hitting the post — that are not unique to the triangle.”“It’s all part of basketball, and Jeff recognizes that,” Jackson said.At several moments in the news conference, Jackson tried to intersperse bits of humor into the occasion, at one point comparing the challenging quest for quality cafeteria food at the Knicks’ practice complex to the difficulty in beating out other teams for free agents.At other times, he was more direct.“We’ve started all over again,” Jackson said of the Knicks. “We’ve cleaned our roster, we’ve garnered money and space, and we’ve changed the context of what this team is.”A version of this article appears in print on , on Page D3 of the New York edition.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.