By DAVID WALDSTEINJUNE 2, 2016
PARIS — A few moments after Serena Williams narrowly avoided a crushing upset at the hands of a player ranked 60th in the world, she met with her coach, Patrick Mouratoglou, and lamented her performance.There was plenty to be critical about. Williams looked flat-footed and immobile in the quarterfinal match, prone to baffling mistakes. To the shock of most of the bundled-up fans on a chilly day at Roland Garros, she lost the first set.Then, late in the second set, Williams presented her opponent, Yulia Putintseva, with a break point. If Putintseva could convert, she would serve for the match.Instead, she hit wide. Williams recovered to win the game and took the next six, eventually winning the match, 5-7, 6-4, 6-1, to sidestep what was — for a while — shaping up as a potentially rude ending.Advertisement“Honestly, at one point I didn’t see the light at the end of the tunnel,” Williams said.When it was finally over, Williams came to the net breathing heavily from the exhaustion of many long rallies and a good deal of pressure. Williams has been trying for almost a year to capture her 22nd Grand Slam singles title, which would draw her even with Steffi Graf for the Open era record.AdvertisementShe missed her chances at the United States Open and the Australian Open. The French Open is the current opportunity, and she is by far the favorite, even if she did not play that way Thursday.“You know, she is not a normal player with normal expectations,” Mouratoglou said, placing his hand on a questioner’s shoulder. “The things that are on her shoulder are very, very heavy, believe me. Everybody expects her to win every single match all year. Maybe when she doesn’t feel good, this thing becomes very heavy and the level goes low. But still she finds her way through it, so I am not going to complain.”If Williams had difficulty with Putintseva, her semifinal matchup could be just as tricky.She will face No. 58 Kiki Bertens of the Netherlands, who upset eighth-seeded Timea Bacsinszky, 7-5, 6-2, on Court Suzanne Lenglen in her first appearance in a Grand Slam quarterfinal match.To get there, Bertens, 24, beat three seeded players, including No. 3 Angelique Kerber in the first round and No. 15 Madison Keys in the fourth. Her best showing here previously came in 2014 when she reached the fourth round as a qualifier.With each victory, Bertens is helping reshape the tennis fortunes of her nation. The last Dutch woman to reach a French Open semifinal was Marijke Schaar in 1971. The last one to reach a semifinal at any major tournament was Betty Stove in 1977.After prolonged struggles with injuries, including ankle surgery, Bertens has played well beyond even her own expectations over the last several weeks. She earned four solid victories for the Netherlands in Fed Cup play, then won two matches to qualify for the pre-French Open tournament in Nuremberg, Germany, and ended up winning it for her second career title.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Even Bertens’s parents are surprised at her uncanny success here. Upon beating Bacsinszky, Bertens looked up at them in the stands, raised her hands in a kind of smiling shrug and shook her head.Advertisement“I was like, ‘Can you believe it?’ Because I cannot,” she said. “And also my parents were like, ‘No, this is not happening.’ But, yeah, it is.”The only time Bertens and Williams faced each other was in the second round of at last year’s United States Open. Bertens forced Williams into a first-set tiebreaker, but lost in two sets.But a sore left calf may hamper her Friday. Bertens required treatment during Thursday’s match and had the leg wrapped. She said she had trouble pushing off on her serve.“Maybe we are just going to try everything today to be fit again tomorrow,” she said. “We’ll see tomorrow how it is.”But there may also be some uncertainty surrounding Williams, who looked strangely immobile against Putintseva. She took about 2 hours 40 minutes to arrive for her postmatch news conference, much longer than usual. She said she was receiving treatment to prepare for Friday, and then ended the session after only seven questions.“I feel better now,” she said. “I feel fine. Just getting ready for tomorrow, actually.”Her tense encounter with Putintseva featured several striking momentum shifts, beginning three points into the third game of the first set. When Williams was serving, play was suspended because of a cold, heavy mist enveloping the stadium. The delay was only about 10 minutes, but when play resumed, without any warm-up, Williams showed the first glimpses of her off-kilter play.She made two quick unforced errors and pounded her leg with her hand after one missed shot and stared at her racket after another. It was a pattern in the first two sets.“She feels she is unprofessional to play that level,” Mouratoglou said. “She was not happy. And I think that is a good thing.”AdvertisementMouratoglou noted that with the slow conditions on court, Williams was unable to put away points as quickly as she usually does. The longer rallies frustrated her mentally and clearly took a toll physically.But it was not simply a matter of Williams handing the points away. Putintseva was connecting on some daring shots. Mouratoglou once coached Putintseva and said she could be the No. 1 player in the world. He still believes she can do that, with certain improvements.As for Bertens, Mouratoglou noted how much confidence she has after winning her last 12 matches.“We can only be surprised because she never did something close to this level, this achievement,” Mouratoglou said.But then he added one of his refrains about Williams that even a casual tennis fan knows to be true.“It’s not about them,” he said. “It is about Serena. She will decide what her future is going to be in the next days.”A version of this article appears in print on June 3, 2016, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: Williams Continues Milestone Quest by Surviving a Shaky Quarterfinal.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.