By PAT BORZIJUNE 18, 2016
MINNEAPOLIS — The Minnesota Twins left-hander Pat Dean grew up a Yankees fan in Naugatuck, Conn., the same hometown as 1940s Yankees star Francis Shea, known as Spec. Dean had eagerly anticipated his first career appearance against the Yankees on Friday night at Target Field.Sadly for Dean, it was not memorable. Dean lacks a cracking fastball, and the Yankees figured him out quickly. Every Yankee but one had a hit by the time Twins Manager Paul Molitor removed Dean with one out in the third. With Masahiro Tanaka delivering a strong outing on five days’ rest, the Yankees won for the second straight night, 8-2.Dean took a businesslike view on the experience of pitching against the team he had rooted for as a boy.“I’m out there to do a job,” he said. “It doesn’t matter who it is.”The Yankees took a 4-0 lead in the first, two of those runs from a Carlos Beltran homer, and led by 5-1 when Dean left the game.AdvertisementThat was plenty for Tanaka (4-2). After the second, when the Twins cobbled together two hits and a groundout for a run, Tanaka did not allow another runner into scoring position until Eduardo Nunez and Joe Mauer singled back to back in the eighth.AdvertisementAs well as Tanaka has pitched this year, he has been most dominant on five or more days of rest — 3-0 with a 1.49 E.R.A. in eight starts, compared with 1-2 and 4.70 in his six starts on four days’ rest. Pitchers in Japan often go a week between starts. Tanaka gave up five runs in six and a third innings against Detroit in his last start, his third straight on four days’ rest.Girardi let Tanaka pitch into the eighth and throw a season-high 110 pitches because he had the extra day’s rest and will not pitch again for a week. Two off days next week will bump Tanaka’s next start to Friday against the Twins at Yankee Stadium.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“It’s not like his numbers are horrible,” Yankees Manager Joe Girardi said, referring to regular rest. “It’s not like he has an 8.00 ERA. But it’s something he’s more accustomed to. It’s kind of how he grew up. We had 40 games in 41 days, and that was kind of rough on everyone.”Girardi noted that the livelier offense had finally provided some support for Tanaka. The Yankees had scored only three runs while Tanaka was in the game in his last three starts. He left those games with two losses and a no-decision after a 10-start unbeaten streak to open the season.“It’s nice for him, because we have not scored him a lot of runs,” Girardi said. “You always worry when you have a long first inning how a guy is going to come out, but he did a good job and then continued to push well.”Tanaka was grateful for the support.“Absolutely, it helped me out mentally, obviously,” he said through an interpreter. “As a starting pitcher, you want to put up as many zeros as possible. That’s what I tried to do all night.”A passing shower delayed the start by 35 minutes, and it took the Yankees only another 10 minutes to score four times. Jacoby Ellsbury singled on Dean’s third pitch, Rob Refsnyder doubled Ellsbury home on the fifth, and Beltran pulled a two-run homer to left on the 13th. The fourth run scored when Dean broke late to cover first, enabling Didi Gregorius to beat out an infield hit.AdvertisementDean departed with one run in and two men on in the third. Austin Romine doubled in two more runs against reliever Neil Ramirez, and Starlin Castro added a sacrifice fly in the fourth. Dean was charged with seven earned runs on eight hits while recording only seven outs. After the game, the Twins sent him to Class AAA Rochester.Beltran went 3 for 4, with singles as the other two hits, in his second game back after missing time with an inflamed left knee. Girardi removed him in the sixth for pinch-runner Ike Davis. Brett Gardner got a day off against a left-hander but should be back in the lineup Saturday, Girardi said.Beltran said he was feeling better.“I’m a little bit more comfortable in my mind,” he said. “I don’t think it’s an issue. I still have a little fluid, but the pain is not there, which is good.”The Yankees are 18-5 at Target Field since it opened in 2010.A version of this article appears in print on June 18, 2016, on Page D4 of the New York edition with the headline: Baseball; Rested Tanaka Shines as Yankees Top Twins.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.