By ERICA WESTLYJULY 30, 2016
Monica Abbott was barely a year out of college when she won a silver medal with the United States softball team at the 2008 Summer Olympics. Now 31, she has not had a chance to win another.Softball, along with baseball, had already been voted off the Olympic program three years before Abbott and her teammates took to the podium. So instead of starring for the United States in Rio this summer, Abbott is gaining acclaim another way.In May, the Houston-based Scrap Yard Dawgs, the newest team in the National Pro Fastpitch league, made national headlines when it signed Abbott to a six-year, $1 million deal — thought to be the highest salary paid by a professional women’s sports team in the United States. It was perhaps the biggest publicity boost the league had received since 2005, when Jennie Finch, who, like Abbott, had achieved fame pitching for the American Olympic softball team, joined National Pro Fastpitch.Now in its 13th season, National Pro Fastpitch has become the main avenue for women to play softball at a high level after college in the United States. It is small, with only six teams, but the Houston team’s acquisition of Abbott and other top players seemed to signal the start of a new phase for the league, one in which first-year teams want to be the best rather than merely exist and are willing to spend money to accomplish that goal.N.P.F. has always aimed to expand, but stability has often taken precedence over growth. Unable to attract national corporate interest, most women’s professional sports leagues have no choice but to rely on local businesses and family groups for financial support. Some of those sponsorships have been long-lasting, but the failures outnumber the successes.AdvertisementWhen Cheri Kempf became N.P.F. commissioner in 2007, she found herself turning down prospective team owners in order to keep the league alive.Advertisement“From 2004 to 2007, this league was giving teams away and not checking to see if the owners could really afford to operate a team,” she said. “It was painful, but I was willing to withstand the criticism because I knew that we had to shrink before we could grow.”For several years, N.P.F. existed as a four-team league, with three strong teams — the Chicago Bandits, the Akron Racers and the Orlando, Fla.-based Pride, which is owned by the United States Specialty Sports Association — and a rotating fourth-place team that changed owners and locations nearly every summer.Introducing a new team into a community can be challenging. Even with a top player like Abbott on the roster, the Scrap Yard Dawgs have struggled to attract fans. Abbott’s first home game with the team brought in more than 1,600 spectators, but attendance at the Houston field has declined since then, averaging around 300 fans per game.Still, the Scrap Yard Dawgs own their playing field, which keeps operating costs at a minimum, said Connie May, the team’s general manager.With Abbott pitching, the team also has a good chance of winning this year’s championship, which would help solidify the team’s future and possibly the league’s. Attracting fans is much easier when a team is winning. And having a new top team would make the league more competitive, which, in turn, would aid expansion efforts.One of the fastest ways for N.P.F. to grow would be by garnering support from a major corporation. “That would be a game-changer,” said Kevin Shelton, the Dallas Charge’s general manager.Kempf said the purchase of a team by a corporation or an investment group would make “more of a statement than an anonymous individual supporting a team.”AdvertisementSo far, however, companies like Nike that invest in women’s sports at the college and Olympic levels have not shown much interest in supporting a pro softball league.For now, N.P.F. is taking a measured approach to expansion, with hopes of adding a team or two each season over the next few years. The league is national in scope, but there is no geographic master plan.Team owners’ experience and financial qualifications matter to Kempf more than their locations. The league has two Texas-based teams, the Scrap Yard Dawgs and the Charge, but Kempf is open to adding more — assuming they have sound business plans. But Southern California, arguably the biggest softball hotbed in the country and home to many top college players, has yet to have a team in the league because no qualified owners there have come forward.But the growing popularity of college softball is a positive sign for the league’s future. The finals of the Women’s College World Series this season had the second-highest television ratings in the championship’s history, behind last year. N.P.F. teams used to rely on Olympic stars to bring in crowds, but today’s top college players attract similar attention.The Pride, which featured seven former Olympians on its roster just six years ago, is now built around players like Keilani Ricketts and Sierra Romero who became household names in college, thanks to ESPN’s increasingly prominent coverage of the N.C.A.A. tournament.“We have more girls playing softball than ever before and starting at younger and younger ages,” said Don DeDonatis, the Pride’s owner and manager. “Our current team could be better than that original team, to be honest.”Get daily updates during the Olympics as well as a weekly roundup of sports news.N.P.F.’s ties to the college game also help with community outreach. Aside from the occasional story on high-profile players like Abbott, N.P.F. teams do not receive much news coverage. Even some college players are unaware that the league exists. The pro teams have been working to change that by playing games on college campuses. Starting Aug. 19, the N.P.F. championship will also be held at a major college stadium, at the University of Alabama, for the first time.More professional softball teams would enable more college players to stay in the sport after graduation. Some Americans, including Ricketts and Abbott, also play in Japan’s professional softball league, but each of its 12 teams is allowed to have only two foreign players, putting those spots out of reach for most college players. (In recent years, several foreign players have played in N.P.F., which has no roster restrictions.)AdvertisementWith roughly 300 Division I college softball teams producing players, N.P.F. could quadruple in size and still not come close to exhausting the supply of players graduating each spring. Despite Abbott’s record contract, most player salaries range from $3,000 to $10,000 per season, and as in other women’s professional sports, players need day jobs to make ends meet.Not long ago, N.P.F.’s future seemed uncertain. Its three stable teams may have been the best in the world, but without growth, the league had little chance of survival. Today, the league is growing and re-energized. A 25-game broadcast deal with CBS Sports Network takes effect next year. The International Olympic Committee will vote this week on whether to bring back softball for the 2020 Olympics, which will be held in Tokyo, where the sport is popular.“What’s happening now is that there’s people saying, ‘Hey, this is a great game,’” DeDonatis said. “I’m always pushing it. All I talk about is women’s softball.”Erica Westly is the author of “Fastpitch: The Untold History of Softball and the Women Who Made the Game.”A version of this article appears in print on July 31, 2016, on Page SP5 of the New York edition with the headline: With a Million-Dollar Arm, a League Makes Its Pitch.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.