By IVAN NECHEPURENKOJULY 27, 2016
MOSCOW — President Vladimir V. Putin blamed politics for the doping scandal that has led to the barring of more than 100 Russian athletes from the coming Rio Games, saying that the absence of some Russian athletes will devalue the medals of other Olympians and render their victories “tasteless.”Speaking in one of the grand halls of the Kremlin on Wednesday, Mr. Putin told members of the Russian Olympic team, including those barred from Rio, that they fell victim to “double standards” imposed by “shortsighted politicians.”As a result, the level of competition will be reduced and the Summer Games will be less of a spectacle, he said, according to a transcript published on the Kremlin’s website.“It is one thing to win in competition with your equals, with strong rivals, after all, and quite another thing to compete against athletes clearly not of your level,” Mr. Putin said. “Such a victory does not have the same taste and is perhaps even quite tasteless.”AdvertisementA total of 108 Russians have been barred from the Olympics so far, including 67 of 68 members of the track and field team. Russia planned to send 387 athletes to the Games.AdvertisementThe International Olympic Committee was urged by athletes and antidoping officials to bar the entire Russian team after an investigation confirmed a pervasive state-sponsored doping scheme. But Olympics officials instead chose to defer that decision to individual sports federations.Mr. Putin promised that Russia would treat the barred athletes as Olympic champions, “with all the administrative and financial consequences this entails.”In January, the Russian government ruled that gold medalists in Rio de Janeiro would receive 4 million rubles each, or $60,000.Yelena Isinbayeva, a pole-vaulter who is among the track and field athletes barred from the Games, could not hide her tears in her speech that followed Mr. Putin’s.“They took from us the goal that had kept us going and motivated us to keep pushing our own limits every day,” said Mrs. Isinbayeva, two-time Olympic champion and the current world-record holder in pole vault. “Today we faced such lawlessness, injustice and complacency from certain people in the sports world, who do whatever they want under the rules that they created themselves.”Following the meeting, Russian athletes went to one of the Kremlin’s ancient cathedrals, where Patriarch Kirill I, the head of the Russian Orthodox Church, conducted a farewell service.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Despite blaming political conspiracy for the current situation, Russia announced measures to improve its antidoping efforts.AdvertisementLast week, the Russian Olympic Committee created a special antidoping commission that will develop a national plan to fight doping. High-ranking Russian officials, including Mr. Putin and Sports Minister Vitaly L. Mutko, pledged Russia’s commitment to clean sports.On Thursday, Russia will hold a track meet for its team in Moscow in which some of the barred athletes will compete.Among the athletes at the meet will be Sergei Shubenkov, the 110-meter hurdles world champion, and Ivan S. Ukhov, the 2012 high jump Olympic gold medalist.After boycotting the 1984 Los Angeles Olympics, the Soviet Union and other Eastern European countries hosted a so-called Friendship Games for athletes who had missed out, including such stars as the boxer Teofilo Stevenson and the runner Alberto Juantorena of Cuba and the sprinters Marlies Gohr and Marita Koch of East Germany.A version of this article appears in print on July 28, 2016, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: Blaming Politics for Sanctions, Putin Calls Medals Devalued.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »