By BRAD SPURGEONOCT. 29, 2016
As Formula One prepares for the Mexican Grand Prix this weekend, only three races remain in the 2016 season and most teams have decided who will drive for them next year.While most fans will have an opinion about which of the 11 teams the 22 drivers should be racing for, they can judge performances only through drivers’ victories, failures or how many points their teammates have scored in the same cars.But results are just one factor that teams’ top personnel use to decide which drivers are best for them. One key to their analysis comes, not surprisingly in a sport that depends on technology, from the data collected through hundreds of sensors in the cars.“Everything these days is data-driven,” said Dave Ryan, the sporting director of the Manor team. “You can analyze everything, and you can’t fool the data.”AdvertisementThat, the experts say, makes the hiring and firing of a Formula One driver an art and science best left to the engineers, sporting directors and marketing departments of the teams.AdvertisementData reveals a driver’s braking points, steering inputs, driving lines, throttle application, use of the gearshifts and other actions.“That will tell you an awful lot about a driver, how aggressive he is being, how he is getting his lap time or why he is not getting his lap time,” Ryan added.The engineers then work with the driver, he said, to adjust his approach by comparing data of drivers on the same team. How quickly a driver can adapt is a key to how good he is.Daniel Ricciardo, a driver on the Red Bull team, described an example of such analysis: “During the braking phase, you can see if one driver starts to lock a wheel,” he said, “and then the way they modulate the braking to manage that can make a difference. Or maybe one driver still stays too long on the brake pedal, and that brake lockup becomes even bigger. And another driver is able to just feel it a little bit earlier and modulate the brake and then get through the corner cleaner, with less locking.”Jolyon Palmer, a driver for the Renault team, said that while fans tended to look only at the final result of a race, the team and its engineers analyzed every moment throughout the weekend and knew exactly why results might not have been as good for one driver as for another at specific moments.Guenther Steiner, the director of the Haas team, said, “Sometimes we know things about why a driver didn’t perform that are not put out into the public.”A team’s choice of driver also comes down to many factors that depend on its needs in its current stage of development.Advertisement“What we need as a team, it’s more than somebody who can score points,” Steiner said. “We need to train a team, basically; we cannot train a driver. We need to make our team better so that we are ready for young talent.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Ryan, of the Manor team, noted that in 1976, when he worked as a mechanic for the McLaren team, it suddenly lost its top driver, Emerson Fittipaldi, who had won two championships, then decided to join a team owned by his brother, Wilson Fittipaldi.What McLaren needed in that case was a driver who could race hard and win, not a driver who needed to develop. So McLaren hired James Hunt, who had three average seasons at the Hesketh team and was known for his driving, not for his technical analysis.“The car was developed, the car was brilliant,” Ryan said. “I’m not saying James didn’t know how to develop the car, but all he had to do was turn up and drive it. And he did, and he did a fantastic job that year.”Hunt won his only title that season.“Just as important, as well, is a driver’s attitude, personality,” Ryan said. “I know a lot of really nice drivers, very nice, successful drivers. But they’ve all got a little edge to them. If you haven’t, you’re just not going to make it. It has to be a bit of a selfish streak. You’ve kind of got to push things a little bit in your direction. You want to kind of see guys prepared to go out on a limb a little bit and make the call that he needs to make to get things right for him.”And, Ryan, continued: “You’ve got to have the driver that’s marketable. Very few businesses or teams have got the budget that they can totally disregard what the driver can bring for the team.”That has to do with the image the team is projecting, or the market it is trying to reach.Most team directors, and some drivers, said the most important quality was how a driver worked within the team.“Obviously, the main thing is to get results,” said Palmer of Renault. “But then to get on well with the team and to make the team want to work for you I think is an important part of it as well. I think that’s something that’s either in you or not.”Ryan said that had to do not just with winning races but with winning over the mechanics and engineers.Advertisement“You listen to their problems, you spend time, you understand that they put their life into it,” he said. None of these mechanics “turn up at 8 in the morning and work until 5,” he said. “This is their whole life. It’s years of their whole life. And if you can get them onboard, they will work all night, every night for you, until they drop. And that’s the difference. And that’s what you need.”Not so for Monisha Kaltenborn, the director of the Sauber team.“The only thing that really matters, and the most important, is the speed,” she said. “Everything else – if he fits into the team, his way of working – at the end of the day they don’t matter, if you have a quick driver.“So leaving the financial aspect aside, the rest is add-on,” Kaltenborn said: “If he fits well into the team, how does he interact with people, how can he do his sponsorship deals. These are all secondary issues.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »