By TYLER KEPNEROCT. 29, 2016
CHICAGO — The Cleveland Indians have a custom: Whenever they sign a draft pick, they bring him to Cleveland and take him to dinner. Cody Allen, though, was in a hurry.The Indians drafted Allen in the 16th round in 2010, but he was coming off Tommy John surgery and wanted another year to become stronger. Allen played the next season at High Point University, and the Indians took him again — in the 23rd round. He signed quickly and reported to Mahoning Valley in the New York-Penn League without first getting that dinner.The team intended to treat him to dinner there, but Allen never stayed in one place for very long. He zipped through four levels of the minors in 2011, and in July 2012, just 13 months after signing, he joined the Indians. Then, at last, he got that free meal.“You get your signing dinner in the majors,” said Brad Grant, the Indians’ amateur scouting director. “Pretty cool.”AdvertisementAllen has kept climbing, right to the pinnacle of his profession. While his teammate Andrew Miller has been the Indians’ anytime relief ace — allowing one run in 17 postseason innings through a 7-2 victory on Saturday in Game 4 of the World Series against the Chicago Cubs — Allen has been just as stingy. He earned his sixth save of the postseason on Friday and has fired 10 scoreless innings, with 18 strikeouts.Advertisement“I see fearlessness out of him,” said Trevor Hoffman, a former closer for the San Diego Padres who was at Wrigley Field to present Major League Baseball’s Reliever of the Year Awards. “I don’t think he’s too worried about a hitter’s strength. He’s more worried about, ‘I’m going to go with my strength and attack hitters.’ And he’s relatively unknown. Guys around the league haven’t heard of him as much as they’re going to.”The former Yankees closer Mariano Rivera was also at Wrigley on Saturday to present the awards with Hoffman. The American League honor, named for Rivera, went to Baltimore’s Zach Britton. Allen was not quite as dominant, but only two A.L. relievers — Miller and Britton — held opponents to a lower batting average than Allen (.177). He also had 32 saves in 35 chances.“He’s got two really good pitches, and he knows how to use them,” Miller said. “Our catchers guide him, and he works really hard, but there’s not many guys that have a riding fastball and a knockout curveball.”Allen, 27, throws a 94-mile-per-hour fastball and a sharp, biting curveball at 84 m.p.h. The curveball got him drafted, after 697 other players in 2011. Nobody else from his round has made the major leagues.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Late in the draft,” Grant said, “you’re looking for a standout tool — a breaking ball, a fastball, something that separates you, because the player pool is starting to thin out. That was one thing that really stood out, and as he came back from the injury, we thought his fastball velocity would tick up in a bullpen role.”Allen has so much faith in his curveball that he used it to get even in the count in Game 3 against Javier Baez, with two outs and the tying run on third in the bottom of the ninth. With a 2-1 count, Allen buried a pitch in the dirt, Baez swung and missed, and Yan Gomes — who had not caught since Oct. 2 — blocked the ball to keep the pinch-runner Chris Coghlan at third.Then Allen fired a high fastball past Baez to win the game.“What makes him successful is his fastball; it’s not his breaking ball,” said Rivera, who then motioned with his hand near his chest. “When he throws his fastball here, like yesterday at the end of the game, there’s no way guys are going to catch up to that ball when you see so many breaking balls. As long as he uses that combination and he trusts it — and it seems like he does — that’s the beauty of it.”AdvertisementAllen thrived in a setup role as a rookie in 2013, with a 2.43 E.R.A. and far more strikeouts than innings; he did not win the A.L. Rookie of the Year Award, but probably should have. That was Manager Terry Francona’s first season with the Indians, and Allen’s mentality and durability impressed him right away.“I could just envision him being that swing guy, fireman, however you want to put it,” Francona said, adding that Allen’s stuff made him effective against hitters on either side of the plate. “Because as you get to know him, nothing throws this kid, even four years ago. He loved being in those situations.”Allen has been the Indians’ primary closer for the last three seasons, but Francona has upended the notion of traditional bullpen roles this October. Miller has one save and has generally been the first line of defense when opponents mount a rally. Yet Francona could not deploy him like that without Allen and another reliable reliever, Bryan Shaw, available to follow him.“To live that moment of getting the last out and feeling the emotions of getting a win — to be on the field and to do that, that’s a special feeling,” Allen said. “But being on the bench having already pitched, or sitting in the bullpen when your team gets the last out, it’s incredible, too.”Allen credited the stability of the Indians’ organization for helping him believe in himself. He came through the minors with several of his current teammates and has worked with Francona and the pitching coach Mickey Callaway for four seasons. They know him and understand why he succeeds.“There’s a lot of core guys here,” Allen said. “So whenever things start to kind of go awry a little bit, they’re not only there to help you through it but also to give you the confidence to know, ‘Hey, don’t reinvent yourself; just kind of stick with it.’”Sticking with his strengths has put Allen on an ascent with just one more level to reach: World Series champion.A version of this article appears in print on October 30, 2016, on Page SP6 of the New York edition with the headline: Often Overlooked, Indians’ Closer Shines in the Playoffs.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.