AdvertisementSupported byBy John HancWhen Katie Quan received an email informing her that she had not been selected in the lottery for the 2016 New York City Marathon, she was disappointed but not surprised. After all, the competition to secure a spot in the race is always intense: This year, only about one in four runners (19,083 out of 82,172) was selected in the drawing.Nevertheless, Ms. Quan, 24, managed to secure a spot in next Sunday’s marathon. That is because she chose what might be called Marathon Plan B: She is running for a cause — specifically Team for Kids, which raises money for youth running programs offered by New York Road Runners, organizers of the marathon.“I had kind of decided even before the lottery that this would be the year I’d run New York,” said Ms. Quan, a Manhattan resident who started running about three years ago. “If I didn’t get picked, I’d fall back on signing up for a charity.”Many others have found an alternate route to the starting line. Although the exact figures for 2016 are not yet available, about 17 percent of the race’s 49,617 finishers in 2015 were charity runners, meaning that they were competing for one of the 340 charitable organizations that pay for and offer coveted entry slots into the race. In return, the runners pledge to raise money for the charity.So what motivates those runners? Is it the cause, or securing a bib for New York and other hard-to-get-into marathons?“A lot of them are participating in order to get into the race, and the charity is second,” said Toby Tanser, a New York-based running coach and founder of Shoe4Africa, a charity that was founded to collect shoes for poor children in Kenya. On the other hand, he said, his charity has raised enough money to build a hospital in Kenya.“We’ve had 50 runners consistently for the last decade,” he said. “And I’ve had five of them actually come to Kenya to visit the hospital. So it’s pretty clear they care about the cause.”Jeff Brown, a sport psychologist, said he believed it was possible that the runners were driven by both the desire to secure a race number and a genuine commitment to a cause.“Are they going to glean something from the charity?” said Dr. Brown, an assistant clinical professor at Harvard Medical School and the lead psychologist for the Boston Marathon medical team. “Yes, but we’re still looking at altruism.”And that can be as good for the mind as running is for the body. “Doing something good, we know from research, is helpful for self-esteem,” said Dr. Brown, who is also a co-author of the book “The Runner’s Brain.” “So to me it’s a win-win. A lot of people are probably doing it for themselves and to support the charity.”A 2010 study by Karin Ann Jeffery, a master’s degree candidate at San Jose State University, found that participants in the same charity marathon training program became more deeply connected with the cause over the course of the program, which in turn became an increasingly powerful factor in their motivation to train, although not the only one. Improved fitness and support from within the training group were also cited as powerful incentives to stick with the program.Clearly, running for a cause — no matter how connected one might have felt to it at first — can be a powerful motivating force. According to the 2016 edition of an annual survey of runners by Running U.S.A., a nonprofit organization that tracks trends in the sport, four out of 10 say they are influenced to race by a charitable cause or affiliation.That number has stayed the same even as overall running participation, in both marathons and shorter distances, has declined in the last few years, according to Running U.S.A. Moreover, fund-raising for running events on the online fund-raising site CrowdRise is growing by 18 percent annually on average, a CrowdRise representative said, suggesting that even as the total number of runners had declined, their fund-raising impact had increased.While many run for large cause-based teams, such as the Leukemia & Lymphoma Society’s Team in Training program, others pursue solo fund-raising efforts.Jay Asparro, 37, of Plainview, N.Y., ran in last year’s marathon as a member of Team for Kids. Like Ms. Quan, he admits his initial motivation was simply to secure a spot in the race. Next Sunday, however, he is planning to finish a three-day, 90-mile ultramarathon across part of Long Island to raise money for the Long Island Alzheimer’s Foundation and to increase awareness about the toll the disease takes on loved ones. His 91-year-old grandmother, Ann Asparro, has Alzheimer’s disease, and Mr. Asparro said he had seen the strain that caring for her had placed on his parents.“I’m doing it for my family,” he said, “and for other families suffering through this.” By the middle of October, he had raised $7,758.“I’m not the smartest guy in the world; I couldn’t go and start a foundation,” Mr. Asparro said. “But I have a high tolerance for pain, and I follow my heart. So this seemed to be the best way to make a contribution.”Last year, Team for Kids members raised $5.5 million for New York Road Runners’ youth running programs.In next Sunday’s race, about 1,700 participants will be running for that cause — the largest single charity in the marathon. Team members like Ms. Quan have made a commitment to raise $2,620, or $100 per mile of the marathon.In return, they are provided with a training program, coaching and opportunities for group runs and clinics. But, said Michael Rodgers, vice president for development and philanthropy at Road Runners, “part of that support is to keep their motivation up and remind them of why they’re doing this.”To that end, runners for Team for Kids receive encouragement in the form of brief pep talks — “Mission Moments” — at the start of their group runs in Central Park; visits from some of the youngsters who have benefited from the running programs they are supporting; appearances by guest celebrity athletes (this year they will include the Olympians Meb Keflezighi and Molly Huddle, as well as the four-time marathon wheelchair champion Tatyana McFadden); and encouraging emails and posts on the group’s Facebook page.The ultimate hope, Mr. Rodgers said, is that first-time Team for Kids runners will keep raising money or volunteering after this year’s marathon.Ms. Quan said she was already considering that, as her motivations have changed. “Honestly, coming into the marathon, it was just like a one-and-done, bucket-list thing,” she said. “But now the team really kind of sucked me in because everyone’s so great. I’ve definitely fallen into ranks with the cause.”Advertisement