OCT. 29, 2016
The N.F.L. fined Giants defensive end Owa Odighizuwa $12,154 for an unsportsmanlike-conduct penalty issued after he pretended to take a picture in the end zone of safety Landon Collins, who returned an interception for a touchdown against Los Angeles in London last Sunday.Other fines included $24,309 against Jacksonville Jaguars defensive tackle Malik Jackson, who was penalized twice for unsportsmanlike conduct during one drive. He was called for roughing Oakland quarterback Derek Carr, and when he protested the call was penalized for using abusive language toward an official. Four plays later, he was called for unsportsmanlike conduct after a field goal and was ejected. Wide receiver Marqise Lee, Jackson’s teammate, was docked $12,154 after he received an unsportsmanlike conduct penalty for using a racial slur in the Jaguars’ 33-16 loss.Miami receiver Jarvis Landry was fined $24,309 for a crackback block that sent Buffalo’s Aaron Williams to the hospital with a head and neck injury. The Dolphins’ Byron Maxwell was hit with a $9,115 fine for a taunting penalty. The Bills’ Richie Incognito was docked the same amount for throwing the helmet of Miami defensive end Andre Branch during a fourth-quarter scuffle.Baltimore’s Za’Darius Smith was fined $18,231 for roughing the passer on the Jets’ Ryan Fitzpatrick.AdvertisementWayne Rooney will not be allowed to leave Manchester United in the January transfer window despite his frustrations at losing his starting place at Old Trafford and interest from his former club Everton, United’s manager, José Mourinho, said.AdvertisementEverton Manager Ronald Koeman expressed interest in signing Rooney should Mourinho be prepared to allow him to leave. But Mourinho said he expected Rooney, 31, to play a key role in efforts to return United to the top of the English Premier League.“He can play at the top level,” Mourinho said. “I can’t say what’s going to happen when he’s 32, 3, 4, 5, but what I can say is that he’s a very good player, a very important player for us. He’s going nowhere. We like him. He likes us.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Reports earlier in the week had suggested that Mourinho might be prepared to give other clubs hope of luring Rooney.(AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE)When Martin Truex Jr. was knocked out of the Nascar playoffs, he vowed to win the remaining races this season. A pole-winning run at Martinsville Speedway in Virginia was a strong step toward fulfilling that goal.Truex turned a lap at 98.206 miles per hour to take the top starting spot in Sunday’s race. It was the fifth pole of the season for Truex, who also won the pole last weekend at Talladega Superspeedway, where a blown engine in his Toyota led to his elimination in the Chase for the Sprint Cup championship.“It hurt a lot this week,” Truex said. “I thought about it every day and every night. I just kept telling myself, ‘Go win Martinsville.’”Joey Logano, who won at Talladega to advance to the third round of the Chase, qualified second in a Ford.AdvertisementLogano was followed by the eight-time Martinsville winner Jimmie Johnson in a Chevrolet.Jeff Gordon qualified 10th for what is assumed will be his final race. Gordon is in the eighth and final scheduled race as replacement for Dale Earnhardt Jr., who is out with a concussion. Gordon is a nine-time winner at Martinsville, and the defending race winner.The Philadelphia 76ers apologized for canceling the national anthem performance of a singer wearing a “We Matter” jersey. The 76ers backtracked from their original stance when they told the R&B singer Sevyn Streeter she could not perform the anthem before Wednesday night’s season opener because of the shirt’s slogan.“We are sorry that this happened,” the 76ers said in a statement. “After receiving feedback from our players, basketball operations staff and ownership group, we believe that the wrong decision was made, and Sevyn should have been welcomed to sing. We apologize to her, and in an effort to move the conversation forward, we have reached out to offer her an opportunity to return and perform at a game of her choice.”WADE FINED Chicago guard Dwyane Wade was fined $25,000 by the N.B.A. for making a throat-slashing gesture after hitting a late 3-pointer in his Bulls debut Thursday night. Wade, who finished with 22 points in the Bulls’ 105-99 home victory over the Boston Celtics, later apologized for the gesture.A version of this article appears in print on October 29, 2016, on Page D2 of the New York edition with the headline: Miming Photo in End Zone? Negative, the N.F.L. Says.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.