By BRAD SPURGEONOCT. 29, 2016
Not since the brothers Pedro and Ricardo Rodríguez raced in Formula One in the 1960s have two Mexicans whipped up as much passion for the series as have Sergio Pérez and Esteban Gutiérrez.As each has come to maturity, the Mexican Grand Prix has made up lost ground, rejoining Formula One last year for the first time since 1992.“I’m very proud, and honestly I wasn’t expecting it that much,” Gutiérrez said of the success of last year’s race, which he attended as a spectator before joining the Haas team this year. “I knew that we are capable with our enthusiasm, and with our joy as Mexicans that we have for this kind of event. I knew that it was going to be something special, but never expected it to that level.” Last year’s three-day event attracted 300,000 spectators.The rise of Pérez and Gutiérrez has been a couple of decades in the making, following similar paths.AdvertisementThey arrived in Formula One two years apart, more or less reflecting their year-and-a-half age difference.AdvertisementPérez, 26, started competing in go-kart racing at age 6, while Gutiérrez, 25, started at 13. Pérez finished second in the junior series in 1996, his first year of competition, and won the title two years later. Gutiérrez won the North Mexican Series in 2006, two years after he began racing.Mexico, like Brazil, another auto-racing hotbed, is not a place where drivers can learn what they need to know to break into Formula One. Many drivers go to Europe and learn racing in the lower categories, but Pérez and Gutiérrez went instead to the United States. Pérez raced in the Skip Barber National Championship in 2004, finishing 11th in his first year. Gutiérrez, who raced in the Formula BMW USA series in 2007, finished second in his championship and was named rookie of the year.Pérez then headed to Europe, joining the German Formula BMW ADAC series in 2005, finishing 14th in his first year and sixth in his second.In 2008, Gutiérrez joined the new BMW Europe series, which combined the British and German BMW series, winning it, with seven victories and five other podium finishes.Both drivers then moved to Formula 3. Pérez won the prestigious British Formula 3 series in 2007, his first year. Gutiérrez joined the Euro series in 2009 and finished ninth.After finishing second in the GP2 series in 2010, Pérez joined Formula One with the Sauber team in 2011. The team managed to take great advantage of his Mexican sponsors and draw others as well.Gutiérrez won the GP3 series in 2010, finished third in GP2 in 2012 and moved to Formula One in 2013, joining the Sauber team to replace Pérez, who had left for McLaren.The drivers share something else: Both have been supported by the Mexican telecom companies Telmex and Telcel, controlled by Carlos Slim.AdvertisementAt Sauber, Pérez showed potential, finishing seventh in his first race, the Australian Grand Prix (though the Sauber cars were subsequently disqualified for a technical infringement). Later that season, Pérez finished seventh at the British Grand Prix. The next year, Pérez placed second at the Malaysian Grand Prix and third in two other races. He then joined the McLaren team as a replacement for Lewis Hamilton, who joined Mercedes in 2013.Although Pérez barely put a foot wrong at McLaren, things did not go well. Neither Pérez nor his world champion teammate, Jenson Button, managed to score even a single podium finish, the first season since 1967 that McLaren was blanked. Pérez was dropped from the team. He signed with Force India for 2014.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Force India would prove, with the Mercedes engine of the new hybrid era, to be much stronger than McLaren, and Pérez has scored four podium finishes for it.“I think that you have to be professional in this sport and give everything to the team that you drive for,” Pérez said.Gutiérrez also found Formula One tough going, scoring only six points in 2013, with a highest finish of seventh, and scoring no points the next year.Dropped from the team at the end of 2014, Gutiérrez sat out racing last year, working as a Ferrari test driver. Then came an opportunity to race with Haas, the new United States-based team, alongside Romain Grosjean of France.Gutiérrez has had little success this season, finishing five times in 11th position, just shy of scoring points.“By being consistent and being persistent we will break through the top 10, which for us is obviously the target in every race from now to the end of the season,” Gutiérrez said. “It hasn’t been an easy task, especially with how my season started, but we have been making very good progress inside the team in many ways.”AdvertisementPérez has finished in the top three twice this year and is in seventh place in the drivers’ series with 84 points — six more than he scored all of last season, his best year.He will remain with Force India next year and hopes to join Ferrari in 2018, when Kimi Räikkönen is expected to retire at age 38.At Force India, Pérez said, “I know the key people on the team, and I know that these people can keep performing and do good things on the team. So I see a good future, especially next year I see is a big opportunity to move forward.”In the meantime, the Mexican public will have two of its own to celebrate this weekend.“I don’t like to be a spectator,” said Gutiérrez. “I like to race and do my best.”A version of this article appears in print on October 29, 2016, on Page A15 of the New York edition with the headline: For local fans, native sons on overlapping journeys.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »