By WALLACE MATTHEWSAPRIL 9, 2017
BALTIMORE — It was a beautiful day for a walk in the park — 70 degrees and sunny — so the Yankees enjoyed many of them at Camden Yards on Sunday. And one of those walks led to a decisive run and a badly needed win for the Yankees, a team that had been stumbling.The walk was the major element of the Yankees’ offense in their 7-3 comeback win over the Baltimore Orioles, averting a three-game sweep and a 1-5 start to the season.No one walked more than Matt Holliday, a player who is paid to do nothing but hit. Holliday, who signed a one-year, $13 million deal in the winter to serve as the team’s designated hitter, drew a career-high five walks, including the one that led to the winning run.The Yankees were given 11 free passes to first base by three Orioles pitchers, but it was not until the ninth inning that they were able to turn a walk into a run.Advertisement“Strange game,” Holliday said. “I’m not even sure I’ve ever even walked four times in a game.”AdvertisementIn 13 previous major league seasons, Holliday had not. But on a day when Orioles starter Wade Miley was nearly unhittable — as much when he put the ball over the plate as when he did not — Holliday went to the plate five times, saw 25 pitches and swung twice.It could have been a frustrating day for a player programmed to swing the bat, but it turned out to be a statistical bonanza for Holliday, whose on-base percentage soared more than 100 points, from .429 to .538.The Yankees, however, struggled as much as Miley, who issued seven walks in five innings, six of them to the first 12 batters. In those innings, the Yankees managed just one hit. Despite a wealth of walks, the Yankees could not muster a run until they strung together three hits in the sixth.“We didn’t take advantage over the first six innings,” Yankees Manager Joe Girardi said. “But we kept at it.”It was in the ninth inning, with the score tied at 3-3, that the Yankees scored the decisive run. Holliday drew a leadoff walk, and Jacoby Ellsbury entered as a pinch-runner. He stole second and scored when Starlin Castro punched a single to center.Aaron Judge, who struggled through the first five games of the season, had tied the game when he led off the eighth by crushing a fastball from reliever Mychal Givens into the left-field seats.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.To that point, the game had the look of another dispiriting loss and a damaging sweep to finish off a weekend in which little had gone right for the Yankees.AdvertisementOn Saturday morning, Greg Bird, the young first baseman who has taken over for the retired Mark Teixeira, arrived at work with a right foot that was too sore for him to play, the lingering effect of a spring training foul ball.A few hours later, the Yankees also lost catcher Gary Sanchez, the most potent bat in their lineup last year, to a biceps strain. And they lost Saturday’s game when reliever Dellin Betances gave up two run-scoring singles in the seventh inning, wiping out the Yankees’ lead.On Sunday, Bird arrived at the ballpark not only sore but with a stomach ailment. By then, Sanchez had been placed on the 10-day disabled list.And as in much of 2016, the revamped Yankees lineup seemed unable to manage a timely hit on Sunday, despite all the walks being issued by Miley and two of his successors.Holliday was picked off to end an opportunity in the first inning. Ronald Torreyes stranded three runners when he struck out to end the second. Two more walks went nowhere in the third.By the fifth inning, the Orioles had built a 3-0 lead on Yankees starter C. C. Sabathia, while the Yankees had one hit, a single by Aaron Hicks in the fifth.The game tightened in the sixth inning when Torreyes, the diminutive backup shortstop who has been the team’s best run producer, tripled into the gap, driving in two runs. Two innings later, Judge, who entered the game batting .133, tied the game with his first home run of the season.“The first one is always the toughest, to be honest,” said Judge, who had also singled in the sixth and, of course, walked. “I’m still trying to get comfortable up there.”AdvertisementIn the ninth, Orioles reliever Darren O’Day did his best to make the Yankees as comfortable as Miley had at the start of the game. He walked Holliday. He walked Chris Carter. He surrendered the go-ahead single to Castro on an 0-2 pitch. And then the wheels came off. The Yankees tacked on three more runs on an infield out, a sacrifice fly and a throwing error.“We definitely needed this win,” said Betances, who bounced back from Saturday to pitch a clean eighth inning. “We were down, and just to come back in that game it just shows the team we have. We’re not going to give up.”Now the Yankees can walk into Yankee Stadium on Monday for their home opener against the Tampa Bay Rays with their heads held a little higher.“We needed to win this game,” Holliday said.A version of this article appears in print on April 10, 2017, on Page D6 of the New York edition with the headline: Yankees’ Pedestrian Offense Awakens Just in Time to Avert a Sweep.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.