

 Karen Crouse
 

ON GOLF
APRIL 7, 2017
AUGUSTA, Ga. — For Rory McIlroy, the Masters title is like a feather. Every time he has tried to grasp it, the energy from his effort has pushed it out of his reach.McIlroy has advanced to the weekend in eight of his nine appearances at Augusta National Golf Club. Three times, he has stood third or better at the tournament’s halfway point, seemingly in prime position to pounce, but his best finish in those years was a tie for 10th in 2016.Unlike Tiger Woods, who won three of the five times he was third or higher after 36 holes here, McIlroy’s best results at Augusta National have come as a persistent hunter. In 2015, he entered the weekend in 19th place and finished fourth. In 2014, he vaulted from 46th to a tie for eighth over the final 36 holes.After a second-round one-over-par 73, McIlroy was tied for 13th, five strokes behind the lead pack of Rickie Fowler, Sergio García, Charley Hoffman and Thomas Pieters.AdvertisementIn addition to those four, he is chasing five others. Gene Sarazen, Ben Hogan, Gary Player, Jack Nicklaus and Tiger Woods make up the ultraexclusive club of men to have won the career Grand Slam, and McIlroy, 27, has been trying to crack the entry code since winning the 2014 British Open.AdvertisementTrying is the operative word. McIlroy plays his best golf when his swing is free and easy, but how can he stay relaxed when he is one Masters win away from immortality and nobody will let him forget it?“I feel like I’ve put a few mental processes in place where I can focus on the job at hand,” McIlroy said, adding: “Nothing’s given to you. You have to go and work for it.”It would help if McIlroy could string together a sub-70 score Saturday, a feat he has pulled off just once in seven previous Masters third rounds, where he has averaged 73.3 strokes.“The wind is supposed to be basically nonexistent, five to 10 miles an hour, which really isn’t much around here,” McIlroy said. “I would say, a couple of rounds in the mid- to high 60s, you’d have to shoot to have a chance.”He added, “If I can put together a 67 or a 66 tomorrow, I feel like I’ll be right in there for Sunday.”The 12 players ahead of McIlroy include the 57-year-old Fred Couples, at one- under, and the 46-year-old Phil Mickelson, at even par. They both came off the course smiling after the second day of gusty conditions that threatened to turn the first men’s major of the year into a golf-themed reality show — “Survivor: Augusta National.”Fowler, 28, whose highest finish in six previous appearances here was a tie for fifth in 2014, professes to love the course.Advertisement“This place is a lot of fun,” Fowler said. His 67 was the lowest round of the day.McIlroy’s love affair with Augusta National hit a rough patch in 2011. He was bidding for a wire-to-wire victory before a collapse on the final nine holes dropped him into a tie for 15th.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I feel like I’ve taken lessons from that day, and they have served me well to this point,” he said.Six years later, McIlroy is unquestionably a better player. If he has a deficiency, it’s his play around, and on, the greens, an area where this tournament is consistently won and lost.After two rounds, McIlroy is tied for 15th in scrambling (directly behind a group that includes the 58-year-old Larry Mize, the 1987 champion, and Pieters).“He does struggle around and on the greens, and that’s just a place where you cannot struggle and expect to be the champion at the end of the week,” the Golf Channel analyst Brandel Chamblee said before the tournament. “He can do almost everything that Augusta National needs of him, except scramble particularly well.”McIlroy chipped in for birdie on the par-3 sixth to get into red numbers, at one under, for the first time this week. He also recorded an unlikely birdie on the par-4 5th after his drive missed the fairway and he had to hit his approach off some mulch, “or whatever they lay down there that smells really bad,” McIlroy said.His shot came up smelling like azaleas, and he made the putt.“That was a bonus to make three after that tee shot,” McIlroy said.His luck ran out on the par-4 18th. McIlroy’s approach hit the flagstick, and it caromed several yards to the right. He ended up with a bogey, and he couldn’t help but feel deflated. In his postround comments, he said all the right things, but his voice lacked its usual buoyancy.“I felt like I could have shot a couple under out there today, two or three under par,” he said. “But I missed a couple of short ones and got a little bit unlucky at the last.”He didn’t sound resigned when he said that. He also said something that should put the European golf community, which reads McIlroy’s words like tea leaves, at ease: “I feel I’m playing well enough, and I’m in a good frame of mind, where I can go out there and attack and make some birdies and try to get closer to the lead.”AdvertisementThere was that word again — try. As he embarks on a potentially monumental weekend, McIlroy should remember that the harder he tries to get what he dearly wants, the more likely that last feather in his crown is to elude him.A version of this article appears in print on April 8, 2017, on Page D3 of the New York edition with the headline: McIlroy Chases History, and an Elusive Title.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »