AdvertisementSupported byRoundupOttawa clinched second place in the N.H.L.’s Atlantic Division and home-ice advantage for the first round of the Eastern Conference playoffs with a 3-1 victory over the visiting Rangers on Saturday.Derick Brassard, playing against his former team, scored for the Senators, who took 33 shots against Rangers goalie Henrik Lundqvist. Mike Hoffman and Jean-Gabriel Pageau also scored for Ottawa.Mika Zibanejad spoiled Craig Anderson’s shutout bid, scoring a wraparound goal in the final minute.The Senators’ postseason opponent remains unknown, but they have the luxury of resting players for Sunday’s final regular-season game against the Islanders. The Rangers have clinched the top wild-card spot in the East and will face the Montreal Canadiens in the first round.MAPLE LEAFS 5, PENGUINS 3 Connor Brown broke a tie with 2 minutes 48 seconds left, and Toronto wrapped up its first playoff spot since 2013 by beating visiting Pittsburgh. With the Maple Leafs’ win, the Islanders were eliminated from the postseason.Howie Kendrick had a three-run triple, Philadelphia scored 12 runs for the biggest first inning in team history, and the Phillies routed visiting Washington, 17-3.Philadelphia piled up nine hits and four walks off Jeremy Guthrie and Enny Romero in the first. The Phillies did not hit any homers in the inning, but they did get three doubles. Maikel Franco, Michael Saunders and Tommy Joseph each had two R.B.I., while the Nationals set a team mark for runs allowed in an inning.Kendrick had three hits and four R.B.I. for the game, Saunders had three hits and two R.B.I., and Cameron Rupp homered and drove in three runs.WHITE SOX 6, TWINS 2 Avisail Garcia went 3 for 4 with three R.B.I., Geovany Soto homered, and host Chicago handed Minnesota its first loss of the season. The Twins (4-1) last started 5-0 in 1968.ROCKIES 4, DODGERS 2 Clayton Kershaw surrendered back-to-back homers for the first time in his career, with Mark Reynolds and Gerardo Parra going deep in the sixth, as Colorado beat Los Angeles in Denver.ATHLETICS 6, RANGERS 1 Kendall Graveman held Texas hitless until Mike Napoli homered with two outs in the seventh inning, and Oakland won on the road.Dwyane Wade returned for Chicago, but the Nets handed the Bulls a potentially costly loss at Barclays Center, 107-106.Spencer Dinwiddie made four free throws in the final 13.6 seconds for the Nets in their home finale. He scored 19 points, as did the rookie Caris LeVert.Jimmy Butler scored 33 points for the Bulls, who came in tied for seventh place in the Eastern Conference but fell a game behind Indiana.PACERS 127, MAGIC 112 Paul George scored 37 points, Myles Turner added 23 points and 10 rebounds, and Indiana moved a step closer to a playoff berth with a win in Orlando, Fla.HEAT 106, WIZARDS 103 Hassan Whiteside scored 30 points, James Johnson hit a layup with 11 seconds left, and Miami won in Washington to move into a tie with Chicago for eighth place in the Eastern Conference. The Bulls own the tiebreaker.CELTICS 121, HORNETS 114 Isaiah Thomas scored 32 points, and Boston remained in contention for the No. 1 seed in the Eastern Conference playoffs with a win in Charlotte, N.C.Lloyd Sam and Luciano Acosta scored in the second half as D.C. United defeated visiting New York City F.C., 2-1.After going scoreless in the first three games of the season, D.C. United (2-2-1) has scored two goals in each of the past two.In the 53rd minute, Sam stole the ball from defender Frederic Brillant deep in N.Y.C.F.C.’s half and fired the ball from near the penalty spot past a sliding Sean Johnson. Sam’s first goal the season came in his 100th Major League Soccer start.Acosta scored his second goal of the season in the 73rd minute. He passed to Sam, whose shot was blocked by Johnson. The ball came back to Acosta for an easy score.Bill Hamid made a terrific double save for United in the 82nd minute, but two minutes later, N.Y.C.F.C.’s Thomas McNamara sent a cross to David Villa, who scored his third goal of the season. N.Y.C.F.C. (2-2-1) outshot United, 15-12.TOTTENHAM ROUTS WATFORD Son Heung-min scored twice in a 4-0 home victory over Watford, Tottenham’s sixth straight win in the Premier League. Dele Alli and Eric Dier also scored for the Spurs, who sit in second place behind Chelsea in the standings. Chelsea won, 3-1, at Bournemouth to maintain its 7-point margin. Marcos Alonso’s second-half goal on a free kick sealed Chelsea’s win. (REUTERS)Julien Benneteau and Nicolas Mahut won a tight doubles match over Britain’s Dominic Inglot and Jamie Murray to give the host French team a 3-0 victory and a meeting with Serbia in September’s Davis Cup semifinals. Benneteau and Mahut won by 7-6 (7), 5-7, 7-5, 7-5.Serbia clinched a 3-0 victory by beating a visiting Spanish team that was playing without Rafael Nadal. Viktor Troicki and Nenad Zimonjic defeated Pablo Carreño-Busta and Marc López, 4-6, 7-6 (4), 6-0, 4-6, 6-2.KERBER ADVANCES TO MONTERREY FINAL Angelique Kerber of Germany, the top-ranked woman in the world, reached her first WTA final of 2017 at Mexico’s Monterrey Open, but she will face a stiff challenge from the three-time champion Anastasia Pavlyuchenkova of Russia.Kerber defeated Carla Suárez Navarro of Spain, the No. 4 seed, 7-6 (6), 6-1, while Pavlyuchenkova, seeded second behind Kerber, defeated third-seeded Caroline Garcia of France, 6-2, 6-4.Advertisement