AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressPITTSFORD, N.Y. — Reserved and unaccustomed to the spotlight, Kathryn Smith still has difficulty putting into perspective what it is like to be the N.F.L.’s first female full-time assistant coach.“It’s crazy,” Smith said when reminded of the nationwide attention she had drawn — including a Twitter message republished by Chelsea Clinton — in the eight months since Buffalo Bills Coach Rex Ryan promoted her to be the special-teams quality-control coach.Though it had been Smith’s intention to pursue a career in athletics when she majored in sports management at St. John’s starting in 2003, she never knew where that path might eventually lead. Football was an option. So was basketball.Smith, 31, a three-sport high school athlete from the suburbs of Syracuse, had never expected that she would one day be recognized for breaking the gender barrier in football, the United States’ most popular sport.“That’s not been my focus,” Smith said of being a trail blazer. “But at the same time, if that shows somebody if you work hard that you can do whatever you set your mind to, and if that’s the message that’s getting across to girls, boys, whoever it is, then I think that’s a good thing.”She said she thought she could soon have company in the N.F.L.“I don’t think it’s as far down the road as maybe other people do,” Smith said. “I might be the first. But I don’t think I’ll be the only one for very long.”Women have gradually made inroads in professional football, first at the executive and ownership levels.The first real glimmers on the field began last summer when Jen Welter served a training-camp internship coaching the Arizona Cardinals’ inside linebackers. And then Sarah Thomas became the N.F.L.’s first female full-time on-field official last year.The former coach Tony Dungy said he believed that the trend would grow.“The future is unlimited,” he said this month before his induction into the Pro Football Hall of Fame. “We will see female coaches because they can coach the game. We see females officiating in the N.B.A. and the N.F.L. It’s just a matter of time that we’ll see more.”Dungy said the key was for head coaches to begin thinking creatively, as Ryan and Cardinals Coach Bruce Arians have done.“For so long, we had a characterization of what we thought coaches were, and now a number of coaches are going against the grain,” Dungy said. “Coaches should not be fit in boxes.”It is not as if women do not follow football. The N.F.L. said 52.6 million women had watched this year’s Super Bowl, the second most after last year’s game.Smith’s owes her position in large part to Ryan. Upon taking over as coach of the Jets in 2009, Ryan first noticed Smith’s potential when she worked as the team’s player personnel assistant. Ryan eventually promoted Smith to be his administrative assistant, and Ryan then took her to Buffalo when he was hired by the Bills in January 2015. He elevated her to the position of administrative assistant to his assistant coaches, with an emphasis on special teams.Aside from working with the special-teams coordinator Danny Crossman, Smith also gained an opportunity to interact with players. She did such a good job that Crossman was not surprised in January when Ryan informed him of his plan to promote Smith.“Coaching is teaching, and teaching is communicating,” Crossman said. “So a hard worker who’s a good communicator and works hard — yeah, why not?”Now, it is on Smith to find her voice and niche, Crossman said.“I think she’s still finding it,” he said, noting that Smith’s true development would start once the Bills began playing games.Anna Isaacson, the N.F.L.’s senior vice president for social responsibility, said Smith’s presence on the field was an invaluable example to women. She recalled what the former tennis star Billie Jean King had said during a women’s summit the N.F.L. held during this year’s Super Bowl festivities.“She said, ‘If you see it, you can be it,’” Isaacson said. “If you’re a little girl, and you see someone in a position that looks like you, then you believe you can be that person. And that, oftentimes, is a huge motivator.”Julie Schmidt, a Bills fan, said Smith’s promotion could inspire her 12-year-old daughter, Aubrey, who sat beside her in the stands during a recent training-camp practice.“I think it’s fantastic that the Bills have shown they can think beyond the box that they’re living in,” Schmidt said. “I think it shows our youth that the possibilities are endless.”Smith is in no position to look too far ahead. Like any coach, her job security is measured by what happens on game day. And for now, she said, she is at the bottom of the totem pole.“I’m just trying to get my work done, and do it as best as I possibly can,” Smith said. “My focus right now is this year, this season, Indy on Saturday, Week 1. I can’t really look too far beyond that right now.”Advertisement