

 Karen Crouse
 

ON GOLF
APRIL 8, 2017
AUGUSTA, Ga. — Dear Tiger,Out of sight, but not out of the headlines: That’s been your lot in the 81st Masters. A leading man in absentia.I know you don’t read anything that’s written about you, but trust us: More column inches have been devoted to your star-making victory at Augusta National 20 years ago at age 21 than to William McGirt’s startling start in his Masters debut this week at age 37.The 1997 Masters changed the sport. Your record 12-stroke victory inspired a generation, led by Rory McIlroy, Jason Day, Patrick Reed, Hideki Matsuyama and Adam Hadwin, to become professional golfers. The first of your four Masters titles was the seed that pollinated the sport in countries, and communities, where it had never taken root.But in liberating the sport from its monochromatic, moralistic past, you became a captive of your legacy. Someone — maybe your father, Earl — drilled into your head that winning is what matters, that the only path to joy is through success.AdvertisementWhat you need to know is that there’s another course, one that Arnold Palmer blazed. You do not have to end up at the summit to experience joy. You’d be surprised at how much happiness a meandering journey replete with blind curves, the occasional detour and a blowout or two can bring. Look at Palmer, whose life and legacy have been celebrated this week.Did you know that Palmer posted scores in the 80s in 12 of the last 16 competitive rounds that he played at the Masters? The patrons who came to see their hero in the flesh didn’t care. If anything, his struggles made him all the more endearing. Our vulnerabilities are what make us fully human. They are the ties that bond us.AdvertisementWe know your back is giving you fits, but are your expectations also holding you back? Robert Damron, who arrived on the PGA Tour full time the same year as you, in 1997, said he suspects that you don’t like playing like everyone else and that your attitude is, “Why go out and do it anymore if I can’t be perfect?”Well, we can think of lots of reasons. For starters, to give the fans what they want, which is your presence, not your pre-eminence. Or have you forgotten the chorus of people shouting, “I love you, Tiger!” in Greensboro, N.C., in your last official 72 holes of competitive golf?There are many more fans where they came from, and they don’t care if you shoot 64 or 84 as long as you smile as you walk by them or sign their programs.If Palmer came across as someone who never had a bad day, it was because he realized that in life, unlike golf, the rules are pretty simple: The more you reach out to others, the more you get in return.You think that nothing can match the feeling of walking up to the 18th green on the Sunday of a major with victory assured? You might be surprised how exhilarating it feels to make that walk at the end of the first round of your next tournament with your eyes, ears and heart open.Julie Elion, a mental coach who works with several players on the PGA Tour, said she spends a good part of her time helping her clients redefine success. If first place is the only goal, it’s a setup for misery because every week produces dozens of losers and only one winner.AdvertisementAt the Farmers Insurance Open in January, before your first official PGA Tour tournament in a year and a half, you said, as you always do, that your goal was to win. But how about if in your next start, you promise to do your best and invite everyone to hold on tight because it might be a bumpy week?“He could come out with his shoulders back and his head held high and enjoy the process and the people that he’s brought to the game and celebrate what he’s accomplished,” Elion said.What if solving your chipping yips were as simple as giving up the ghosts that are your past glories and saying, “This is who I am now, frailties and all”?We get that being fully human is probably a scarier prospect than being a part-time golfer. After his three-under-par 69 made him the early first-round leader, McGirt told the story of crossing paths with you at the 2012 P.G.A. Championship, which he had qualified for by finishing second at the Canadian Open two weeks earlier.Do you remember? He was on the putting green, and you came over and congratulated him on his fine play. He told you that his only regret was that he had never looked at a leaderboard on Sunday because he was afraid he would get too nervous and falter if he knew where he stood.And you stared at him as if he were from Mars. You moved closer and said, “You think Kobe doesn’t look at the scoreboard with a minute to go in the game?”McGirt got your point. He wasn’t afraid to look at the scoreboards this week. But forget what you told him. Forget Kobe. You’ve more than earned the right to ignore the scoreboard and play, once you are healthy, for your fans and for fun.You could learn something from McGirt, who said he had made sure to savor every minute of this week because he doesn’t want to look back and wish he could have enjoyed the experience more.Savor what’s left of your competitive career. At this point, what have you got to lose?A version of this article appears in print on April 9, 2017, on Page SP4 of the New York edition with the headline: Note to Tiger: You Can Find Joy Without Victory.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »