By SETH BERKMANAPRIL 8, 2017
The Mets’ pitching blueprint this season depicted a steady procession of dynamic pitchers to send out to the mound each night, with the back end of their rotation bearing a load equal to that of the front.Before Saturday’s game at Citi Field, Mets Manager Terry Collins sang the praises of Robert Gsellman, the team’s fifth starter, comparing him to the team’s two top arms, Noah Syndergaard and Jacob deGrom.“You break this guy down pitch for pitch, he’s got as quality of stuff as anyone on the staff,” Collins said.Syndergaard and deGrom opened the season by combining to throw 12 shutout innings and looked every bit as dominant as advertised. Against the Miami Marlins, Gsellman, making his first start of the year, could not live up to Collins’s pregame billing.AdvertisementGsellman allowed one run in each of the first three innings and was removed for a pinch-hitter in the fifth as the Mets fell to the Marlins, 8-1.AdvertisementAfter the game, Collins said Gsellman’s showing had not shaken the foundations of his belief.“He just didn’t make the pitches he had to, and that’s very uncharacteristic from what we’ve seen of him,” Collins said.Gsellman struck out seven but had trouble locating his fastball and struggled with his sinker early on. In the first inning, Giancarlo Stanton singled on a fastball just outside the zone to drive in Miguel Rojas. Marcell Ozuna led off the next inning by launching one of Gsellman’s fastballs into the second deck of left field.“The first three innings, I was going sideways instead of staying on top of the ball,” Gsellman said. “So I was leaving the ball up. That’s what the hitters like, is the ball up, and I was giving them a favor today.”Last year, Gsellman was a revelation as a substitute starter, going 4-2 with a 2.42 earned run average to become the surprise help the Mets needed in their push toward a wild-card berth.A strong spring-training performance had the club buzzing about his potential, fostering thoughts of Gsellman’s chances to become another top starter for the Mets’ parade of arms.Syndergaard, the opening-day starter and head of that troupe, was as effusive as Collins before the game.“His sinker, good luck,” Syndergaard said. “You might want to bring a couple bats up there, because one of them is going to get broken.”AdvertisementThe Marlins did bring the lumber on Saturday, just not in the way Syndergaard implied. Stanton went 3 for 4 with a walk, J. T. Realmuto was 3 for 6 with two R.B.I., and Rojas also drove in two runs.Collins said the same sinker that Syndergaard had praised was not behaving as intended for Gsellman.“The pitch that’s his bread-and-butter pitch, you saw in the first inning, everything was belt-high,” Collins said.The Mets, meanwhile, were hushed on offense by Marlins starter Adam Conley, a 6-foot-3 left-hander who has enjoyed pitching at Citi Field — he entered the day with 13 scoreless innings in two previous starts at the park.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Conley held the Mets hitless for another four and two-thirds innings before Lucas Duda hit a solo home run, his first of the season, to left field. Conley left after the fifth, having allowed only one run with six strikeouts.“He doesn’t throw real hard, but he’s very deceptive,” said Neil Walker, who struck out in all four of his at-bats. “He threw strikes when he needed to.”For the second consecutive game, the Mets’ offense went cold amid blustery and chilly conditions; it mustered only three hits over all.Earlier in the afternoon, Collins had mentioned the questionable scheduling of a night game in April, suggesting that the weather had caused discomfort among the players during a 7-2 loss to the Marlins on Friday.“In about that seventh inning, you can only be chilled so many times,” Collins said. “Finally it starts to get into those hands and the knees and all the joints that are in that static starting position. All of a sudden, they start to get sore after a while.”AdvertisementAt least one Mets player was happy to embrace the frosty conditions: Paul Sewald, who made his major league debut in the eighth inning. Sewald, who arrived Friday from Class AAA Las Vegas after Ty Kelly was designated for assignment, allowed two runs on three hits.Collins said Sewald had been chosen to give the Mets another bullpen option after they played a 12-inning game on Wednesday and Zack Wheeler lasted only four innings on Friday.The Mets probably would have preferred not to use Sewald, but Collins was forced to deploy six relievers after Gsellman was, on this night, at least, unable to engineer the kind of performance the Mets associate with Syndergaard and deGrom.“I really think he’s going to be really, really good,” Collins said of Gsellman. “He just had a bad night.”James Wagner contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on April 9, 2017, on Page SP3 of the New York edition with the headline: Gsellman Is Praised, Then Bruised.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.