By DAVE CALDWELLAPRIL 9, 2017
NEWARK — The Islanders’ stirring run, extended with a victory over the Devils on Saturday, came too late. A little more than an hour after the team won its fifth straight to keep its slim playoff hopes alive, it was eliminated from playoff contention when Toronto rallied to beat Pittsburgh.With a 4-2 victory over the Devils, the Islanders temporarily moved within 1 point of the Maple Leafs. But Toronto got goals from Kasperi Kapanen and Connor Brown less than three minutes apart in the third period to clinch the eighth and final playoff berth in the Eastern Conference.The Islanders (40-29-12) will close the regular season on Sunday at Barclays Center against the Ottawa Senators. Even if Toronto had lost on Saturday, the Islanders could have reached the playoffs only if they won Sunday’s game and Toronto lost its regular-season finale against Columbus.The Islanders qualified for the playoffs last season and won their first playoff series since 1993. After a poor start this season, they rallied when Doug Weight replaced Jack Capuano as coach. But a three-game losing streak in late March put them in a precarious situation.AdvertisementIf that was the deal they made for themselves, the Islanders held up their end of the bargain. Before Saturday’s game, they had won four in a row, including three without their injured captain, John Tavares.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.And then Islanders goaltender Jaroslav Halak, who spent nearly three months in the minor leagues before he was recalled on March 23, stopped 37 of 39 shots for his fifth straight victory. Halak stopped all 14 shots in an otherwise sluggish first period for the Islanders.Advertisement“We were just kind of in the ozone a bit, wandering around,” Weight said.Anders Lee scored two goals for the Islanders to increase his season total to 33. He has scored five goals in his last five games. Adam Pelech and Jason Chimera added goals for the Islanders, who have played without Tavares for four straight road games.“We just want to give ourselves a chance,” Chimera said after the game.Beau Bennett scored an unassisted goal for the Devils at the five-minute mark of the third period to trim the Islanders’ lead to 3-1, but Lee scored a power-play goal 3 minutes 11 seconds later. Halak gave up his second goal of the game with only three seconds to play and the outcome already determined.“I’m trying not to think about the big picture,” Halak said of the Islanders’ failed bid for the playoffs.Of his demotion earlier this season, he said: “It’s all in the past. I just try to focus on what’s happening now.”Weight stood in a corridor outside the Islanders’ dressing room after the game and said he preferred to be participating in a news conference instead of being in front of a television watching the fateful Toronto-Pittsburgh game — a contest whose outcome he could not control in the slightest.“That’s worse than being on the bench,” he said.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.