AdvertisementSupported byKeeping ScoreBy Benjamin HoffmanWith the way the Charlotte Hornets have been playing recently, it may finally be time to retire the “Crying Jordan” meme. While the Internet’s Photoshop enthusiasts will undoubtedly be sad at no longer eliciting easy laughs by replacing the head in any photo with Michael Jordan’s tear-strewn face from his Hall of Fame acceptance speech in 2009, the fact that the meaning behind the original meme may no longer be valid takes away some of its humor.According to the website KnowYourMeme.com, the origins of “Crying Jordan” were fairly straightforward: In 2012, a user of the site MemeCrunch submitted a photo of Jordan crying over a red background emblazoned with the words “Why Did I Buy the Bobcats?” At the time, the Hornets were known as the Bobcats — the original Charlotte Hornets had moved to New Orleans in 2002 — and they were in the midst of a 7-59 season in which they set an N.B.A. record for lowest winning percentage. The team was saved from breaking the N.B.A. record for losses by a lockout that reduced the season to 66 games.The rest is Internet history, as various stills of Jordan crying during the speech have been used to convey sadness in almost any way imaginable, regardless of context.While it’s true that Jordan, who experienced about as much personal success as any basketball player except for members of Bill Russell’s Boston Celtics, very likely had a hard time adjusting to life as the owner of the moribund Charlotte franchise — the team went 282-440 in his first nine years as owner — things have turned around in a big way this season. The Hornets may not have risen to championship contenders, but they are staking a claim as one of the best teams in franchise history, and could very well be the best, depending on which history you choose to follow. With a .574 winning percentage through Friday, the Hornets were on pace to be the best team since the Bobcats were added as an expansion team before the 2004-5 season. Their 39 wins were just five short of the 2009-10 team’s record of 44. They were the No. 5 seed in the Eastern Conference playoff race, with just a half-game between them and the Atlanta Hawks for the No. 3 seed. But things get confusing when you look at the team’s record books. Through a quirk of historical accounting, the best record for a franchise that was created in 2004 belongs to a team that played in the 1996-97 season. The records and statistics of the original Charlotte Hornets were reassigned to the newer Charlotte franchise in 2014 because the New Orleans Hornets gave up their rights to the name by choosing to be called the Pelicans. Jordan sought and received league approval to bring the Hornets name back to Charlotte, and with that came the rights to the Hornets’ entire history.The change resulted in some truly odd quirks, like Baron Davis’s having technically been an All-Star for two franchises without having changed teams between the appearances, and it also changed the franchise win record from 44 in 2009-10 to the 54 that Glen Rice led the team to in 1996-97. Though Charlotte advanced to the playoffs twice during the Bobcats era, there is no doubt that this year’s Hornets squad, led by Kemba Walker, Nicolas Batum, Marvin Williams, Cody Zeller and Jeremy Lin, is the most intriguing one to come along since Davis led the team to the Eastern Conference semifinals in 2001.Winners of 17 of their last 21 games, the Hornets have had the sixth-most efficient offense and the third-most efficient defense in that span while being one of the best teams in the N.B.A. at avoiding turnovers. With a continuation of their momentum, and a little luck, the Hornets could easily surpass the Boston Celtics, the Miami Heat and the Atlanta Hawks to settle in behind the Cleveland Cavaliers and the Toronto Raptors as the best teams in their conference. If that happens, the smiling face of Walker might finally replace the frustrated face of Adam Morrison, the first player Jordan ever drafted in 2006, as the first thought that comes to mind for the franchise. And the denizens of the Internet, who have thrived on poking fun at Jordan, might have to find some new jokes. Advertisement