By TOM PEDULLAMARCH 18, 2016
Jets General Manager Mike Maccagnan played down Robert Griffin III’s recent two-day visit and used a conference call with reporters on Friday to repeatedly stress the team’s desire to re-sign the free-agent quarterback Ryan Fitzpatrick.“We feel we have a good situation here for Ryan, and he’s a very good fit for us,” Maccagnan said. “Our goal is to try to get Ryan under contract.”Last Friday and Saturday, the Jets hosted Griffin, a former Heisman Trophy winner whose fortunes soured with the Washington Redskins after a stellar rookie season. Maccagnan said he had not been in contact with Griffin since the quarterback’s Pro Day at Baylor. Maccagnan described the extended time the oft-injured Griffin had spent at the team’s complex in Florham Park, N.J., as “more of a meet and greet.”In answering a question about Griffin, Maccagnan noted, “Our focus primarily is trying to get something worked out with Ryan.”AdvertisementThat has been far more difficult than either side could have anticipated after Fitzpatrick, 33, expressed a desire to remain with the Jets at the end of a surprising 10-6 regular season and after Coach Todd Bowles had made it equally clear that he would like to have him back.Fitzpatrick’s age and journeyman background — the Jets were his sixth team — have made the Jets and other quarterback-needy teams wary of making a major financial commitment to him, even after he set career highs by throwing for 3,905 yards and a team-record 31 touchdowns. He also provided needed leadership and possesses an excellent understanding of the system orchestrated by the offensive coordinator Chan Gailey. Fitzpatrick did well under him before, when the two worked together with the Buffalo Bills.Fitzpatrick has been hurt by interceptions throughout his career. Although he avoided costly pickoffs for much of the 2015 season and was intercepted only 15 times, three of those contributed significantly to the Jets’ 22-17 loss at Buffalo in the regular-season finale. The Jets would have advanced to the playoffs for the first time since the 2010 season by winning that game.To further complicate matters, the Jets have little room to maneuver, even under a salary cap that rose to $155.7 million. The franchise spent heavily last year in Maccagnan’s first off-season as general manager. Maccagnan noted that the current market had exploded at many positions, including quarterback. The unproven Chase Daniel, for instance, recently received a three-year deal worth $21 million from the Philadelphia Eagles.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“It was a market flush with cash,” Maccagnan said. “A lot of teams had a lot of room under the cap to spare. A lot of people are getting deals above what some teams anticipated.”It has been widely reported that the Jets are offering Fitzpatrick about $7 million per year. The proposed deal is thought to be close to what Daniel was given, even though Daniel lacks Fitzpatrick’s résumé. So does Brock Osweiler, 25, who left the Denver Broncos to join the Houston Texans for a four-year contract totaling $72 million.AdvertisementFitzpatrick may be forced to settle for far less than what he believes constitutes his market value if no suitors arise beyond the Jets. “Hopefully we can find a middle ground we’re both happy with,” Maccagnan said.It is unclear how the Jets will create more room to maneuver under the cap. One possibility would be to cut the veteran tackle D’Brickashaw Ferguson, who counts for $14.1 million against the cap.“Right now, I’d say he will be on our roster going forward,” Maccagnan said. “But we’ll see how this thing unfolds.”Cap room could also come from trading the defensive line stalwart Muhammad Wilkerson, whose franchise tag is worth $15.7 million. But Maccagnan said the possibility of dealing Wilkerson was “not something we’re actively pursuing.”He also addressed the news that cornerback Darrelle Revis had undergone surgery to repair a torn ligament in his right wrist. Revis will be in a hard cast for the next two to three months and will be limited in his participation in the off-season program. Maccagnan said the Jets had been unaware of a problem with Revis’s wrist until recently and had therefore not listed him on their weekly injury report during the regular season.A version of this article appears in print on March 19, 2016, on Page D7 of the New York edition with the headline: Jets Say Signing Fitzpatrick, Not Griffin, Is Still Focus .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.