By BILLY WITZMARCH 18, 2016
TAMPA, Fla. —  Dread had given way to resignation on a late October night at Wrigley Field. The Chicago Cubs, already trailing the Mets by three games to none in the National League Championship Series, were down by four runs before they even came to bat. By the bottom of the sixth, with the Cubs trailing, 6-1, the capacity crowd was glum, preparing for the inevitable.Then, with one out, Starlin Castro walked to home plate.In an instant, fans rose in unison and the ballpark’s atmosphere was transformed from funerary to a foot-stomping, hand-clapping fiesta.When the Cubs became the darlings of baseball last fall, they had many faces — the hip-to-be-square manager Joe Maddon, the roly-poly slugger Kyle Schwarber and the lumberjack-lookalike pitcher Jake Arrieta among the most visible. But the soundtrack was laid down by Castro, the team’s star shortstop through its barren rebuilding seasons, who was benched at midseason, then resurfaced as their second baseman, swinging a torrid bat along the way.Each time Castro came to the plate at Wrigley Field late in the season, he was accompanied by “Ando En La Verasace,” a toe-tapping song by the Dominican pop singer Omega, sending a surge of energy through the ballpark.Advertisement“Everyone in the ballpark was involved,” said reliever Jason Motte, a teammate of Castro’s with the Cubs last year who is now with Colorado. “It was pretty awesome in the playoffs. The whole place was going nuts.”AdvertisementWhen the Yankees acquired Castro from the Cubs this off-season, it was to plug a hole at second base that had been gaping since Robinson Cano left as a free agent three years ago and to bring some right-handed balance to their left-leaning lineup.Castro might even be equipped to do something more monumental — bring some life to Yankee Stadium.With the exception of the wild-card playoff game, which drew a passionate, energetic crowd, the Stadium, with its lower bowl regularly dotted with empty seats, was largely a cavern of quiet again last season.But if Castro gets fans off their seats, it will be to a different tune. He said he is retiring “Ando En La Versace.”“It’s like a tradition in Chicago, so I’m going to keep it there,” said Castro, who got stuck on the song when he saw Omega perform it in concert. “I can bring it, but I don’t want to. It was special. Leave it there, keep it in everybody’s mind.”Many hitters put a great deal of thought into their walk-up songs, as relievers do for their entrance songs, viewing it as an opportunity to express themselves and make a connection with fans. Mariano Rivera made “Enter Sandman” by Metallica a Yankee Stadium ritual when he entered games, and when Alex Rodriguez returned last year from a drug suspension, he frequently went to the plate accompanied by Journey’s “Don’t Stop Believin’.”Castro, who said he is mulling his options, is not the only new Yankee looking for a new song. Outfielder Aaron Hicks, acquired from Minnesota, asked for suggestions on Twitter.“Trust me,” Castro said. “I’m going to pick out a good one.”While Castro is learning the intricacies of playing second base, he brings a shortstop’s arm to the position and showed his athleticism Wednesday with an over-the-shoulder catch. But the biggest lure for the Yankees was Castro’s bat. They have used 10 players at second base since Cano left after the 2013 season. Though Castro turns 26 next week, he already has 991 hits — the main reason he is a three-time All-Star. He could hit second against left-handers or almost anywhere from seventh to ninth against right-handers, fortifying a lineup that scored the second-most runs in baseball last season.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Castro, who is batting .417 this spring, homered in back-to-back games this week, including a deep drive Thursday against Pittsburgh far over the center-field wall. His opposite-field power should play well at Yankee Stadium.Advertisement“This kid has really incredible hands,” the hitting coach Alan Cockrell said. “He’s very quick and direct to the ball, so you can wait a little longer. Nobody in the big leagues throws a ball straight, there’s a lot of velocity and they change speeds. When your hands are short and quick, you can wait a little longer and get a bit better read on the pitch.”When Castro was benched last August, his demeanor did not change, said Chris Denorfia, a teammate with the Cubs who is in camp with the Yankees. He still carried the same smile that seems ever-present this spring. He still had the same walk-up song.Then, after Castro returned to the lineup, Motte and others in the bullpen began clapping along with the song during one of Castro’s at-bats. They were soon shown on the stadium’s video board, and it did not take long for the rest of the crowd, the dugout and others to join in. It caught on. In September, Pirates catcher Francisco Cervelli told Castro he wanted to take his glove off and clap along. Royals catcher Salvador Perez actually did.And Motte, meanwhile, was increasingly hamming it up for the cameras. “It was a catchy tune; it makes you want to move,” Motte said in a recent telephone interview, saying at first it reminded him of “Thrift Shop” by Macklemore. “It got to the point where all the TV cameras in Wrigley would show Castro, then pan down to the bullpen and we’d be clapping, and then the dugout and they’d all be clapping. We probably took it a little overboard and got a little obnoxious, but it got everybody pumped.”Including the man in the batter’s box.“Sometimes when we were losing the game I come to the plate, the emotion that you feel — everybody gets emotional,” Castro said. “Maybe it gets the team up and you score some runs that inning.”It will take some time, certainly, to recreate a similar atmosphere in the Bronx, where there have been few reasons — musical or otherwise — in recent seasons for fans to put their hands together.A version of this article appears in print on March 19, 2016, on Page D5 of the New York edition with the headline: Castro Is Seeking New Walkup Song, and Other Hits.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.