AdvertisementSupported byBy Ben RothenbergINDIAN WELLS, Calif. — Fifteen years after she last won here in front of a virulently hostile crowd, Serena Williams booked a spot in the final of the BNP Paribas Open, beating Agnieszka Radwanska, 6-4, 7-6 (1), in a semifinal match Friday evening.Williams, who skipped this event 13 times after the abrasive treatment she and her family received during her win in the 2001 final, returned last year but withdrew before her semifinal match, citing knee problems.“Definitely didn’t think I would be in another final here, ever,” Williams said. “Then, last year — just really, really bad luck. I felt devastated that I wasn’t in the final or at least even being able to play. After the last final I had here, I never pictured myself being back. So it’s an interesting feeling.”Williams, whose sister Venus only ended her own boycott of the event this year, said that her return to the final would bring some closure to the family’s story at the tournament.“It’s kind of cool that I can really close the door by being in the final again,” Serena Williams said. “I think it’s something that really kind of came full circle.”Williams has been received warmly throughout the tournament, allaying the trepidation she felt when she returned last year.“I would love to walk out there with everyone, you know, clapping,” she said of the final. “That’s the only thing I can hope for.”The top-ranked Williams booked her spot in Sunday’s final with a convincing win over Radwanska, who will rise to No. 2 in the WTA rankings next week. After a torpid start, Williams recovered from a 2-4 deficit to take the first set and then opened the second set by winning the first 11 points of the second set. Radwanska, who has never beaten Williams in 10 meetings, was able to pull even in the second set with a slew of short slices that drew Williams forward in the court. But in the second-set tiebreaker, Williams announced herself with two blistering return winners off Radwanska’s first two serves and cruised to a 7-1 finish. Williams told the crowd after her semifinal win that she had appreciated hearing cheers of “Go, Serena” and “U.S.A.” during the match, and she later said she had noticed an increase in support as her career progressed, adding to the base of “die-hard” fans she had enjoyed all along.“When you see great athletes, or athletes that have been around for centuries, like me, you know, you just kind of appreciate them and realize they might not be around for the next century or two,” said Williams. “You have to take it in.”Advertisement