By KEN BELSONMARCH 19, 2016
PORT ST. LUCIE, Fla. —  For many avid baseball fans, traveling to Arizona or Florida to watch their favorite teams during spring training is a distinctive way to break up the winter, and something that can often be done more than once.For Marc Gold, however, it has been a life’s pursuit that finally became a reality on Friday when he visited the Mets’ spring training camp for the first time.“It’s the pure enjoyment of it,” Gold, 68, said while watching Noah Syndergaard throw a bullpen session before turning to use his cellphone to record video of Jacob deGrom taking batting practice. “It’s not like I have to think about all the stuff I had to do.”The “stuff” was preparing, shipping and selling horseradish and other condiments to supermarkets around the country. For decades, he and his brothers, cousins, uncles and parents have helped run the family business, which makes Gold’s Horseradish.AdvertisementIn the horseradish business, the busiest time of the year is late winter and early spring, leading to the Jewish Passover holiday. So while other Mets fans found time to slip away to Florida for spring training, Gold, always dutiful, was at the family’s factory, first in Brooklyn and later on Long Island, trying to keep up with demand.AdvertisementEvery February and March, other Mets fans could wander from practice field to practice field here, watching their favorite Mets players up close or just checking out young prospects with uniform numbers approaching 100. (Who is that guy, anyway?) Gold always dreamed of joining them. But he never did.“He always would talk about the nice weather and how great it must be to sit around and just watch baseball,” said Gold’s son, Shaun. “We always would say, ‘Next year in spring training,’ just like, ‘Next year in Jerusalem.’ ”Gold has lived and died with the Mets from their inception, in 1962. Growing up in the Canarsie section of Brooklyn, he followed the Dodgers of Campanella, Reese, Robinson and Snider, the fabled Boys of Summer. Like many in the borough, he was angry and bitter when Walter O’Malley moved the team to Los Angeles for the 1958 season. He was left with no one to root for. The Yankees? They might be the only team remaining in New York, but they were still the enemy.But everything changed when the Mets arrived. Then 14, Gold was hooked, even if this New York team was incredibly awful.He started a newsletter about the team’s travails called Mets Maze. With a tape recorder he received for his bar mitzvah, he recorded Mets radio broadcasts, including the team’s first spring training game. He rode the subway to the Polo Grounds, where he sat alone in right field keeping score as the team proceeded to lose a record 120 games in 1962.“Can you imagine rooting for a team that lost 75 percent of its games?” Gold asked.Sitting in his local synagogue during the High Holy Days, he would pass slips of paper with baseball trivia questions on them to Stuart Sternberg, a family friend and the current owner of the Tampa Bay Rays.“He has the most amazing recall and facts,” Sternberg said. “It’s mind-boggling.”Indeed, all these years later, Gold spits out data about players like Joe Christopher, Tim Harkness and Rod Kanehl — mainstays on those early, overwhelmed Mets teams — the way the current crop of fans might obsess over Michael Conforto’s wins above replacement, or Matt Harvey’s strikeout-to-walk ratio. The only difference is that Conforto and Harvey are good.AdvertisementAs his own children grew up, Gold often took them to Shea Stadium and then later to Citi Field. Gold’s Horseradish also became a Mets sponsor, so he was able to work with team executives to deliver mustard to the stadium while producing promotional bobbleheads.Yet through it all, Gold never had the time to make it to Florida.“I’ve always been encumbered,” Gold said as he walked to a training field on Friday to watch David Wright cut off throws from the outfield.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Last August, Gold Pure Food Products, which was founded by his grandparents in 1932, was sold. After more than 40 years in the business, Gold suddenly had plenty of time to watch the Mets. And suddenly, they were worth watching. Reinforcements arrived and the Mets went on a surprising run to the World Series. Whatever regrets Gold felt about the end of his career were cast aside for about three hours every night.“I left the company in August and Cespedes arrived,” he said, referring to Yoenis Cespedes, the slugger the Mets acquired from the Detroit Tigers at the July 31 trade deadline.This winter, Cespedes, a free agent, decided to stay with the Mets, delighting fans, like Gold, who had assumed he would sign for more money elsewhere. Meanwhile, Gold kept busy doing charity work, playing guitar and reading the newspapers. And with the demands of the horseradish business no longer hanging over him, Gold, now close to 70, decided that, yes, it was time to finally check out spring training.So here he is, in Port St. Lucie, seeing professional players up close. They are, in general, taller or stronger than they appear on television, and sometimes friendlier, too. The experience of talking to deGrom, Curtis Granderson and other players felt surreal.“This is self-indulgent,” Gold said at one point on Friday. “I shouldn’t be at a baseball game.”As Gold adjusted to his surroundings, he realized that no one was going to accuse him of sneaking out of work and that after all these years he was entitled to enjoy what amounted to a fantasy camp. Deferred joy, after all, is still joy.Some of Gold’s best friends who watched him follow the early Mets have seen him change in recent months as he has had time to fully re-embrace the team that drove him to such distraction more than half a century ago.Advertisement“He’s come full circle,” said Stan Fischler, a longtime hockey writer who remains a mentor to Gold. “He’s 68 going on 14. He’s like a kid in a candy store.”A version of this article appears in print on March 20, 2016, on Page SP9 of the New York edition with the headline: At 68, a Condiment King Finally Gets a Taste of Mets Spring Training.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.