By SCOTT CACCIOLAJUNE 2, 2016
OAKLAND, Calif. — Anderson Varejao has a postgame ritual. As his teammates make their way to the locker room, he waits outside the door to greet each of them, one by one. Varejao is always the last player to enter. He makes sure of it. It is one of the small ways in which he contributes to the fabric of the team.“That’s just him being a really good team guy,” said Bruce Fraser, an assistant coach with the Golden State Warriors. “And he’s probably done that everywhere he’s been.”Not so long ago, Varejao was the professional locker-room greeter for the Cleveland Cavaliers. He also played some solid basketball for them. In 11-plus seasons with the Cavaliers, Varejao averaged 7.6 points and 7.5 rebounds a game, often as a defense-minded center alongside his good friend LeBron James.Now, James and Varejao are back in the N.B.A. finals — only this time, they are opponents.“I’m pretty sure I’m going to go through a lot of emotions,” Varejao, 33, said before his new team (the Warriors) faced his old team (the Cavaliers) in Game 1 here on Thursday night. “Physically and mentally, I can’t; it’s something that will happen. But I’m just trying to control as much as I can to not let it bother my game and what my focus is, which is helping this team.”AdvertisementVarejao, who has played sparingly for the Warriors in their playoff run, is making history. He is the only player to have been employed in the same season by the two teams in the finals. No, that does not mean he is guaranteed a ring. Jewelry falls under the jurisdiction of the winning team, according to a league official.AdvertisementYet, here he is, treading that fine line between friend and foe. Varejao is well aware of the unusual circumstances. He cited his relationship with the Warriors’ Stephen Curry.“Last year, he was against me,” Varejao said. “Now, we’re together.”In February, the Cavaliers traded Varejao to the Portland Trail Blazers, who released him. Varejao had his choice of suitors. A phone call from the Warriors’ Leandro Barbosa, a longtime teammate on Brazil’s national team, helped convince Varejao that he could thrive in the Bay Area. Varejao appears to have made a fine choice.“He was one of the guys who reached out to me: ‘The guys want you here,’” Varejao said of his initial conversation with Barbosa, who sits next to Varejao in the team’s locker room at Oracle Arena. “He put some other guys on the phone, and it made it easy for me to decide to come here.”Still, Varejao sounded as if he had mixed feelings about the finals, which was understandable. He invested a lot of emotional capital in the Cavaliers, who are still searching for their first championship in franchise history. Last season, an injury relegated Varejao to the role of spectator as the Cavaliers pushed the Warriors to six games before succumbing.On Wednesday afternoon, news cameras and reporters swarmed Varejao at the conclusion of the Warriors’ practice at Oracle — a rare situation for a player who averaged 2.6 points and 2.7 rebounds a game during the regular season.“I knew this would happen if the Warriors would make it to the finals and the Cavs would make it to the finals,” Varejao said with a hint of resignation. “You can’t avoid talking about this stuff, which is O.K. I mean, it’s fine. I’m pretty sure today’s the big deal we’re going to talk about it. And after that, you won’t have to ask me about it again.”Varejao would prefer to avoid all the attention. He delights in doing the little things, mucking it up in the shadows cast by stars — first, James; and now, Curry.Advertisement“He’s done so much in his career,” James said. “He’s sacrificed a lot. For him to be in this position, I think, is great for him and for his family.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Varejao, with his irrepressible hairdo, is an unmistakable presence on the Warriors’ bench. In Game 7 of the Western Conference finals, he found a way to make more of an impact when the Warriors closed out the Oklahoma City Thunder with a 96-88 victory. Two days later, Coach Steve Kerr could still recite Varejao’s statistics and extracurriculars from memory.“Anderson played 1 minute and 51 seconds and he had two assists, a basket, and he took a charge, and his hair was flying everywhere, and he was howling these emotional shrieks and yells that were getting the crowd going and his teammates going,” Kerr said. “I thought the game changed when he went out there.”The finals tend to be heated affairs, but on the eve of Game 1, it was impossible to find anyone on either side who was remotely critical of Varejao.Tristan Thompson, Cavaliers: “I’m happy for Andy.”Harrison Barnes, Warriors: “He instantly clicked.”LeBron James, Cavaliers: “Good things happen to good people.”Bruce Fraser, Warriors: “He’s awesome.”Varejao played down the suggestion that he had institutional knowledge of the Cavaliers that would help his new team. He said he was simply hoping to earn some minutes.“My focus,” he said, “is on helping this team win the championship.”A version of this article appears in print on June 3, 2016, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Warrior Treads Fine Line Between Friend and Foe.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.