By ANDREW DASJUNE 2, 2016
Soccer will experiment with video replay in league and cup competitions in six countries this year, FIFA and the body that governs the rules of the game announced on Thursday, with the intention of approving full use of the technology in matches over the next year.The leagues and organizations approved this year for experimentation with the replay system, known as video assistant referee, include Major League Soccer in the United States, the Bundesliga in Germany and the A-League in Australia, as well as selected competitions in Brazil, Portugal and the Netherlands, according to FIFA and the rule-making body, the International Football Association Board.Video assistant referee will be used only in match-changing situations: goals, penalty decisions, direct red cards and cases of mistaken identity in which a referee cautions or sends off the wrong player. Routine fouls would not be subject to review, and the system would supplement existing goal-line technology.For now, the testing will be done as a series of shadow experiments to evaluate equipment and procedures without the participation of match officials or communication with them. In its current form, a referee on the field or a video assistant watching elsewhere can request or suggest a review of a potentially incorrect decision. Video of the play would then be reviewed during a brief stoppage in play, and the referee would make a final decision. (Because most situations defined by the rule-making association as match-changing — goals, fouls and expulsions — are accompanied by brief stoppages, the hope is that the flow of matches will not be affected.)AdvertisementThe association said it was permitting online and live testing in several countries to get more data before approving video assistant referee worldwide. It will conduct live testing in December at the FIFA Club World Cup in Japan with the intention of approving more live use of the technology in 2017. Full testing and approval is not expected to be completed until at least 2018.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.While the introduction of technology in soccer still has many opponents — the widespread use of goal-line technology took years to approve despite several major disputes over calls — M.L.S. has been a leading advocate for it in recent years, and the league said that it had conducted testing with video assistant referee since 2014. The M.L.S. experiments, and others in various leagues, helped persuade the association that in-game mistakes on important decisions could be corrected without interrupting the flow of the game.Advertisement“We believe the time has come for a mechanism that helps referees avoid clearly incorrect decisions that change the game,” M.L.S. Commissioner Don Garber said in a statement.M.L.S. said it would conduct its tests at United Soccer League matches at M.L.S. sites this summer, with the intention of trying it at M.L.S. games in the future. Other countries could soon be added to the list.“There are others that are very interested but need to hold further consultations with their key stakeholders and with different technology providers,” said Lukas Brud, the International Football Association Board’s secretary. “They still have time, and we expect to be able to officially confirm additional participants in the coming months.”A version of this article appears in print on June 3, 2016, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: FIFA Has Seen the Future, And It Includes Replay.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.