By ALLAN KREDANOV. 23, 2016
The Rangers have been impressive, particularly at home, for the first six weeks of the season. First place in the Metropolitan Division is theirs, at least for the moment, giving their fans reason to ponder their playoff possibilities in the spring.So there was no better barometer than again clashing with the defending Stanley Cup champions, the Pittsburgh Penguins, two nights after the Rangers stormed back from an early two-goal deficit to win, 5-2, on the road.The Rangers were in a similarly lofty spot a year ago when they met the then-high-flying Montreal Canadiens at home the night before Thanksgiving. But a 5-1 drubbing sent them spiraling into a December tailspin from which they never quite recovered, and they wound up being ousted in the first round of the playoffs by the Penguins.The Penguins seemed stunned after their loss on Monday. Given how their clenched-jawed coach, Mike Sullivan, operates, they came to Madison Square Garden determined to avoid a repeat.AdvertisementAfter spotting the Rangers an early lead on a goal by Rick Nash, the Penguins came out swarming in the second period, scoring five times in less than 15 minutes, and cruised to a 6-1 victory. Matt Murray needed to make only 16 saves for the Penguins, who outshot the Rangers, 38-17.Advertisement“Every night you’re tested,” said the Penguins captain Sidney Crosby, who scored twice, added an assist and had what passed for a fight with the Rangers captain Ryan McDonagh in the first period. “You can’t have an off night. We responded the right way.”Scott Wilson scored at 2 minutes 2 seconds of the second period with his third goal of the season, tying the score before Crosby deflected a shot by Ian Cole past Henrik Lundqvist at 4:58.Phil Kessel then made the score 3-1 at 10:12 with a shot that fooled Lundqvist before Crosby scored again — his league-leading 14th goal of the season — at 12:57.Lundqvist — who rested Monday as the backup Antti Raanta defeated the Penguins — was then yanked by Coach Alain Vigneault. Raanta came in, and Conor Sheary scored four minutes later to make the score 5-1.By that point, the first-place Rangers were hearing boos from their frustrated fans. Matt Cullen completed the scoring with his fourth goal of the season at 13:05 of the third period.“When you play the really good teams, if you do get away from your game plan, personally as a player or as a group, it’s going to be a tough night,” said Lundqvist, who fell to 9-6-1 this season. “They kept coming.”Vigneault was asked after his team’s morning skate if he had considered starting Raanta for a second straight game against the Penguins. Lundqvist had struggled against them in the playoffs last spring and Raanta has won all five of his decisions thus far this year.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“No, Hank’s the guy,” Vigneault said.Nash started the scoring at 4:22 of the opening period with a power-play goal, his ninth goal of the season. Nash has quietly reasserted his offensive prowess after scoring a career-low 15 times last season.AdvertisementLater in the first, in a skirmish of captains, Crosby and McDonagh tussled after McDonagh rammed Sheary into the boards. McDonagh received a five-minute boarding penalty for the hit while Crosby was assessed two minutes for roughing, a decision that went over badly with the Garden crowd.Crosby said his feisty reaction was mostly a heat-of-the-moment reflex.“I saw Shears kind of get hit in the numbers there,” Crosby said. “I just tried to stick up for him. Those are hits that sometimes happen fast. I don’t think he was targeting by any means.”End-to-end action ensued, suddenly giving the game a playoff feel. Lundqvist denied Sheary from close range and made several more steady saves as the Rangers killed off the penalty. Murray’s best stop came just before the first-period buzzer with a pad stop of a Nick Holden shot from the right circle.The Penguins headed for their dressing room trailing by 1-0, but with a 10-7 advantage in shots. They came out for the second period looking like a different team, and scored five goals on 11 shots.Before the game, Sullivan had talked about the Rangers emulating Pittsburgh’s speedy style after his team overwhelmed the Rangers in April.The Penguins turned their season around last year when Sullivan was hired in December and instituted a relentless up-tempo style that benefited Pittsburgh’s best players, including Crosby, Kessel, Evgeni Malkin and Kris Letang.The Rangers have been employing a similar approach this season, winning with regularity by generating scoring from every segment of their lineup. Four Rangers have eight or more goals, and 14 of them have at least 10 points this season.Advertisement“They are a dangerous team off the rush,” Sullivan said. “They play the way we play. We’re trying to play to their strength.”Vigneault made similar points before the game.“They won the Cup last year,” he said of the Penguins. “They are the best in the league.”On Wednesday, the Penguins made Vigneault sound like a prophet, and at 12-5-3 they moved within 2 points of the Rangers, who fell to 14-6-1.“There’s no doubt that we disappointed ourselves tonight and we disappointed our fans,” Vigneault said after the game. “All we can do is get ready for the next game, and that’s what we are going to do.”SLAP SHOTSThe Penguins are 13-5-1 in their last 19 games at the Garden … Pittsburgh was without the injured forward Patric Hornqvist for the fourth straight game … The Rangers were missing forwards Mika Zibanejad (broken fibula) and Pavel Buchnevich (back spasms) … The Rangers’ next game is on Friday afternoon against the Flyers in Philadelphia.A version of this article appears in print on November 24, 2016, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: Hockey; Rangers Paid Back With a Rout.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.