By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSMAY 31, 2016
CHARLOTTE, N.C. — Kelvin Benjamin is back on the football field running and catching passes.Now the question becomes how the Carolina Panthers will use Benjamin, a 6-foot-5, 250-pound wide receiver, next season.Benjamin missed the Panthers’ 17-2 season after tearing the anterior cruciate ligament in his left knee in training camp last summer. Despite his absence, the Panthers led the league in scoring and reached the Super Bowl, which they lost, 24-10, to the Denver Broncos.The Panthers did so well in part because quarterback Cam Newton, the N.F.L.’s most valuable player, spread the ball around more. Nine Carolina players had at least 10 catches, and five had more than 30. That was not the case in 2014, when Benjamin was Newton’s No. 1 target, catching 73 passes for 1,008 yards and nine touchdowns.“It is still to be seen how all of that works out,” tight end Greg Olsen said of Benjamin’s return to the starting lineup. “One of our greatest strengths as an offense last year was the versatility and the ability of that wide receiver group to just play a role. That was a catalyst for our season developing the way it did.”AdvertisementOlsen, who led the team in receptions and yards receiving last season en route to his second Pro Bowl, said he saw Benjamin’s return as a huge plus — and not only because of his talent.AdvertisementHe said Benjamin’s unselfish nature would allow him to fit back into the lineup easily. He added that “the million dollar problem” was having talented individuals accept their roles in an offense.“Kelvin is the rare guy who can be a No. 1 talent, but still understands how he fits into the big picture,” Olsen said. “Anytime you can more add guys like that to a team, you can’t help but improve.”Benjamin makes no pretense about returning as the dominant No. 1 receiver.“Hey, I just want to come in and be a part of it,” Benjamin said Tuesday.Benjamin began running and cutting at full speed last week, although he will not be cleared to participate in team drills until training camp in late July.Still, he said his knee felt strong, which was why he had chosen not to wear a knee brace.“I try not to baby it; I try to go hard,” Benjamin said, adding that he could not “really hold back.”“If it gives out, it gives out,” he said. “I trust in the rehab we did, and I feel comfortable about it.”Benjamin said if he wore the knee brace, it might become “a mind thing.”Panthers Coach Ron Rivera does not have a problem with Benjamin practicing without the brace, even though Benjamin said doctors had advised him to wear one during organized team activities.Advertisement“That is just for right now, where he isn’t working against anybody,” Rivera said. “He’s developing that confidence that you are going to need when he’s working against somebody and he doesn’t have the brace on.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Rivera said he could not wait to add a healthy Benjamin to the team’s already versatile offense.“It’s going to be exciting, it really is,” Rivera said. “I think we have some potential to be better, I really do. I think we can be better all of the way across the board as a football team. But talking about isn’t going to help you. You have to go out and do it.”Benjamin said his focus was on his conditioning, which he said needs to improve. He stayed after and ran sprints with some of the other wide receivers, keeping up with the leaders.“We had a tremendous season last year, and having me back will only be good,” Benjamin said. “We have to keep building and keep pushing from here.”A version of this article appears in print on June 1, 2016, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: Panthers Receiver Rejoins an Offense That Stayed Potent.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.