By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSJUNE 2, 2016
The Pro Bowl will be played in Orlando, Fla., for the next three seasons after spending much of the last four decades in Hawaii.The game, the N.F.L.’s annual all-star event, has been held in Hawaii since 1979 with the exception of two years.To help rebuild interest in the game, it will return to the traditional N.F.C.-A.F.C. matchup, said Peter O’Reilly, the N.F.L.’s senior vice president for events.SHOOTING SUSPECT SEEKS REPORT Lawyers for a man charged in the shooting death of the retired New Orleans Saints star Will Smith asked a judge to give them a police report that does not omit the names of witnesses.AdvertisementJohn Fuller, a lawyer for the suspect, Cardell Hayes, has said that Hayes was not the aggressor and that a witness saw a gun in Smith’s possession.AdvertisementTwo minor league teams are turning to the football scandal embroiling New England quarterback Tom Brady to pad their attendance numbers. The Pawtucket Red Sox plan to hold a Free Brady Night on June 10, with free admission to anyone named Tom or Brady.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In response, the Buffalo Bison, in a show of support for the Buffalo Bills, an A.F.C. East rival of the Patriots, have planned a Keep Brady Suspended Night during a doubleheader the next day. Fans donating a “properly inflated” football at the Bisons game will get two-for-one admission.AROUND BASEBALL Michael Fulmer took a no-hit bid into the seventh inning, and the visiting Detroit Tigers beat the Los Angeles Angels, 3-0. • Zach Davies, 23, had a career-high nine strikeouts over eight shutout innings, and the Milwaukee Brewers averted a three-game sweep with a 3-1 win over visiting St. Louis. Danny Valencia had three hits, including two doubles, and Oakland won its fifth straight game, 5-1, over visiting Minnesota. Jake Smolinski homered, and Jed Lowrie singled twice and scored two runs to help give Oakland starter Sean Manaea his second career win. • A Yan Gomes single sent Lonnie Chisenhall home as the winning run in the 11th inning as host Cleveland beat Texas, 5-4. Jon Lester pitched a four-hitter for his first complete game of the season, and the Chicago Cubs edged the visiting Los Angeles Dodgers, 2-1. Lester struck out 10 after giving up a leadoff homer to Kike Hernandez.William Walters, a professional gambler linked to Phil Mickelson in an insider trading scandal, pleaded not guilty and had his bail set at $25 million.Walters was charged with making tens of millions of dollars in illicit stock trades. Mickelson was spared from criminal charges after the Securities and Exchange Commission accused him in a lawsuit of making nearly $1 million in a 2012 stock trade at Walters’s suggestion and then using the proceeds to pay off a gambling debt.The former star Pelé plans to sell memorabilia, including a replica of the World Cup trophy, in an auction next month in London that could be worth $7 million.Pelé, 75, said some of the proceeds from the sale would go to a hospital in his native Brazil.The centerpiece of the auction will be a replica of the Jules Rimet Trophy that FIFA gifted to Pelé after Brazil won the World Cup for a third time.AROUND SOCCER Barcelona striker Neymar will be the first soccer player with a boot endorsed by the N.B.A. great Michael Jordan. He will wear a shoe carrying Jordan’s No. 23 on one foot and his own No. 10 on the other.  Lawyers for the Barcelona star Lionel Messi tried to show a Spanish court that he was not familiar with the tax issues that led to tax fraud charges against him and his father.AdvertisementThe Houston Rockets introduced Mike D’Antoni as their coach. D’Antoni, 65, previously coached the Phoenix Suns, the Knicks and the Los Angeles Lakers.A version of this article appears in print on June 2, 2016, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: Byrd Suspended for 162 Games for Drug Test.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.