By SAM BORDENJUNE 1, 2016
GDANSK, Poland — As rain fell on this port city Wednesday evening, the players of Poland’s national team bounced around with verve and pep. The fans chanted, “Polska!” over and over. The coaches barked and bayed.Their opponents from the Netherlands looked far more subdued. They were professional, to be sure, but there was less life, less anticipation. An hour before a relatively meaningless exhibition match, only two weeks after the long slog of the club season had ended, more than a few of the players looked, quite simply, as if they would have preferred to be anywhere but here.It was understandable. Two years ago, the Dutch were one of the dominant stories of the World Cup in Brazil, providing a series of memorable moments: striker Robin van Persie opening with a majestic, looping, inch-perfect diving header; Louis van Gaal, then the coach, substituting his goalkeeper minutes before a shootout and looking like a genius when the keeper won it; the Netherlands going on to the semifinals, and then carving up Brazil in the third-place game.The Oranje looked smart and savvy and effective. Yet from that incredible height came a brutal collapse last fall during qualifying for the European Championship. And now, a lost summer looms as teams like Poland — as well as minnows such as Wales, Albania, Northern Ireland and Iceland — prepare to take part in an expanded European Championship while the Dutch, somehow, have to stay home.AdvertisementBert van Oostveen, the chief executive of the Dutch federation, said in an interview that the sting of failure had been considerable, in part because the feeling was familiar. Van Oostveen noted that the Netherlands had had this happen before: good showings at the 2010 World Cup, the 1988 Euros and the 1978 World Cup were each followed by a poor performance in the next major tournament. So van Oostveen was candid in his assessment.Advertisement“What I see is that it is perhaps a Dutch mental sickness of thinking that you are really that good,” he said. “It has happened too much. People don’t understand it is one thing to reach the top but to stay just as good is much, much harder.”He sighed and added: “Everyone is frustrated we are not in France. The Dutch fans are famous for traveling, but they have nowhere to go.”For a small country of about 17 million, the Netherlands has a remarkable soccer history. Great teams, like that ’88 team that won the Euros, and great players like Johan Cruyff, Ruud Gullit, Marco van Basten and Dennis Bergkamp earned the Dutch a global stature. The national team’s guiding philosophy, known as Total Football, became known (and taught) around the world.But this downturn feels like something greater than past problems. A generation of top players that includes van Persie, Arjen Robben and Wesley Sneijder — who have been at the heart of the team for years — has deteriorated. Van Persie, 32, and Sneijder, 31, are playing on vanity contracts in the less-illustrious Turkish league; Robben, 32, is a shell of himself — mostly because of injuries — with Bayern Munich. None were called up to the team for this series of friendlies as the federation and Coach Danny Blind — who was hired in the midst of the qualifying collapse — wanted to give younger players a chance to develop.But that is a problem, too. Once known for its production of youth players, the Dutch academy system has struggled to churn out successors to its earlier stars. Memphis Depay, a Manchester United midfielder, is an obvious possibility, but the Dutch federation believes there should be many more, and it sees the paucity of top-tier prospects as indicative of a larger problem.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.That is part of why the federation undertook what was essentially a self-imposed audit of its entire operation last year, analyzing everything from resource allocation to mental-strength training. Even the long-ingrained Dutch tactics, focused on possession, interchanging positions and deliberate passing moves, were scrutinized.“The main thing was that the whole of football was being progressive and we found ourselves standing still,” van Oostveen said. “The game is changing. The players are changing — the evolution of speed, ball position, playing in several systems. It is all happening. The really successful teams can play different systems; we need to be able to play more than one.”AdvertisementThe Dutch solicited input from outsiders, asking foreign coaches like Arsenal’s Arsène Wenger and the former A.C. Milan coach Arrigo Sacchi for their thoughts on where soccer was headed. Coaches from youth teams and professional teams were polled. Players contributed, too. The result was an 11-point plan — featuring larger ideas, such as increasing the quality of youth coaches, as well as more granular notions, like a renewed focus at all levels on defending — that Dutch officials see as a 10-year process.The goal, in short, is a complete overhaul. And if that means that the Netherlands also struggles through qualifying for the 2018 World Cup in Russia, then the federation is prepared to accept that.“The result should be seen in 2022, ’24, ’26,” van Oostveen said. “You will not create in five months the new van Persie. We have to be realistic. The effects of all this for Russia? They will not be that huge. We hope we qualify; it is important. But it is a harder qualification than this last one, and we know that.”That reality leaves the Dutch fans, famous for their vigor, in an uncomfortable limbo. Balancing patience with the disbelief that still lingers over missing the Euros is difficult.Coen Westerhof, a Dutch fan from Almere, said that he “was just so mad” about how the qualifying played out but that he had tried to accept the notion that it was time for “old guys out, new guys in.”Westerhof said he was among a group of Dutch fans who had decided to adopt Belgium, a neighbor to the south, in the Euros. After the Netherlands lost its penultimate game in qualifying, one fan started a Facebook page in an effort to organize a group of Dutch fans who wanted to learn Belgian fan songs, the Belgian national anthem and other things related to cheering for the Belgian team.More than 10,000 people joined the page right away. After the Dutch lost their final qualifier and were eliminated, over 110,000 more expressed interest.“You know,” said Maurice Huismans, a D.J., “we have to do something.”Indeed they do. A few hundred Dutch fans did show up at Energa Stadium on Wednesday, tucked into one corner, where they and 40,000 more optimistic Polish fans watched a mostly turgid exhibition on a sloppy field. The Dutch were rewarded, sort of, as the Netherlands took advantage of two horrendous defensive mistakes by Poland to win, 2-1.Nice as it was, it was the definition of an empty victory.The Poles, after all, are going to France. The Dutch are still figuring out where they go from here.A version of this article appears in print on June 2, 2016, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Netherlands Looks for a Total Reboot.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.