AdvertisementSupported byBy Rebecca R. RuizRIO DE JANEIRO — The United States’ top Olympic official had his first formal forum on Tuesday to weigh in on the issue that is consuming global sports officials ahead of the Rio Games: how to penalize Russia for doping violations and elaborate cheating schemes.In recent weeks, American athletes and the country’s antidoping agency had publicly called for the International Olympic Committee to bar Russia from the Rio de Janeiro Games entirely. Executives of the Olympic committee had rejected those pleas and instead deferred to individual sports federations.On Tuesday, at a meeting at an oceanside hotel here, Larry Probst, chairman of the United States Olympic Committee, raised his hand in support of the I.O.C.’s decision, revealing the widening gulf between Olympic leaders and the athletes and antidoping officials who have clamored for a stronger response.Also present in the hotel ballroom was Casey Wasserman, an American businessman leading the United States’ effort to win the Olympic committee’s favor and have the 2024 Summer Games awarded to Los Angeles. He and others from hopeful host cities had been invited by the I.O.C. to observe the meeting.The United States Olympic Committee said Tuesday that Mr. Probst was not available to discuss the factors influencing his vote.“We have a doping problem,” Mr. Probst said at the meeting. “It’s not just Russia. The current system is broken, and we have to fix the problem.”In the days leading up to the Olympics, the ceremonial gatherings of the I.O.C.’s dozens of officials tend to be celebratory, but Tuesday’s meeting was fraught. I.O.C. members — princes, politicians and athletes alike — spent hours slinging mud, directing blame at the World Anti-Doping Agency.Thomas Bach, the I.O.C.’s president, defended the decision not to bar the entire Russian Federation from the Rio Games. The I.O.C. has instead asked individual sports federations to scrutinize Russian athletes before deciding who is eligible to compete when the Games begin Aug. 5. The “nuclear option” of a blanket ban, Mr. Bach said, would have resulted in “death and devastation.”“The innocent athletes would have to be considered as collateral damage,” he said.There was seemingly little tolerance for dissent at the meeting. After an I.O.C. member from Barbados, Austin Sealy, said he was “a little concerned” about how Russian athletes would be evaluated within the next three days, Mr. Bach laughed, deferred to the president of WADA and moved on.“The buck was passed,” Mr. Sealy said as he exited the Windsor Oceânico hotel, the I.O.C.’s headquarters for the Rio Games.Alexander Zhukov, president of Russia’s Olympic committee, said, “We are witnessing the direct interference of politics in sport.” He called the details of his country’s schemes “really shocking” and joined fellow dignitaries in shifting attention to WADA for failing to investigate Russia in spite of  tips from whistle-blowers.“Why should WADA not be responsible for violations of the antidoping organization it has accredited?” Mr. Zhukov said.With only one dissenting vote — from a British Olympian representing fellow athletes — the Olympic committee members fell in line with Mr. Bach.“Owing to the exceptional circumstances and time frame, it was the only possible decision,” Prince Albert II of Monaco said.Still, over more than two hours, officials and athletes excoriated the current antidoping system and demanded that the authorities undertake further investigation. Few called on the Olympic committee to accept responsibility for violations in Russia, something Mr. Bach himself had pinned wholly on WADA.“WADA has seemed to be more interested in publicity and self-promotion rather than doing its job as a regulator,” said Gerardo Werthein, the president of Argentina’s Olympic committee. “It’s clear there has been widespread evidence of malpractice in Russia.”Mr. Werthein said he thought the Olympic committee should share responsibility.Other officials were hesitant to accept the fundamental premise of wrongdoing. Mr. Bach seemed not to accept the results of a recent investigation commissioned by WADA, describing its results as “allegations” this week. That two-month inquiry, conducted on an accelerated timetable with the Rio Games in mind, produced forensic evidence and computer records corroborating the whistle-blower account of Russia’s former antidoping lab director Grigory Rodchenkov.In the spring, Dr. Rodchenkov told The New York Times that for years he had covered up steroid use by Russian Olympians at the explicit direction of the nation’s deputy minister of sport, whom Russia’s president, Vladimir V. Putin, suspended last month.Speaking here this week, Mr. Bach couched his condemnation on the condition of evidence.“If proven true,” he said, “such a contemptuous system of doping is an unprecedented attack on the integrity of sport.”Richard McLaren, the Canadian lawyer who conducted that investigation, said in an interview Tuesday: “These are not allegations. These are final findings that could be proven in a court of law.”Mr. McLaren said his continuing inquiry was focused on new leads and specific athletes, not confirming broad claims.Last month, the Olympic committee disinvited from Rio Russia’s minister of sport, Vitaly Mutko, and all employees of the ministry, a powerful acknowledgment of the government’s role in covering up doping violations.But some said Tuesday that allowing the Russian Federation to compete in the Games was right in light of Mr. McLaren’s continuing investigation.“It’s an interim report, and people assume it’s the final report,” Prince Feisal al Hussein of Jordan said. “The decision is correct. It allows for due process.”Last month, Mr. Putin appointed Vitaly Smirnov, Russia’s longest-serving Olympic committee member, to lead a national antidoping commission. Outside Tuesday’s meeting here, Mr. Smirnov said in English that he would accept questions from Russian reporters only.“The timing is very delicate,” said Chang Ung, a North Korean Olympic committee representative. “Our Sherlock Holmes, McLaren, he found guilty one defector from the Moscow laboratory. He prosecuted everything, and just before the Olympic Games.”Mr. Zhukov, the head of Russia’s Olympic committee, said Tuesday’s debate had threatened to undermine the “unity and progress” of the Games.Addressing his fellow officials, he said, “Resist this unprecedented pressure which is now on the Olympic movement.”Advertisement