By SETH BERKMANAUG. 4, 2016
The Mets outfielders have a ritual after each victory. They get together and exchange congratulations, leaping in the air and punctuating the celebration by swinging their arms for a low-five.After the Mets’ 4-1 victory over the Yankees on Thursday night in the Bronx, Jay Bruce showed that he had not yet mastered the routine. When he converged with Curtis Granderson and Alejandro De Aza, Bruce mistimed his jump and then stood awkwardly waiting to slap hands.Bruce’s mistake was forgivable. The Mets might not have been victorious without his three-run homer in the fifth inning, his first base hit for the team.“This is a group of guys that I think I’m going to mesh really, really well with,” Bruce said. “It was like hitting my first home run.”AdvertisementFor the next few weeks, Bruce will be relied on to create more end-of-game revelry. Before the game, the Mets placed Yoenis Cespedes on the 15-day disabled list, thrusting Bruce into the role as the team’s primary slugger.Advertisement“You look at what he’s done with runners in scoring position — he’s put up huge numbers, and we need that right now,” Manager Terry Collins said. “That was not just a big hit for us tonight, but for him also.”Cespedes’s strained right quadriceps, which was not helped by the Mets’ reluctance to put him on the D.L. when he first hurt it before the All-Star break — or by an uncalled-for round of golf on Wednesday — presented challenges throughout the lineup.Granderson, who has recently played center field because of the injury to Cespedes, moved to left. De Aza started in center and prevented an extra-base hit by Didi Gregorius in the fourth inning with a slick leaping backhanded catch.Kelly Johnson followed De Aza’s grab by leading off the fifth with a line drive toward the right-field seats. The ball cleared the fence by the slimmest of margins, like a pole-vaulter contorting his legs just over the bar.Sam Manchester will guide you through the 2016 summer Olympics in Rio de Janeiro.Hey. It’s Sam from the NYT Sports desk. I’m at the Olympics in Rio (so you don’t have to be :)). Grab a limited spot and I’ll text you updates, answer your questions and share the behind-the-scenes stuff nobody else gets.Thanks! Talk to you soon.Two batters later, Granderson doubled, and De Aza reached on a fielder’s choice. After Neil Walker flied out, Bruce stepped into the batter’s box with runners on first and second base in his first major test in a high-pressure role without Cespedes’s protection in the order.Bruce, acquired from the Cincinnati Reds on Monday, had gone hitless in his first 10 at-bats and was mired in an overall 0-for-19 slump. After watching the Mets thin their farm system to trade for him, some impatient fans were perhaps already experiencing buyer’s remorse.Bruce momentarily alleviated their nervousness with his homer, which landed in the Yankees’ bullpen in right-center field and gave the Mets a 4-0 lead. Boos suddenly rained down from the throats of Yankees fans, but simultaneous “Bruce” chants from a sizable Mets contingent provided a more soothing soundtrack.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.With the four-run advantage, Bartolo Colon coasted for six and two-thirds innings, improving to 10-6. His only strikeout came against the first batter he faced, Brett Gardner, but the Yankees were bewildered by Colon nonetheless.Advertisement“He was big tonight,” Collins said. “I thought tonight he had maybe his best stuff all year.”Colon has won at least 10 games in each of the last five seasons, and 13 times over all. He also became the first pitcher to win a Subway Series game for both teams, according to the Elias Sports Bureau.The victory ended a split four-game series. A Mets loss would have been quite damaging — psychologically and in the standings.With a lineup abundantly stocked with left-handed hitters, the Mets found an elixir in Yankee Stadium’s short porch in right. The Mets are last in the majors in batting average with runners in scoring position and now, with Cespedes out for two weeks or more, will be without one of their few potent right-handed bats.But the Yankees, who are the worst hitters in the American League with runners in scoring position, experienced even more futility in those situations, going 0 for 6 before Aaron Hicks singled in Gary Sanchez in the seventh for their only run.In Wednesday’s victory over the Mets, Mark Teixeira lifted the Yankees with a three-run homer and emotional bravado, jawing at Mets starter Steven Matz after being hit by a pitch later in the game. Teixeira’s spark was absent against Colon, though, because of lingering soreness in his left shin, where Matz’s pitch struck him.INSIDE PITCHWith YOENIS CESPEDES on the D.L., BRANDON NIMMO was recalled from Class AAA Las Vegas. … LUIS SEVERINO will start for the Yankees on Tuesday at Boston, Manager Joe Girardi said. Severino has pitched out of the bullpen since being recalled from Class AAA Scranton/Wilkes-Barre on July 25.Tyler Kepner contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on August 5, 2016, on Page D3 of the New York edition with the headline: Mets Earn Split of Four-Game Series as Bruce Ends Slump With Home Run.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.