By TYLER KEPNEROCT. 28, 2016
CHICAGO — So much has changed since the Chicago Cubs last appeared in the World Series, but their home is the same as it was in 1945: Wrigley Field, at the corner of Clark and Addison, on the North Side of town.“I’m thinking it should look pretty much the same even back then, which I think is a cool thought, minus the light towers,” Cubs Manager Joe Maddon said before facing the Cleveland Indians in Game 3 on Friday night.Maddon added: “When I got out there today, you want to slow it down as much as you can and appreciate the moment and what you’re actually going through. The sin would be to not do that and have it go so quickly that you don’t actually enjoy it.”For most of its lifetime, Wrigley Field did not have lights; plans to install them were scrapped in the 1940s during World War II. Baseball first started playing night games in the World Series in 1971, but this was not a problem for the Cubs, since they rarely contended.AdvertisementIn 1984, though, the Cubs won the first two games of the best-of-five National League Championship Series against San Diego — and the first two games of the World Series that year were scheduled for midweek nights in the N.L. park.AdvertisementMajor League Baseball decided that if the Cubs won, they would forfeit home-field advantage to the American League champion and instead host the middle games — 3 through 5 — on Friday, Saturday and Sunday afternoons.As it happened, of course, the Padres won the last three games of the N.L.C.S., and their home-field advantage did not help much in a five-game World Series loss to Detroit.The Cubs’ failures in 1984 and 2003, when they also fell one win short of the World Series, have helped make this World Series a civic catharsis in Chicago, which is good news for local tavern owners.While some bars, like the venerable Murphy’s Bleachers, are not charging a cover to get in, others, like The Cubby Bear, are charging $100 per person. Some are charging $500 or more (food and drink not included) just to reserve a table to watch on TV.“I was hearing about the prices just to get into these places, and then what you get for it, and the fact that people are flying in just to be at a bar — not even be at the ballpark — that is pretty impressive,” Maddon said.Alas, Maddon’s mother, Beanie — who worked for decades at the Third Base Luncheonette in his hometown, Hazleton, Pa. — was stuck in Philadelphia because of a problem at O’Hare International Airport.“Hopefully she’ll get here tonight or tomorrow,” he said. “But that’s tough for Beanie right now, hanging out in the Philly airport.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.SWITCH FOR SANTANA Carlos Santana has played almost 1,000 games in the major leagues, and in all that time, he has played only four innings in left field. Yet that is where the Indians put Santana for Game 3 on Friday, to get his bat into the lineup as the leadoff man.AdvertisementSantana came up as a catcher but has not played there in two years. The designated hitter is not used in N.L. parks, and Mike Napoli started at first base on Friday.So the Indians improvised to find a spot for Santana.“That puts us in the best position to win,” Manager Terry Francona said. “We didn’t come all this way to try to keep it close. We said early on, before the Boston series, that we might have to get a little creative at times. I would prefer to attempt to do that and then see what happens than play it safe and regret it later.”Francona said he told Santana to do his best and, if something goes wrong, he would take the blame. Santana hit .259 with 34 home runs, 87 R.B.I. and a team-high 99 walks this season, but he was just 5 for 35 with two homers in the postseason before Friday.EXPERIENCE COUNTS John Lackey made his first World Series start on his 24th birthday, for the Angels in 2002. Four days later he won Game 7 on short rest, and now, at 38, he is the active leader in postseason starts, with 22.“Once you’ve done it, you know you can do it,” said Lackey, who will start Game 4 for the Cubs on Saturday. “I guess there’s a lot of guys this time of year that are hoping to do it. But once you’ve actually done it before, it makes it a little bit easier. No matter what happens, nobody can say I can’t win the big one.”Lackey did it again in 2013, when he won Game 6 to clinch the World Series for Boston. He is 8-5 with a 3.26 E.R.A. in the postseason — with just one loss in his last 10 starts — though he has not recorded an out past the fourth inning in either of his starts this October.HEYWARD SITS AGAIN Jason Heyward, who signed an eight-year, $184 million contract with the Cubs before last season, was benched for the third game in a row on Friday against the Cleveland right-hander Josh Tomlin.AdvertisementWhile Heyward hits left-handed, Tomlin is actually tougher on left-handers (.229 opponents’ average this season) than he is on righties (.299). Jorge Soler started in right field.“Tonight’s lineup is based on their pitcher primarily,” Joe Maddon said, adding later, “It does not mean that Jason’s not going to start at any point.”Heyward, whom Maddon still likes for defense late in games, had a miserable season at the plate (.230 with seven home runs) and has been even worse in the postseason, with two hits in 30 at-bats. HONOR FOR A MET The Mets’ Curtis Granderson won the Roberto Clemente Award for community service. Granderson’s Grand Kids program, founded in 2007, uses education, fitness and nutrition to promote youth development.He has also donated $5 million to his alma mater, the University of Illinois-Chicago, to develop a youth academy.A version of this article appears in print on October 29, 2016, on Page D7 of the New York edition with the headline: Cubs’ Fortunes Have Changed, but Wrigley’s Venerable Charm Remains.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.