By MIKE VORKUNOVOCT. 28, 2016
The Knicks were disjointed and scattered on opening night in Cleveland, like a high-profile jam band not yet in tune. The 29-point loss to the Cavaliers on Tuesday provided evidence of their disconnection, in the form of myriad missed shots and impotent defense. It also left them hankering to play again — with nearly four days to digest their disappointment.The Knicks take the floor again Saturday night, this time at Madison Square Garden, against the Memphis Grizzlies. But what was clear earlier this week was only reinforced over the last few days: Although the Knicks’ season has begun, they remain a work in progress. They are a team trying to find rhythm, incorporate a new star and finally harness the potential of the triangle offense, which has influenced their playbook for a third consecutive year.Intriguingly, Jeff Hornacek, the Knicks’ first-year coach, portrayed these early struggles as a positive.“I think the lesson is when you put a new team, who they think, maybe, because we’re veterans we’re just going to get it together really quickly,” he said, “you obviously learn a little lesson that, hey, it may take a little while.”AdvertisementThe crux of the problem seems familiar: the triangle offense. Following Tuesday’s loss, Derrick Rose said he was still not comfortable in the scheme, preferring a steady diet of pick-and-rolls, a staple of his time in Chicago. His statistical line — 17 points, but just 1 assist and 4 turnovers — seemed to convey his unease. Disconcertingly, his performance was not an outlier: The Knicks shot just 36.8 percent from the field and had more turnovers (18) than assists (17).AdvertisementRose missed nearly two weeks of training camp this month because of a civil trial in Los Angeles in which he, along with two co-defendants, was found not liable after a woman accused the men of rape. The time away affected Rose’s preparation and the team’s, leaving him trying to catch up, and Hornacek still teaching. That Rose would prefer his new team to run more of the plays he ran with his old one is not surprising, but it is also indicative of the challenge the Knicks have faced since Phil Jackson took over as team president, bringing the triangle with him.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.While Hornacek disputed Rose’s assumption that a lack of pick-and-rolls was the problem on Tuesday, he acknowledged that expecting Rose to assimilate so early in the season was unreasonable after he had missed so much of training camp.Hornacek noted the danger of expecting a team of newly gathered high-profile players to jell immediately. As an example — though an imperfect one — he pointed to the 2010 Miami Heat, who began their season 9-8 after pulling together LeBron James, Dwyane Wade and Chris Bosh.“And those guys were in their prime of playing and they had led their teams, just like our guys,” Hornacek said. “It’s going to take a little while. We don’t want to use that as an excuse.”These Knicks do not have the high-end talent of that Heat team, but perhaps they will eventually develop into a cohesive whole — although Carmelo Anthony has said that adjusting to the triangle was an “ultimate kind of sacrifice” and that it will take time for Rose to grow comfortable.“In the meantime, we want him to play the way he can play,” Anthony said. “If he wants the ball, the ball is in his hands. If he wants to spread it out and pick and roll, we want him to feel comfortable with the ball in his hands and we’ll play off of that.”The Knicks and Rose will have to adjust to one another during a challenging opening stretch in which they play six consecutive games against playoff contenders, though they consider themselves contenders as well.Willis Reed, a member of the franchise’s two championship teams and a friend of Jackson’s, also thought so after watching the opener and sitting in on Friday’s practice. Reed considered the many times during his playing days that he and the Knicks had to adjust to a new coach, and he remembered that when the Hall of Fame coach Red Holzman took over, he spent most of their practice time focused on defense, giving the team nearly free rein offensively.Advertisement“I don’t care what you run,” Reed said, quoting Holzman. “As long as it works.”A version of this article appears in print on October 29, 2016, on Page D2 of the New York edition with the headline: Knicks Need Time to Regroup (or Just to Group).  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.