
On Soccer By                     
RORY SMITH

OCT. 28, 2016
DORTMUND, Germany — The choice in front of Ousmane Dembélé, a teenage French forward of almost limitless promise, was flattering and bewildering in equal measure. He had just turned 19, and he had only one season of senior-level soccer — with Rennes, a modest team in France’s top division — under his belt. Yet by last summer, he had become one of the most coveted players on the planet.Most of Europe’s elite clubs had been in touch, each trying to persuade Dembélé to place his future in their hands. Liverpool made the first move, asking Rennes for a price on the final day of January’s transfer window. Soon, Manchester City, Bayer Leverkusen, Arsenal and Chelsea had also made their interest known.As the frenzy intensified, eager suitors pulled out all the stops. Dembélé spoke with Jürgen Klopp, Liverpool’s charismatic manager. Patrick Vieira, the French icon now coaching in New York, was enjoined as an emissary by Manchester City.Dembélé, a bright, clearheaded character, knew his priority was to go somewhere he could expect to play. He discounted City, for one, as too drastic a step. He sifted through the other contenders with a diligence rare among his peers. He trawled the internet for information. Friends said Dembélé, a longtime video game devotee, also consulted Football Manager, a soccer simulator.All of his research told him there was only one place for a teenage prodigy to go. The player everybody wanted rejected the riches of the Premier League to join Borussia Dortmund.AdvertisementHe was not the only one. In addition to Dembélé, a host of bright young things — the Turkish wing Emre Mor, 19; the Spanish midfielder Mikel Merino, 20; the versatile Portuguese Raphaël Guerreiro, 22 — would arrive at Dortmund’s Signal Iduna Park, along with a contingent of more experienced faces like the German internationals André Schürrle and Mario Götze.AdvertisementOne by one, each arrival eased the sting of what could have been a dispiriting summer for Dortmund, Germany’s second superpower. Bayern Munich, as it seems to do every year, had plucked one of Dortmund’s crown jewels, the captain Mats Hummels, and the core midfielders Henrikh Mkhitaryan and Ilkay Gundogan soon followed him out the door, bound for the Premier League.“We gave long consideration on how to replace the players we lost,” Michael Zorc, Dortmund’s technical director, said. “We decided to go with a two-column model: very young, highly skilled players, but also established, internationally experienced ones.”The result is, arguably, the most gifted collection of young players anywhere in Europe, crafted into a team of rich spirit and endless adventure by Thomas Tuchel, Dortmund’s astute, imaginative manager. There have been bumps in the road, of course: Tuchel’s team arrives at Saturday’s Revierderby against Schalke — it is Germany’s fiercest local rivalry — seventh in the Bundesliga and prone to inconsistency. The team is capable of going goal for goal with Real Madrid in the Champions League but also of losing to newly promoted RB Leipzig in the Bundesliga.Dortmund knew not to expect immediate perfection. Its chief executive, Hans-Joachim Watzke, had accepted there would be “one setback or another” along the way, but, like others at the club, he deemed the occasional low a price worth paying for a high that promises to be exhilarating.The new arrivals, after all, are not Dortmund’s only tantalizing prospects. Julian Weigl, a 20-year-old midfielder who came from Germany’s second division, has made the national team. Erik Durm and Matthias Ginter were both on the Germany squad that won the 2014 World Cup, and Barcelona and Liverpool are among the teams reportedly keeping a close eye on the American teenager Christian Pulisic.Seeing so many players Dembélé’s age thrive at Dortmund not only convinced him that the Ruhr valley was the best place to nurture his career, but it also has turned the club into soccer’s premier destination for young talent. It is a reputation that fires considerable pride, but Zorc acknowledged it was as much an economic necessity as a philosophical preference.“It is not our primary goal to have the youngest squad among Europe’s top teams,” he said. “We are not on the same level in terms of money as, say, the eight best teams in the world. We cannot solely buy ready-made stars. We also have to develop talent, and we have proven in the past that we can offer even very young players the chance to play at the highest level.”AdvertisementAs the chase for Dembélé illustrated, though, competition for soccer’s brightest prospects is intense. In that context, what sets Dortmund apart is not only identifying them so reliably but enticing them so consistently.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In part, that is because of the efficacy of the scouting network run by Sven Mislintat, 43, whose playing career never extended beyond Germany’s lower leagues but who can count Robert Lewandowski, Shinji Kagawa and Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang among his greatest discoveries.Mislintat and his staff often track players for more than one year, according to Zorc, to establish “whether they could be Dortmund players.”The club does not just evaluate natural ability, its executives said, but also seeks references about a player’s willingness to learn. Scouts take particular interest in what makes each player unique — they talk in terms of individual “weapons” — but just as crucial is whether a prospective signing might be able to identify with Dortmund’s ethos.“We feel obliged to the tradition of the club and the city to play an attacking, attractive football based on diligence and hard work,” Zorc said. Anyone who does not fit that mold, he added, is disregarded.Once a possible signing is identified, the speed with which the club operates lends another edge. Zorc said he believes that “the most important factor” in helping Dortmund capture in-demand players is that “we express our interest at an early stage.” Intermediaries acting on the club’s behalf were in touch with Dembélé for 12 months before he joined.Tuchel’s personal touch helps, too. Though he and Mislintat do not enjoy the easiest relationship — the two disagreed about whether to sign Óliver Torres, a Spanish playmaker, last summer, and with their offices at separate sites, they rarely speak — Tuchel is always consulted on signings, and often involved.Last year, he called Weigl, then with 1860 Munich, to explain how he had mapped out his development. Mor was persuaded to reject an offer from Liverpool over the summer after Tuchel’s intervention. “Tuchel told me directly he has big plans for me,” he said. “He convinced me where nobody else could.”AdvertisementThe other factor, a less welcome one, is the club’s reputation. For a budding star like Dembélé, Dortmund can act as the perfect bridge between obscurity at a place like Rennes and greatness at a giant club like Barcelona. Many other players — most recently Hummels (who left for Bayern Munich), Mkhitaryan (now at Manchester United) and Gundogan (Manchester City) — saw it the same way.But that is not how Dortmund regards itself.“We do not see ourselves as a selling club,” Zorc said bluntly. “Our aim is the greatest possible success.” He pointed to Aubameyang, a productive French-born forward, as the perfect example. “Every year he is sold by the media to Real Madrid,” he said. “But he still scores goals for Borussia Dortmund.”Zorc and his cohort do not devote themselves to polishing players for others to enjoy. They do not want those who fit the bill to see Dortmund as the place they wait. They want it to be the place they belong.A version of this article appears in print on October 29, 2016, on Page D3 of the New York edition with the headline: Young Players See Their Future in German Club.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »