AdvertisementSupported byBy Jeff ArnoldIn the jack-of-all-trades football universe of Jabrill Peppers, the strategic options appear unlimited.Peppers, Michigan’s dynamic redshirt sophomore, is listed as a linebacker and a defensive back on the Wolverines’ roster. But in helping lead Michigan to its first 7-0 start since 2006, Peppers has covered much more ground: 485 snaps in fact, at 12 positions, according to statistics compiled by Michigan’s athletic department.Peppers’s seemingly ceiling-free ability prompted Michigan Coach Jim Harbaugh to compare him recently not to just any other football player but to the multisport Olympian Jim Thorpe. Without openly campaigning for Peppers, Harbaugh has thrust him into prime position for the Heisman Trophy. The Heisman, college football’s top individual honor, was last won by a Michigan man in 1997, when Charles Woodson, another two-way star, was the top vote-getter in the same season the Wolverines finished as co-national champions with Nebraska.Nineteen years later, Michigan is ranked No. 2 entering Saturday’s game at Michigan State (2-5) and on course for its first berth in the College Football Playoff. The Wolverines’ re-emergence this season has been led largely by a nationally top-ranked defense that is headlined by Peppers, a multipositional do-it-all.“If there is a better player in the country, I don’t know who it is,” Harbaugh said, adding: “There’s nothing he can’t do. It’s the darnedest thing I’ve ever seen.”For his part, Peppers seems to ignore the hype machine that has enveloped him since he was an all-American at Paramus Catholic High School in New Jersey. He is stiff-arming any Heisman talk as well as any speculation about his future in the N.F.L. should he choose to leave Michigan early.The 6-foot-1, 205-pound Peppers also is coy about how much more his role could expand within Harbaugh’s playbook. Peppers says there is still more he can do, even though he ranks second among Michigan’s tacklers, rushed for two touchdowns in a 78-0 win over Rutgers and returned a punt for a score in a win against Colorado. He maintains that his focus remains on this season, rather than on where his talents might take him as a pro. (In addition to the Heisman talk, Peppers this week was named a finalist for the Thorpe Award, which honors the nation’s top defensive back.)“I’m just going to keep doing what I’ve been asked to do, and that’s just play the best ball I can play,” Peppers told reporters last week. “Hopefully, they’ll notice me when the time comes, but one thing is for sure: I’m going to keep getting better.”In 22 career games and 17 starts at Michigan, Peppers has made a strong impression. But while his wide-ranging skills have paid dividends for Harbaugh the past two seasons, it is still uncertain how Peppers’s diverse repertory might translate to sustained success as a pro player.One veteran agent, Leigh Steinberg, characterized Peppers as a unique talent who offers general managers an “amazing windfall as opposed to a problem with position placement.” Peppers probably projects as an N.F.L. safety or cornerback, but his ability to fill other roles should, Steinberg said, propel him up draft boards.“Those players don’t come along often,” Steinberg said in a telephone interview, calling them “gems” and “franchise-makers.”“They’re kind of generational players,” he said, “and, at least at this point, he appears to be a vital difference-maker.”Not surprisingly, Woodson, who spent 18 years in the N.F.L., is among those who see an upside in Peppers’s versatility. Peppers mirrored his game after that of Woodson, who played multiple roles throughout his Michigan career, but Woodson said that he believes it is Peppers who will become the model for players hoping to break free of the limits of a single position.“It may not matter that he has one particular position that he’s great at, but the more he can do, the more chances at finding his way on any team,” Woodson said. “Whether it’s playing at corner, playing at nickel, playing at safety, playing on offense — he’ll have a chance to do all of those things with some team.”Peppers offers strong run-stopping abilities at linebacker, but his size may lead some teams to classify him as a defensive back. And as Harbaugh continues to distribute Peppers around the field to take advantage of his speed and athleticism, the constant movement could leave potential suitors with unanswered questions.“Before you pull the trigger, you have to get a good idea of what you’re buying or what you think you’re buying,” said Greg Gabriel, who has more than 30 years of N.F.L. scouting experience, including nine as the Chicago Bears’ director of college scouting.“He’s a unique guy, in that he’s got some special traits,” Gabriel said. “He’s a great college player; you hope it’s going to translate over to the next level, but what’s he going to be? There’s going to be some guessing.”Exactly how many roles Peppers will be fit into as the Wolverines try to get back to the top of the college game has not yet been fully defined. But Peppers, who in addition to his work as a ball carrier and tackler has taken 13 snaps at quarterback, will not rule out any role. Harbaugh will not either, relying on both his gut and an assistant who knows Peppers better than Harbaugh does.“When you have a young man who can take on more and more, you just continue to push, because that’s who he is, that’s what he thrives off of,” said the Michigan linebackers and special teams coach Chris Partridge, who coached Peppers at Paramus Catholic. “If you limit him, you’re limiting him as a person.”Advertisement