AdvertisementSupported bySports of The TimesBy Juliet MacurWASHINGTON — It was hard to tell whether Alex Ovechkin, the Washington Capitals star, was sad, angry or exhausted, or all three, on Wednesday night as he processed yet another failed playoff run.But as he stood in the locker room after a Game 7 loss to the Pittsburgh Penguins, water dripping down his face and his 31-year-old body wrapped in two giant red towels, one thing was certain: Ovechkin was numb. Just as Capitals fans were numb. Which is what happens after one too many years of profound disappointment in the postseason.The issue is no longer whether the Capitals will ever win the Stanley Cup with Ovechkin and the immensely talented core around him. It’s whether this group can ever can get past the playoffs’ second round.“We’re trying,” Ovechkin said on Wednesday, his voice nearly a whisper.In nine playoff appearances in Ovechkin’s 12 years in Washington, the team with so much potential year after year has failed to do anything with it. This season, the Capitals seemed to have their best chance to win it all, too. They had posted the N.H.L.’s top record for the second year in a row, and beating the Penguins would have made them favorites to win the Stanley Cup. But here, in this perpetually sad sports city, it’s always would’ve or could’ve.How does a team so good always fare so badly in the postseason? It’s like acing quizzes year after year, then consistently failing the final. Something doesn’t make sense. The hockey fans here deserve an explanation. Ovechkin didn’t have a good one. No one did.“You wonder how much disappointment you have to put yourself through before you can find a way to get the job done,” forward T.J. Oshie said.Washington’s fans are wondering, too. How could the Capitals lose to the Penguins for the second straight year in the playoffs when Pittsburgh’s captain, Sidney Crosby, was out for part of the series with a concussion? How could they get to Game 7, with everything on the line, and fail to score?When their 2-0 loss became official, some of their fans murmured a low chorus of displeasure, while others applauded briefly, perhaps out of ingrained loyalty. Many simply turned their backs and headed home. They’ve seen all this before.“Oh, yeah, they’ll win the Stanley Cup someday,” Renee Caldarelli, a season-ticket holder from Manassas, Va., said last week. “When I’m dead and buried.”This feeling of doom, that the home team will always do something to mess up a good season, is not unique to Washington, of course. Boston overcame it. Chicago did, too. But it seems to be spreading in this city, with baseball’s Washington Nationals seemingly borrowing from the Capitals’ story line, turning excellent regular seasons into playoff fiascoes.In 2012, the Nationals had the best record in Major League Baseball — sound familiar? — and were one out from beating the St. Louis Cardinals in their division series. But they lost the lead, the game and the series.In 2014, they lost in the first round again, this time to the San Francisco Giants, a setback that included an 18-inning heartbreaker that the Giants won in Washington.Last season, the Nationals went down in the first round once more, losing an intense five-game series to the Los Angeles Dodgers.Like the Capitals, the Nationals’ problem is not so much that they can’t win a championship; it’s that they can’t even get in a position to play for one.Like Ovechkin, Max Scherzer, the Nationals’ star pitcher, struggled to come up with a reason.“I really don’t think there’s anything psychological about it, nothing deep in our minds that’s keeping us from winning,” Scherzer said this month. “Sometimes, that’s just the way certain things happen.”Scherzer, who won a Cy Young Award last season but neither of his postseason starts, cited Jordan Spieth’s meltdown at the 2016 Masters as an example of a phenomenal athlete who just has a bad day.“It happens,” he said. “That’s sports.”In Washington, it feels like more than that. The window for the Capitals and the Nationals to win a championship will not last forever. In fact, it may not stay open that much longer.For the Nationals, the slugger Bryce Harper’s contract runs through 2018, at which point he becomes an immensely expensive free agent. For the Capitals, the current team is the most talented one the franchise has had in years, but Ovechkin is graying and past his prime, and the core of the team — the standout players like Oshie and Nicklas Backstrom and the young stars like Evgeny Kuznetsov and Andre Burakovsky — isn’t likely to return intact.Eleven players will be either restricted or unrestricted free agents. Not all of them will be back.Time also was up on Wednesday for Michael McNealy, who has worked security behind the Capitals’ bench and been assigned to Capitals games for 36 years, all the way back to when the team played in a Maryland suburb.Now 61, his plan was to retire after this season, and he was sure the Capitals would send him off with a Stanley Cup victory as a parting gift.“I’ve never seen a team like this, never one this talented,” he told me last week.Yet Wednesday was his last day. After the game, McNealy cleared the sticks and the handwarmers and the towels from the Capitals’ bench. He stood by as the team’s jerseys whirled near him in a dryer for one final time, and watched as player after player left the locker room, all dressed up in a suit, head down, to depart for another long, painful summer.“I thought this would’ve been the year,” McNealy said before grabbing the hockey stick he was given as a present and following the same route out the same door. “This team was so great.”As always here, though, great is fine. But it was not good enough.Email: juliet@nytimes.comAdvertisement