By BRAD SPURGEONOCT. 29, 2016
The Williams Grand Prix team may not have scored a Formula One title since 1997, but it is still the series’ third most successful outfit and remains one of the famous names at the pinnacle of auto racing.Now, as it prepares to compete in the Mexican Grand Prix — which the team won three times from 1987 to 1992 — there is some optimism in the racing world that the team might be on the verge of being a winner once again.The Williams team has undergone substantial rebuilding and is now under the leadership of the openly ambitious Claire Williams, 40, who took over much of the job from her 74-year-old father, Frank Williams, the team founder, a little more than three years ago.Team Williams has managed to jump from ninth in the series three years ago to third in the last two seasons. With just three races to go, it is battling for fourth position in this year’s Formula One series. But the climb to the top is steep, and even the head of its technical department, Pat Symonds, is making no promises, saying that this season has not turned out as planned.AdvertisementOnly Ferrari and McLaren, the two most successful teams in Formula One history, have managed to change owners, directors and racing eras and win again.Advertisement“Running a Formula One team you always have to evolve,” Claire Williams said earlier this season while discussing the team’s rise. “You have to look at your performance, and if you need to make changes, whatever those changes may be, then you have to do that.’’That would be a good summation of the team’s philosophy from the beginning.Founded in 1977, team Williams made its racing debut with its own chassis in 1978. The team was Williams’ third effort to start a Formula One team. His previous teams, starting in 1969 and in 1975, had failed financially and on the track. But with the new entity, which included the designer Patrick Head as part-owner, Williams found a recipe for success. Head’s engineering mind was one of the main assets that would write several of the series’ most innovative chapters.The team’s first victory came, fittingly for this quintessentially British team, at the British Grand Prix of 1979 with the driver Clay Regazzoni. The team was a regular winner in the 1980s, taking its first titles in 1980 and 1981.Then, near tragedy struck in 1986 and the venture looked as if it would end. Williams, driving his rental car too quickly from the Paul Ricard circuit in the south of France to the airport in Nice after a preseason test session, crashed and nearly died. Partially paralyzed, he never regained full use of his hands and legs and has used a wheelchair ever since. He was 43.But typical of his personal drive, Williams said that while he was in the hospital after the accident he told his wife, Virginia, they had had a wonderful 43 years of one kind of life and would have another wonderful 43 years in another way. (Virginia Williams died in March 2013 at age 66, of cancer.)Not only did the team continue racing, but with Williams back at work after the accident, the team won the constructors’ championship in 1986 and 1987. In total, the Williams team has won seven drivers’ championships and nine constructors’ championships. McLaren has won 12 constructors’ titles and eight drivers’ titles; Ferrari has won 16 constructors’ titles and 15 drivers’ titles.After a period in which McLaren dominated at the end of the 1980s, Williams entered a partnership with Renault as its engine manufacturer in 1989. The resulting engine and chassis combination made Williams the dominant team of the 1990s. Nigel Mansell won the title in 1992; followed by Alain Prost, who won his fourth drivers’ title in 1993, Damon Hill in 1996 and Jacques Villeneuve in 1997.AdvertisementThe Williams car of the early 1990s, with its active suspension, semiautomatic gearbox, fly-by-wire controls and traction control was so advanced that it led the series into banning most of the concepts for fear that the cars would end up being able to drive themselves with no need for a driver.But a gradual slide began in 1998. Although the team and its drivers finished second or third in the series in 1998 and from 2000 to 2003, it was the combination of Ferrari and Michael Schumacher that swept the titles from 2000 to 2004.Since Juan Pablo Montoya’s victory at the Brazilian Grand Prix in 2004, the team has won just one race, when the accident-prone Pastor Maldonado drove a perfect race to win the Spanish Grand Prix in 2012.The team reached its lowest point in 2011 and 2013, when it finished ninth in the championship.The first step in rebuilding the team came with the hiring of Symonds in the summer of 2013 to run the technical department, after years of tension between Head and his assistants. Head no longer works on the racing team. Symonds had worked for many years at the Renault team and its predecessor, Benetton, winning several titles.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The team also made a brilliantly timed switch from a Renault engine — to which it had returned for two seasons after years with other engines — to Mercedes engines for 2014.The change marked the start of the new era of the hybrid engine, meaning Williams had chosen what would be the best engine for the following three seasons.The results came immediately: From finishing ninth in 2013, Williams bounced to third in 2014 and 2015. It looked as if it would be a serious contender for the top spot after that first season with Mercedes, but it has had a tougher time this year, and is in fifth place, in a close battle with the Force India team.Symonds said that this year, it was not just the other teams that had got stronger, but that Williams had stalled.“I think we have been remarkably stagnant this year, and I think other teams, particularly Force India, have moved on,” Symonds said. “We have introduced upgrades, we have improved the car. I think our development, which was strong in ’14 and late ’15 as well, has let us down this year.“Some of the things that we concentrated on in the first part of the year that were going to be our developments right through the year didn’t work as well as we expected,” Symonds added.When asked if the full focus of the team was now on beating Force India, Rob Smedley, the head of performance engineering, responded no.Advertisement“That’s a huge mistake,” said Smedley, who joined Williams from the Ferrari team in 2014. “You’ve got to go out and get the absolute best result possible and not focus on any competitor, but focus on all the competitors.“I’ve been in situations where we’ve been fighting other teams for world championships, and you make a huge mistake when you start to concentrate on one single competitor,” Smedley said.After several years as a driver with Williams, Felipe Massa of Brazil announced his retirement from racing next year. But the driver Valtteri Bottas, who has recently been in negotiations with another team, is expected to stay with Williams.“I think we’ve had some great moments with Williams together, and I think we have more we can achieve together,” Bottas said. “We definitely want more and we want to win races together.”Williams is better off financially now than it has been for many years. Partly because of the significant increase in prize money in the last two seasons, it has been able to hire some additions to its technical staff.Moreover, the team looks forward to competing next year with new technical regulations that will put more emphasis on the cars’ aerodynamics.“For 2017, the creative element is totally different, and the rate of improvement we get in the wind tunnel is just staggering,” Symonds said. “You then come to, ‘is that enough?’ Who knows? This sport is a relative sport, so it’s hard to say.”A version of this article appears in print on October 29, 2016, on Page A14 of the New York edition with the headline: Team Williams, racing royalty, is trying to rebound.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »