By BRAD SPURGEONOCT. 29, 2016
There is no purer moment in auto racing than the instant when a car pulls out from inches behind a competitor and powers past, gaining a position.But this season, the way a driver is permitted to defend against the challenger has become one of the most controversial topics in Formula One, and the moves of one driver in particular are raising concern.Article 27.7 of the sporting regulations of the International Automobile Federation, or F.I.A., the series’ governing body, states: “Any driver defending his position on a straight, and before any braking area, may use the full width of the track during his first move, provided no significant portion of the car attempting to pass is alongside his.”The issue came to a head recently at the Japanese Grand Prix when Max Verstappen of the Red Bull team defended his second place against Lewis Hamilton of the Mercedes team by forcing the world champion off the track.AdvertisementOn the penultimate lap, Hamilton made his move to pass Verstappen, and the Dutchman quickly swerved to block him. Hamilton yelled into his team radio, “Max moved under braking!” — claiming Verstappen waited until they were in the braking zone before he moved, which most drivers agree the rule does not permit.AdvertisementSome of the drivers think Verstappen, the youngest driver in the series, does not have enough experience to be racing with them. He started in the series last year at the age of 17, with barely any car racing background.He is the youngest driver ever to win a race in Formula One, at the Spanish Grand Prix in May, and he turned 19 just a week before the race in Japan.“I think that Max drives a little bit at certain moments like you do in karting, where you change your racing line very quickly,” said Romain Grosjean, a driver on the Haas team.“You can close the door, fair enough,” Grosjean added. “But you move over carefully, and from the beginning you make it known to the other driver when he is far away, that you are there. You don’t move over at the last minute when the other guy has already put his front wing in the place. Maybe that’s done in karting, but at 350 kilometers an hour, it’s not the same speed.”The controversy has gone on all season and has seemed especially heated between Verstappen and Ferrari’s Kimi Räikkönen, the oldest driver in the series. The two clashed in the races in Spain and Austria, and by the summer’s Hungarian Grand Prix and Belgian Grand Prix Räikkönen complained that it was dangerous and unfair racing.“His only interest is pushing me off the circuit completely,” Räikkönen said during the race in Belgium.Verstappen has a penchant for waiting until the very last second, often in the braking zone of the corner, to see which side of his car the challenger plans to attack, and then abruptly moving over to that side to block it.AdvertisementHamilton accused him of using the same move in Suzuka, forcing the world champion to use an escape road through the corner to avoid a crash.In response to drivers’ complaints, the F.I.A. announced at the United States Grand Prix last weekend that it would be stricter on “any change of direction under braking which results in another driver having to take evasive action” and report such moves to the race stewards to judge whether the moves should be penalized.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But while victims of Verstappen’s moves complain, others say that he has mastered the art of defending his position like no other driver.“Nobody likes to be overtaken, so of course you try to defend and fight that guy off that’s trying to overtake you,” said Nico Hülkenberg, a driver on the Force India team. “How do you do that fairly? Ask Max, he’s very good at that.”Hülkenberg said a driver’s style of defending is very personal.“I think it’s a very individual thing, really, that comes down to your personality, your character, that really mirrors that on the track,” Hülkenberg said. “It’s just probably the way you grew up in racing, what you have been taught by your previous mentors, what your racing history is, etc. So it’s not that simple.”But even Charlie Whiting, the race director of the F.I.A., said after the race in Belgium that Verstappen risked getting a bad reputation with his fellow drivers.That does not seem to concern the young Dutchman.“It’s not because other drivers tell me how to change my driving style that I will change my driving style,” Verstappen said.And yet the most telling moment of Verstappen’s understanding of aggressive defending moves came after the Malaysian Grand Prix, when his teammate Daniel Ricciardo won the race, with Verstappen finishing a close second.The team director, Christian Horner, had instructed the drivers to think of the team. He allowed them to race each other, but he did not want an injudicious move to cost them either first or second position.Verstappen seemed to be softer on Ricciardo than he had been on other adversaries.“I was like, ‘Well, if it was someone else next to me, I would have got the move done,’” Verstappen said after the race, referring to a moment when they were driving side by side into one of the corners. “I would have pushed them wide. But it’s your teammate, you can’t.”AdvertisementThere are those, of course, who say you cannot push any driver wide. But therein lies the crux of the debate, the art of the pass.A version of this article appears in print on October 29, 2016, on Page A13 of the New York edition with the headline: A young driver’s aggressive defensive tactics divide rivals.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »