
On Baseball By                     
 TYLER KEPNER
 
OCT. 29, 2016
CHICAGO — As he watched Game 3 of the World Series on Friday from his home in Las Vegas, Rollie Fingers thought back to some of the moments that defined his Hall of Fame career. At a raucous Wrigley Field, the Cleveland Indians were calling for their best reliever, Andrew Miller, with a runner on second in a scoreless game against the Cubs — in the fifth inning. Fingers could relate.“Anything can happen in a short series,” said Fingers, who earned 341 saves in his career. “In a situation where it could be the turning point in the game, with as many arms as they have in the bullpen now — they don’t have any junkballers — bring in your best guy in the fifth or sixth to get out of a jam. If you have to pinch-hit for him, do it, because you’ve still got guys down there that are pretty good.”That is exactly the formula the Indians used in their heart-pounding 1-0 victory, which gave them a two-games-to-one lead in the World Series. It was a clinic in sensible, seize-the-moment managing by Terry Francona, who has won 10 of his 11 World Series games with Boston and Cleveland.Francona removed starter Josh Tomlin from a shutout in the fifth inning. Tomlin had thrown just 58 pitches. But with a runner on second and two outs, Francona considered a basic question: Who had a better chance to get a critical out, Tomlin or Miller, the left-hander with the wipeout slider?AdvertisementThe Cubs had announced the left-handed Miguel Montero as a pinch-hitter, and their right-handed options to counter Miller — Albert Almora and David Ross — were limited. Francona chose Miller, who got a fly out to end the threat.AdvertisementMiller struck out the side in the sixth, running his scoreless streak this postseason to 15⅓ innings, and then left for the pinch-hitter Coco Crisp, who singled home the winning run in the seventh.“I just thought that he did what he was supposed to do,” Francona said of Miller, “and if he wouldn’t have hit, maybe we would have sent him back out. But I think he threw 19 pitches. I was O.K. with where we were there. That was plenty for tonight.”Miller, who actually threw just 17 pitches, gave way to Bryan Shaw for five outs. Cody Allen — 10 scoreless innings this postseason — collected the last four outs, striking out Javier Baez for the final one on a high fastball with the tying and winning runs in scoring position.
                Andrew Miller, the versatile and dominant reliever for the Indians, throws a slider that gives hitters fits. Here’s what makes it so tough to hit.            It took 17 players in all, keeping Francona busy all game. But the moves worked, and the Indians survived.“There’s no better manager in baseball than him,” the pitching coach Mickey Callaway said. “He’s unbelievable. He thinks of everything at every moment.”Francona’s strategy had precedent, but you have to go back Fingers’s prime to find it. Mariano Rivera was never called into a World Series game before the seventh inning (even when he was a setup man, in 1996). Neither was Bruce Sutter, Goose Gossage or Dennis Eckersley. Or Kent Tekulve, Dan Quisenberry or Sparky Lyle.Fingers was. Twice for Oakland, in 1972 and 1974, he was called in to pitch in the fifth inning. Both times, there was a run in, at least one runner on, and the cleanup hitter — and soon-to-be National League Most Valuable Player — coming up.AdvertisementThe first time, Fingers struck out the Reds’ Johnny Bench. The second time, he struck out the Dodgers’ Steve Garvey. In three World Series for the A’s, Fingers worked in 16 games and averaged more than two innings per outing. Each time, he earned a championship ring.“The first game in ’74, the phone was ringing in the fourth inning,” Fingers said. “I had to turn to the scoreboard to make sure what inning we were in. I’d gotten up before and started throwing, but I don’t remember ever going into a game in the fifth. But we needed to win the ballgame, and they figured that might have been the turning point, so why not bring in your closer? He knew I could throw three or four innings, because I’d done it before.”When Fingers finally tired in the ninth, Manager Alvin Dark called for another Hall of Famer – a starter, Catfish Hunter – to collect the final out for the save. The A’s lost Game 2, but Fingers closed out the next three to win Most Valuable Player for the series.Miller earned that trophy in the American League Championship Series, and his willingness to pitch at any point gives Francona the freedom to manage to the moment. The Indians knew about Miller’s selflessness when they traded for him; it was part of his appeal, part of the reason they were willing to ship the Yankees two premium prospects — the lifeblood of a small-market organization — to get him in July.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“The fact that I came in in the fifth is not a big deal,” Miller said. “We have a lot of trust in whoever’s out there. Tito puts guys in good situations. We trust the plan and it’s gonna work out.”Francona — known by many as Tito — also called for Miller in the fifth inning of the Indians’ first playoff game against Boston. His explanation that night said it all.“He’s really good,” Francona said.For years, statistically minded analysts have promoted the idea of using your best reliever at a critical point in the game, not necessarily just in the ninth inning. The theory is that the team might never have a lead to protect unless it survives a jam that could happen well before the ninth.A few factors have kept this from happening. One is money: Pitchers who collect saves earn more on the open market. Two winters ago, when he had one career save, Miller commanded a four-year, $36 million contract from the Yankees in free agency. The closer that the Yankees let go that same winter, David Robertson, got four years and $46 million. He was coming off a season of 39 saves.AdvertisementAnother reason is that many, if not all relievers prefer to know in advance when they might pitch. It helps them prepare, physically and mentally, for a job often packed with pressure. There is also the practical matter of asking a pitcher to warm up early in a game. If the threat passes, the pitcher may not pitch — but he has already gotten warm. Do that too often across a long season, without frequent off-days to recover, and the pitcher will wear down.The ground rules should be different in October. Now they are.“You have a little extra flexibility because you have built-in off-days, everything’s on the line, you’re not worried about tomorrow as much as you are today,” Miller said. “You’re not worried about next week. A lot of times in the regular season, you’re trying to sort it out because there’s a much bigger picture. Here it is. We have five games left entering today. You do whatever takes and you try to win today.”Fingers, 70, remembers the feeling. Adrenaline carried him through in the World Series, where he was such a weapon that the former commissioner Bud Selig, who previously owned the Milwaukee Brewers, still tells Fingers in dismay that his injury cost the Brewers the title in 1982.In the Oakland years, Fingers felt no pain.“Physically, I was fine,” he said. “If you can’t get up for a World Series game, there’s something wrong with you. You’re floating above the ground all the time.”Thanks to Francona’s tactics, and flawless execution by his relievers, the Indians are floating above the Cubs in the World Series.A version of this article appears in print on October 29, 2016, on Page D7 of the New York edition with the headline: Cleveland’s Inventive Strategy: Summon Top Reliever in the Fifth.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »