By BRAD SPURGEONOCT. 29, 2016
“Most people would rather forget Mexico 1970” were the last words of the contemporary race report in Motor Sport magazine, summing up the feeling after that running of the Mexican Grand Prix.Those were strong words, but as the article noted, “If there is to be another Mexican Grand Prix, the blind enthusiasm of the spectators will have to be curbed in one way or another, whether by high fences or the butt of the rifle.”The 200,000 spectators were so fired up that before the race started some of them broke through the fences and jumped over the guardrails to sit on the grass beside the track.It was the last race of the season, which would normally garner extra interest for that year’s driver’s title race. But no driver that day was in the running for the title — Jochen Rindt had been too far ahead in the points for any driver to catch him when he had died the previous month in the Italian Grand Prix at Monza. He became the first and only posthumous world champion in Formula One.AdvertisementSo the main draw for the crowd was Pedro Rodríguez, a local favorite and one of two brothers who were idolized in Mexico. (The other brother, Ricardo, had died in 1962 in a crash on that same track, which was then named for him.)AdvertisementSome fans became so dangerous that, for a while, the organizers wanted to cancel the race. But they feared that if they did a riot might follow, and the spectators might burn the pits and destroy the cars. Some were already throwing glass bottles onto the track to protest the delay.So the organizers asked Rodríguez and Jackie Stewart, the reigning world champion, to go around the track, speak to the fans and beg them to move behind the guardrails to ensure their own safety and allow the race to begin.While this temporarily calmed some members of the crowd, who did move, many later returned to sit on the grass. There was a further delay as the organizers had to sweep broken glass off the track.Before the race, the organizers had told Formula One that they could not afford to have more than 18 cars participate. At the previous race in Watkins Glen, N.Y., 27 cars had started.Only the top teams were picked to compete — Tyrrell, Ferrari, Matra, McLaren, March, Brabham, BRM and Lotus. Graham Hill in a Rob Walker Lotus and John Surtees in his Surtees were also invited. On the Friday before the race, Jack Brabham, the three-time world champion, announced that it would be the final race of his career.Clay Regazzoni started from pole position in a Ferrari, with Stewart second on the grid in his Tyrrell and Jacky Ickx starting third in the other Ferrari. Brabham, in one of his own cars, was fourth on the grid, and Chris Amon in a March and Jean-Pierre Beltoise in a Matra were fifth and sixth. Rodriguez started from seventh in a BRM.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.On Lap 2, Ickx, the Ferrari team leader, quickly passed his teammate to take the lead, and Stewart, close behind him also passed Regazzoni.Then, after 14 laps, Stewart made a pit stop as his steering column had come loose, and that put the Ferraris back in first and second. Brabham moved into third, which would have been a fabulous end to his career, but his engine blew on Lap 53 of the 65-lap race.AdvertisementStewart returned to the race, and on Lap 33 he hit and killed a large dog that was running across the track.“At the speed I was going, there was no avoiding it,” he said. Some doubted his story, but Stewart’s car was badly damaged — the front wishbone suspension and one front wheel were knocked out of shape — and undriveable.As the two Ferraris cruised on in the lead, toward the end of the race some spectators began running back and forth across the track, perhaps daring to see if they could fare better than the dog.In the end, the Ferraris, with Ickx leading Regazzoni, came in first and second, and Denny Hulme finished in third in a McLaren. Amon finished fourth, and Beltoise finished fifth. Rodríguez finished sixth.After the race, the spectators invaded the track, forcing cars to stop abruptly after they crossed the finish line because there was no room for them to drive.The Mexican Grand Prix was removed from the calendar the following year because of that chaos. It returned to the schedule 16 years later, from 1986 to 1992, and was reinstated again last year to resounding success because of the enthusiasm of the spectators, who remained orderly.Formula One has since instituted strict safety measures for both drivers and spectators.A version of this article appears in print on October 29, 2016, on Page A15 of the New York edition with the headline: The 1970 Mexican Grand Prix was one of passion and chaos.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »