By DAVE CALDWELLAPRIL 8, 2017
NEWARK — Paige Schector had nearly two hours to kill at Prudential Center on Saturday before the Devils played their final home game of the season, but she was first in line outside the doors.“I brought extra tissues,” she said. “I have a feeling I’m going to cry.”The Devils have settled into last place in the Metropolitan Division, and they fell out of the playoff race long ago, but Schector and many others had gathered at the arena not just to send off the season but to say goodbye to Patrik Elias.Elias, the Devils’ career scoring leader, had not played at all this season before he announced his retirement from hockey on March 31. But he agreed to wear the uniform one more time and skate with the Devils during warm-ups on Saturday before they played the Islanders. Players rarely go out this way.“I kind of had this hope that maybe he’d be able to play at some point this year,” said Devils center Adam Henrique, a former linemate of Elias’s. “I think the two of us had some chemistry together.”AdvertisementElias, a flashy forward who ended his career with 408 goals and 617 assists, helped the Devils win the Stanley Cup in 2000 and 2003. He underwent knee surgery last May and had hoped to make a comeback this season, but he said he had realized about two months ago that he could no longer withstand the daily grind of professional hockey.AdvertisementSo there Elias was, stepping onto the ice at Prudential Center at 5:29 p.m. on Saturday, helmetless and alone. The fans chanted “Patty! Patty!” as he fired the puck into an empty goal. He was soon joined by the Devils for the rest of their warm-up — an exercise the team called “Patty’s last lap.”But the most emotional part, for him, came later, at the ceremonial pregame puck drop. There, Elias was joined by his daughters, Sophia, 6, and Kaila, 3, and his wife, Petra.“I kept it together until the girls came on there,” he said. “I didn’t expect that one.”Later, he said, “I was getting a little bit of nervousness and butterflies — almost like this is your first N.H.L. game, not like you’re done.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Elias’s No. 26 jersey will be retired before a home game next season, the fifth such honor for a player from the nine-year era in which the Devils won three Cups. Goaltender Martin Brodeur and defensemen Scott Stevens, Ken Daneyko and Scott Niedermayer were the previous honorees. But Elias said Saturday’s skate really did feel like the end.“I won’t be allowed to come in here every day and practice anymore,” he said, smiling.Elias was limited by injury to 16 games last season, and he played what ended up being his final N.H.L. game on April 9, 2016, scoring a goal and adding two assists in a 5-1 home victory over Toronto. A day short of one year later, he got the official send-off that he did not receive then.“This is pretty unique, and it is pretty special,” Devils Coach John Hynes said. “It is fun to be a part of, especially for a guy like Patrik.”Elias became an unrestricted free agent in July but, with his future uncertain, he remained unsigned. The Devils gave him a corner cubicle in their dressing room during his comeback attempt, but General Manager Ray Shero left it up to Elias to decide whether to return.AdvertisementElias resumed skating in September, often joined by other Devils who were also recovering from injuries. Henrique, a teammate of Elias on the Devils team that lost to the Los Angeles Kings in the 2012 Stanley Cup finals, was happy that Elias spent this final week with the team.“He’s meant a lot to a lot of the guys in the dressing room,” Henrique said. “We’ve got a lot of young kids on the team now, and I think it was cool for them to see what a player like this was like.”For Schector, the fan at the front of the line, Elias was the final link to a long-gone era for the Devils, who have not made the playoffs since 2012. On Saturday, they ended up losing to the Islanders, 4-2.“This is a very special player who exemplified the Devils, but was also a different kind of Devil,” she said.She was right. Elias gave a taut, defense-oriented team some offensive flair — no matter who his linemates were. He was a player who often thrilled those in the stands.“I hope they remember me as a guy who got them out of their seats once in a while, put a smile on their faces and got them excited to come watch a hockey game,” Elias said.A version of this article appears in print on April 9, 2017, on Page SP10 of the New York edition with the headline: Devils Send Off a Star From Brighter Days.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.