By KAREN CROUSEAPRIL 7, 2017
AUGUSTA, Ga. — At 46, Phil Mickelson is twice as old as Jordan Spieth is. But they were equals on the Masters leaderboard Friday, tied at even par after Mickelson carded a 73 and Spieth a 69 on another windy day at Augusta National.They will play together in the third round in a pairing that is sure to attract patrons like bees to flowers.Mickelson got to three-under for the tournament with a birdie, his fourth of the round, at No. 10. But he covered the last five holes in three-over.“I fought hard today,” he said, adding, “I played the last five holes very poorly after a really good round.”AdvertisementMickelson, a three-time Masters winner, said his putter let him down. “And a lot of it was wind-based,” he said, adding, “The wind is having more of an effect than the break is.”AdvertisementWith negligible wind in the forecast for the next two days, Mickelson was optimistic. But then, when is he not?“Hopefully, with calm conditions I’ll get that thing dialed in tomorrow because I’ve been putting really well,” he said.As Mickelson was beginning to drop off, Spieth, the 2015 champion, was hitting his stride by playing the second nine in three-under 33. That was six strokes better than he played over the same holes in the first round, with most of the improvement coming on the par-5 15th. He recorded a par on Friday after a disastrous nine on Thursday.“We’re in a position now where I think we can go out there and win this thing,” he said.ROOKIES EYE THE PRIZE A player hasn’t won the Masters in his debut since Fuzzy Zoeller in 1979, but two rookies are positioned to break the streak. The Belgian Thomas Pieters is in a four-way tie for the lead at four-under after a second-round 68. Three strokes back is Jon Rahm of Spain, who posted a 70.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Both players are products of American colleges. Pieters, 25, attended Illinois and won the 2012 individual N.C.A.A. Division I title. Rahm, 22, won 11 titles at Arizona State before graduating last May.Rahm, who in January became the first player since Jay Don Blake in 1991 to win his first P.G.A. Tour title at the tour event in San Diego, said he was pleased with his ball striking but was waiting for his putter to get hot. Nonetheless, he wasn’t short on confidence.“First-timers usually don’t have a great history at Torrey Pines, either, and I was able to win that,” Rahm said. “I kept that in mind. There’s nothing that says I’m going to play bad or I should play bad.”AdvertisementPieters was no less optimistic. He said his goal coming into the week was to be in contention come Sunday. “Then you really give yourself a chance,” he said. “So it’s a bit bold to say that you want to come here and win and then you don’t do it and, you know, you look like a fool.”AMATEUR MAKES THE CUT Stewart Hagestad, an amateur born in California and now a financial analyst in New York, became the first United States Mid-Amateur champion to make the 36-hole cut since the Mid-Amateur exemption into the Masters field was established in 1989.Hagestad, with rounds of 74 and 73, was tied for 19th after the second round. The Mid-Amateur competition — an event conducted by the United States Golf Association — is similar to the United States Amateur except that players must be 25 years old and can have slightly higher golf handicaps.Before 1989, there were Mid-Amateur champions who made the cut, but they were not in the Masters field based on the Mid-Amateur exemption.“I obviously knew the history with Mid-Ams and the Masters,” said Hagestad, 25, “and that’s been something that’s been on my mind the whole week.” BILL PENNINGTONFAMILIAR NAMES There are eight major championship winners within six strokes of the leaders, even if none of the four players tied at the top of the leaderboard — Charley Hoffman, Sergio Garcia, Thomas Pieters and Rickie Fowler — have won a major. The major champions lurking are Phil Mickelson, Justin Rose, Fred Couples, Adam Scott, Jordan Spieth, Rory McIlroy, Charl Schwartzel and Martin Kaymer.The weather is supposed to improve — sunnier and less windy, which also means harder and more challenging greens. Experience in those conditions will likely matter greatly.As McIlroy, who is one over par, or five strokes off the lead, said: “You put yourself in position in the first two days, it’s a little bit of survival mode. And you go from there. I’m close enough.” BILL PENNINGTONA version of this article appears in print on April 8, 2017, on Page D3 of the New York edition with the headline: Mickelson Joining Spieth in 3rd Round’s Marquee Pairing.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.