AdvertisementSupported byBy Bill PenningtonKILLINGTON, Vt. — Mikaela Shiffrin won her first World Cup race when she was 17, was an Olympic gold medalist a year later at the 2014 Sochi Games and was a two-time world champion by the time she was 19. Each title came in her specialty event, the slalom.But Shiffrin is now 21 and unwilling to be pigeonholed. She wants it all.Shiffrin is about to branch out from the safer, slower, meticulous world of slalom to tackle the daredevil, treacherous, high-speed races of downhill and super-G.“When I was younger, I wanted to be one of the best skiers in the world — period — not the best slalom skier in the world,” Shiffrin said last week. “I just wanted to be flipping good at everything.“I see this little girl having this dream of tucking down the mountain and going off jumps and skiing the downhill. I want to see if I can actually do that.”Since May, for the first time, Shiffrin has devoted most of her practice time — 80 percent, she estimated — to the downhill and the super-G, which are known as speed events. It is part of a strategic plan with conspicuous goals, like challenging for four medals at the 2018 Winter Olympics and contending for the overall World Cup title.Shiffrin is a favorite in a World Cup giant slalom and slalom this weekend at the Killington resort in Vermont, but her 2016 debut in a speed event will be next week at Lake Louise, Alberta, where there will be two World Cup downhills and a super-G.It is the first step in an inevitable path as Shiffrin chases her childhood dreams.At the same time, Shiffrin is tiptoeing into territory long dominated by her American teammate Lindsey Vonn, the most decorated women’s skier in history. Vonn turned 32 last month and is currently sidelined with a severely broken arm. She has dominated downhill and super-G events in nearly every season since 2008 and has won a record 76 World Cup races and two Olympic medals, including the only gold medal won by an American in the women’s Olympic downhill.Shiffrin, who had her highest World Cup finish in a speed race at 15th last year in one of two career super-G races, is far from a top rival to a healthy Vonn. But Shiffrin has already won 21 World Cup races — Vonn had four victories at the same age — and expanding her reach in the sport was all but preordained.Shiffrin remains deferential to Vonn, just as she was when she was a teenager and tried to discourage the American ski community from labeling her “the next Lindsey Vonn.”But comparisons will be made between two of the biggest names in ski racing. The slalom was once Vonn’s best event, too, until she started to have greater success in the speed events and the supercombined, an event that mixes one run of downhill and one run of slalom, with the times combined.Shiffrin is not abandoning the slalom, where she has won her last nine races. Indeed, she said she hoped to maintain that dominance.“I still feel like a slalom skier; I’ve touched on it enough that I know I can still do it,” Shiffrin said, at a lodge alongside the race trail that will host this weekend’s Killington races. “But you have to ski a lot of slalom in training to be really good at slalom. You can’t get the timing without doing it.“So that’s a minor concern for me. The more I do speed training, the less I’ll be able to really ski slalom fast.”To add some perspective: Shiffrin won some slalom races last season by an astounding two or three seconds, and one of those finishes earned her a World Cup record for the event. This month, even after limiting her slalom practice time, she won the season’s opening slalom by 0.67 of a second.But the overall makeup of her race schedule will soon shift dramatically.Mike Day, her coach on the United States ski team, said Tuesday that the plan this winter was for Shiffrin to enter two downhills and five or six super-G races, along with the full complement of slalom and giant slalom races, which are known as technical events. Already, it has meant long training days, where Shiffrin has practiced with the speed racers in the morning and the technical event athletes in the afternoon, which is an uncommon regimen.“It’s a huge commitment, and she’s done an amazing job from a fitness perspective to make sure she can capitalize and maximize every one of those days,” Day said.Shiffrin insisted that her added duties had had a refreshing effect on her career because they had presented a new learning curve.At the Sochi Olympics, hours after becoming the youngest slalom gold medalist — and with very little sleep — she said she was dreaming of winning five gold medals at the 2018 Olympics in Pyeongchang, South Korea.Now that she is actually training for those events, she has tempered her expectations, if only slightly. Day said he expected Shiffrin to compete in four events at the 2018 Games.“I know in Sochi, I said I wanted to win five gold medals next time, but that’s not necessarily my goal,” Shiffrin said with a laugh. “I wouldn’t actually do all the events. But whatever events I do enter, I definitely want a shot to medal.”Advertisement