AdvertisementSupported byWizards 106, Knicks 103By Mike VorkunovAfter Kristaps Porzingis finished his workout Thursday morning during the Knicks’ shootaround, he told Coach Jeff Hornacek that he wanted to play the team’s final four games of the season. It was a meager goal, but an important one for Porzingis.A second-year forward, he had already missed 12 games after playing in 72 his rookie season. He has been bothered by a series of injuries, the latest being a lower-back problem that kept him out of a home victory over the Chicago Bulls on Tuesday.Porzingis was poised to return Thursday against the Washington Wizards, but that changed less than an hour before tipoff. He had a back spasm while warming up before the game, which forced him to sit again.The Knicks certainly missed him in their 106-103 loss to the Wizards, although any loss at this point in this season is more to the Knicks’ long-term benefit, as it improves their odds of a high pick in the draft. After the first-year forward Maurice Ndour had a standout game against the Bulls, Hornacek rotated another little-played rookie, Marshall Plumlee, into the starting lineup in Porzingis’s place.Hornacek did not dispute that Porzingis could miss all three of the Knicks’ remaining games this season. The team will see how he feels Friday morning in Memphis before the game against the Grizzlies but will exercise caution.“If he comes out tomorrow and warms up and says, ‘Hey, Coach, I’m fine,’ then he’ll play,” Hornacek said. “But we do have to be careful. It’s the end of the season.”Against Washington, the Knicks were buffeted by the All-Star point guard John Wall. He led the Wizards with 24 points and 8 assists. He knifed through the Knicks’ defense with impunity and helped Washington stave off a late Knicks run.Sasha Vujacic was the second-half catalyst for the Knicks, scoring all 10 of his points after halftime. The Knicks tied the score at 101-101 with 1 minute 9 seconds remaining when Carmelo Anthony nailed back-to-back jump shots.But Washington responded, with Bradley Beal, who finished with 25, hitting a 3-pointer and two free throws to close out the win. As a coda, Anthony, who had scored 23 points, missed a shot from beyond the arc.The loss compounded a woeful season for the Knicks. Brandon Jennings, who was waived by the Knicks in February before signing with the Wizards, offered his own theory about what had precipitated the downfall, which followed a promising start. The turmoil involving Anthony and the team president Phil Jackson was critical. It left Anthony dealing with more pressure than he had already had to shoulder.“I think it was just like a roller coaster — emotional roller coaster — for him this year with everything he had to deal with, which isn’t fair,” said Jennings, who played 20 minutes and had 4 points. “For a player to wake up every day and you’re hearing trade rumors and that you might be gone, this and that.”Anthony and Jackson were involved in several tiffs this season, butting heads during the winter over Jackson’s public criticism of Anthony’s play. The tension escalated as Anthony’s name was circulated in trade rumors, and he repeatedly faced questions about his commitment to the organization and his future.“Everything was hitting your phone about Melo leaving,” Jennings said. “It definitely took a toll on the team, too. Because it wasn’t even about basketball anymore. It was more about what’s going on with Melo.”The Knicks went into a tailspin and eventually crashed.Advertisement