AdvertisementSupported byBy Seth BerkmanLast spring in Indianapolis, the N.C.A.A. women’s basketball rules committee focused on ways to increase the sport’s appeal.The major changes approved at the meeting provided a face-lift this season. Notably, the two 20-minute halves were changed to four 10-minute quarters in an attempt to improve the flow and quality of games.Then in January, the W.N.B.A. revamped its playoff system, eliminating conference alignments and creating single-game eliminations through the first two rounds.Women’s basketball is entering a pivotal time to entice a national audience. Over the next three weeks, Connecticut will try to become the first Division I women’s basketball team to capture four straight national titles. Breanna Stewart, the Huskies’ leader, who will almost certainly be the top pick in the W.N.B.A. draft in April, is often considered a once-in-a-generation talent. The W.N.B.A. is entering its 20th season, guided by its new president, Lisa M. Borders, and will look to capitalize on interest emanating from the 2016 Summer Olympics.The new rules come as ESPN has broadened its women’s basketball coverage. Earlier this month, ESPN networks broadcast a record number of conference tournament games and will carry every N.C.A.A. tournament game.In a season in which Stewart and UConn have driven coverage, there is likely to be more interest than usual in the women’s tournament, which is set to begin Friday. But next season and beyond, the sport will have to find ways to maintain and extend its audience.According to ESPN, ratings for regular-season games on ESPN and ESPN2 did not jump this year, remaining at a 0.2 household rating. The networks broadcast 41 regular-season games compared to 38 last year.In addition to changing the format of the game, the college teams now reach the bonus and shoot two free throws on the fifth team foul in each quarter, creating an incentive not to foul that improves the pace of play. They can also advance the ball to the frontcourt after a timeout with under a minute to play in the fourth quarter or overtime.Early data shows the average game length has dropped by one minute from last season, while scoring is up slightly and free-throw attempts are down. “In all honesty, that was a major piece of our conversation in Indianapolis during rule changes last year: How do we have our game have more flow and be more presentable?” said Brad Duckworth, the N.C.A.A. women’s basketball rules committee chairman. “I think we did that.”UConn Coach Geno Auriemma said that games were running more fluidly, but added that the committee should continue to look at methods to improve the quality of the women’s game.Stewart said she thought the more universal system of four quarters — which is the system the W.N.B.A. and international competitions use — could help bring in more fans who watch only one level of women’s basketball.In the W.N.B.A., there is hope that the drama of two rounds of sudden-death playoff games will create intrigue. The top eight teams, regardless of conference, will qualify for the postseason. The top two seeds will receive byes. The fifth seed will host the eighth seed and the sixth seed will host the seventh. In the second round, the third seed hosts the lowest-seeded first-round winner, and the fourth seed hosts the other winner.Renee Brown, the league’s chief of basketball operations and player relations, said in a statement that the new structure created more competitive balance and more exciting matchups and was an opportunity to “gain new exposure and generate increased excitement.”In response to dwindling viewership numbers, ESPN will televise every W.N.B.A. playoff game live for the first time this year.Atlanta Dream forward Angel McCoughtry recalled her anger over a 2010 playoff game against the Liberty that was not broadcast on ESPN, where she set a postseason record with 42 points, outdueling Cappie Pondexter, who had 36. McCoughtry said casual viewers were bound to find a team or player that interests them by televising more games, but did not like the shortened early rounds.“One-game elimination, I think that’s a disgrace,” she said. “You can’t just give a team one game. Give the other team a chance to redeem themselves.”Last season, average league attendance fell to 7,318, a record low. As part of its modifications, the W.N.B.A. also instituted a schedule with more interconference games.In recent years, a star like Seattle Storm guard Sue Bird played only once per season at New York and Connecticut. Bird, who is from Long Island and went to UConn, noted the importance of fans being able to attend more games featuring a wider variety of players.“I think it’s great,” Bird said of the changes, adding that the new playoffs format, based on best records rather than conference affiliation, should be more conducive to the top two teams’ reaching the finals. Bird said that single-elimination could benefit teams that previously lost money during the first round of the playoffs. Elena Delle Donne, the 2015 W.N.B.A. most valuable player, said it was important to take advantage of a prominent stage this summer and to create a new outlook for the game as the W.N.B.A. transitions from the former president Laurel J. Richie to Borders.“It’s a big moment right now,” said Delle Donne, who met with Borders at the United States national team training camp in February, and was impressed by her business networks and how they might help increase the league’s reach. “Laurel did everything she could and did a lot for us,” Delle Donne said, “but it’s a good year to start fresh and get some new eyes on what we’re going to do.”McCoughtry, who is entering her eighth season, yearned for a return of the buzz that surrounded pioneers like Lisa Leslie, Dawn Staley and Cynthia Cooper a decade ago.“Where’s the excitement?” McCoughtry said. “We have to get back to that.”When asked how that could be achieved, McCoughtry looked around a gym at the training camp, which included Delle Donne, Bird, Stewart and more top talents.Rules that might create a more pleasurable viewing experience could help, but the gems that draw — Maya Moore’s picturesque jumper or Britney Griner’s ferocity attacking the rim — are already present and underused.“It’s all in marketing, that’s all,” McCoughtry said. “Give these girls more commercials, give these girls shoes. Market the hell out of these girls. They’re the best in the world.”Advertisement