AdvertisementSupported byBy David WaldsteinCLEVELAND — There has been ample discussion of oddities like curses and billy goats tormenting the Chicago Cubs, but there are some bizarre circumstances affecting the Cleveland Indians this year, too. Among the factors that worked against them in Game 2 of the World Series on Wednesday were a malfunctioning drone and an injury incurred during a postgame celebration.Maybe the Indians, who have not won a World Series since 1948, are the ones who are cursed.Trevor Bauer was the man with the drones. He loves them. He builds them, plays with them and has a fleet of them. But while working on one earlier this month, he sustained a bad cut on the pinkie of his pitching hand that required stitches.That injury knocked him out of his previous start, in Game 3 of the American League Championship Series, after only two-thirds of an inning because the finger started bleeding profusely. Before that, he had most recently pitched on Oct. 6, so in the 19 days leading up to the biggest start of his career, he had thrown only 21 pitches.He said the finger was fine for Wednesday’s game, which the Cubs won, 5-1, but he was out of sync, perhaps because of the long layoff.“Possibly,” Bauer said. “You never know. I just wasn’t sharp for whatever reason.”Bauer did not make it out of the fourth inning. He required 87 pitches for three and two-thirds innings, and he gave up six hits and two runs and walked two. He often got behind in the count, and he could not control his curveball, which he either sent wide of the plate or left hanging over the hitting zone.After the second inning, he said, he went into the batting cage to practice his curveball in an attempt to regain a feel for it.“It’s tough on a cold night,” he said. “There was no moisture there; it’s slippery, hard to get a feel for it. Went up to the cage after the second inning and threw like 20 or 30 of them and got the feel for it, and I thought it was pretty good after that.”Roberto Perez, the Cleveland catcher, said it was not part of the game plan to throw so many fastballs. But he was forced to call them because Bauer was behind in the counts and because the Cubs hitters showed so much patience.Perez said he did not know if the pinkie was a problem for Bauer but acknowledged that the abnormally low workload for Bauer this month could have contributed.“I think so,” he said. “He hadn’t thrown in a week or so.”Bauer’s rough outing was only one of the Indians’ issues. Jason Kipnis made two errors but had a mixed night, as he also recorded the Indians’ first hit and scored the Indians’ only run.Kipnis had sprained his left ankle in the aftermath of the Indians’ A.L.C.S.-clinching win over the Toronto Blue Jays in Game 5. He and Francisco Lindor jumped to celebrate, and upon landing Kipnis badly twisted his ankle, which swelled up. While not quite as bizarre as being cut by a drone, it still counted as an unusual injury.“It has good innings and bad innings,” he said of his ankle. “But that is not an excuse. I need to make those plays.”In the fifth, Kipnis failed to get the ball cleanly out of his glove while fielding a two-out ground ball that could have ended the inning. The error allowed for another run to score later that frame.Then in the seventh, Lindor made a sensational diving play to rob Addison Russell of a hit and then flipped the ball from the ground to Kipnis, who just dropped it.“It was an outstanding play,” Kipnis said of Lindor’s snag and backward throw. “I cost him a top-10 highlight, I know that. For him to go behind his back and hit me in the chest is ridiculous. I tried to push off and just missed it.”Kipnis, who is from Northbrook, Ill., a suburb north of Wrigley Field, grew up as a Cubs fan and has been looking forward to playing in World Series games at the same ballpark he attended as a child — provided they go better than Wednesday’s outing did.“If I play defense like that it will be embarrassing,” he said.The Indians had trouble elsewhere in the field. Lonnie Chisenhall, the right fielder, threw to the wrong base on one play that helped the Cubs score a run, and he fell down on the wet grass on another ball hit to right field, allowing Ben Zobrist to extend a double into a triple. Zobrist later scored on a ground ball single to center.The Indians did not play good defense, as they normally do, they did not pitch as well as they normally do, and they struggled to get hits, which has been a theme during the postseason. The overall poor night resulted in Cleveland’s second loss of the postseason, and Manager Terry Francona’s first loss in a World Series after nine straight wins with the Red Sox and Indians.“They beat us tonight,” Francona said. “It wasn’t because somebody had a bad finger. They just played better than us tonight.”Advertisement