AdvertisementSupported byBy Scott CacciolaIt is neither glamorous nor new, but Commissioner Adam Silver considers it the most important issue for the N.B.A. right now: star players missing games for the sole purpose of rest.With more coaches sitting players in recent weeks as they prepare their teams for the long haul of the postseason, much to the chagrin of fans and the N.B.A.’s broadcast partners, the issue was a main topic of conversation among the league’s owners at their annual meetings in New York this week.On Friday, Silver said there was agreement among the owners that teams should avoid resting “multiple players” for games that are broadcast on national television. In addition, Silver said, the owners concluded that teams should rest players for home games whenever possible, rather than sit them on the road when opposing fans might miss their only chance to see them play.“Resting is a complex issue with a lot of factors to consider,” Silver said at a news conference in Midtown Manhattan. “But there was a consensus on the need to find the right balance between appropriate rest for our players on one hand and our obligation to our fans and business partners on the other hand.”In recent seasons, the N.B.A. has sought ways to reduce the instances when teams play games on consecutive days, known as the dreaded back-to-back, both to limit wear and tear on players and to lessen the likelihood that coaches will rest players for one of those two games.As a part of the new collective bargaining agreement between the league and the players’ union, which will take effect in July, the 2017-18 season will start about a week earlier than usual to space out games and reduce the number of back-to-backs. But they will not be eliminated completely.“I’m particularly sympathetic to our players,” Silver said, “because my sense is our players take the brunt of it, but they’re not the ones who are choosing to rest. Just so it’s clear, I haven’t heard of instances in the league where players are raising their hands and saying, ‘Coach, please rest me.’ These are team-led decisions.”Silver’s remarks came in the wake of two particularly high-profile occurrences of coaches resting stars.In December, the Cavaliers left LeBron James, Kyrie Irving and Kevin Love back in Cleveland as the remainder of the team traveled to Memphis for a game against the Grizzlies. Then, in March, Coach Steve Kerr of the Golden State Warriors rested Stephen Curry, Klay Thompson, Draymond Green and Andre Iguodala for a nationally televised game against the team’s biggest conference rivals, the San Antonio Spurs.A number of the Spurs’ key players also sat out, but at least two of them — LaMarcus Aldridge and Kawhi Leonard — had significant health problems.The game against the Spurs was the second half of a back-to-back for the Warriors, who were in the midst of a brutal stretch of their schedule. Like many coaches who have rested players on occasion, Kerr expressed sympathy for the fans who had paid a lot of money ahead of time to see the game — and, most likely, his crew of All-Stars. But he also stressed that the health of his players was of paramount importance.Spurs Coach Gregg Popovich, who popularized the practice of resting players, recently defended the approach, suggesting that he had preserved some of his players’ careers.“We have definitely added years to people,” Popovich told reporters this month. “So it’s a trade-off. You want to see this guy in this one game? Or do you want to see him for three more years?”It has been a persistent challenge for Silver throughout his three years as commissioner. In April 2015, for example, he described rest as an “ongoing discussion” with the players’ union. His personal view, he said at the time, was that he would rather the league avoid engaging with coaches and general managers about the issue of playing time.“I think it’s a very slippery slope for the league office to start getting in the business of telling a coach or team what minutes a player should play,” he said.But last month, Silver sent a memo to the league’s owners in which he described teams sitting players as an “extremely significant issue for our league” and urged the owners to become more involved in the decision-making process with their coaches. Silver also warned of the potential for “significant penalties.”On Friday, Silver struck a more conciliatory tone, saying the owners had discussed issuing “guidelines” for teams rather than “enforceable rules.”“It’s not a function necessarily of owners calling coaches and saying, ‘I’m now going to dictate to you or micromanage how you coach the team or how you choose minutes for a particular player,’” Silver said. “But these need to be organizational decisions where there’s a fair balance between the competitive issues on one hand and the very real business issues on the other hand.”Advertisement