AdvertisementSupported byBy Karen CrouseORLANDO, Fla. — The Australian Marc Leishman missed one green and did not find sand or water during his opening-round five-under-par 67 at the Bay Hill Club and Lodge on Thursday. If every round were so carefree, no one would suggest it was a misnomer to call golf a game. Leishman’s bogey-free start at the Arnold Palmer Invitational included one par putt of over 5 feet and four par attempts on the front nine that measured less than 2. It was good for a five-way share of second, one stroke behind another Australian, Jason Day, the world No. 3, whose round of 66 included an out-of-bounds drive at No. 9.At No. 2, Rory McIlroy is the highest-ranked player in the 120-man field, but he will have to scramble to survive the cut after shooting a three-over 75. McIlroy carded a double-bogey 6 on the first hole and never recovered. The struggles of McIlroy and the scrambling of Day helped frame the masterpiece that was Leishman’s scorecard. Asked to name the last time he had played such a stress-free round, Leishman said, “When I was about 14.” He laughed. “It’s been a fair while.” At 32, Leishman knows what it feels like to steep in the stress hormone cortisol. Last year, shortly after he missed the cut at this event, his wife, Audrey, fell gravely ill with acute respiratory distress and toxic shock syndrome. Three days before Easter, she was placed in a medically induced coma. Her last request to Leishman before drifting into unconsciousness was to take the couple’s two young boys to have their photographs taken with the Easter bunny. In a development her doctors considered nothing short of miraculous, Leishman’s wife recovered and was on the course Thursday following her husband from outside the ropes for part of his back nine. The simple activities of their daily lives at this time of the year, Leishman said, “remind us of what happened and how life can get turned on its head very quickly.” He added, “She took them for their photos with the Easter bunny this year, which was good.” After his wife’s hospitalization, Leishman was gone from competitive golf for a month, a period of time that included the Masters. Since his return, he has put together the best stretch of his career, with four top-5 finishes in 23 worldwide starts, including a playoff loss at the British Open and a six-stroke victory over Henrik Stenson at the Nedbank Golf Challenge in South Africa in December.Ranked 58th in the world after last year’s Arnold Palmer Invitational, Leishman is 29th this week. On Thursday, Leishman finished tied with Stenson, Troy Merritt, Adam Scott and Brendan Steele, who played in Leishman’s threesome. “He’s dealt with a lot in the last 12 months,” said Scott, a good friend of Leishman’s, who was taking aim at his third victory in three starts. “Maybe it just gave him some nice perspective on everything. He’s played great golf since coming back.” Scott, who described Leishman as “a great bloke,” added, “You wouldn’t wish that 12 months on anyone, but it’s nice to see a guy like that take something good away from it.” Leishman was at Augusta National for a couple of days of practice ahead of what would have been his fourth trip to the Masters when he got the emergency call summoning him home. Because his wife spent last Easter in a coma, he was looking forward to celebrating the holiday with her and his family. The family was to head to Augusta National next, where Leishman planned to enlist Audrey as his caddie in the par-3 contest. “It’s probably going to be a little bit emotional when we get there,” he said, “to get back to that place, Augusta, where it wasn’t looking like I was probably ever going to be there with Audrey again.” Leishman was pleased with his ball-striking and putting. It gave him high hopes of improving upon his best Masters finish, a tie for fourth in 2013, when he was paired in the final round with Scott, who became the first Australian winner. “I’ve been playing pretty well,” said Leishman, whose only missed green was the par-3 second. His biggest test came on his last stroke of the day, a downhill 4-footer for par after he left a 16-foot birdie attempt short. “I felt comfortable today,” Leishman said. “Obviously, it’s a funny game and can change very quickly. Hopefully I can have three more of those and see where we end up.” Advertisement