AdvertisementSupported byBy Victor MatherRIO DE JANEIRO — The Olympics is Michael Phelps returning to the pool, Simone Biles going for gymnastics gold and Ashton Eaton looking for another decathlon win.But that is just one Olympics, the one that Americans are focused on. There are more than 200 countries at the Rio Games, and each has its own Olympic heroes and obsessions.With the help of some of the many journalists who have converged on Rio from around the world, here’s a look at how other countries are seeing the Games.The Chinese swimmer most cite as the biggest threat is Sun Yang, a double gold medal winner in London four years ago. But Chinese fans are more focused on the 100-meter freestyle contender Ning Zetao. Why? Because he’s “superhandsome,” said Jianjie Cao of Xinhua News. That has given him outsized popularity in China, “especially with the girls,” Cao said.Chinese fans are also focused on diving, and Wu Minxia, who has four gold medals over the last three Games. The equal-opportunity Cao declared her to be “beautiful.”The two-time defending badminton champion Lin Dan is a somewhat more divisive figure. A former member of the Chinese Army, he was known for saluting on the podium. But his tattoos, Cao said, are not for every fan.Sports relegated to the triple-digit channels in the United States will be riveting South Koreans over the next two weeks.In archery, South Korea might win all four golds on offer, said Tin-ji Wang of the Yonhap News Agency. And could the biggest star of the games from South Korea actually be a pistol shooter? Jin Jong-oh will be trying for the 10-meter air pistol/50-meter pistol double.A particular hero to Korean fans is An Chang-rim, the world’s No. 1-ranked lightweight judo competitor. Born in Japan to Korean parents, An chose to compete for the land of his forebears, earning undying admiration there.“We do our best sitting down,” said Sean Martin of New Zealand Newswire. So look for Kiwi athletes in cycling, kayaking, equestrian and rowing. The men’s rowing pair of Hamish Bond and Eric Murray has been unbeaten since 2009. The legendary Sir Mark Todd, eventing gold medalist in 1984, is competing here at 60.The two-time shot-put gold medalist Valerie Adams’s comeback from injury is making news in New Zealand, and Martin said the runner Nick Willis had inspired renewed interest in middle distance running in the land of greats like Peter Snell and John Walker.Another New Zealand star is Sonny Bill Williams, who has been a heavyweight boxer as well as a star in rugby union and its cousin, rugby league. Now he has turned to a third form of the game, rugby sevens, for its Olympic debut.As usual, it is all about the pool, said Mick Carroll of News Corp Australia. The team was disappointing in London. “Some of the men got cocky; the camaraderie wasn’t there,” Carroll said, but hopes are high for a return to glory in Rio. The biggest stars are the freestyle sprinters: the sisters Cate and Bronte Campbell for the women and Cameron McEvoy for the men.Though she may not even make the final, the hurdler Michelle Jenneke has become a YouTube sensation and is plastered on soft-drink billboards in Rio thanks to a hip-wiggling dance she does before the start of races.Australians are also interested in the women’s rugby competition, where their team will compete against its fierce rival New Zealand. “They are a lovely team of great girls who are thankful to be here,” Carroll said.Norway is never going to be a top Summer Games nation, said Tore Meek of the Norwegian News Agency. Norway had 26 medals in Sochi, but just four in London.A new sport at these Games, women’s golf, may be No. 1 on viewing lists in Oslo because of the two-time major winner Suzann Pettersen. Eyes will also be on men’s double sculls rowing, and women’s handball. But it is just not the same as biathlon or Nordic combined.The big name at the Games is the world-record-holding swimmer Federica Pellegrini, who won gold in the 200-meter freestyle in 2008 but missed out on a medal in 2012. Pellegrini’s popularity in Italy rivals that of top soccer players, said Andrea Buongiovanni of La Gazzetta dello Sport.While swimming has surged in the last 15 years in Italy, the country’s fencing success goes back to the dawn of the Games. The nation will also be focused on the volleyball and water polo teams, and cycling, where the 2014 Tour de France winner Vincenzo Nibali will compete.Two Japanese athletes will be going for a feat that few others have accomplished: winning the same event at four consecutive Games. Saori Yoshida and Kaori Icho have each won wrestling titles at every Olympics since 2004, when women’s wrestling was added to the program. They will try to join two Americans, Carl Lewis and the discus thrower Al Oerter, with four gold medals in a row.Swimming will also be in the headlines in Japan, said Makoto Morimoto of Kyodo News. In the men’s 400 individual medley, the Japanese swimmers Kosuke Hagino and Daiya Seto could finish 1-2.Morimoto says Japan can win four gold medals in judo, and the men’s gymnastics team is looking for gold with Kohei Uchimura in the individual event and in the team event.Advertisement