AdvertisementSupported byRays 4, Yankees 1By Billy WitzST. PETERSBURG, Fla. — Wednesday was one of those inevitable days for the Yankees when they make news without really trying.The first headline came via the former star Derek Jeter, with the revelation that he does indeed seem to be interested in bidding for the Miami Marlins as part of a group of investors.Then there was the young outfielder Clint Frazier, who may now be in the minor leagues (with a new haircut) but who was the focus of a brief uproar, anyway, when the Yankees broadcaster Suzyn Waldman said he had inquired about whether the team would unretire numbers and, if so, whether he could take Mickey Mantle’s No. 7.The Yankees denied that, Waldman apologized, and Frazier wrote on Twitter, “I care more about the front of the jersey than the back.”Finally, it came time for the current Yankees to take on the Tampa Bay Rays. Then Michael Pineda, the Yankees’ enigmatic and erratic pitcher — the one with the Tiffany repertoire and the dime-store composure — reminded everyone who might have forgotten over the winter why he can be so frustrating to watch.Pineda had vowed to improve his concentration, something he seemed to lose last season whenever he got two strikes on a hitter or two outs in an inning. He had been comforted recently by the presence of his mother, who had spent the last several weeks of spring training with him and was watching him pitch against the Rays before returning home to the Dominican Republic.But regardless of Pineda’s determination to author a new beginning, the start to his season followed a familiar script.Pineda, who gave up seven first-inning home runs last season, watched designated hitter Corey Dickerson deposit his third pitch of the game over the center-field wall. Pineda then allowed two two-out, two-strike hits that drove in three more runs in the second inning, enough for the Yankees to fall, 4-1, to the Rays, who took two of the three in the season-opening series.The Yankees now head to Baltimore, where, after having Thursday off, they hope to get their young sluggers on track. Gary Sanchez and Greg Bird, who batted second and third for the Yankees, are a combined 2 for 26 with seven strikeouts to start the season.Their three starting pitchers — Masahiro Tanaka, C. C. Sabathia and Pineda — have lasted a combined 11 ⅓ innings, though having two days off this week gives some relief to a bullpen that has not allowed a run.“That’s got to change,” Manager Joe Girardi said. “You can’t live like that the whole year.”The Yankees got their only run on Jacoby Ellsbury’s home run to right field in the second inning off right-hander Alex Cobb, who otherwise subdued the Yankees, holding them to four hits and a walk over five and two-thirds innings. Four relievers shut the Yankees out the rest of the way.It was a night of fruitless opportunities for the Yankees at the plate. When Sanchez, who was hitless in his first 11 at-bats, singled to send Brett Gardner to third in the third, Bird tapped back to the mound to end the inning. Gardner left Aaron Judge at third to end the fifth, and reliever Jumbo Diaz struck out Starlin Castro on three pitches, leaving two runners on to end the sixth.Gardner began the eighth with a single and took second on a passed ball, but any hope for a rally fizzled quickly. Sanchez grounded out, Bird struck out and Matt Holliday grounded out. In the ninth, Castro followed Ellsbury’s leadoff single by hitting into a 6-4-3 double play.Holliday, who is 2 for 11 in the cleanup spot, is not hitting much better than Bird or Sanchez, but he is a veteran with a long track record. Girardi said early in spring training that managing this team would be different for him because of its youth.“The biggest way it changes is you’re probably helping younger players get through more situations,” Girardi said on the day pitchers and catchers reported, recalling what it was like to have players like Jeter and Alex Rodriguez. “I didn’t really have to help Jete get through an 0 for 10 or an 0 for 20. I didn’t really have help Alex get through a ‘You didn’t hit a homer for a week?’ or ‘When are you going to hit your 500th?’ Those guys were used to handling the situation.”He continued: “As much as X’s and O’s, it’s probably managing the outside stuff more: the noise, not looking over your shoulder every day, those sort of things.”Late Wednesday night, Girardi said he was not troubled because Bird and Sanchez appeared to be having quality at-bats.It is one thing to have to aggressively manage expectations for young players, even those who seem as preternaturally calm as Bird and Sanchez. But Girardi and the pitching coach Larry Rothschild have spent years trying to unlock Pineda’s potential.Girardi was asked before the game if he had spent much time over the winter trying to figure out a pitcher who had struck out a career-high 207 hitters last season — sixth in the American League — and yet was 6-12 with a 4.82 E.R.A. Batters with two outs hit .325 against Pineda, 28, last season, more than 100 points better than with fewer than two outs.“Off-season, in season, midseason, every season,” Girardi said, his brow furrowed. “As I said, it comes down to mistakes — missed location, he’s ahead in the count and misses location with his slider.”Girardi pointed to a home run that Pineda had allowed in an exhibition game Friday night at Atlanta as an example. He said later that three misplaced fastballs had done in Pineda on Wednesday.Dickerson crushed a belt-high 1-1 fastball to put the Rays ahead, and after Ellsbury’s home run tied it, Pineda came undone in the next inning. He had some misfortune when Logan Morrison followed Steven Souza Jr.’s single by hitting a ball off the catwalk that landed for a single. After Pineda struck out Tim Beckham and Souza was thrown out at the plate thanks to Sanchez’s deft tag, Norris hit a 2-2 pitch for a single to right that scored both runners, who had advanced on a wild pitch.After Norris stole second, thanks to an early jump, Dickerson lined a 1-2 pitch to right to drive him home. There were still seven more innings to play, more than enough for an offense with plenty of pop, but not on Wednesday, when the result, like so much else about the Yankees’ day, seemed inevitable.Advertisement