By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSJULY 27, 2016
Kristin Armstrong could win her third straight Olympic gold medal in Rio de Janeiro. The women’s pursuit team is favored to capture gold. Several Americans could land on the BMX podium.Will anybody in the United States notice? Or even care?That is perhaps the biggest challenge facing U.S.A. Cycling as the Rio Games arrive. One of the nation’s most popular participatory sports is dealing with aging athletes, declining membership and a vast disconnect between amateur riders and their elite counterparts.It has left U.S.A. Cycling officials to wonder just where they stand in the sport’s structure.“There is no doubt we need to adapt as an organization,” said Derek Bouchard-Hall, who took over as the governing body’s chief executive last year after a successful career in private business.To usher U.S.A. Cycling into the future, Bouchard-Hall spent several months examining the organization’s shortcomings before proposing a three-prong approach to shake things up.AdvertisementFirst, he is championing a renewed emphasis on amateur cycling, rather than funneling so much of U.S.A. Cycling’s resources to elite athletes. The idea is that by fostering growth at the grass-roots level, the sport in the United States will become more robust in the long term.AdvertisementSecond, he wants to broaden the coverage of U.S.A. Cycling to encompass not just racers but the everyday cyclist, those who ride in mass events, such as a bike ride across Iowa taking place this week, and the Gran Fondos pseudo-races that have become popular.Finally, he wants an organization that is more open, transparent and willing to adjust to feedback, a customer-focused approach that stems from his previous job with the bike retailer Wiggle.U.S.A. Cycling is not abandoning elite athletes. Instead, Bouchard-Hall believes the amateur cyclist and elite cyclist go hand-in-hand, the growth of one helping the other.“People say, ‘Where do you put your efforts, the amateurs or the elite?’ The answer is both,” he said. “This is a balance that all national governing bodies in America face.”The Rio Olympics may offer an opportunity to kick-start his plan.NBC will focus on more glamorous sports like gymnastics and swimming that traditionally push the attention needle at the Summer Games. But any visibility at the Olympics is priceless for U.S.A. Cycling, whether it comes through highlights of Armstrong in the time trial or Connor Fields on the BMX track, or online streams of cycling events throughout the Games.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The publicity is crucial for U.S.A. Cycling, which has always struggled to raise money. Part of the organization’s support comes from the United States Olympic Committee and is based on success at world championships and other major competitions. But according to recent U.S.O.C. tax returns, sports such as shooting, rowing and sailing often receive more money than cycling.“Where we suffer is our federation doesn’t have the funds,” said Sarah Hammer, who anchors the women’s pursuit team. “Something like swimming, they can generate their own through sponsors.”AdvertisementU.S.A. Cycling has rarely had that ability, even when Lance Armstrong — no relation to Kristin — was in the spotlight.Some worry that matters could get even tighter for elite athletes if Bouchard-Hall redirects some of their scant funding to support the growth of grass-roots cycling. But he quickly dispels that notion, pointing toward fund-raising and sponsorship plans to help fill those coffers.More important, Bouchard-Hall said, people should understand that his plan to revitalize U.S.A. Cycling is a long-term approach that will eventually benefit elite athletes, too.By growing the sport at the local level, Bouchard-Hall hopes U.S.A. Cycling will turn around its slow membership decline. More young people will pick up cycling, reversing a trend toward an aging demographic. And some day, the best of those athletes will advance far enough in the sport that they will compete at world championships and the Olympics.“We’re not even participating in track cycling in some of the disciplines, which is unfortunate,” Bouchard-Hall said. “We believe we’re a really important part of the racing ecosystem, but we also believe it’s the right thing to do to foster participation at all levels.”U.S.A. Cycling received a small bump four years ago from the London Games, where it won four cycling medals — the fifth most of any nation. But Bouchard-Hall hopes for a bigger return from Rio, where the time zone will make viewing easier for American fans.The difficulty lies in trying to build on the visibility.“We’re not a sport that generates a lot of attention without big megastars and big money,” Bouchard-Hall said. “When we had Lance, we got a lot of attention, cycling got a lot of publicity. But our Olympians, as great as those stories are within the sport — and people who follow the sport do love them — they don’t translate well outside of them. What we need to do is get out the stories, and that’s a difficult challenge.”It is also a rare opportunity. The Olympics are a once-every-four-years event that will provide Bouchard-Hall a chance to promote his vision for the future of U.S.A. Cycling.“You have to be able to change as an organization when everything around you is changing,” said Mark Gullickson, the long-tenured director of U.S.A. Cycling’s mountain biking program.Advertisement“I think Derek was faced with some really tough challenges,” Gullickson said, “and we’re still in the early phases of where you’re headed. But I think we’re making changes that we need to make if you really want to change the direction of the program to meet the needs of the members.”A version of this article appears in print on July 28, 2016, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: U.S.A. Cycling Hopes for Success to Raise Organization’s Profile.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.