By JAMES WAGNEROCT. 26, 2016
CLEVELAND — Watching Roberto Perez, the Cleveland Indians’ defense-minded catcher, smash two home runs in a Game 1 victory over the Chicago Cubs in the World Series on Tuesday night sparked the imagination. What if the All-Star catcher Jonathan Lucroy had not vetoed a trade to the Indians in late July?The Indians overcame many injuries this season, notably to their catching corps, to reach this point. Yan Gomes, who caught in Cleveland’s season opener, played only 74 games because of a separated shoulder and a broken wrist. Perez, 27, sustained a broken thumb in May.The Indians’ front office agreed to a deal with the Milwaukee Brewers for Lucroy, who then exercised his no-trade clause over concerns about playing time. He was later traded to the Texas Rangers. When Perez and Chris Gimenez, the Indians’ two healthy catchers at the time, heard the news of Lucroy’s veto, they vowed to carry the Indians to the playoff themselves.“He definitely took onus on himself that he was going to be the one to help us get there, and here we are,” Gimenez said of Perez. “He’s hit two home runs in the World Series. It’s so awesome to see. It really could not happen to a better person.”AdvertisementPerez, the first Cleveland player to homer twice in a World Series game, seemed the unlikeliest of Indians to lead the offensive charge Tuesday. He was a career .237 hitter in the minor leagues. He has hit .220 across parts of three seasons in the majors, batting .183 in 61 games this year.Advertisement“I’ve come a long ways,” he said after Tuesday’s game. “I’m just playing with a lot of confidence right now.”The Indians saw more than Perez’s meager batting line. His thumb injury required surgery, and it took him time to recover. But Perez has also tweaked his approach.“He’s made a good adjustment in learning how to pull the ball the right way,” Gimenez said of Perez, whose two home runs were to left field.Still, Perez reached the big leagues because of his glove, and he has shepherded the Indians’ pitching staff.“He’s elite,” said Gimenez, a veteran catcher.Gomes, who has become Perez’s backup in the playoffs, said: “He’s become more confident in himself. It shows. From running a staff to running a game, you can tell his confidence has shot up. It’s one of the most important things: having the pitching staff trust you.”Perez, who had only 139 career starts as a major league catcher entering the playoffs, knew he would face tall tasks in the American League playoffs when the Indians went up against the Boston Red Sox and then the Toronto Blue Jays, two teams with high-powered offenses. Cleveland lost only once across the two series, and pitchers raved about Perez’s knack for turning close pitches into strikes with the way he presents the pitch to umpires.“He’s going to be a multiple-time All-Star,” said Trevor Bauer, the Indians’ starter for Game 2 on Wednesday night.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Bauer later added: “Baseball is won and lost on individual pitches. And having someone back there that is going to get you a couple extra inches or a couple extra calls per game helps tremendously.”AdvertisementSandy Alomar Jr., the Indians’ first-base coach and a former All-Star catcher with the team, praised Perez’s preparation. He said that Perez — who, like Alomar, is from Puerto Rico — had always had good hands and that a minor adjustment with the positioning of his legs had allowed for improvement in his pitch framing.Last week, Perez said: “I take pride in what I do behind the plate, whether it’s blocking, calling a game, receiving. I’m just trying to steal a strike. It’s a game changer. Guys trust me back there, and that’s the key.”The confidence that Perez has built has come with more playing time. And if Lucroy had accepted the trade to Cleveland, Perez would probably not have been on the field Tuesday, leading the Indians to victory.SHORT REST FOR KLUBER Cleveland’s Corey Kluber, who fired six scoreless innings in Game 1 on Tuesday, will pitch again on short rest in Game 4 scheduled for Saturday in Chicago, Indians Manager Terry Francona said.Kluber has started only once on short rest in his career, in Game 4 of the A.L. Championship Series against the Blue Jays. He allowed two runs in five innings, the only time he has been scored upon in his four postseason starts.Kluber was limited to 88 pitches in Tuesday’s start, Francona said, because the Indians hoped to preserve him for Game 4. This would also allow Kluber to potentially start on short rest again if the series goes to a seventh game. Over the past 30 days, Kluber has thrown 381 pitches, a relatively low workload.“This has been Kluber’s least amount of pitches this month just because when they’re winning, we go to the bullpen, and if they’re losing, we take them out,” Francona said.AdvertisementFrancona said the Indians’ other starters — Trevor Bauer and Josh Tomlin — would also start again on short rest, if needed.Even though Andrew Miller, the Indians’ premier reliever, threw a season-high 46 pitches over two innings on Tuesday, Francona said he would be available to pitch an inning in Game 2.HEYWARD SITS AGAIN Cubs Manager Joe Maddon again chose not to start the struggling right fielder Jason Heyward. Instead, Jorge Soler, a right-handed hitter, was in right field in Game 2 against Trevor Bauer, a right-hander who was better against left-handed hitters this season.In an effort to slow the Indians’ base running, the Cubs started Willson Contreras behind the plate instead of the veteran Miguel Montero, who was one of the worst catchers in the major leagues this season at throwing out base stealers.“He’s got one of the most premier arms again in either league,” Maddon said of Contreras.A version of this article appears in print on October 27, 2016, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Star Catcher’s Rejection of the Indians Paved the Way for Game 1’s Offensive Hero.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.