By KEN BELSONOCT. 24, 2016
Arian Foster, a four-time Pro Bowler who was among the league’s top rushers in 2014, became the latest football player to leave the sport because of injuries, abruptly announcing his retirement on Monday after playing in only four games this season.In a statement released late Monday through the website Uninterrupted, Foster, 30, who joined the Miami Dolphins this year, said he was retiring immediately.“There comes a time in every athlete’s career when their ambition and their body are no longer on the same page,” Foster said in the statement. “I’ve reached that point.”He added, “I know it’s not commonplace to do it midseason, but my body just can’t take the punishment this game asks for any longer.”
            BREAKING NEWS: @ArianFoster announces his retirement on UNINTERRUPTED. His story on why he’s walking away. pic.twitter.com/FK09XpkqUo Foster, an undrafted rookie signed by the Houston Texans in 2009, was the N.F.L.’s top rusher in the 2010 season with 1,616 yards and was named to the Pro Bowl in four seasons in a five-year stretch, most recently for the 2014 season. But he was released by the Texans in March, having missed 12 games last season because of injuries. He joined the Dolphins on a one-year contract but appeared in just four games this season because of injuries.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.AdvertisementDuring the off-season, Detroit Lions wide receiver Calvin Johnson announced his retirement at age 30 after nine standout seasons in the league. And in September, at age 26, San Francisco 49ers offensive lineman Anthony Davis retired for a second time, having sustained several concussions. That announcement came just 15 months after Davis had retired for the first time.AdvertisementDavis attempted a comeback this year, but another concussion persuaded him to leave the game for good.Younger players have been retiring at increasing rates as they consider the long-term consequences of playing while injured. According to Business Insider, 19 players retired from the N.F.L. at age 30 or younger in 2015. Only five such players did so in 2011.Jake Locker, Marshawn Lynch, Jerod Mayo, Patrick Willis and Jason Worilds are among those who have recently retired while in their prime.In 2015, linebacker Chris Borland retired after just one year with the 49ers because, although he was not injured, he feared the potential trauma to his brain from repeated hits to the head. Borland was 24 at the time.Update: After receiving input from many savvy football observers, we revised the first sentence of this article to reflect that while Foster was in the Pro Bowl just two seasons ago, his performance level this season was diminished.A version of this article appears in print on October 25, 2016, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: Pro Football; Foster, a Pro Bowler Worn Down by Injuries, Retires.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.