AdvertisementSupported byBy David WaldsteinCLEVELAND — When Jason Kipnis was a boy, long before he helped the Cleveland Indians earn a spot in the World Series, he attended St. Norbert School, 21 miles from Wrigley Field.Most of the students who attended the school, in Northbrook, Ill., were ardent supporters of the Chicago Cubs. That included Kipnis, of course, and a classmate of his older sister’s named Steve Bartman.Bartman is the star-crossed fan who drew widespread scorn, accused of helping to extend the Cubs’ World Series drought, after he interfered with a catchable foul ball in Game 6 of the 2003 National League Championship Series.Kipnis, the Indians’ second baseman, recalled hearing only nice things about Bartman growing up, and he condemned the treatment that Bartman received from Cubs fans after that game. But he has never had the chance to tell him.“Not many people in Chicago have seen him since,” Kipnis said. “There are some dumb fans in Chicago who ruined it for him.”Perhaps no one personifies the 2016 curse-busting World Series more than Kipnis, a long-suffering Cubs fan whose allegiances to that club have come to a screeching halt now that he is a member of the Indians, who face the Cubs in the World Series beginning Tuesday night.If Bartman was unfairly victimized for playing a role in a Cubs loss, Kipnis would be happy to be justifiably blamed for beating his childhood team and extending its drought one more year.The Cubs have not won a World Series since 1908, but the Indians have their own streak of misery, having won no titles since 1948. The Series starts with two games at Progressive Field and then will move to Wrigley Field, the site of so many memories for Kipnis as a boy, for Game 3 on Friday.“I dreamed about, as a kid, playing in the World Series at Wrigley Field,” Kipnis said. “I always thought it would be the bottom of the ninth — I’d be hitting with two outs, full count, bases loaded. But it’s the top of the ninth.“The fact I get to play in front of friends and family and people that I know is going to make it that much more special for me. It’s really a perfect storm of events that somehow, by chance and fate, it worked out in my favor. Not many people get to experience it the way I do.”Kipnis grew up in Northbrook and went to White Sox games as well as Cubs games, though the Cubs were his favorite team, he said. He vividly recalled that at 16 he was part of the crowd at Wrigley on Oct. 3, 2003, when Mark Prior defeated Atlanta’s Greg Maddux to take Game 3 of a division series.“That’s one of my fonder baseball memories,” he said.What happened in the next series was just as memorable, but not in a gratifying way for the Cubs and their fans. The Florida Marlins won Game 6 and Game 7, then went on to win the World Series by beating the Yankees. The Cubs had to wait another 13 years to finally get to the World Series, their first trip since 1945.A television reporter from Chicago asked Kipnis on Monday if even a tiny part of him felt torn about wanting the Cubs to lose — even if just for family members. Kipnis blurted out, “No,” before the question was even finished.“There is zero conflict,” he said. “Every part of me is rooting for my own team.”An All-Star in 2013 and 2015, Kipnis hit a career-high 23 home runs this season, though his on-base plus slugging percentage was down to .811 from .823 the year before.Like several Cleveland hitters, he struggled in the American League Championship Series. He went 1 for 19 against Toronto, but his hit was a home run. Still, the Indians won, but at the moment Cleveland clinched the pennant in Toronto on Wednesday, Kipnis sprained his left ankle jumping up and down in celebration with the shortstop Francisco Lindor. He has been hobbled since.He vowed he would be ready to play Tuesday but indicated that he might take medication for the pain. It was an unsurprising promise from a player who has been known to sneak onto his friend’s softball team as an ordinary civilian, not a major league All-Star.“I’ve done that numerous times, yes,” Kipnis said.A jocular sort, Kipnis enjoys being playful. He will even poke fun at a nervous Cubs fan base still worried about mystical forces, like the curse supposedly placed on the team by a tavern owner whose goat was denied access to Wrigley Field.“I think it’s a serious thing for them not to let that goat in,” Kipnis said. “I don’t know how the baseball gods can ever forgive them.”Advertisement