AdvertisementSupported byBy Victor MatherThe Denver Broncos were an unusual Super Bowl champion last season because they won without top-level quarterback play.Yes, they had Peyton Manning, but it was the final season of his career and his worst one: He averaged only 225 passing yards and posted a 5 percent interception rate and an abysmal quarterback rating. The rest of the team, especially the defense, excelled enough to win the Vince Lombardi Trophy.Manning’s backup, Brock Osweiler, started seven games at the end of the regular season when Manning was injured, and while his numbers were not stellar, they were better. The Broncos were 5-2 in his starts, and it seemed that at age 25 he would be ready to take over the team in 2016.So it was startling news in March when Osweiler passed on a chance to start for the Super Bowl champions and instead signed as a free agent with the Houston Texans. Even more startling was the price: $72 million over four years (with $37 million guaranteed in the first two years). That was a huge number for a player who did not necessarily seem like a big upgrade over Brian Hoyer, the Texans’ adequate incumbent, who led the team to a 9-7 record and the playoffs.That left the Broncos scrambling. The training-camp battle was among the much maligned veteran Mark Sanchez; the first-round draft choice Paxton Lynch; and a former seventh-round selection in his second year, Trevor Siemian. Though Siemian’s entire N.F.L. experience was one kneel-down play, he won the contest.There were many who foresaw a plunge for Denver behind the untested, unheralded Siemian, and though the size of the Osweiler deal raised some eyebrows, many expected him to be a solid acquisition for the Texans.It has not quite worked out that way.On Monday night, the Texans visited Denver, and Osweiler took the field to booing. Fans tend to get mad at players who leave their team for big money elsewhere. Given how things have worked out this season, Broncos fans should have considered cheering instead.Osweiler looked poor the entire game, a comprehensive 27-9 win for the Broncos. The Denver defense continually pressured him into a 22-for-41, 131-yard performance. He completed no passes longer than 13 yards and fumbled three times.The symbolic moment came at the start of the fourth quarter, when the ball seemed to slip from Osweiler’s hands, spun pathetically and fell to the turf a few yards downfield. The play was ruled a fumble.“It’s not all about money in life,” Broncos cornerback Chris Harris Jr. told The Associated Press. “He had a great situation, great team here, better receivers, to me. So I think he already knows he made the wrong choice.”Referring to General Manager John Elway, Broncos cornerback Aqib Talib told USA Today: “If you look at it over all, he saved a bunch of money. And Trev is a great quarterback, man. He’s better than Brock in my eyes. So it’s a win-win situation.”Of quarterbacks who have started a game this year, Osweiler ranks 42nd in adjusted yards per pass, ahead of only Blaine Gabbert, who was benched in San Francisco, and Drew Stanton, who filled in for one game in Arizona.Siemian’s figure is not spectacular, 24th, but that is an upgrade over Manning’s final season, and the Broncos have shown they can win without superior quarterback numbers. The Broncos are 5-2 and well positioned for the playoffs again.Hoyer, whom the Texans gave up on, ranks 11th with the Bears.Are the Texans starting to get restless and looking elsewhere for a quarterback? Despite Osweiler’s poor numbers, the team leads the mediocre A.F.C. South with a 4-3 record. The other quarterbacks on hand, Tom Savage, with 19 career pass attempts, and the career backup Brandon Weeden, are uninspiring.And then there’s Osweiler’s big contract. You need only one really good reason to choose a starting quarterback. The Texans have 72 million of them.Advertisement