
On Soccer By                     
RORY SMITH

APRIL 5, 2017
LONDON — Quite often, the more Pep Guardiola pronounces his happiness, the less convincing he sounds. His tone of voice is just a little too flat, as though he is trying to convince himself as much as anyone else; his face appears just a little too straight.He says he is happy regularly. He smiles much less frequently.Still, Guardiola must be taken at his word. Once again, on Wednesday night, he declared that he was happy. Not just happy, in fact, but proud, privileged, even honored to have such a courageous group of players at his disposal, players who dare to be “proactive, not reactive,” players with the nerve to “play that way,” players who “were not afraid.”Guardiola’s Manchester City team had just lost to Chelsea for the second time this season, this time by 2-1. The defeat was his sixth in his first year managing in England, and it gave him losses to an opponent both at home and on the road for the first time in a single campaign. City sits fourth in the Premier League, 14 points from the top of the standings.That place is held by Chelsea. It is Chelsea that can now start to research which companies offer the best rates on open-top buses in west London, Chelsea that can now begin to study the schedule, wondering when and where its second championship in three years might be secured (at Everton on April 30, maybe, or perhaps against Middlesbrough at home eight days later). Chelsea has every reason to be happy. Guardiola, on the surface, does not.AdvertisementIt is to Guardiola’s credit, of course, that in defeat he could still find reasons to be cheerful, that he chose not to nitpick refereeing decisions or curse his luck but to focus on the “huge personality” his team had shown.AdvertisementYet twice this season Chelsea has beaten City, a 12-point swing against Guardiola’s team that goes a long way to explaining why Chelsea is about to become the champion and City must fret for another six weeks over whether it will have a place in the Champions League next year.After both losses, Guardiola declared that he was happy, proclaimed that his side merited victory. “Absolutely, we were the much better team,” he said Wednesday. That is the prerogative of all managers, of course — rare and precious are those who come out and accept that defeat was warranted — and it does not make him unique.Still, the question is worth asking: If Guardiola is genuinely happy, if Guardiola genuinely believes his team deserved to win, why is it that on both occasions the opposite has happened? Once, perhaps, would be unfortunate. Twice looks a lot like a pattern.Guardiola’s rationale is simple. “It was the details in the boxes; that’s all,” he said when asked what the difference between the teams was. Chelsea capitalized on its chances — most recently, two goals from Eden Hazard, one on a deflected shot and one on a penalty kick — and City, Sergio Agüero’s goal aside, did not.Guardiola has a point, too: Agüero could have tied the game in the second half, and John Stones missed from just a few yards out in the dying seconds. It was similar to what happened earlier this season: Chelsea was ruthless, City profligate.Missing chances, however, is not necessarily just bad luck: It can be an indication of a flaw in a team — particularly if it happens more than once, and particularly if it happens more than once in crucial, high-pressure games. City has proved fragile on such occasions this year; Chelsea, once Manager Antonio Conte switched to the three-man defense that has steered the team to the verge of the championship, has been anything but.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.That Guardiola and Conte hold each other in high esteem is abundantly clear.On Tuesday night, Guardiola described Conte as “the best manager in the world,” one he studies in order to sharpen his own skills.Conte returned the compliment on Wednesday, saying, “He really is the best.” Their mutual admiration is a refreshing change in a league that feeds on conflict and confected rancor.AdvertisementPerhaps that respect is rooted in the sense that each has something the other does not. Perhaps Conte appreciates the way Guardiola sees the game, his concept of what soccer can look like; perhaps Guardiola envies Conte’s ruthless streak.It is no criticism of Chelsea to suggest that other teams in the Premier League have a higher ceiling. City, at its best, possesses a beauty Chelsea cannot match. Tottenham and Liverpool have their moments, too. And it feels distant now, but Arsenal can occasionally play a bit.What none of them have is Chelsea’s consistency, its effectiveness, its remorselessness, and that is because of Conte. He does not, like so many of his peers, prioritize style over everything else; he does not sacrifice his individuals for the glorification of a preordained idea; he prefers earthy pragmatism to philosophy.It was telling, for example, that he bemoaned his team’s lack of “balance” in the first half on Wednesday when most would have suggested the game was the sort of breakneck frenzy held in such high regard in the Premier League. Conte wanted more control, more management of the situation. “I don’t like it when it is open,” he said.That is his secret, particularly in direct encounters with his supposed rivals. He knows that Guardiola, for example, wants his team to express itself, to play expansive, adventurous soccer. So Conte sets up his players to use that as a weapon.He wants Guardiola to be happy with how his team has played. The happier Guardiola is, the more it suits Conte and his players, drilled to find the holes left behind and exploit them. “It is normal to suffer in some part against City,” Conte said. In that suffering lies his success.It took Conte a little longer than Guardiola on Wednesday night to emerge to face the news media. He, too, was asked what the difference had been between Chelsea and City this season. It took him a while to find the right words.“The difference,” Conte said, eventually, “is that we won the game and they lost the game.”As Conte spoke, he was smiling — a broad, beaming smile. Sometimes, if you are happy, you do not need to say so.A version of this article appears in print on April 6, 2017, on Page B16 of the New York edition with the headline: City’s Coach Says He’s Happy; Chelsea’s Has Reason to Be.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »