By MIKE VORKUNOVAPRIL 5, 2017
The Knicks have used the last month of this disappointing season to fiddle with their lineup, sometimes finding surprising results. They have seen Ron Baker play competently in place of Derrick Rose, and they have beaten the Heat in Miami with Carmelo Anthony on the bench. At times, that hardscrabble-but-egalitarian approach produced better results than the top-heavy bunch that struggled for most of the season.But Tuesday night, the Knicks put together perhaps their most unexpected performance yet. With Rose out for the season and Kristaps Porzingis sidelined with a sore lower back, the Knicks walloped the Bulls, 100-91, at Madison Square Garden. Chicago looked little like the playoff contender it is — the Bulls came into the night seventh in the Eastern Conference standings — and more like a patsy for the suddenly spry Knicks.While Anthony provided the scoring, dropping 23 points, Kyle O’Quinn provided a little bit of everything else. He scored 8 points, grabbed 12 rebounds, dished out 5 assists and blocked 5 shots.Even more eye-popping was Maurice Ndour, a rookie who received his first career start after having played just 199 minutes all season. Ndour used the night as a coming-out party, scoring 13 points, grabbing 12 rebounds and coming up with 2 steals.AdvertisementEverything about his performance was unexpected, even for Ndour. He is usually most visible at the Garden in the hour before tipoff, working out with the assistant coach Kurt Rambis. When he found out he would be starting, during shootaround, he was flabbergasted.Advertisement“Me, you sure?” he said, recalling his reaction. “It’s me? I’m starting?”The timing was fortuitous. Although he played four years of college basketball — two at a junior college, Monroe College in New Rochelle, and two at Ohio University — and spent this season on the Knicks’ bench, Ndour’s mother watched him play in the United States for the first time Tuesday night. She had flown in to New York from their native Senegal on Sunday night.“It was really one of the special moments,” Ndour said. “I had joy and I had fun all the day, and I enjoyed myself playing, not only for the team, but playing for her and just for her to see me out there. It was amazing.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The win — the Knicks’ third in their last five games — hurt their lottery odds, but that turn of events seemed immaterial to fans who were happy to see a victory.Still, the game was not entirely positive. Porzingis, sitting on the bench, was deprived of critical repetitions as a center of the Knicks’ offense — a position he has found only recently.This season, Coach Jeff Hornacek said, opponents have come out game-planning for Porzingis. While most of his statistics have improved, Porzingis has had an up-and-down season while battling injuries. When Rose and Anthony were on the court, Porzingis was sometimes lost in the offense and relegated to a third option.Porzingis’s profile may rise next season. Rose will be a free agent, and his chances of returning to the Knicks grew even dimmer when he was found to have a season-ending knee injury Sunday. Anthony is also far from certain to be back.That could leave Porzingis as the featured star — a weight he will have to prove he can handle.“You have to see a guy go through it,” Hornacek said. “He’s seen some of it this year. Even though we’ve had Carmelo and Derrick, people know what he does, they try and take things away from him. Can you say that’s next year or the year after? He’s made great strides. He’s heading that way.”A version of this article appears in print on April 5, 2017, on Page B8 of the New York edition with the headline: Basketball; Knicks Defeat the Bulls.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.