AdvertisementSupported byBy Scott CacciolaOAKLAND, Calif. — Stephen Curry has a well-established after-practice routine of taking 100 shots from 3-point range. He works his way around the arc, hoisting 10 shots from each spot. He once made 70 in a row. He often looks annoyed if the ball so much as glances off the rim before falling through.Bruce Fraser, an assistant coach with the Golden State Warriors, passes Curry the ball and can sense, having spent so much time with him over the past two seasons, if Curry lacks his usual focus. An average total for him is somewhere in the mid-80s, Fraser said. Anything short of that is a disappointment.“I can tell pretty easily if he’s bored, because he’ll only miss shots if he’s bored,” Fraser said. “I mean, he’s human — he’s going to miss some shots — so maybe I should rephrase this, because he’s not actually superhuman. If he’s missing more shots than he normally does, then it’s because he’s bored.”Deep into his record-setting season with the Warriors, Curry, 28, seems determined to push the outer bounds of basketball and to press himself, as always, to become a better player. This raises an interesting question: Is there actually that much room for improvement? Some of his teammates are skeptical.“I mean, there isn’t a whole lot,” Andrew Bogut said. “What’s next? I guess shooting pull-ups from halfcourt on a more consistent basis.”So, yes, on the surface, it sounds like an absurd question. Absurd because Curry, who led the Warriors to a 121-85 win over the Knicks on Wednesday, has made 330 3-pointers this season, obliterating the N.B.A. record of 286 that he set last season. Absurd because he is averaging a career-best 30.5 points along with 6.4 assists a game. Absurd because he is shooting 51 percent from the field and 46 percent from 3-point range. Absurd because he is the league’s reigning most valuable player and a shoo-in to win the award again.But the question is absurd mostly because Curry, a 6-foot-3-inch, 185-pound point guard, is the guiding force behind the Warriors, who could be the most dominant team of all time. What could he realistically do at this stage to refine his skills, other than make every shot and eliminate some turnovers? Curry, for one, still sees room to grow — an unnerving prospect for the rest of the league.Most summers, he said, he concentrates on maintaining and even building his endurance. His shot works from the ground up, which means that he needs his legs — especially late in games, when all those parabolic jumpers are not nearly as effortless as he makes them look. As an example of his expanded range, he has made 15 of 30 attempts (50 percent) from beyond 30 feet this season, a stupefying level of accuracy. Last season, he was 3 of 16 (18.8 percent).“I like the percentage of makes,” Curry said of his shooting as a whole. “I want to keep that increasing as well.”Curry can catch and shoot, because of course he can, but he also thrives off the dribble. One of the things that make him such a maddening assignment for defenders is that he does not have a go-to move. Some shooters prefer to go to their left. Others rely on a jab step or a pump fake. There is a rhythm to the way most players go about their business.Curry, though, can do it all, and he syncopates his style, making it nearly impossible for opponents to anticipate what he will do next. He has enough confidence to know that he can shoot after dribbling between his legs or around his back — or after making countless other moves. He sizes up his defender and breaks the code.“As soon as it touches my hand, I can go from that point to a quick release and shoot it,” Curry said. “I don’t really time stuff up — like, ‘All right, I’m about to hit him with a one-two and then shoot.’ It’s more just, as soon as you get into a move and see daylight, being able to transition from the dribble to the shot as quickly as possible.”He added, “I work on that stuff and try to keep it as quick as I can, and as efficient.”Curry also continues to improve, Fraser said, because he is constantly gaining familiarity with his teammates and their tendencies. For example, he has become a better passer, delivering the ball with greater precision. Against the Utah Jazz on Wednesday night, Curry made two dazzling passes in the first quarter — behind the back to Draymond Green in transition and then a lob from just inside midcourt to Bogut for an alley-oop dunk.“His physical skill as a passer has gotten better — the touch, the location,” Fraser said. “You want to catch the ball right in your shooting pocket. Being able to throw the ball to a specific area for that person to be able to catch it and go into his shot is actually a big deal. Steph’s passes were not always that accurate.”But the biggest area for potential growth is clear to Fraser — although it might come as a surprise to the rest of humankind.“His focus,” Fraser said.It has to do with the way in which Curry is wired, Fraser said. He has a lot of “little kid in him,” as Fraser put it, and there are obvious benefits. Curry’s psychological makeup helps make him impervious to pressure, Fraser said. Little seems to bother him. He plays freely and with joy.“We can’t take away that mustang spirit,” Fraser said. “We don’t want to bridle him.”The drawback, Fraser said, is that Curry can get bored — bored with making the same solid pass, bored with shooting the same dependable jumper and even bored with winning games by the same lopsided margins. These are first-world problems, of course. But there are occasions when Curry appears to ratchet up the degree of difficulty just to challenge himself.“The game comes so easily to him now that he needs a little more juice at times,” Fraser said, “and that might mean taking more risks.”These are risks that are not always necessary, and turnovers have been a (relatively minor) recurring problem. In January, he committed eight in a narrow win against the Philadelphia 76ers — not his finest moment. Coach Steve Kerr has continually emphasized the importance of making the solid play instead of the spectacular one.“Steph will sometimes ask me during a game, ‘How many turnovers do I have?’ ” Fraser said. “Because he knows that’s a thing Steve doesn’t like. He’ll never ask about his shooting numbers during a game, or any other kind of stats. But the only thing he knows is that Steve harps on turnovers, so it’s definitely on his mind.”Kerr recalled his playing days with the San Antonio Spurs, back when Manu Ginobili was in his first season with the team. Ginobili, Kerr said, had a habit of driving Coach Gregg Popovich crazy by throwing circus passes. Finally, after one game, Popovich turned to Ginobili and asked him why he felt it was so necessary.“Pop,” Ginobili replied, “this is what I do.”Popovich gradually came to accept Manu being Manu as a part of the package.“There’s a certain amount of that on this team because of the skill involved, especially with Steph,” Kerr said. “Steph’s going to throw some of the around-the-back stuff. He’s going to make some crazy plays. And obviously so much more of it is good than bad, so you live with it.”Besides, in the grand scheme of things, these are quibbles. We might as well critique the brush strokes of Rembrandt. Any momentary lapses in concentration, any lulls in focus after so many carefree wins — Curry’s coaches are there to nudge him along. So Kerr emphasizes turnovers, and Fraser mixes things up at practice to stoke the flames in Curry’s furnace.Fraser and Nick U’Ren, a special assistant to Kerr and the team’s manager of advanced scouting, make friendly wagers with Curry if they detect that he is laboring with his after-practice shooting routine. The amount they bet is weighted according to their respective salaries, which means that Curry puts up substantially more money — not that he is in danger of losing any of it. Fraser has kept a running tally for the season.“We owe him,” he said.Advertisement