By KAREN CROUSEMARCH 16, 2016
ORLANDO, Fla. — Eddie Fairchild ran as if he were in a septuagenarian sprint. Fairchild, 72, was chasing a golf cart driven by 86-year-old Arnold Palmer, the host of this week’s PGA Tour stop at the Bay Hill Club and Lodge.Palmer, whose enduring popularity was built on his larger-than-life presence, is shrinking from the public eye. Slowed by the infirmities of age, he dispensed with two traditions this year, choosing not to meet with the news media before the event, which starts Thursday, or take part in the ceremonial first tee shot at next month’s Masters.These decisions left Arnie’s Army worried about the state of its leader’s health. His appearance on Tuesday afternoon created a palpable buzz on the grounds. It was as if Palmer were wordlessly conveying that he remained the tournament’s driving force.With a state trooper seated beside him and with his wife, Kit, holding on tightly in the back, a tanned and conspicuously thinner Palmer steered the cart with one hand and waved with the other as well-wishers shouted, “There’s the king!” and “Mr. Palmer, thank you!” He stopped where the path met a residential road and signed a few autographs. Fairchild caught up, but not before Palmer had eased the cart onto the road and stepped on the gas.AdvertisementNever mind that Palmer built a reputation on leaving no autograph seeker behind.“He didn’t hear me,” said Fairchild, a retiree from Michigan who added that he had been following Palmer around golf courses during tournament weeks since the late 1950s.AdvertisementFairchild had Palmer’s autograph, from another year, on the green-billed cap he was wearing.Earlier in the day, Fairchild had obtained the autograph of Palmer’s grandson Sam Saunders. Like Palmer’s, it was neat and legible.“Arnie always said if you’re going to write your name, write it so people can read it,” Fairfield said.Bryson DeChambeau, a 22-year-old amateur, received a penmanship lesson from Palmer during a practice round last year in Latrobe, Pa., with other members of the United States Walker Cup team.“He said, ‘Make your signature legible,’ ” DeChambeau said. “I’ve done it ever since.”He added, “Even though it’s a long name, I’m going to take that time to make everybody feel special.”At last year’s Palmer Cup, another amateur team event, Maverick McNealy, 20, had the task of delivering an address to Palmer at the opening banquet.“Basically the message was thank you for the legacy you left for the game,” McNealy said, “and how that is in a lot of ways more impressive than the legacy left on the golf course, and it’s our job as the next generation of golfers to pay that forward and embody that.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.What was Palmer’s reaction? “He just gave us a big thumbs up and smiled in typical Arnold Palmer fashion,” McNealy said.AdvertisementThe respect shown Palmer knows no generational bounds. Rickie Fowler, 27, who lives in Jupiter, Fla., drove two hours each way last week to deliver the news to Palmer in person that he was skipping the tournament.Bubba Watson, 37, a two-time Masters champion, had much less distance to cover after he decided last week not to risk further injuring his tight back. He drove from his Orlando home with his 4-year-old son, Caleb, in tow to tell Palmer that he was withdrawing from this week’s field. The conversation, he said, lasted several minutes and covered a wide range of topics.“A younger guy coming to him to ask about life, just kind of encourage him as much as I could, if he even needed it,” Watson said.At one point, he added, Palmer pulled Caleb onto his lap, and Watson asked if he could take a photo. Upon arriving home, Watson called Palmer to ask if he could post the picture on Twitter.Palmer, of course, was the master of an earlier technological age. A 62-time tour winner, he won the first of his seven majors in 1958. His career took off around the time color television was gaining a foothold in the United States. Palmer’s charisma illuminated the small screen.While he drew people in with his magnetism, Palmer’s humanity was his calling card.Brandt Snedeker, 35, was a one-time tour winner in 2010 — “a nobody” was how he described himself — when he reached out to a friend who was a friend of Palmer’s. Fresh from a final-round collapse at the Phoenix Open, a disheartened Snedeker was the apprentice hoping for a few minutes to learn at the knee of the master. To Snedeker’s delight, a meeting was arranged for early March, when the Phoenix Open defeat was still an open wound.On the appointed day and time, Snedeker showed up at Bay Hill. He was greeted by Palmer, who ushered him into his office. They sat and talked about golf for more than an hour before continuing the conversation over lunch in the clubhouse.After they finished eating, Palmer asked Snedeker if he would like to play the back nine. It was an offer Snedeker could not refuse.Advertisement“Arnie birdied No. 17,” Snedeker said, referring to the par 3, “and took money off me.”He added: “I had the best day. I showed up fully expecting to take up five minutes of his time, and he gave me the whole day.”Snedeker has since notched seven more PGA Tour victories, one at this year’s Farmers Insurance Open. When in contention, he said, he thinks of the advice Palmer imparted that day, about playing each shot down the stretch with conviction. Snedeker includes this tournament in his schedule as a way of repaying the generosity of spirit shown to him by Palmer.On Wednesday, Rory McIlroy, dressed head to toe in Nike apparel, sat in front of reporters and acknowledged the debt he owed to Palmer, the sport’s pioneering pitchman.He added, “Obviously he had so much talent and success, but if you look at how he is with people and how generous he is with his time and how gracious he is, he’s a great example to anyone growing up playing this game and playing it professionally.”A version of this article appears in print on March 17, 2016, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: Rare Appearance, and a Greeting Fit for a King .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.