By SCOTT CACCIOLAMARCH 17, 2016
OAKLAND, Calif. —  The Golden State Warriors started their game against the Knicks on Wednesday night by missing their first six shots. It was an atypical sequence from the Warriors, the N.B.A.’s most dominant team, and the Knicks took the lead. The crowd at Oracle Arena sat in silence. Everyone in the building seemed confused.For the Knicks, it was a brief flirtation with joy, a sliver of sunshine through the storm clouds of a sad season. And then it was gone — poof! — as Stephen Curry began to throw lobs for dunks, drive for finger-roll layups and assemble his usual brand of basketball sorcery. The Knicks were not in possession of a magic potion.The Warriors crushed the Knicks, 121-85, to win their 50th straight regular-season home game, a stretch of genius that dates to last season. Curry scored 34 points before spending the fourth quarter on the bench. He was 8 of 13 from 3-point range. He did little dances after a couple of the more artistic ones.Kurt Rambis, the coach of the Knicks, acknowledged beforehand that his team would need to play at its best to have a chance. The Knicks (28-41) fell well short of that bar, and it might not have made much of a difference anyway. Carmelo Anthony finished with 18 points, but his teammates struggled. Kristaps Porzingis had 2 points and shot 1 of 11 from the field.AdvertisementIt was the fifth game of a six-game trip that the Knicks will conclude Saturday against the Washington Wizards. Hoping to ride the momentum from their last-second victory Sunday against the Los Angeles Lakers, they seemed to lack energy and any semblance of chemistry against Golden State.AdvertisementThen again, the Warriors (61-6) have had that effect on a lot of opponents this season. Everyone on their team can shoot — and even some of their fans. One man was summoned from the crowd for a contest during a timeout in the third quarter and promptly swished a no-look shot over his shoulder.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Knicks, meanwhile, had trouble making layups. Making matters worse, Jose Calderon absorbed the brunt of a collision before leaving the game with a sore right calf.The only piece of good news for the Knicks? They will not face the Warriors again this season.On Jan. 31, Curry struggled at Madison Square Garden. He shot 5 of 17 from the field and left with a giant scratch across his forehead, courtesy of some overly aggressive defense by Anthony. The Warriors still won by 21.“I’m pretty sure he didn’t mean to actually claw me in that situation,” Curry said, adding, “I underestimated his reach.”The wound had healed well ahead of Wednesday’s game — “No scars,” Curry said — and he went about his familiar business. The Warriors led by 12 after the first quarter, by 16 at halftime and by 33 at the end of the third.Amid the destruction, Anthony draped a towel over his shoulders and wore the glowering expression of a short-order cook. The Knicks were toast.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.