AdvertisementSupported byRangers 2, Ducks 1By The Associated PressANAHEIM, Calif. — Kevin Klein had the first two-goal game of his 11-year N.H.L. career, scoring the tiebreaking goal with less than seven minutes to play in the Rangers’ 2-1 victory over the Anaheim Ducks on Wednesday night.Klein also scored a tying goal in the second period for the Rangers (40-23-7), who opened a three-game California trip with their second win in five games over all. Klein, a defenseman, had played 555 regular-season games and 67 playoff games with Nashville and the Rangers before his first two-goal performance.“It’s nice, but the 2 points is the big thing,” Klein said. “Just to chip in, I’m happy about that.”Antti Raanta made 22 saves in the Rangers’ second victory over Anaheim this season.Jamie McGinn scored for the Ducks (38-22-9), who have lost four of five in their first poor stretch since Christmas. The Ducks lost in regulation at home for the first time since Jan. 17, ending a 10-game points streak at Honda Center.Anaheim goaltender John Gibson stopped 21 shots.“I thought we passed up way too many chances to shoot,” Ducks Coach Bruce Boudreau said. “We tried to be cute, and when we’re a cute team and not just getting pucks to the net, we’re not successful. And when you don’t get a chance on the power play, it makes it a little more difficult. I think we deserved at least one.”The Rangers’ captain, Ryan McDonagh, appeared to be hit in the face by an Anaheim shot at the final buzzer, falling to the ice in pain. McDonagh eventually skated off.Coach Alain Vigneault said McDonagh was “O.K., as far as I know.”Klein, who committed a turnover that led to McGinn’s goal in the first period, made up for it when he drove to the net in the waning minutes and deflected a sharp pass from J. T. Miller for his eighth goal of the season.“He’s such a heart-and-soul guy,” forward Dominic Moore said of Klein. “It’s really great to see him be the hero tonight.”Brandon Pirri made his debut for Anaheim, playing on the Ducks’ top line with the captain Ryan Getzlaf and David Perron. Anaheim acquired Pirri from the Florida Panthers at the trade deadline but had to wait two and a half weeks while he recovered from an ankle injury that kept him off the ice for a month.McGinn put the Ducks on the board midway through the first period after a spectacular play by Corey Perry. Perry, a former N.H.L. most valuable player, took the puck from Klein with an artful reach before finding McGinn, who scored his third goal in eight games with his new team.Early in the second, Klein sent a long rebound of Tanner Glass’s shot into an open net when Gibson was slow to move post to post. The Rangers dominated long stretches of play in the second, but Gibson kept it even.Advertisement