AdvertisementSupported byGlobal SoccerBy Rob HughesLONDON — If anyone tells you that Champions League soccer can be numbing and predictable, remind them of this week, when Europe had its own version of March Madness.On Tuesday, all four clubs failed to score. On Wednesday it was the opposite, with 10 goals (seven worthy of being called world-class) scored as the tournament’s two most fabulous teams, Barcelona and Bayern Munich, offered a vision of what could be during this year’s final.At the Camp Nou, Barcelona beat Arsenal, 3-1. “At some stage in our sport, you have to admire art,” Arsenal Manager Arsène Wenger said, summing up his 200th match in the tournament. “That’s exactly what Barcelona do, especially Messi. They turn life into art.”In torrential rain, Barcelona’s magical strikers did as they do most games — score. First it was with a cool, low shot from Neymar, then an acrobatic midair volley from Luis Suárez and finally, an artful, trademark dink over the Arsenal goalkeeper by Lionel Messi.And yet, Bayern Munich’s 4-2 comeback win in extra time against Juventus was the more dramatic, more thrilling and more memorable encounter. After half an hour, Bayern was down 2-0 and looked like it was going out. In the 91st minute, Bayern was still a goal down, but it somehow did what German clubs do so often: It rescued itself with a late, late goal. And in the second half of the 30 minutes of extra time, two Munich substitutes, Thiago Alcântara and Kingsley Coman — very possibly the club’s future — gutted the Juventus defense with exquisite goals.“After our first goal, we knew we could do it,” said Robert Lewandowski, the Polish striker who hit that first goal for Bayern. “We said to one another, this is the Champions League, we can do it because we are Bayern Munich.”Indeed so. With the Allianz Arena lit bright red and with 70,000 fans changed from shocked silence to shrill song, this truly was a powerhouse of modern soccer.But Juventus, known in Italy as the Old Lady, is not feeble, either. Home and away, both contests were mirror images of each other. In Turin, Italy, Bayern had led 2-0 before Juventus came back for a 2-2 tie. On Wednesday, the reverse happened: Juventus scored twice in the first half and, with just a little more care in its finishing, it might have sunk the Bavarians.At this point, Bayern was being outplayed, outfoxed and outcoached.Juventus, which was missing the key defender Giorgio Chiellini, midfielder Claudio Marchisio and forward Paulo Dybala, opted to attack in Munich. While Bayern Coach Pep Guardiola expected a cagey defense from the Italians, his opposite number, Massimiliano Allegri, instead boldly went for the throat.His surprise weapon was Álvaro Morata, who was born in Madrid and rejected by Real. Morata made the pass that let Paul Pogba strike the first goal and then, with an astonishing surge and another pass, he set up Juan Cuadrado to score the second.Television analysts described Morata’s run for that second goal — moving from deep in his own half, bursting past four Munich players — as bordering on Messi-like. Well, not quite. It was more brusque than something from Messi, more obviously athletic and less serene than a Messi creation.Following that, things had to change or else Munich was out.The biggest change came 60 minutes in, when Guardiola took off Xabi Alonso, the aging Spaniard in midfield, and threw in Coman. In one of those quirks of European soccer, Coman, 19, is on loan. His parent club? Juventus.Bayern can buy him outright, for less than $25 million. It might be a good deal, for Coman has breathtaking ability and speed. He plays on either wing, and his entry on Wednesday turned Bayern from a beaten team to a resurgent one.In the 73rd minute, Coman and Douglas Costa combined on the right to invite Lewandowski to head in his eighth goal in eight Champions League games this season.In the 91st minute, Coman crossed the ball again for Thomas Müller to head the goal.Then came extra time, and Munich had one more substitute to bring off the bench and finish the comeback. In came Thiago, a product of F.C. Barcelona taken to Munich after Guardiola took over as coach. Normally a playmaker, he also can finish, often exquisitely. His goal after 108 minutes was curled around a defender from the edge of the penalty area. Two minutes later, Coman put the final dagger into his former team as he lifted the ball with deadly serenity into the far side of the net.At 4-2, it was the mother of all comebacks against a tiring and dispirited Old Lady of Turin. One imagines there will be no going back to Italy for Coman, and Bayern has warned Guardiola that it will not allow its coach to pilfer any of its players when he departs to take over Manchester City after this season.“This win will weld us together,” Philipp Lahm, Bayern’s captain, told reporters. “It was important to see that everyone — everyone from the bench — was pushing us.”And what is even more important is that when the quarterfinal draw is held Friday, Barcelona and Bayern Munich do not end up facing each other. They are the two most exciting teams in Europe right now and deserve to face off in the final. Advertisement