By VICTOR MATHERNOV. 23, 2016
When you are a baseball player remembered for one big at-bat, it is almost always something good: a walk-off double, a record-breaking single, a pennant-clinching homer.When you are a pitcher remembered for one pitch … well it is not always as good.Ralph Branca died Wednesday. He was a fine pitcher for the Brooklyn Dodgers, but inevitably all his obituaries referred prominently to the pitch he threw to Bobby Thomson in 1951 that promptly flew into the left-field stands and won the pennant for the New York Giants. The hit became known as the Shot Heard Round the World, and they heard Branca’s name around the world, too.Here are some other pitchers whose careers were overshadowed by the one pitch that did not go quite right.Ralph Terry to Bill Mazeroski, 1960.If any pitch surpasses the fame of the fastball thrown by Branca, it is this one. The setting could not have been more dramatic: World Series, Game 7, ninth inning, tie score. Mazeroski’s shot won the Series for the Pirates over the Yankees. Terry bounced back to win the most valuable player of the 1962 Series, but he will always be remembered for giving up that blast, the first Series-ending home run ever.Mitch Williams to Joe Carter, 1993.And this was the second. Williams was known as Wild Thing and had made a habit of giving Phillies fans many nervous moments. His teammate Curt Schilling finally started putting a towel over his head so he did not have to watch when Williams was on the mound. The Phillies nonetheless made the World Series, but it all came crashing down when Carter hit a bottom-of-the-ninth homer in Game 6 to win the Series for the Blue Jays.AdvertisementAl Downing to Hank Aaron, 1974.Word association for baseball fans. Al Downing. Answer? Probably Hank Aaron. Downing pitched in 17 major league seasons, but giving up Aaron’s record-breaking 715th home run is how he is remembered. Others in this category are Tracy Stallard (Roger Maris’s 61st home run, 1961), Eric Show (Pete Rose’s 4,192nd hit, 1985) and Mike Bacsik (Barry Bonds’s 756th home run, 2007).AdvertisementDonnie Moore to Dave Henderson, 1986.With the Angels one strike away from the World Series in Game 5, Moore gave up a home run to Henderson of the Red Sox, sending the game to extra innings. He had a chance to make everyone forget that hit but gave up a sacrifice fly, to Henderson, in the 11th, and the Red Sox went on to win the American League Championship Series. Less than three years later, his career over, Moore shot his wife, who survived, and committed suicide.Carl Mays to Ray Chapman, 1920.It is unfortunate to be remembered for a pitch that lost you a championship. It is horrific to be remembered for a pitch that killed a man. Mays, a submariner for the Yankees, fired an high inside fastball to Chapman of the Indians. Chapman never moved. The ball hit his helmetless head, and he died the next day at age 29. “I would give anything if I could undo what has happened,” Mays said, and he was exonerated of blame. But he had to live with the memory of the pitch for half a century, until his death in 1971.Bob Cain to Eddie Gaedel, 1951.Unlike the others on this list, Cain is remembered for four pitches, not one. He issued 316 walks in his career, but 315 are long forgotten. Not this legendary base on balls. Cain faced the 3-foot-7 Gaedel and to no one’s surprise he threw four straight high pitches. “I will never forget the look of utter disbelief that came over Cain’s face as he finally realized that this was for real,” wrote Bill Veeck, who envisioned the publicity stunt.Cain was good humored about it, and he might as well have been. It is the moment for which he will always be remembered.An article on Thursday about pitchers like Ralph Branca whose careers were overshadowed by one play misstated, in some copies, the day Branca died. It was Wednesday, not Tuesday.A version of this article appears in print on November 24, 2016, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: Branca Wasn’t Only One Branded by Single Pitch.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.