By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSMARCH 16, 2016
Told to reduce his son’s time in the clubhouse, Chicago White Sox first baseman Adam LaRoche took a different path: He said he planned to retire and walk away from a $13 million salary.The president of the White Sox, Kenny Williams, confirmed Wednesday that he had twice asked LaRoche in the last week to “dial it back” with his 14-year-old son, Drake.Williams said LaRoche’s son was a “quality young kid” and not a distraction. But Williams indicated he did not want anything to disturb the team’s focus this season.“Sometimes you have to make decisions in this world that are unpopular,” Williams said before Chicago played a spring training game in Phoenix against Milwaukee.AdvertisementThe situation seemed likely to stir a debate beyond the sport: What is a proper take-your-child-to-work environment?It was unclear what LaRoche, 36, would ultimately do or how the White Sox would fill his spot if he did not return.On Tuesday, LaRoche abruptly said he planned to leave the game. White Sox General Manager Rick Hahn described it as a “personal decision” without elaborating, and LaRoche was asked to reconsider.LaRoche drew plenty of support from fellow players. He is in his second year with the White Sox, his sixth major league team.“Good for you Roche!” Bryce Harper, the reigning National League most valuable player and La Roche’s former Washington Nationals teammate, posted on Twitter. “Nothing like father and son in the clubhouse...It’s a FAMILY game.”AdvertisementLaRoche, a son and brother of major leaguers, knows about that.It has become part of major league culture to see sons in the clubhouse and on the field with their fathers for early pregame practice. Ken Griffey Jr., Cal Ripken Jr. and Prince Fielder are among the many stars who came up that way.Different teams have had different rules. Some clubs have allowed children in the clubhouse after Sunday games, provided they were victories.“On our side of things, I think everyone would say we enjoyed Drake LaRoche in the clubhouse and everything he brought to the clubhouse,” White Sox outfielder Adam Eaton said. “He helped out around and wasn’t a burden by any stretch of the imagination. He wasn’t a big problem last year, either.”Eaton added: “Adam and Drake are probably the most respected people in baseball I ever played with. Drake would clean cleats; he would help out in drills, pick up baseballs when we needed; he didn’t say boo to anybody and was never a trouble in the clubhouse.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Williams said he wanted to be clear that his request was “not because the young man was a distraction, not because he wasn’t well received or well liked by players, management and everyone else.”He added: “He’s a quality, quality young kid that one day might be a heck of a player one day. Anyway, one of the things we said coming into this season is ‘Let’s check all the columns’ with regards to our preparation, our focus to give us every chance to win.”That led Williams to speak with LaRoche, who hit only .207 with 12 home runs last season.“To have his child on the field 100 percent of the time, and that’s kind of where we were, every day, yeah, I asked him initially just dial it back,” Williams said. “Even 50 percent is probably too much, but there is a wide range between zero and 50 percent.”He added: “I was a little surprised at the stance that he took. It’s unfortunate. But talk about a quality decision, a life decision and a family decision. He talked about being there for his family and family first and front and center, and I respect and admire that.”Williams emphasized that he thought it was “great” to have kids around a team. “I just don’t think it’s great every day,” he said.AdvertisementPUIG WON’T BE DISCIPLINED Los Angeles Dodgers outfielder Yasiel Puig will not be punished by Major League Baseball for his involvement in an incident in a Miami nightclub last fall.Puig was left with a swollen eye and facial bruises on Nov. 26. A Miami Police Department spokesman, Delrish Moss, said at the time that the injuries had been sustained as Puig was leaving the club, the Blue Martini, at bouncers’ request after an argument with his sister.M.L.B. said in a statement that it had interviewed Puig and his sister and reviewed video from inside the club. The “investigation did not uncover any witness who supported the assault allegation,” M.L.B. said. Puig was not charged.“Both Puig and his sister denied that an assault occurred, and the available video evidence did not support the allegation,” the M.L.B. statement said. “Barring the receipt of any new information or evidence, no discipline will be imposed on Puig.”TEJADA’S METS TENURE ENDS The Mets officially cut ties with shortstop Ruben Tejada after no other club claimed him on waivers. The move will save the Mets about $2.5 million of the $3 million they otherwise would have paid him this season and leaves Tejada, 26, free to pursue a deal with any other team.Tejada signed with the Mets as a teenager out of Panama, and the Mets have been the only organization he has known. But on a healthy Mets roster, he was no better than the third-string shortstop this season.One team that could be interested in signing him is the St. Louis Cardinals, who lost the starting shortstop Jhonny Peralta to a torn thumb ligament.  JAY SCHREIBERA version of this article appears in print on March 17, 2016, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: LaRoche to Quit After Feud With White Sox Over Son .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.