By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSMAY 29, 2016
Martin Truex Jr. did not avoid ladders or black cats, never worried about cracking mirrors or stepping on cracks. He knew his bad luck on the Sprint Cup circuit would change.Truex showed that in a big way Sunday night, leading a Nascar-record 588 miles to win the Coca-Cola 600 at Charlotte Motor Speedway — and break free of the bad luck that seemed to hit him when dominating races.“There’s a lot of emotion right now, not real sure it’s sunk in yet,” Truex said. “Real amazing weekend, the kind you dream about.”Truex started from the pole in Concord, N.C., moved quickly out front and led all but eight of 400 laps for his first win in 34 events.AdvertisementTruex ran strong enough in the past year to grab several checkered flags, but something always went awry. He led 141 laps at Texas yet finished sixth after poor pit strategy. In Kansas, he was out front for 172 laps until a loose wheel knocked him back to 14th. A year ago here, Truex led a race-best 131 laps but fell to fifth when he pitted for fuel late.AdvertisementTruex never let it get to him.“I had confidence; I had faith,” said Truex, who bettered Jim Paschal’s mark of leading 335 laps to win at Charlotte in 1967.Kevin Harvick was second, followed by Jimmie Johnson, Denny Hamlin, Brad Keselowski and Kurt Busch.Truex took the surprise out of this one early and was barely touched by the field. He was passed by Johnson on a restart 55 laps from the end, but Truex went back in front a lap later and was not pushed again.Truex’s single-car Furniture Row Racing team outclassed the armada of multicar Sprint Cup powerhouses.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Johnson, a four-time Coca-Cola 600 winner, was on Truex’s door a handful of times on restarts, but then would fade back. Harvick, who won here in 2011 and 2013, was the best of the rest — he got by Johnson 44 laps from the end yet never made a serious run at the top.“I mean they have had a few runs where they have just been the class of the field and things have kept them from victory lane,” Johnson said of Truex and his crew. “Tonight he wasn’t going to be denied. There was no way around that.”Formula One Drought Ends After crashes, engine problems and eight Formula One races without a win, Lewis Hamilton’s jubilation was evident as he threw himself into the arms of his Mercedes team after winning a rainy, incident-packed Monaco Grand Prix.The despondent Red Bull driver Daniel Ricciardo started from the pole position and finished second — after a blunder from his team, which failed to have his tires ready — and Sergio Perez was third for Force India.AdvertisementHamilton’s victory was even sweeter because he closed the gap on the championship leader Nico Rosberg, his teammate, who finished a lowly seventh after obeying orders to let Hamilton pass early on.Two weeks ago, Hamilton and Rosberg crashed into each other at the Spanish Grand Prix, both going out of the race and failing to pick up points. This time, the struggling Rosberg moved aside to give Hamilton a chance to catch Ricciardo and clinch his 44th career win.Because of poor visibility and a drenched circuit, the first few laps in Monaco were behind a safety car. But once the racing began properly, it was a thriller featuring multiple crashes.“As soon as it rained I knew there was an opportunity,” said Hamilton, whose only other Monaco win was in 2008 for McLaren. “Fortunately I was quick enough in the wet.”Hamilton closed the championship gap on Rosberg to 24 points, while Ricciardo is another 16 points behind in third.A version of this article appears in print on May 30, 2016, on Page D2 of the New York edition with the headline: By Ignoring Past Stumbles, Truex Cruises to the Finish.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.