AdvertisementSupported byBy Zach SchonbrunPHILADELPHIA — Amid the constant icing, there was physical therapy. When he was not on crutches, he was exercising in the pool. He had his meals served in the training room so he did not have to leave.Dylan Molloy was going to do whatever it took to play on Saturday, in Brown’s first appearance in the N.C.A.A. men’s lacrosse Final Four since 1994. But the coaches feared there was no way he could overcome a broken bone in his foot in less than two weeks.“With the amount of swelling and the amount of pain he was in, yeah,” Brown Coach Lars Tiffany said, “there wasn’t much optimism.”And yet, somehow, there was Molloy, the nation’s leader in points, warming up with a healthy limp before the matchup with top-seeded Maryland at Lincoln Financial Field. He did not start; Tiffany wanted to keep the Terrapins on their toes. But with 9 minutes 2 seconds left in the first quarter, Molloy scored his first goal, energizing the Bears in a seesawing battle against Maryland.Ultimately, the Terrapins, playing in their third consecutive national semifinal game, outlasted Brown, 15-14, in overtime. Colin Heacock provided the game-winning goal less than two minutes into the period.Molloy (two goals) mainly orbited around the goal, visibly hobbling at times and sapped of the explosiveness and bulldozing strength that made his game so distinctive. He served largely as a decoy, absorbing attention while Bailey Tills (four goals) and Henry Blynn (two goals, two assists) could attack.But his very presence in uniform was a surprise. Molloy, who sustained the injury in Brown’s win over Johns Hopkins on May 14, did not play last week in the quarterfinal game against Navy. Meanwhile, Brown’s team doctor, Brett D. Owens, was contacting orthopedic specialists in Providence and New York for consultation about the possibility of Molloy’s recovery.Eventually, Tiffany said, Owens spoke to several orthopedists who work with N.F.L. teams, and they indicated it was possible for Molloy to play.“They said, ‘We’ve gotten some athletes through this,’” Tiffany said, relating Owens’s conversation. “Not really the running backs or wide receivers, but more so like linemen, guys who don’t need to be explosive.”Owens then flew to Philadelphia on Saturday morning to give Molloy a shot of lidocaine to numb the pain in his foot. Tiffany said Molloy had surgery scheduled for Tuesday.Molloy, who appeared at the postgame news conference on a scooter, said that his foot had certainly been in pain but that he had wanted to play.“It’s a broken bone; it couldn’t feel much better than it was feeling the last couple days,” Molloy said. “The swelling was definitely down from last week. I was going to be out there regardless.”Though Brown’s unrelenting offense led the nation in scoring this season, averaging more than 16 goals per game, the Bears were up against a seasoned Maryland defense, which was able to contribute in more ways than one. When Brown’s goalie, Jack Kelly, drifted away from the net to cover an attackman for what is known as a 10-man ride, Terps defenseman Matt Dunn saw the open opportunity and heaved the ball from well beyond midfield, scoring on a bounce.Trailing by four with six minutes left, the Bears finally seemed to be able to build momentum, scoring three straight goals in a span of about 90 seconds. Three minutes later, with 1:49 remaining, Brown tied the score on a shot by Brendan Caputo.In the overtime, Maryland attacked quickly. Matt Rambo (five assists) found Heacock wide open in the middle, and after a pump fake got Kelly in the air, Heacock slipped the ball down low for an easy winner.The Terps will play in their fourth national title game in six years, facing unseeded North Carolina, which had not played in the Final Four since 1993.The Tar Heels used all that pent-up frustration to explode for nine goals in the first quarter of their 18-13 win over seventh-seeded Loyola (Maryland) in the first game Saturday.Chris Cloutier, a sophomore midfielder from Kitchener, Ontario, scored half of North Carolina’s goals, a stunning total that tied Syracuse’s Gary Gait (1988) and Brown’s Oliver Marti (1992) for the most in an N.C.A.A. Division I tournament game. Cloutier’s nine goals were two more than any player had collected in a game on championship weekend and nearly a third of his total goals for the season (29).His breakthrough performance, Steve Pontrello’s five points and Stephen Kelly’s 19 face-off wins and two assists kept North Carolina’s offense running on all cylinders against a defense ranked ninth in Division I in goals allowed per game.“We had a lot of moments of indecision,” Loyola Coach Charley Toomey said. “We didn’t give our goalies a lot of chances to make saves.”Advertisement