By SCOTT CACCIOLAMAY 28, 2016
OKLAHOMA CITY — Amid the steady drumbeat of an arena rooting for him to fail, Klay Thompson refused to let the Golden State Warriors fade away. With his team facing elimination from the N.B.A. playoffs for the second time in three nights, Thompson spotted up from the 3-point line and carried his team.On Saturday night, the Warriors prolonged their season-long quest for a second straight N.B.A. championship by defeating the Oklahoma City Thunder, 108-101, in Game 6 of the Western Conference finals.Thompson, so often overshadowed by Stephen Curry, scored 41 points as the Warriors tied the series at three games apiece, forcing a Game 7, set for Monday night in Oakland, Calif. Thompson sank 11 of 18 3-point attempts, and Curry added 31 points, 10 rebounds and 9 assists.“I don’t think there could be any more pressure on us in Game 7 than there was tonight,” Warriors Coach Steve Kerr said.AdvertisementThe game was an all-consuming nightmare for the Thunder’s Kevin Durant and Russell Westbrook. Durant finished with 29 points but shot 10 of 31 from the field. Westbrook was only marginally more accurate, scoring 28 points while shooting 10 of 27.AdvertisementThe Thunder, who were 3 of 23 from 3-point range, will have one more chance to advance to their first N.B.A. finals since 2012.The Thunder took an 8-point lead into the fourth quarter and kept trying to build on it. But Thompson refused to let them pull away. His fourth 3-pointer of the quarter cut Oklahoma City’s lead to 4. Curry later drained back-to-back 3-pointers to tie the game, 99-99.“We didn’t draw a whole lot up that created shots for them,” Kerr said of Thompson and Curry. “They were mostly just kind of playing the way they play.”With less than two minutes to play, the Warriors’ Andre Iguodala stripped Westbrook of the ball and found Thompson in a comfortable spot, behind the 3-point line. It might as well have been a layup. The Warriors were up by 3, and the crowd fell silent.“It was one of those nights where you make a few easy looks,” Thompson said, “and then you take those 30-footers with your feet not set and they just happen to keep going in.”Later, after the Thunder had forced a rare miss by Thompson, Westbrook threw the ball away — one of three turnovers he committed in the final 55 seconds. Curry scored to seal the victory.“I thought we got a little stagnant coming down the stretch,” Thunder Coach Billy Donovan said.At the start of the night, the Warriors must have felt as if they were walking into the world’s loudest mausoleum. They had lost Games 3 and 4 here by a combined 52 points. It was the first time the Warriors had lost consecutive games this season, and they did not merely lose; they were roasted.Advertisement“We knew what we got ourselves into after Game 4,” Green said.Kerr had recognized that the Thunder had too much length and too much size for him to employ his favored small lineup, in which Green slides from forward to center. So when the Warriors returned home for Game 5, Kerr went big and planted Andrew Bogut in the post. It helped that Bogut avoided foul trouble, and the Warriors won to ensure a trip back to Oklahoma City.Before Game 6, Kerr acknowledged that more pressure might be on the Thunder. They had a chance to close out the series at home, and while Durant and Westbrook had endured their share of pressure cookers, this opportunity — 48 minutes from the finals — was still slightly foreign.The Warriors had been tested — tested last season, when they won their first title in 40 years; tested without Curry, whose injuries in the first round scrambled their rhythm; and tested just days ago, when they avoided elimination for the first time. On Saturday, the Warriors were hoping for more of the same.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Thunder fans, bedecked in matching blue T-shirts, roared when Durant scored the game’s first points. The arena practically shook when he soared for a dunk soon afterward. Meanwhile, Green, who had entrenched himself as one of the city’s most loathsome visitors when he kicked Steven Adams in the groin in Game 3, was booed every time he touched the ball.Despite missing 13 of their first 18 shots, the Warriors survived the first few earsplitting possessions and trailed by 23-20 at the end of the first quarter.The Thunder soon found some separation. With Curry waiting to check back into the game, Westbrook lobbed a pass to Andre Roberson for a dunk that pushed the lead to 12. Curry did not score his first points until nearly five minutes had elapsed in the second quarter.But the Thunder had their own problems. Durant, hounded by the Warriors’ Iguodala, shot 6 of 19 from the field in the first half, and Oklahoma City was 2 of 14 from 3-point range.“There’s a reason he’s been one of the best defenders in the league for a long time,” Kerr said of Iguodala.AdvertisementThe Thunder led by 53-48 at the break, but Thompson opened the second half with two 3-pointers. The pace for both teams was frenetic, treading that fine line between aggressive and reckless. When the Warriors’ Festus Ezeli committed an offensive foul that wiped away a layup by Thompson, an exasperated Curry pointed at his temple: Think!It was not the most conducive environment for cerebral basketball, not with the circus tempo and not with the noise. Curry had the added annoyance of being defended by Westbrook, who draped himself all over Curry. There was some ill will between them, too. After Game 5, Westbrook laughed when Durant was asked whether Curry was an underrated defender.“I could care less about other people’s opinions about me,” Curry said before Game 6. “I know what I do for my team, and I know what my teammates expect of me.”The Warriors also knew what they expected from Thompson, and he delivered when they needed it most.An article in some copies on May 29 about the Golden State Warriors’ 108-101 victory over the Oklahoma City Thunder in Game 6 of the Western Conference finals misstated the number of points Stephen Curry and Draymond Green scored. Curry had 31 points, not 29, and Green had 12 points, not 14. The article also misidentified the player who scored to seal the victory. He is Curry, not Green. (The N.B.A. initially credited the basket to Green, but revised the official statistics the day after the game.) The error about Curry’s point total was repeated in an article on May 30 about Golden State Warriors Coach Steve Kerr’s history in Game 7s, and in the On Pro Basketball column on May 30, about the Warriors’ 3-point shooting in Game 6.A version of this article appears in print on May 29, 2016, on Page SP1 of the New York edition with the headline: Thompson Takes Control, and Warriors Force Game 7.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.