By DAVID WHITENOV. 23, 2016
The Thanksgiving Day lineup of N.F.L. games should be fairly appetizing. Here is a look at the matchups and who we think will win them:12:30 p.m. Line: Lions by 2 ½ The Lions are playing for sole possession of first place after winning five of six games to join Minnesota on top of the N.F.C. North. The Lions can do worse than let this game come down to the kickers: their Matt Prater popped a 58-yarder as a prelude to a 22-16 overtime win in the first matchup of these teams three weeks ago.The Vikings? They missed an extra point and had a field-goal attempt blocked. Minnesota needs touchdowns, which means it needs receiver Stefon Diggs to get his aching knee healthy on a short week.Pick: Vikings 4:30 p.m.  Line: Cowboys by 7 To pick up the Cowboys’ record book is to throw out your lower back. How is it, then, that a Dallas team led by two rookies is forcing a rewrite by Thanksgiving?Nine straight wins in the same season is a team record. Eight straight games with at least 400 yards of net offense has tied an N.F.L. record. And quarterback Dak Prescott — amply supported by his fellow rookie, running back Ezekiel Elliott — has thrown for 300-plus yards, multiple touchdowns and no interceptions in two consecutive games, a first by an N.F.L. rookie.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Forgive the Redskins for not quaking in their cleats. They have lost just one of their last eight games since a 27-23 defeat against Dallas in Week 2. Expect quarterback Kirk Cousins to take proper advantage of a Cowboys secondary missing two starters. Pick: CowboysAdvertisement8:30 p.m.  Line: Steelers by 8 ½ The Steelers have not won on Thanksgiving in 66 years. But then, the Steelers (1-6 on the holiday) have never squared off against Scott Tolzien, the Colts’ backup quarterback, before.AdvertisementWith Andrew Luck in the concussion protocol, the start is expected to go to Tolzien, who has thrown one regular-season pass since 2013.Pittsburgh’s offense has to play better on the road as it tries to defend its share of first place in the A.F.C. North. The Steelers scored one offensive touchdown in Cleveland last Sunday, needing three field goals and an end-zone fumble recovery to keep a safe, 24-9 distance from the winless Browns.Hand the ball off to running back Le’Veon Bell, and let him have a holiday against one of the worst defenses going. Pick: SteelersAll times are Eastern. Picks do not reflect the betting line.A version of this article appears in print on November 24, 2016, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Up for Grabs on Thanksgiving, a Top N.F.C. Spot.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.