AdvertisementSupported byDodgers 9, Mets 1By Filip BondyBefore this wacky game even began Saturday night, Dwight Gooden had some special praise for Noah Syndergaard, his modern-day, fire-balling equivalent.“He throws tight, inside, where a lot of pitchers today don’t go,” Gooden said.Then in the third inning against the Dodgers, Syndergaard went far, far inside, where few pitches ever wander — whipping the ball at 99 miles per hour behind the back and above the waist of the Citi Field antihero Chase Utley. Utley bent slightly, safely toward the plate. Chaos quickly ensued. Both Syndergaard and Manager Terry Collins were ejected by the plate umpire, Adam Hamari, and the Mets were forced to do some quick ad-libbing on the mound.While neither Syndergaard nor Collins admitted the pitch was deliberate, they both argued that Hamari should have issued the customary warning instead of ane immediate ejection.“There was a time in this game when you had a shot,” said Collins, who said he was worried that Syndergaard could be suspended. “Nobody got hit.” He added that Hamari “made an assumption, which he’s allowed to do; I disagreed with it.”To the vast appreciation of the Citi Field sellout crowd, reliever Logan Verrett entered the game and struck out Utley. The fans’ joy did not last long, however. Utley soon thundered two homers over the wall in right-center field, including a grand slam in the seventh inning, and the Dodgers went on to rout the Mets, 9-1, with the aid of five total home runs and five shutout innings from their starter, Kenta Maeda.Last season, in Game 3 of the World Series, Syndergaard nearly struck the red-hot Alcides Escobar of the Royals with his first pitch. While he has a modest history of such things, Syndergaard had never before been thrown out of a game. Syndergaard, perhaps cynically, insisted his pitch behind Utley was an accident.“It was a warm one, I got a little sweaty and the ball got away from me,” Syndergaard said. “A warning would have sufficed.”Utley soon followed with two revenge blasts. The first homer in the sixth inning was a solo shot off Verrett. The second, his fourth homer of the season and the sixth grand slam of his career, came off Hansel Robles and stunned the audience into silence.The Mets had honored the 1986 team with a ceremony on Saturday that included virtually the entire championship cast. Nothing, though, could tamp down the ill feelings left over from Game 2 of last year’s National League division series, when Utley’s takeout slide broke the leg of Ruben Tejada and eliminated him from the remainder of the postseason.Utley said Syndergaard’s pitch had “possibly” been intended to send a message, but that he understood it. He also suggested that the jeers from the crowd had motivated him.“A loud, energizing environment gets the best out of you,” Utley said. “It gets the adrenaline going.”Syndergaard’s pitch was so outrageously located that it left Hamari with little choice in the matter, said the crew chief Tom Hallion.“We have a judgment of whether we thought it was intentional, and if it was, we can either warn or eject,” Hallion said. “With what happened in that situation, we felt the ejection was warranted because the pitch was thrown behind Utley. We have to make a snap decision. We can’t think about, O.K., this guy did this or he did that in Game 6 or whatever.”Hamari did not hesitate, waving his arm to indicate Syndergaard and his 1.87 earned run average were no longer a part of the game.“I was very confused at the time,” Syndergaard said. “Such a quick trigger. I was dumbfounded, a whirlwind of emotions. It rattled me.”Collins charged from the dugout immediately, and his protestations were far from politic.There had already been a bit of unrelated nonsense between the two teams before the ejections. The Mets reportedly complained to Major League Baseball about the Dodgers using a global positioning device to situate their fielders.“We observed some members of the Dodgers organization using technology to establish defensive positions, presumably for use during the game,” Mets General Manager Sandy Alderson told ESPN. “Major League Baseball is going to look at that issue.”The Dodgers did not deny using such a device as a positioning and scouting aid, though they said it was not employed during a game. There is no M.L.B. rule outlawing the method. The Dodgers reportedly asked the Mets if they could paint lines on the Citi Field grass as markers for their fielders, but Alderson denied the request.With one more game to play Sunday in this series, Utley was asked if he might be thrown at again.“Possibly,” he said. “Anything can happen in baseball.”Advertisement