AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressNAIROBI, Kenya — They were accustomed to running barefoot on baking ground. They were raw, untrained. All eager.Each day, the five runners who grew up in the Kakuma refugee camp pounded the dusty tracks past thousands of makeshift tents to pass the time.Until there was a lifeline.Workers from the foundation of Tegla Loroupe, a former marathon world-record holder, arrived to hold track and field trials, and the five excelled. For this group of runners, many with no family and all with little schooling, running could offer food, a solid house. Proper shoes.“When I started the project, I said, What can I do with these people?” Coach Volker Wagner said.What he did not have to worry about, he said, was their “eagerness to run.”The five runners are refugees, five of 65 million across the world who have been displaced from their homes. Now, they are also track athletes, and they are going to the Olympics.The runners, all from South Sudan, are part of the International Olympic Committee’s first 10-member refugee team. It is a team of athletes whose roads to Rio de Janeiro have surely been hard, but whose journeys may ultimately be more heartwarming than those of any of the other 10,000-plus athletes who will compete beginning Friday at the world’s biggest sports event.The peerless swimmer Katie Ledecky; a photo essay of Olympians and their heroes; the sprinter Justin Gatlin’s comeback; how Boston’s citizens fought to reject their city’s bid; and 10 writers on their memories of Games past.“When we go to Rio, we are going to give a message that a refugee can do anything any other human being can do,” said Yiech Pur Biel, 21, an 800-meter runner who trains with the group at a base in the foothills just outside Kenya's capital, Nairobi.The refugee team is made up of men and women who have talent and drive, and the same dreams of competing on the world’s biggest stage that other athletes have. But they have no way of representing their countries, from which they were forced to flee. So they have been given a flag, the Olympic flag, to march behind at the opening ceremony in Rio and to compete under at the Games.They have stories of unfathomable hardship.Yiech was a 9-year-old caught up in the Sudanese civil war in 2005 when his mother left him with a neighbor and went in search of food for her family. She did not come back. Yiech was sent, alone, to the vast Kakuma refugee camp in the north of Kenya.James Nyang Chiengjiek was not much older, a child who herded cattle, when soldiers tried to kidnap him and force him to go to war. He ran away and also ended up at Kakuma, a camp teeming at one time with nearly 200,000 people.Scrambling to hide when her village was attacked by a rival tribe, Rose Nathike Lokonyen came across the bodies of her grandparents. She was 7.Paulo Amotun Kokoro’s childhood memories are of running, but not for fun or for sport. He ran for his life as bullets whizzed past his head.Anjelina Nadai Lohalith, 21, was separated from her parents as a child more than a decade ago. She has not heard from them since and can only hope that the news passed on to her that they are still alive is true.“What I want to be is a champion,” said Lohalith, whose event is the 1,500 meters. “One day, one time.” She hopes for a successful Olympics but, more than that, a reunion.The team also includes two swimmers from war-torn Syria who, separately, made the treacherous voyage across the Aegean Sea on flimsy inflatable boats to reach Europe. They then trekked from country to country seeking shelter.There are two judokas from the Democratic Republic of Congo, rescued from war as children only to be abused, starved and locked in cages by their handlers as they pursued a sport they loved. And a marathon runner who left Ethiopia in fear for his life, who now drives a taxi in Luxembourg to make ends meet, trains alone, and still wins races.Make no mistake: Their places at the Olympics have been earned: All 10 have met qualifying criteria.It is still a steep curve, especially for the South Sudanese. They have been in formal training for a few years at the most, some of them just months. But after the hardships they endured early in life, this challenge is not that scary.“If I compare the training or the duration of training with other people I am going to compete with, is not the same,” Lohalith said. “But I do not fear that.”They have come a long way, but Wagner said that if any of them made it through the qualifying heats at the Olympics, it would be huge. But that is not the point. It was never the point.“When you give these people hope, that made this project successful,” Wagner said.They look forward to being at the Olympic Village in Rio and meeting other athletes. They look forward to having their own uniforms and running shoes. They look forward to being part of a team.Most of all, they look forward.Advertisement