JULY 23, 2016
To the Sports Editor:Re “An Apology That’s Needed, Even if It Is Years Too Late,” July 18: We applaud William C. Rhoden’s suggestion that an apology to Tommie Smith and John Carlos for their expulsion by the United States Olympic Committee from the 1968 Games is long overdue. As teammates, we watched events unfold during those tumultuous days when a number of this country’s most accomplished athletes put their futures on the line to speak out against injustice. Smith, Carlos and their fellow 200-meter medalist, the Australian Peter Norman, paid a particularly high personal price for their courageous efforts asking the nation and the world to pay attention to the devastating and ongoing effects of centuries of racism. The apology Mr. Rhoden proposes would acknowledge the silent, symbolic gesture they chose as the dignified, eloquent and appropriate protest that, in fact, it was. Such an apology would also remind a nation reeling from police shootings and shootings of police officers that we have unfinished business addressing racism and injustice in America and that thoughtful — and thought-provoking — nonviolent protest is a time-honored democratic tradition.Curt Canning, Art Evans, Doug Foy, Charlie Hamlin, Dave Higgins, Bill Hobbs, Paul Hoffman, Andy Larkin, Cleve Livingston, Mike Livingston, Peter Raymond, Scott Steketee, Monk TerryThe writers are members of the 1968 United States Olympic rowing team.To the Sports Editor:The negative interpretation of the salute of Tommie Smith and John Carlos is attributable to Avery Brundage, the president of the International Olympic Committee, who, while protesting politicization of the Olympics, was hardly neutral politically. It is noteworthy that in 1936, Brundage, as head of the U.S.O.C., removed two Jewish athletes, Marty Glickman and Sam Stoller, from the 4x100-meter relay to avoid offending Hitler. He allowed German athletes to give the Heil Hitler salute with outstretched arms, but suspended Smith and Carlos for raising their fists as a human rights gesture.Julian L. SeifterWellesley, Mass.To the Sports EditorAny apology related to the medal stand protest following the 200-meter race in the 1968 Mexico City Olympics should emanate from Tommie Smith and John Carlos. The medal stand during the playing of our national anthem is clearly not the appropriate place to protest. They disgraced the country they were representing.AdvertisementJim SpenceWilliamsburg, Va.To the Sports Editor:Re “Doctor Faulted on C.T.E. Will Retire,” July 21: After reading of the retirement of Dr. Elliot J. Pellman, one word comes to mind: malpractice. Dr. Pellman, a rheumatologist who was the chairman of the N.F.L.’s Mild Traumatic Brain Injury Committee for many years, was working outside his expertise when he sent Jets players back onto the field after they had sustained concussions. Somewhere along the line Dr. Pellman forgot his oath to do no harm. His job was to protect the players, but instead his aim was to protect the money rolling into the N.F.L.Christopher J. FarrellUlster Park, N.Y.To the Sports Editor:Re “N.B.A. to Move All-Star Game in Protest Over Bathroom Law,” July 22: I was disappointed that your article did not point out the retribution being taken by the N.B.A. against the city of Charlotte. It was the city that passed an L.G.B.T.-friendly ordinance. The State Legislature and the governor overrode that ordinance, bowing to political pressure in other parts of the state. Why is the N.B.A. punishing Charlotte? This adds injury to insult. Charlotte should be praised. Your article should have made note of this painfully ironic situation and why good intentions by a municipality can sometimes result in poor responses by others. If the N.B.A. held its All-Star Game in Charlotte, the players and the league, as well as the city, could have used the occasion to educate legislators, the governor and those of the public in other areas of North Carolina that supported the state law not to punish the city for passing a socially responsible ordinance.AdvertisementRichard J. ReibsteinNew YorkA version of this letter appears in print on July 24, 2016, on Page SP8 of the New York edition with the headline: Decades Later, Still Resonating.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.