By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSMAY 3, 2017
BOSTON — Major League Baseball told the Red Sox and Orioles to stop their festering feud.Then the umpires backed it up.Hours after a conference call in which baseball officials told the two teams, “Enough is enough,” Baltimore starter Kevin Gausman was ejected in the second inning for hitting a batter, and Boston went on to win, 4-2, Wednesday night.Before the game, the teams talked to M.L.B.’s chief baseball officer, Joe Torre, after Boston pitchers threw at Orioles star Manny Machado recently. On April 21, Machado made a late slide that injured Red Sox second baseman Dustin Pedroia.“Given the situation and the tension between the two clubs and all the stuff that’s gone over the past few weeks, we’re all on high alert with anything,” the crew chief Sam Holbrook said in a statement to a pool reporter. “There needs to be an end to this stuff, and I felt like an ejection was the right thing to do at that time.”
            Xander Bogaerts gets hit by a curveball from Kevin Gausman and gets thrown out of the game pic.twitter.com/j2Ze3wV11O Orioles center fielder Adam Jones was tossed later, after arguing a called strike in the fifth inning. On Monday night, Jones had been the target of racial slurs at Fenway Park, and on Tuesday the Red Sox fans gave him a loud ovation.AdvertisementHe did not comment after Wednesday’s game.
            Adam Jones was also ejected in the fifth, upset after a questionable Strike 2 call. pic.twitter.com/0ae0ew65NM Gausman was ejected after what appeared to be a curveball hit Xander Bogaerts. Catcher Caleb Joseph slammed his mask on the plate and Manager Buck Showalter bolted from the dugout to argue. Gausman looked puzzled, at first, and then protested.AdvertisementGausman said it was “pretty bush league” that he was ejected, noting that Red Sox starter Chris Sale had been merely warned after throwing a pitch behind Manny Machado the previous night.“He did it on purpose, and everybody knew it,” Gausman said. “For him to get away with it, and I hit a guy with a curveball and they throw me out of the game, that’s pretty ridiculous.”Josh Rutledge drove in a pair of runs for Boston after entering the game in the first inning when starting third baseman Marco Hernandez left with a strained left shoulder. Drew Pomeranz (3-1) gave up two runs on five hits, his fourth time in five starts he’s allowed two or fewer runs.Craig Kimbrel struck out the side in the ninth, fanning Machado to end it for his 10th save.Gausman (1-3) took the loss. Reliever Richard Bleier allowed Bogaerts to score on Rutledge’s single in the second.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.